F1854 R3344 11951541 51448
A JOURNAL OR Historical Account OF THE Life, Travels, Sufferings, Christian Experiences and Labour of Love in the Work of the Ministry. OF THAT Ancient, Eminent and Faithful Servant of JESUS CHRIST, George Fox; Who departed this Life in great Peace with the LORD, the 13th of the 11th Month, 1690. The First Volume. Dan. 12.3. And they that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever. Verse 4. Many shall run to and fro; and Knowledge shall be En∣creased. 2 Tim. 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; (i. e. with Christ.) LONDON, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard, in Lombard-Street. MDCXCIV.
THE TESTIMONY OF Margaret Fox Concerning her Late Husband GEORGE FOX; TOGETHER With a brief Account of some of his Travels, Suf∣ferings and Hardships endured for the Truth's sake. IT having pleased Almighty God to take away my Dear Husband out of this Evil, Troublesome World, who was not a Man thereof; being Chosen out of it, and had his Life and Being in another Region, and his Testimony was a∣gainst the World, that the Deeds thereof were evil, and therefore the World hated him: So I am now to give in my Account and Testimony for my Dear Husband, whom the Lord hath taken unto his blessed Kingdom and Glory. And it is before me from the Lord, and in my View, to give a Relation, and leave upon Record the Dealings of the Lord with us from the Beginning. He was the Instrument in the Hand of the Lord in this pre∣sent Age, which he made use of to send forth into the World, to preach the Everlasting Gospel, which had been hid from many Ages and Generations; the Lord Revealed it unto him, and made him open that New and Living Way, that Leads to Life Eternal, when he was but a Youth, and a Stripling. And when he De∣clared it in his own Country of Leicestershire, and in Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Warwickshire, and his Declaration being a∣gainst the Hireling-Priests and their Practices, it raised a Great Fury and Opposition amongst the Priests and People against him: yet there was always some, that owned him in several places; but very few, that stood firm to him, when Persecution came on him. There was he and one other put in Prison at Darby,His first Imprison∣ment. but the other declined, and left him in Prison there; where he con∣tinued almost a whole Year, and then he was Released out of Pri∣son: And went on with his Testimony abroad,Second Imprison∣ment. and was put in Prison again at Nottingham; and there he continued a while, and after was Released again.
And then he Travelled on into Yorkshire, and passed up and down that Great County, and several received him; as William Dewsbury, Richard Farnsworth, Thomas Aldam and others, who all came to be faithful Ministers of the Spirit for the Lord. And he continued in that Country, and Travelled thorow Holderness and the Wowlds, and abundance were Convinced; and several were brought to Prison at York for their Testimony to the Truth, both Men and Women: So that we heard of such a People that were Risen, and we did very much inquire after them. And after a while he Travelled up farther towards the Dales in Yorkshire, as Wensdale, and Sedbur; and amongst the Hills, Dales and Mountains he came on, and Convinced many of the Eternal Truth. And in the Year 1652. it pleased the Lord to draw him to∣wards us; so he came on from Sedbur, and so to Westmorland, as Firbank-Chappel, where John Blaykling came with him: and so on to Preston, and to Grarig, and Kendal, and Ʋnder-barrow, and Poobank, and Cartmel, and Staveley; and so on to Swarth∣more, my Dwelling-House, whither he brought the blessed Tide∣ings of the Everlasting Gospel, which I, and many Hundreds in these parts, have cause to praise the Lord for. My then Hus∣band, Thomas Fell, was not at home at that time, but gone the Welch Circuit, being one of the Judges of Assize: And our House being a Place open to entertain Ministers and Religious People at, one of George Fox his Friends brought him hither; where he stay∣ed all Night. And the next day, being a Lecture, or a Fast-day, he went to Ulverston-Steeple-house, but came not in, till People were gathered; I and my Children had been a long time there before. And when they were singing before the Sermon, he came in; and when they had done singing, he stood up upon a Seat or Form, and desired, That he might have liberty to speak: And he that was in the Pulpit, said he might. And the first words, that he spoke, were as followeth: He is not a Jew, that is one outward; neither is that Circumcision, which is outward: But he is a Jew, that is one inward; and that is Circumcision, which is of the heart. And so he went on, and said, How that Christ was the Light of the World, and ligheth every Man that cometh into the World; and that by this Light they might be gathered to God, &c. And I stood up in my Pew, and I wondered at his Doctrine; for I had never heard such before. And then he went on, and opened the Scriptures, and said; The Scriptures were the Prophets words, and Christ's and the Apostle's words, and what, as they spoke, they enjoyed and possessed, and had it from the Lord: And said, Then what had any to do with the Scriptures, but as they came to the Spirit, that gave them forth. You will say, Christ saith this, and the A∣postles say this; but what canst thou say? Art thou a Child of Light, and hast walked in the Light, and what thou speakest, is it inwardly from God? &c. This opened me so, that it cut me to the Heart; and then I saw clearly, we were all wrong. So I sat me down in my Pew again, and cried bitterly: And I cried in my Spirit to the Lord, We are all Thieves, we are all Thieves; we have taken the
Scriptures in Words, and know nothing of them in our selves. So that served me, that I cannot well tell, what he spake after∣wards; but he went on in declaring against the false Prophets, and Priests, and Deceivers of the People. And there was one John Sawrey, a Justice of Peace, and a Professor, that bid the Churchwarden, Take him away: And he laid his hands on him several times, and took them off again, and let him alone; and then after a while he gave over, and came to our House again that night. And he spoke in the Family amongst the Servants, and they were all generally Convinced; as William Caton, Tho∣mas Salthouse, Mary Askew, Anne Clayton and several other Ser∣vants. And I was stricken into such a sadness, I knew not what to do; my Husband being from home. I saw, it was the Truth, and I could not deny it; and I did, as the Apostle saith, I Re∣ceived the Truth in the Love of it: And it was opened to me so clear, that I had never a Tittle in my Heart against it; but I desired the Lord, that I might be kept in it, and then I desired no greater Portion. And then he went on to Dalton, Aldingham, Dendrum and Ram∣syde-Chappels and Steeple-houses, and places several up and down, and the People followed him mightily; and abundance were Con∣vinced, and saw, that which he spoke, was Truth: But the Priests were all in a Rage. And about two Weeks after James Naylor and Richard Farnsworth followed him, and enquired him out, till they came to Swarthmore, and there stayed a while with me at our House, and did me much Good; for I was under great Hea∣viness and Judgment. But the Power of the Lord entred upon me, within about two Weeks, that he came; and about three Weeks-end my Husband came home: And many were in a migh∣ty Rage. And a deal of the Captains and Great Ones of the Country went to meet my then Husband, as he was coming home, and informed him, That a Great Disaster was befallen a∣mongst his Family, and that they were Witches; and that they had taken us out of our Religion: and that he might either set them a∣way, or all the Country would be undone. But no Weapons form∣ed against the Lord, shall prosper; as you may see hereaf∣ter. So my Husband came home greatly offended: And any may think, what a Condition I was like to be in, that either I might displease my Husband, or offend God; for he was very much troubled with us all in the House and Family, they had so pre∣possest him against us. But James Naylor and Richard Farns∣worth were both then at our House, and I desired them to come and speak to him; and so they did, very moderately and wise∣ly: But he was at first displeased with them; but they told him, They came in Love, and good Will to his House. And after that he had heard them speak a while, he was bet∣ter satisfied; and they offered, as if they would go away: but I desired them to stay, and not to go away yet; for George Fox will come this Evening. And I would have had my Hus∣band to have heard them all, and satisfied himself farther a∣bout
them; because they had so prepossest him against them of such dangerous, fearful things in his coming first home. And then was he pretty moderate and quiet: and his Dinner being ready, he went to it; and I went in, and sate me down by him. And whilst I was sitting, the Power of the Lord seized upon me: and he was stricken with Amazement, and knew not what to think; but was quiet and still. And the Children were all quiet and still, and grown Sober, and could not play on their Musick, that they were learning: and all these things made him quiet and still. And then at Night George Fox came: And after Supper my Husband was sitting in the Parlour, and I asked him, If George Fox might come in? and he said, Yes. So George came in with∣out any Complement, and walked into the Room, and began to speak presently; and the Family, and James Naylor, and Richard Farnsworth came all in: and he spoke very excellently, as ever I heard him; and opened Christ and the Apostles Practices, which they were in, in their Day. And he opened the Night of Apo∣stacy since the Apostles Days, and laid open the Priests and their Practices in the Apostacy; that if all in England had been there, I thought, they could not have denied the Truth of those things. And so my Husband came to see clearly the Truth, of what he spoke, and was very quiet that Night, and said no more; and went to Bed. And next Morning came Lampit, Priest of Ul∣version, and got my Husband into the Garden; and spake much to him there: But my Husband had seen so much the Night be∣fore, that the Priest got little Entrance upon him. And when the Priest Lampit was come into the House, George spoke sharp∣ly to him, and asked him; When God spake to him, and called him to go, and preach to the People? But after a while the Priest went away: This was on a Sixth-day of the Week about the Fifth Month, 1652. And at our House divers Friends were speaking one to another, how there was several Convinced here aways; and we could not tell, where to get a Meeting: My Husband al∣so being present, he over-heard, and said of his own Ac∣cord; You may Meet here, if you will: And that was the First Meeting we had, that he offered of his own Accord. And then Notice was given that Day and the next to Friends; and there was a good large Meeting the First-day, which was the First Meeting, that was at Swarthmore: and so continued there a Meet∣ing from 1652, till 1690. And my Husband went that Day to the Steeple-house, and none with him, but his Clerk and his Groom, that rid with him; and the Priest and People were all fearfully troubled: But praised be the Lord, they never got their Wills up∣on us to this day. And then after a few Weeks, George went to Ulverston-Steeple-house again, and the said Justice Sawrey, with others, set the Rude Rabble upon him; and they beat him so, that he fell down as in a Swoon, and was sore bruised and black'ned in his Body, and on his Head and Arms. Then my Husband was not at home: but when he came home, he was displeased, that they should do so;
and spoke to Justice Sawrey, and said, It was against Law to make Riots. And after that he was sore beat and stoned at Walney, till he fell down: And also at Dalton was he sore beat and abu∣sed; so that he had very hard Usage in divers places in these parts. And then when a Meeting was settled here, he went a∣gain into Westmorland, and settled Meetings there; and there was a great Convincement, and abundance of brave Ministers came out there-aways, as John Camm, John Audland, Francis Howgil, Ed∣ward Burrough, Miles Halhead, and John Blaykling with divers o∣thers. He also went over Sands to Lancaster, and Yelland, and Kellet, where Robert Widders, Richard Hubberthorn and John Lawson, with many others were Convinced. And about that time he was in those parts, many Priests and Professors rose up, and falsly accused him for Blasphemy, and did endeavour to take away his Life; and got People to swear at a Sessions at Lancaster, that he had spoken Blasphemy. But my then Husband and Colonel West, having had some Sight and Knowledge of the Truth, with∣stood the two Persecuting Justices, John Sawrey and Thompson; and brought him off, and cleared him: for indeed he was Inno∣cent. And after the Sessions there was a great Meeting in the Town of Lancaster; and many of the Towns People came in, and many were Convinced. And thus he was up and down about Lancaster, Yelland, Westmorland and some parts of Yorkshire, and our parts above one Year; in which time there was above Twen∣ty and four Ministers brought forth, that were ready to go with their Testimony of the Eternal Truth unto the World: And soon after Francis Howgil and John Camm went to speak to Oliver Crom∣wel. And in the Year 1653. George's drawings was into Cumberland by Milholm, Lampley, Embleton and Brigham, Pardsey and Cocker∣mouth, where at or near Embleton he had a Dispute with some Priests, as Larkham and Benson, but chiefly with John Wilkin∣son, a Preacher at Embleton and Brigham; who after was Convinced, and owned the Truth, and was a serviceable Minister both in England, Ireland and Scotland. And then he went to Coldbeck and several places, till he came to Carlisle, and went to their Steeple-house: And they beat and abused him, and had him be∣fore the Magistrates; who Examined him,The third Imprison∣ment. and put him in Pri∣son there in the Common-Goal among the Thieves. And at the Assizes one Anthony Pearson, who had been a Justice of Peace, and was Convinced at Appleby (when he was upon the Bench) by James Naylor and Francis Howgil, who were then Prisoners there, and brought before him; so Anthony Pearson spake to the Justices at Carlisle, he being acquainted with them, having mar∣ried his Wife out of Cumberland; and after a while they Re∣leased him. And after he went into several parts in Cumberland, and many were Convinced, and owned the Truth: and he ga∣thered and settled Meetings there amongst them, and up and down in several Parts there in the North.
And in the Year 1654. he went Southward to his own Coun∣try of Leicestershire, visiting Friends. And then Colonel Hacker sent him to Oliver Cromwel:The fourth Imprison∣ment. and after his being kept Prisoner a while, he was brought before Oliver, and was Released. And then he stayed a while, visiting Friends in London, and the Meetings therein; and so passed Westward to Bristol, and visited Friends there: and after went into Cornwal, where they put him in Prison at Launceston,The fifth Imprison∣ment. and one Edward Pyot with him; where he had a bad, long Imprisonment. And when he was Released, he passed into many parts in that County of Cornwal, and settled Meetings there. And then he Travelled thorow many Counties, visiting Friends and settling Meetings all along; and so came in∣to the North, and to Swarthmore, and to Cumberland. And so for Scotland he passed in the Year 1657. and there went with him Robert Widders, James Lancaster, John Grave and o∣thers. And he Travelled thorow many places in that Nation, as Douglas, Heads, Hambleton, Glascow, and to Edenborough, where they took him, and carried him before General Monk, and the Council, and Examined him, and asked him his Business into that Nation: who Answered; He came to visit the Seed of God. And after they had threatned him, and charged him to depart their Nation of Scotland, they let him go. And then he went to Lin∣lithgow, and Sterling, and Johnstons and many places, visiting the People; and several were Convinced. And after he had stayed a pretty while, and settled some Meetings, he returned into Nor∣thumberland, and into the Bishoprick of Durham, visiting Friends and settling Meetings, as he went; and then returned back again to Swarthmore, and stayed amongst Friends a while, and so re∣turned South again. And in 1658. Judge Fell died. And in 1660. he came out of the South into the North, and had a Great General Meeting about Balby in Yorkshire; and so came on visiting Friends in many places, till he came to Swarth∣more again. And King Charles then being come in, the Justices sent out Warrants,The sixth Imprison∣ment. and took him at Swarthmore, charging him in their Warrants, That he drew away the King's Liege People, to the endangering the embruing the Nation in Blood; and sent him Prisoner to Lancaster-Castle. And I having a Great Family, and he being taken in my House, I was moved of the Lord to go to the King at Whitehall; and took with me a Declaration, and an Information of our Principles: And a long time, and much ado I had, to get to him. But at last, when I got to him, I told him; If he was Guilty of those things, I was Guilty, for he was taken in my House: And I gave him the Paper of our Principles, and desi∣red, that he would set him at Liberty; as he had promised, That none should suffer for tender Consciences: and we were of tender Con∣sciences, and desired nothing, but the Liberty of our Consciences. And then with much ado, after he had been kept Prisoner near half a Year at Lancaster, we got a Habeas Corpus, and Removed him to the King's Bench; where he was Released. And then would I gladly have come home to my great Family; but was bound in my Spirit, and could not have Freedom to get away for a whole
Year. And the King had promised me several times, that we should have our Liberty: And then the Monarchy-Men rose; and then came the Great and General Imprisonment of Friends the Na∣tion thorow: And so could I not have Freedom nor Liberty to come home, till we had got a General Proclamation for all our Friends Liberty; and then I had Freedom and Peace to come home. And in 1663. he came North again, and to Swarthmore: And then they sent out Warrants, and took him again, and had him to Holcrof before the Justices, and tendered him the Oath of Al∣legiance; and sent him Prisoner to Lancaster-Castle.The se∣venth Im∣prison∣ment. And about a Month after, the Justices sent for me also out of my House, and tendered me the Oath; and sent me Prisoner to Lancaster. And the next Assizes they tendered the Oath of Allegiance and Su∣premacy to us again both, and Premunired me: But they had mis∣sed the Date, and other things in his Indictment, and so it was quasht; but they tendered him the Oath again, and kept him Prisoner a Year and an half at Lancaster-Castle. And then they sent him to Scarborough-Castle in Yorkshire, where they kept him Prisoner close under the Soldiers much of a Year and an half; so that a Friend could scarcely have spoken to him: yet after that it pleased the Lord, that he was Released. But I continued in Prison, and a Prisoner four years at that time: And an Order was procured from the Council, whereby I was set at Liberty. And in that time I went down into Cornwall with my Son and Daugh∣ter Lower, and came back by London to the Yearly Meeting; and there I met with him again: And then he told me, The time was drawing on towards our Marriage; but he might first go into Ire∣land.The eithth Imprison∣ment. And a little before this time was he Prisoner in his own Country at Leicester for a while; and then Released. And so in∣to Ireland he went: and I went into Kent and Suffex; and came back to London again: And afterward I went to the West, to∣wards Bristol, in 1669. and there I stay'd, till he came over from Ireland. And then it was Eleven years after my former Husband's Decease. And in Ireland he had had a great Service for the Lord and his Eternal Truth, amongst Friends and many People there, but escaped many Dangers, and Times of being ta∣ken Prisoner; they having laid in Wait afore-hand for him in many places. And then he being return'd, at Bristol, he declared his Intentions of Marriage: and there also was our Marriage solemni∣zed. And then within ten Days after I came homewards; and my Husband stayed up and down in the Countries amongst Friends, visiting them. And soon after I came home, there came another Order from the Council to cast me into Prison again; and the Sheriff of Lan∣cashire sent his Bailiff, and pulled me out of my own House, and had me Prisoner to Lancaster-Castle (upon the Old Premunire;) where I continued a whole Year: And most part of all that time was I sick and weakly; and also my Husband was weak and sickly at that time. And then after a while he Recovered, and went about to get me out of Prison; and a Discharge at last was got
under the Great Seal: and so I was set at Liberty. And then I was to go up to London again, for my Husband was intending for America: And he was full two years away, before he came back again into England; and then he arrived at Bristol, and then came to London: and he intended to have come to the middle of the Nation with me. But when we came into some parts of Worcestershire, they got there Information of him; and one Justice Parker by his Warrant sent him and my Son Lower to Worcester-Gaol:The ninth Imprison∣ment. and the Justices there tendered him the Oath, and Premunired him, but Released my Son Lower; who stayed with him most of the time he was Prisoner there. And after some time he fell sick in a long, lingering Sickness, and many times was very ill: so they writ to me from London, That if I would see him alive, I might go to him; which accord∣ingly I did. And after I had tarried Seventeen Weeks with him at Worcester, and no Discharge like to be obtained for him, I went up to London, and writ to the King an Account of his long Imprisonment, and how he was taken in his Travel homewards; and how he was weak and sick, and not like to live, if they kept him long there. And I went with it to Whitehall my self; and I met with the King, and gave him the Paper: And he said, I must go to the Chancellour, he could do nothing in it. Then I writ also to the Lord Chancellour, and went to his House, and gave him my Paper, and spoke to him, That the King had left it wholly to him; and if he did not take pity, and Release him out of that Prison, I feared, he would end his days there. And the Lord Chancellour Finch was a very tender Man, and spoke to the Judge; who gave out an Habeas Corpus presently. And when we got it, we sent it down to Worcester; and they would not part with him at first, but said, he was Premunired, and was not to go out on that manner. And then we were forced to go to Judge North, and to the Attorney General, and we got another Order, and sent down from them; and with much ado, and great Labour and Industry of William Mead, and other Friends, we got him up to London, where he Appeared in Westminster-Hall at the King's-Bench, before Judge Hales, who was a very honest, tender Man; and he knew, they had Imprisoned him but in Envy. So that, which they had against him, was Read; and our Counsel pleaded, That he was taken up in his Travel and Journey: And there was but a little said, till he was quitted. And this was the Last Pri∣son, that he was in, being freed by the Court of King's-Bench. And when he was at Liberty, he Recovered again: And then I was very desirous to go home with him, which we did. And this was the first time, that he came to Swarthmore, after we were Married; and so he stayed here much of two years. And then went to London again to the Yearly Meeting; and after a while went into Holland, and some parts of Germany, where he stayed a pretty while: and then Returned to London again at the next Yearly Meeting. And after he had stayed a while in and about Lon∣don, he came into the North to Swarthmore again; and stayed
that time nigh two years: And then he grew weakly, being troub∣led with Pains and Aches, having had many sore and long Tra∣vels, Beatings, and hard Imprisonments. But after some time he rid to York: and so passed on thorow Nottinghamshire and seve∣ral Counties, visiting Friends; till he came to London to the Yearly-Meeting, and stayed there, and there-aways, till he fi∣nished his Course, and laid down his Head in Peace. And though the Lord had provided an outward Habitation for him, yet he was not willing to stay at it; because it was so remote and far from London, where his Service most lay. And my Concern for God, and his holy, Eternal Truth was then in the North, where God had placed and set me; and likewise for the Ordering and Governing of my Children and Family: so that we were very willing both of us, to live a-part some years up∣on God's Account, and his Truth's Service, and to deny our selves of that Comfort, which we might have had in being together, for the sake and Service of the Lord, and his Truth. And if any took Occasion, or Judged hard of us because of that, the Lord will Judge them; for we were Innocent. And for my own part, I was willing to make many long Journies, for ta∣king away all Occasion of evil Thoughts: And though I lived Two hundred Miles from London, yet have I been Nine times there, upon the Lord, and his Truth's Account; and of all the times that I was at London, this last time was most Comfortable, that the Lord was pleased to give me Strength and Ability, to travel that great Journey, being Seventy six years of Age, to see my Dear Husband, who was better in his Health and Strength, than many times I had seen him before. I look upon that, that the Lord's special Hand was in it, that I should go then; for he li∣ved but about half a Year after I left him: Which makes me admire the Wisdom and Goodness of God in Ordering my Jour∣ney at that time. And now he hath finished his Course, and his Testimony, and is entered into his Eternal Rest and Felicity. I trust in the same powerful God, that his holy Arm and Power will carry me tho∣row, whatever he hath yet for me to do; and that he will be my Strength and Support, and the Bearer up of my Head unto the End, and in the End. For I know his Faithfulness and Good∣ness, and I have Experience of his Love; To whom be Glory and Powerful Dominion for ever: Amen. M. F.
The Testimony of some of the AUTHOR'S Relations. NEither Days, nor Length of Time with us can wear out the Memory of our Dear and Honoured Father George Fox, whom the Lord hath taken to himself. And though his Earthly House of this Tabernacle be dissolved, and Mortality put off; yet we believe, he has a Building with God Eternally in the Hea∣vens, and is entred into Rest, as a Reward to those great Labours, hard Sufferings and sore Trials, he patiently endured for God and his Truth. Of which Truth he was made an Able Minister, and One, if not the First Promulgator of it in our Age: who though of no great Literature, nor seeming much Learned, as to the out∣ward (being hid from the Wisdom of this World;) yet he had the Tongue of the Learned, and could speak a Word in due Sea∣son to the Conditions and Capacities of most, especially to them, that were weary, and wanted Soul's Rest; being deep in the Di∣vine Mysteries of the Kingdom of God. And the Word of Life and Salvation through him reached unto many Souls; whereby many were Convinced of their great Duty of inward Retiring to Wait upon God: and as they became diligent in the Performance of that Service, were also raised up to be Preachers of the same E∣verlasting Gospel of Peace and Glad Tidings to others; who are as Seals to his Ministry both in this and other Nations, and may possibly give a more full Account thereof. Howbeit we knowing his unwearied Diligence, not Sparing, but Spending himself in the Work and Service, whereunto he was Chosen and Called of God, could not but give this short Testimony of his Faithfulness therein; and likewise of his tender Love and Care towards us: who as a tender Father to Children (in which Capacity we stood, being so Related unto him) he never failed to give us his wholesome Counsel and Advice. And not only so, but as a Father in Christ, he took Care of the whole Family and Houshold of Faith, which the Lord had made him an Eminent Overseer of, and endued him with such an Excellent Spirit of Wisdom and Ʋnderstanding, to propose and direct Helps and Advantages to the Well-ordering and Establishing of Affairs and Government in the Church, as now are found very serviceable thereunto; and have greatly disappointed and prevented the false, loose and libertine Spirit in some, who to their own Confusion have endeavoured (by Separation and Di∣vision) to disturb the Church's Peace. And although many of that sort have at sundry times shot their poisonous Darts at him, publickly in Print, and privately other ways; yet he has been always preserved by the Heavenly Power of God, out of the Reach of their Envy, and all Perils and Difficulties, that attend∣ed on their Account: Who as a Fixed Star in the Firmament of God's Power, did constantly abide, and held his Integrity to the last, being of a sweet, savoury Life; and as to Conversation kept
his Garments clean: And though outwardly dead, yet liveth, and his Memory is right precious unto us; as it is and will be to all, that abide in the Love of Truth, and have not declined the Way of it. For he was one of the Lord's Worthies, Valiant for the Truth upon Earth, not turning his Back in the Day of Battle; but his Bow still abiding in its Strength, he through many Hard∣ships brought Gladness and Refreshment to Israel's Camp: being assisted by the Might of that Power, that always put the Armies of Aliens and Enemies to Flight. And now having finished his Course, is removed from us into a Glorious State of Immortality and Bliss; and is gathered unto the Lord, as a Shock of Corn in its full Season, and to that Habitation of Safety, where the Wick∣ed cease from troubling, and the Weary be at Rest. John Rous. William Meade. Thomas Lower. William Ingram. Daniel Abraham. Abraham Morrice. Margaret Rous. Sarah Meade. Mary Lower. Susanna Ingram. Rachel Abraham. Isabel Morrice. An Epistle by Way of Testimony, to Friends and Brethren of the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in England, Wales, and elsewhere, concerning the Decease of our Faithful Brother GEORGE FOX. From our Second-Days Morning Meeting in London, the 26th of the 11th Month, 1690. DEar and truly beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters in Christ Jesus, our Blessed Lord and Saviour, we sincerely and ten∣derly salute you all in his free and tender Love, wherewith he hath graciously visited us, and largely shed it abroad in our Hearts and Souls, to our own unspeakable Comfort and Consolation, and towards his whole Heritage, and Royal Off-spring; blessed be his pure and powerful Name for Evermore. And our Souls do truly and fervently desire, and breathe unto the God of all our Mer∣cies, that you all may be preserved, and kept truly faithful and diligent in his Work and Service, according to your Heavenly Cal∣ling and Endowments with his Light, Grace and Truth, unto the End of your Days; as being livingly engaged thereby, all your appoint∣ed Time to serve him, and to wait, till your Change come: That none may neglect that true Improvement of your Times and Talents, that God has afforded you here, for your Eternal Advantage hereafter, in that Inheritance and Life Immortal, that never fades away. And
that the whole Flock and Heritage of Christ Jesus, which he has purchased and bought for himself with a Price incorruptible, may always be so preserved in his own pure Love and Life, as to grow, in¦crease, and prosper in the same; and thereby be kept in Love, Ʋnity and Peace with one another, as becomes his true and faithful Follow∣ers, is that, which our very Hearts and Souls desire, being often tru∣ly comforted and enlarged in the living sense and feeling of the En∣crease and Aboundings thereof, among faithful Friends and Brethren. And Dear Brethren and Sisters, unto this our Tender Salutation, We are concerned in Brotherly Love, and true Tender-heartedness, to add and impart unto you some Account of the Decease of our Dear and Elder Brother in Christ, namely, his and his Church's true and faithful Servant and Minister, George Fox; whom it hath pleased the Lord to take unto himself, as he hath divers others of his faith∣ful Servants and Ministers of late Time; who have faithfully served out their Generation, and finished their Testimony and Course with Joy and Peace. Howbeit, O Dear Brethren and Friends! that so many Worthies in Israel, and serviceable Instruments in the Lord's Hand, are of late taken away and removed from us, so soon one after another, appears a Dispensation, that deeply and sorrowfully affects us, and many more, whose Hearts are upright and tender toward God, and one to another in the Truth. The Consideration of the Depth, Weight and Meaning thereof, is very weighty upon our Spi∣rits, though their precious Life and Testimony lives with us, as be∣ing of that same Body, united to one Head, even Christ Jesus; in which we still, and hope, ever shall have secret Comfort and Union with them, whom the Lord has removed, and taken to himself out of their Earthly Tabernacles and Houses, into their Heavenly and Everlasting Mansions. This our said Dear Brother, George Fox, was enabled by the Lord's Power, to Preach the Truth fully and effectually, in our Publick Meeting in White-Hart-Court, by Grace-Church-street, Lon∣don, on the Eleventh Day of this instant 11th Month, 1690: After which he said, I am glad I was here; now I am clear, I am fully clear. Then he was the same Day taken with some Illness or Indisposition of Body, more than usual; and continued weak in Body for two days after, at our Friend Henry Goldney's House in the same Court, close by the Meeting-House, in much Contentment and Peace, and very sensible to the last. In which time he mentioned divers Friends, and sent for some in particular; to whom he exprest his Mind, for the spreading Friends Books and Truth in the World, and through the Nations thereof; as his Spirit in the Lord's Love and Power was uni∣versally set, and bent for Truth and Righteousness, and the making known the Way thereof to the Nations and People afar off: signi∣fying also to some Friends, That all is well; and the Seed of God reigns over all, and over Death it self. That though he was weak in Body, yet that the Power of God is over all, and the Seed reigns over all dis∣orderly Spirits: which were his wonted sensible Expressions, being in the living Faith and Sense thereof, which he kept to the End. And the Thirteenth Instant, between the Ninth and Tenth Hour in the Night, he quietly departed this Life in Peace; being two days
after the Lord enabled him to Publish and Preach the Blessed Truth in the Meeting, as aforesaid. So that he clearly and evidently ended his days in his faithful Testimony, in perfect Love and Unity with his Brethren, and Peace and Good-will to all Men; being about Sixty and six Years of Age (as we understand) when he departed this Life. And on the Sixteenth of this Instant, being the day appointed for his Funeral, a very great Concourse of Friends and People assembled at our Meeting-House in White-Hart-Court aforesaid, about the Mid-day, in order to attend his Body to our Burying-place near Bunhill-Fields, to be Interred, as Friends last Office of Love and Respect, due on that Account. The Meeting was held about two Hours, with great and heavenly Solemnity, manifestly attended with the Lord's Blessed Power and Presence; and divers living Testimonies given from a live∣ly Remembrance and Sense of this his Dear, Ancient Servant, his Blessed Ministry and Testimony of the breaking forth of this Gospel-day; his Innocent Life, long and great Travels, and Labours of Love in the Everlasting Gospel, for the turning and gathering many Thou∣sands from Darkness to the Light of Christ Jesus, the Foundation of true Faith; also of his manifold Sufferings, Afflictions and Oppositions, which he met withal for his faithful Testimony, both from his open Adversaries and false Brethren; and his Preservations, Dominion, and Deliverances out of them all by the Power of God: To whom the Glory and Honour was and is ascribed, in raising up and preserving this his faithful Witness and Minister to the End of his Days; whose blessed Memorial will Everlastingly remain. He loved Truth and Righteousness, and bore faithful Testimony against Deceit and Falshood, and the Mystery of Iniquity: and often, of late time especially, warned Friends against Covetousness, Earthly-mindedness, against getting into the Earth, and into a brittle Spirit; and the younger sort, against Loosness and Pride of Life, &c. A few days before he died, he had a great Concern upon his Mind, concerning some, in whom the Lord's Power was working, to lead them into a Ministry and Testimony to his Truth; who through their too much entangling themselves in the things of this World, did make themselves unready to answer the Call and Leadings of the Power of God, and hurt the Gift, that was bestowed upon them, and did not take that regard to their Service and Ministry, as they ought: And mentioned the Apostle's Exhortation to Timothy, To take heed to his Ministry, and to shew himself approved, &c. And exprest his Grief con∣cerning such, as preferred their own Business before the Lord's Busi∣ness, and sought the advancing worldly Concerns, before the Concerns of Truth: And concluded with a tender and fatherly Exhortation to all, to whom God had imparted of his Heavenly Treasure, that they would improve it faithfully; and be diligent in the Lord's Work, that the Earth might be sown with the Seed of the Kingdom, and God's Harvest might be minded by those, whom he had called and enabled to labour therein: and that such would commit the Care of their outward Concerns to the Lord, who would care for them, and give a Blessing to them. However, this is not mentioned to encourage any to run unsent, or without being called of God. Many are living Witnesses, that the Lord raised him up by his
Power, to proclaim his mighry Day to the Nations, and made him an Effectual Instrument in our Day, to turn many from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to God; and freely to suffer and bear all Reproaches, and the manifold Persecutions, Buffetings, Halings, Sto∣nings, Imprisonments, and Cruelties, that were in the Beginning, and for some time inflicted on him and others, for the Name of Christ Jesus. He was in his Testimony as a fixed Star in the Firmament of God's Power, where all that be truly wise, and that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever. He knew and Preached the Mystery of Christ Revealed, the Life and Substance, and the Power of Godli∣ness, above all Shadows and Forms: The Lord endued him with a hidden Wisdom and Life. He loved Peace, and earnestly laboured for universal Love, Unity, Peace, and good Order in the Churches of Christ: And wherever he met with the contrary, it was his great Grief and Burthen. He was greatly for the Encouragement of faith∣ful Labourers in the Lord's Work; and it was a great Offence and Grief to him, to have their Testimony weakned, or Labours slighted through Prejudice in any professing Truth. And inasmuch as the Lord suffered him not to be delivered up to the Will of his Enemies and Persecutors, who often heretofore breath∣ed out Cruelty against him, and designed his Destruction; but in his good Pleasure so fairly and quietly took him away in his own time, when his Testimony was so blessedly finished, and his Work accomplish∣ed, This is all remarkable, and worthy of serious and due Obser∣vation, as being by a special and Divine Providence and Wisdom of God; to whom we ascribe the Glory of all, and not unto Man or Crea∣tures. Though we must needs allow, and own that good Report and due Esteem, which faithful Elders, Ministers and Servants of God and Christ have by Faith obtained, to the Praise of that blessed Power, that upheld them in every Age in their day; many whereof are even of late taken away from the Evil to come, and are at Rest in the Lord, out of the Reach of all Envy and Persecution, where the Wicked can∣not trouble them any more. And we must patiently bear our Parting with them, and our Loss and Sorrow on that Account, with respect to their unspeakable Gain: Yet how can we avoid being deeply affected with Sadness of Spirit, and brokenness of Heart, under the sense and consideration of such Loss and Revolutions, which we have cause to believe are Ominous of Calamities to the wicked World, though of good to the Righteous? Did the Death of plain upright Jacob,Gen. 50. namely Israel, (who was as a Prince of God) so deeply affect both his own Children and Kindred, as that they made a great and exceeding sore Lamentation for him; and even the Egyptians also, that they bewailed him seventy days? And the Death of Moses so deeply affect the Children of Israel,Deut. 34. as that they did weep and mourn for him in the Plain of Moab thirty Days? And the Death of Stephen, that faithful Martyr of Jesus, so deeply affect cer∣tain Men fearing God,Acts 7. as that they made great Lamentation for him? And the Apostle Paul, when taking his leave of the Elders of the Church of Ephesus,Acts 20. and telling them, They should see his Face no more? If this did so deeply affect them, that they wept all abundantly, sorrow∣ing
most of all for these Words, That they should see his face no more, (with many more of this kind;) How then can we otherwise chuse, but be deeply affected with Sorrow and Sadness of Heart (though not as those, which have no hope) when so many of our Ancient, Dear and Faithful Brethren (with whom we have had much sweet Society) are removed from us one after another? (We pray, God raise up and increase more such!) Yet must we all contentedly submit to the good Pleasure and Wisdom of the Lord our God in all these things; who taketh away, and none can hinder him, nor may any say unto him, What dost thou? Yet we have cause to bless the Lord, that he hath of late raised, and is raising up more to publish his Name in the Earth: And we that yet remain, have but a short Time to stay after them, that are gone; but we shall be gone to them also. The Lord God of Life keep us all Faithful in his holy Truth, Love, Ʋnity and Life to the End. He hath a great Work still to bring forth in the Earth, and great things to bring to pass, in order to make way for Truth and Righteousness, to take place therein; and that his Seed may come forth, and be gathered, and the Power and Kingdom of our God and of his Christ, made known and exalted in the Earth, unto the Ends thereof. Dear Friends and Brethren, Be faithful, till Death, that a Crown of Life you may obtain. All dwell in the Love of God in Christ Jesus, in Ʋnion and Peace in him: To whom we tenderly Commit you to keep and strengthen you, bless and preserve you to the End of your Days. In whose dear and tender Love we remain— Your Dear Friends and Brethren, Stephen Crisp. Geo. Whitehead. Fra. Camfield. James Park. John Elson. Peter Price. John Field. John Edridge. Nicholas Gates. Francis Stamper. John Vaughton. Gilbert Latey. Charles Marshal. Rich. Needham. James Martin. Daniel Monro. John Heywood. George Bowles. William Robinson. William Bingley. John Butcher. Benjamin Antrobus. These Names are since added, at the desire of the Persons following: Sam. Goodaker. Amb. Rigg. William Fallowfield. POSTSCRIPT. BEfore his Death he writ a little Paper, desiring all Friends every where, that use to write to him about the Sufferings and Affairs of Friends in their several Countries, should henceforth write to their seve∣ral Correspondents in London, to be Communicated to the Second-Days Meeting, to take Care, that they be answered.
Thomas Ellwood's Account of that Eminent and Honourable Servant of the Lord, George Fox. THis Holy Man was raised up by God in an Extraordinary Manner, for an Extraordinary Work, even to Awaken the sleeping World, by proclaiming the Mighty Day of the Lord to the Nations, and publishing again the Everlasting Gospel to the Inha∣bitants of the Earth, after the long and dismal Night of Apostacy and Darkness. For this Work the Lord began to prepare him by many and various Trials and Exercises from his very Childhood: And having fitted and furnished him for it, he called him into it very Young; and made him Instrumental, by the effectual Working of the Holy Ghost, through his Ministry to call many Others into the same Work, and to turn many Thousands from Darkness to the Light of Christ, and from the Power of Satan unto God. I knew him not, till the Year 1660: from that Time to the Time of his Death I knew him well, Conversed with him often, Observed him much, Loved him dearly, and Honoured him truly; and upon good Experience can say, He was indeed an Heavenly-minded Man, zealous for the Name of the Lord, and preferr'd the Honour of God before all things. He was Valiant for the Truth, Bold in As∣serting it, Patient in Suffering for it, Unwearied in Labouring in it, Steady in his Testimony to it; Immoveable as a Rock. Deep he was in Divine Knowledge, Clear in opening heavenly Mysteries, Plain and Powerful in Preaching, Fervent in Prayer. He was richly endued with heavenly Wisdom, Quick in Discerning, Sound in Judgment, Able and ready in Giving, Discreet in Keeping Coun∣sel: A Lover of Righteousness, an Encourager of Vertue, Ju∣stice, Temperance, Meekness, Purity, Chastity, Modesty, Humility, Charity and Self-Denial in all, both by Word and Example. Grace∣ful he was in Countenance, Manly in Personage, Grave in Gesture, Courteous in Conversation, Weighty in Communication, Instructive in Discourse; Free from Affectation in Speech or Carriage. A se∣vere Reprover of hard and obstinate Sinners; A mild and gentle Admonisher of such, as were tender, and sensible of their Fail∣ings: Not apt to resent personal Wrongs; Easie to forgive Injuries: But zealously Earnest, where the Honour of God, the Prosperity of Truth, the Peace of the Church were concerned. Very Tender, Compassionate and Pitiful he was to all, that were under any sort of Affliction; full of Brotherly Love, full of Fatherly Care: For indeed, the Care of the Churches of Christ was daily upon him, the Prosperity and Peace whereof he studiously sought. Beloved he was of God; Beloved of God's People: and (which was not the least part of his Honour) the Common Butt of all Apostates Envy; whose Good notwithstanding he earnestly sought. He lived to see the Desire of his Soul, The Spreading of that Blessed
Principle of Divine Light, through many of the European Nations, and not a few of the American Islands and Provinces, and the Ga∣thering many Thousands into an Establishment therein; which the Lord vouchsafed him the Honour to be the First Effectual Pub∣lisher of, in this latter Age of the World. And having fought a good Fight, finished his Course, and kept the Faith, his righteous Soul (freed from the Earthly Tabernacle, in which he had led an Exemplary Life of Holiness) was translated into those Heavenly Mansions, where Christ our Lord went to prepare a Place for His; there to possess that Glorious Crown of Righteousness, which is laid up for, and shall be given by the Lord the Righteous Judge, to all them that love his Appearance. Ages to come, and Peoples yet unborn shall call him Blessed, and bless the Lord for raising of him up: And Blessed shall we also be, if we so walk, as we had him for an Example; for whom this Testimony lives in my Heart, He liv'd and died the SERVANT of the LORD. T. E. Advertisement. FOrasmuch as many other Testimonies from divers Counties and Friends concerning George Fox, and his Great Service for the Truth are sent up to London, which cannot conveniently be printed with the Journal, lest they should swell it too Bigg; and many of them being of the same Import, Therefore they are reserved for fur∣ther Consideration, to be disposed of, as a future Service may be seen in the Wisdom of God for them, when Way is made for his Epistles, or any of his other Works to be published.
The Appearance of the Lord's Everlasting Truth, and Breaking forth again in his Eternal Power in this our Day and Age in ENGLAND— WHerein the Lord's mighty Power and Word of Life hath been Richly and Freely preached, to the Gathering of many into Reconciliation with God by it; to the Exaltation and Glory of the great God, through the bringing forth of the Heavenly and Spiritual Fruits, from such as have been Gathered by his Eternal Light, Pow∣er, and Spirit unto himself. And by the Sowing to the Spirit in the hearts of People, Life Eternal hath been Reaped; That the Flocks have been Gathered, which have the Milk of the Word plenteously: That the Riches of the Word have flourished, and mightily abound∣ed; and God's Heavenly Plow with his Spiritual Men hath gone on chearfully, to the Overturning the Fallow Ground of the Hearts, that had not borne Heavenly Fruit to God. And God's Heavenly Thresh∣ers with his Heavenly Flail, have with Joy and Delight Thresht out the Chaff, and the Corruptions, that have been a-Top of God's Seed and Wheat in Man and Woman: And thus have they Thresht in Hope, and are made Partakers of their Hope; through which God's Seed is come into his Garner. Oh! the Unutterable Glory, and the Unexpressible Excellency of the Everlasting, Glorious Truth, Gospel and Word of Life, that the Infinite, Invisible and Wise God, (who is over all) hath Reveal∣ed and Manifested! And how have the Professors, Priests and Powers risen up in Opposition against his Children, that are born of the Immortal Seed by the Word of God! And Oh! how great have the Persecutions, and Reproaches, and Spoiling of Goods been, that have been Executed upon them! But they that have Touched them, and Touches them, which are as Dear to God, as the Apple of his Eye, how hath the Lord Manifested himself to stand by them, in Overthrowing Powers, Priests and States! What Changes have there been since (1644) and 1650, and 1652! How have the Gaols been filled since then in this Nation with the Heirs of Life, God's Chosen Ones, who had no Helper in the Earth, but the Lord and his Christ! So that Truth's Faithful Witnesses were scarcely to be found, but in Gaols and Prisons, where the Righteous were Numbred among the Transgressors; who had neither Staff nor Bag from Man, but the Staff, the Bread of Life, and the Bag that holds the Treasure, that waxes not old. But the Lord Jesus Christ, that sent them forth, was their Exceeding great Supporter and Upholder by his E∣ternal Power and Spirit, both then and now. G. F.
THE PREFACE, BEING A SUMMARY ACCOUNT Of the DIVERS Dispensations of God TO MEN, FROM The Beginning of the World to That of our present Age, by the Ministry and Testimony of his Faithful Servant George Fox, as an Introduction to the en∣suing Iournal. DIVERS have been the Dispensations of God since the Creation of the World unto the Sons of Men; But the Great End of all of them has been the Re∣nown of his own Excellent Name in the Creation and Re∣stauration of Man: Man, the Emblem of himself, as a God on Earth and the Glory of all his Works. The World began with Innocency: All was then good that the good God had made: And as he blessed the Works of his hands, so their Natures and Har∣mony magnified him their Creator. Then the Morning Stars Sang to∣gether
for Joy, and all parts of his Works said Amen to his Law. Not a Jarr in the whole Frame, but Man in Paradise, the Beasts in the Field, the Fowl in the Air, the Fish in the Sea, the Lights in the Heavens, the Fruits of the Earth; yea the Air, the Earth, the Water and Fire Worshipped, praised and exalted his Power, Wisdom and Goodness. O Holy Sabbath, O Holy Day to the Lord! But this Happy State lasted not long: For Man, the Crown and Glory of the Whole, being tempted to aspire above his place, unhappily yielded against Command and Duty, as well as Interest and Felicity; and so fell below it, lost the Divine I∣mage, the Wisdom, Power and Purity he was made in. By which, being no longer fit for Paradise, he was expelled that Gar∣den of God, his proper Dwelling and Residence, and was dri∣ven out, as a poor Vagabond, from the presence of the Lord, to wander in the Earth, the Habitation of Beasts. Yet God, that made him had pitty on him; for He seeing he was deceived, and that it was not of Malice, or an Original Pre∣sumption in him, but through the Subtilty of the Serpent, (that had first fallen from his own State, and by the Mediation of the Wo∣man, man's own Nature and Companion, whom the Serpent had first deluded) in his infinite Goodness and Wisdom found out a way to Repair the Breach, Recover the Loss, and Restore fallen Man again by a Nobler and more Excellent Adam, promised to be born of a Woman; that as by means of a Woman the evil one had prevailed upon Man, by a Woman also He should come into the World, who would prevail against him and bruise his Head, and deliver Man from his Power: And which, in a signal manner, by the Dispensation of the Son of God in the Flesh, in the fullness of Time, was personally and fully accomplished by him, and in him, as Man's Saviour and Redeemer. But his Power was not limitted, in the Manifestation of it, to that time; for both before and since his blessed Manifestation in the Flesh, He has been the Light and Life, the Rock and Strength of all that ever feared God: Present with them in their Tempta∣tions, followed them in their Travels and Afflictions, and sup∣ported and carried them through and over the Difficulties that have attended them in their Earthly Pilgrimage. By this Abel's heart excelled Cains, and Seth obtained the preheminence, and Enoch walked with God. It was this that strove with the Old World, and which they rebelled against, and which sanctifi∣ed and instructed Noah to Salvation. But the outward Dispensation that followed the benighted State of Man, after his Fall, especially among the Patriarcks, was generally that of Angels; as the Scriptures of the Old Testament do in many places express, as to Abraham, Jacob, &c. The next
was that of the Law by Moses, which was also delivered by Angels, as the Apostle tells us. This Dispensation was much outward, and suited to a low and servil State; called there∣fore that of a School-Master, to point out and prepare that People to look and long for the Messiah, who would deliver them from the servitude of a Ceremonious and imperfect Dis∣pensation, by knowing the Realities of those Misterious Re∣presentations in themselves. In this time the Law was written on Stone, the Temple built with Hands attended with an outward Priest-hood and External Rites, and Ceremonies, that were Shadows of the Good Things that were to come, and were only to serve till the Seed came, or the more excellent and general manifestation of Christ, to whom was the Promise, and to all Men only in him, in whom it was Yea and Amen; even Life from Death, Immortality and Eternal Life. This the Prophets foresaw, and comforted the believing Jews in the certainty of it; which was the Top of the Mosaical Dispen∣sation, and which ended in John's Ministry, the Forerunner of the Messiah, as John's was finished in him, the Fullness of all. And God, that at sundry Times and in divers manners had spoken to the Fathers by his Servants the Prophets, Spoak then by his Son Chrst Jesus, Who is Heir of all things; being the Gospel-Day, which is the Dispensation of Sonship: Bringing in thereby a near∣er Testament and a better hope; even the beginning of the Glory of the latter days, and of the Restitution of all things; yea, the Re∣storation of the Kingdom unto Israel. Now the Spirit, that was more sparingly communicated in former Dispensations, began to be Poured forth upon all Flesh, according to the Prophet Joel, and the Light that shined in Darkness, or but dimly before, the most gracious God caused to Shine out of Darkness, and the Day-star began to arise in the Hearts of Believers, giving unto them the knowledge of God in the Face (or Appearance) of his Son Christ Jesus. Now the Poor in Spirit, the Meek, the true Mourners, the Hun∣gry and Thirsty after Righteousness, the Peace-makers, the Pure in Heart, the Merciful and the Persecuted, came more especially in Remembrance before the Lord, and were sought out and blessed by Israel's true Shepherd. Old Jerusalem with her Children grew out of Date, and the New Jerusalem into Request, the Mother of the Sons of the Gospel-Day. Wherefore no more at Old Jerusa∣lem, nor at the Mountain of Samaria, will God be worshipped above other places; for, behold, he is declared and preached a Spirit, and he will be known as such, and worshipped in the Spirit and in the Truth. He will come nearer then of old time, and he will write his Law in the Heart, and put his Fear and Spirit in the inward parts, according to his promise. Then Signs, Types and Shadows flew away, the Day having discovered their Insuf∣ficiency
in not reaching to the inside of the Cup, to the cleansing of the Conscience; and all Elementary services were expired in and and by him that is the substance of all. And to this Great and Blessed End of the Dispensation of the Son of God, did the Apostles Testifie, whom he had chosen and anointed by his Spirit, to turn the Jews from their Prejudice and Superstition, and the Gentiles from their Vanity and Idola∣try, to Christ's Light and Spirit that shined in them; that they might be quickned from the Sins and Trespasses in which they were Dead, to serve the Living God in the Newness of the Spirit of Life, and walk as Children of the Light, and of the Day, even the Day of Holiness: For such put on Christ, the Light of the World, and make no more Provision for the Flesh, to fulfil the Lusts thereof. So that the Light, Spirit and Grace that comes by Christ, and appears in Man, was what the Apostles mini∣stred from, and turned Peoples Minds unto, and in which they gathered and built up the Churches of Christ in their Day. For which cause they advised them not to quench the Spirit, but wait for the Spirit, and Speak by the Spirit, and Pray by the Spirit, and Walk in the Spirit too, as that which approved them the truly begotten Children of God; born, not of Flesh and Blood, or of the will of Man, but of the will of God; by doing his will, and denying their own; by drinking of Christ's Cup, and being Baptized with his Baptism of Self-denial: The Way and Path that all the Heirs of Life have trod to Blessedness. But alas! even in the Apostles Days, (those bright Stars of the first Magnitude of the Gospel Light) some Clouds (foretelling an Eclipse of this Primitive Glory) began to appear, and several of them gave early Caution of it to the Christians of their Time; that even then there was, and yet would be more and more, a falling away from the Power of Godliness and the Purity of that Spiritual Dispensation, by such as sought to make a fair shew in the Flesh, but with whom the offence of the Cross ceased: Yet with this comfortable Conclusion, that they saw beyond it a more glorious Time than ever, to the true Church. Their sight was true, and what they foretold to the Churches, gathered by them in the Name and Power of Jesus, came so to pass: For Christians degenerated a-pace into outsides, as Days and Meats, and divers other Cerimonies. And which was worse, they fell into Strife and Contention about them, separating one from ano∣ther, then Envying, and, as they had Power, Persecuting one ano∣ther, to the shame and scandal of their common Christianity, and grievous stumbling and offence of the Heathen, among whom the Lord had so long and so marvellously preserved them. And having got at last the Worldly Power into their Hands, by Kings and Emperors embracing the Christian Profession, they changed what they could, the Kingdom of Christ, which is not of this World, into a Worldly Kingdom; or at least stiled the Worldly Kingdom that was in their Hands the Kingdom of Christ,
and so they became Worldly, and not true Christians. Then Humane Inventions and Novelties, both in Doctrine and Worship, crowded fast into the Church; a Door being opened thereunto by the Grossness and Carnality that appeared then among the generality of Christians; who had long since left the Guidance of God's meek and heavenly Spirit, and given themselves up to Superstition, Will-worship, and Voluntary Humility. And as Superstition is Blind, so it is Heady and Furious; for all must stoop to its blind and boundless Zeal or Perish by it: In the Name of the Spirit, persecuting the very appearance of the Spirit of God in o∣thers, and opposing that in them which they resisted in them∣selves, viz. the Light, Grace and Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ; but always under the Notion of Innovation, Heresie, Schism, or some such plausible Name. Though Christianity allows of no Name or Pretence whatever for persecuting of any Man for matters of meer Religion; Religion being in its very Nature, Meek, Gentle and Forbearing; and consists of Faith, Hope and Charity, which no Persecutor can have, whilst he remains a Persecutor; in that a Man cannot believe well, or hope well, or have a charitable or tender regard to another, whilst he would violate his mind or persecute his Body for matters of Faith or Worship towards his God. Thus the False Church sprang up, and mounted the Chair. But though she lost her Nature, she would keep her good Name of the Lambs-bride, the True Church and Mother of the Faithful; constraining all to receive her Mark, either in their Forehead or Righthand, publickly or privately: But Indeed and in Truth she was Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots: Mother of those that with all their show and outside of Religi∣on, were adulterated and gone from the Spirit, Nature and Life of Christ, and grown Vain, Worldly, Ambitious, Covetous, Cruel, &c. which are the Fruits of the Flesh and not of the Spirit. Now it was that the True Church fled into the Wilderness, that is, from Superstition and Violence, to a Retired, Solitary and lonely State; hidden and as it were out of Sight of Men, though not out of the World: Which shows that her wonted Visibility was not Essential to the Being of a True Church in the Judgment of the Holy Ghost; she being as True a Church in the Wilderness, though not as Visible and Lustrious, as when she was in her for∣mer Splendor of Profession. In this State many Attempts She made to return, but the Waters were yet too High, and her way blocked up, and many of her excellent Children in seve∣ral Nations and Centuries fell by the Cruelty of Superstition, because they would not fall from their Faithfulness to the Truth.
The last Age did set some steps towards it, both as to Do∣ctrine, Worship and Practice. But Practice quickly failed, for Wickedness flowed in a little time, as well among the Profes∣sors of the Reformation as those they reformed from; so that by the Fruits of Conversation they were not to be distinguished. And the Children of the Reformers, if not the Reformers them∣selves, betook themselves very early to Earthly Policy and Power to uphold and carry on their Reformation that had been begun with Spiritual Weapons; which I have often thought, has been one of the greatest reasons the Reformation made no better Progress, as to the Life and Soul of Religion: For whilst the Reformers were Lowly and Spiritually Minded, and trusted in God, and lookt to Him, and lived in his Fear, and consulted not with Flesh and Blood, nor sought Deliverance in their own way, there were daily added to the Church such as, one might reasonably say, should be saved. For they were not so care∣ful to be safe from Persecution as to be Faithful under it. Being more concerned to spread the Truth by their Faith and Patience in Tribulation, than to get the worldly Power out of their Hands that inflicted their Sufferings upon them; and it will be well if the Lord suffer them not to fall by the very same way they took to stand. In Doctrine they were in some things short, in other things, to avoid one extream they run into ano∣ther: And for Worship, there was for the generality, more of Man than God. They owned the Spirit, Inspiration and Reve∣lation indeed, and grounded their Seperation and Reformation upon the Sense and Ʋnderstanding they received from it, in the Reading of the Scriptures of Truth; and this was their Plea, the Scripture was the Text, the Spirit the Interpreter, and that to e∣very one for himself. But yet there was too much of humane Invention, Tradition and Art that remained both in Praying and Preaching, and of worldly Authority and worldly Greatness in their Ministers, especially in this Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark and some Parts of Germany. God was therefore pleased among us, to shift from Vessel to Vessel: And the next remove humbled the Ministry, so that they were more Strict in Preaching, De∣vout in Praying, and Zealous for keeping the Lords-day, and Ca∣techising of Children and Servants, and Repeating at Home in their Families what they had heard in publick. But even as these grew into Power, they were not only for Whipping some out, but others into the Temple: And they ap∣peared Rigid in their Spirits, rather than Severe in their Lives, and more for a Party then for Piety: Which brought forth ano∣ther People, that were yet more retired and select. They would not communicate at large, or in common with others; but formed Churches among themselves of such as could give some account of their Conversion, at least, of very promising experiences of the Work of God's Grace upon their Hearts, and under mutual
Agrements and Covenants of fellowship they kept together. These People were somewhat of a Softer Temper, and seemed to recommend Religion by the Charms of its Love, Mercy and Goodness rather than by the Terrours of its Judgments and Pu∣nishment; by which the former Party would have terrified Peo∣ple into Religion. They also allowed greater liberty to Prophecy than those be∣fore them; for they admitted any Member to Speak or Pray, as well as their Pastor (whom they always Chose, and not the Civil Magistrate). If such found any thing pressing upon them to either Duty, even without the Distinction of Clergy or Lai∣ty; Persons of any Trade, be it never so Low and Mechanical. But alas! even these People suffered great loss: For tasting of Worldly Empire, and the favour of Princes, and the gain that en∣sued, they degenerated but too much. For though they had cryed down National Churches and Ministry and Maintenance too, some of them, when it was their own turn to be Tryed, fell under the Weight of Worldly Honour and Advantage, got into profitable Parsonages too much, and outlived and contra∣dicted their own Principles: And, which was yet worse, turn∣ed some of them absolute Persecutors of other Men for God's Sake, that but so lately came themselves out of the Furnace, which drove many a step farther, and that was into the Wa∣ter. Another Baptism, as believing they were not Scripturally Baptised; and hoping to find that Presence and Power of God in submitting to that Ordinance, which they desired and wanted. These People made also Profession of Neglecting, if not Re∣nouncing and Censuring, not only the Necessity but use of all Hu∣man Learning as to the Ministry; and all other Qualifications to it besides the Helps and Gifts of the Spirit of God, and those na∣tural and common to Men; and for a time they seemed like John of Old, a Burning and a Shining Light, to other Societies. They were very Diligent, Plain and Serious, strong in Scrip∣ture, and bold in Profession, bearing much Reproach and Con∣tradiction: But that which others fell by, proved their Hurt. For worldly Power spoiled them too; who had enough of it to try them what they would do if they had more; and they rested also too much upon their Watry Dispensation, instead of passing on more fully to the Fire and Holy Ghost, which was his Baptism, who came with a Fan in his Hand, that he might throughly (and not in part only) purge his Floor, and take a∣way the Dross and the Tin of his People and make a Man fi∣ner than Gold. Withall, they grew High, Rough and Self-righteous, opposing further attainment; too much forgetting the Day of their Infancy and Littleness, which gave them some∣thing of a real Beauty; in so much that many left them and all visible Churches and Societies, and Wandred up and down, as
Sheep without a Shepherd, and as Doves without their Mates; seeking their Beloved but could not find Him, as their Souls desired to know Him; whom their Souls loved above their chiefest Joy. These People were called Seekers by some, and the Family of Love by others; because, as they came to the knowledge of one another, they sometimes met together, not formally to Pray or Preach, at appointed times or Places, in their own Wills, as in times past they were accustomed to do; but waited together in Silence, and as any thing rose in any one of their Minds that they thought Savoured of a Divine Spring, so they sometimes Spoke. But so it was that some of them not keeping in Hu∣mility and in the Fear of God, after the Abundance of Revela∣tion, were exalted above Measure, and for want of staying their Minds in an humble Dependance upon him that opened their Ʋnderstandings to see great things in his Law; they run out in their own Imaginations, and mixing them with those Divine Openings, brought forth a Monstrous Birth; to the Scandal of those that feared God, and waited daily in the Temple, not made with Hands, for the Consolation of Israel; the Jew inward, and Circumcision in Spirit. This People obtained the Name of Ranters from their extra∣vagant Discourses and Practices. For they interpreted Christ's fullfilling of the Law for us, to be a discharging of us from any Obligation and Duty the Law required, instead of the Con∣demnation of the Law for sins past, upon Faith and Repentance, and that now it was no Sin to do that which before it was a Sin to commit; the slavish Fear of the Law being taken off by Christ, and all things good that Man did, if he did but do them with the Mind and Perswasion that it was so. Inso∣much that divers fell into Gross and Enormous Practices; pre∣tending in excuse thereof that they could, without Evil, com∣mit the same Act which was Sin in another to do; thereby distinguishing between the Action and the Evil of it, by the Dire∣ction of the Mind and Intention in the doing of it. Which was to make Sin Super-abound by the aboundings of Grace, and to turn from the Grace of God into Wantonness, a securer way of Sinning than before: As if Christ came not to take away Sin, but that we might Sin more freely at his Cost, and with less Danger to our selves. I say, this ensnared Divers, and brought them to an utter and lamentable Loss as to their E∣ternal State; and they grew very troublesome to the better sort of People, and furnished the looser with an occasion to Pro∣phane. It was about that very same time, as you may see in the ensuing Annales, that the Eternal, Wise, and Good God was pleased, in his Infinite Love, to Honour and Visit this benigh∣ted
and bewildred Nation with his Glorious Day-spring from on High; yea with a most sure and certain sound of the Word of Light and Life, through the Testimony of a Chosen Vessel, to an effectual and blessed purpose, can many thousands say, Glory be to the Name of the Lord for ever. For as it reached the Conscience and broak the Heart, and brought many to a Sense and Search, so what People had been vainly seeking without, with much Pains and Cost, they by this Ministry found within; where it was they wanted what they sought for, viz. The right way to Peace with God. For they were directed to the Light of Jesus Christ within them, as the Seed and Leven of the Kingdom of God; near All, because in All, and God's Talent to All. A Faithful and True Wness and Just Monitor in every Bosom. The Gift and Grace of God to Life and Salvation that appears to all, though few regard it. This, the Traditional Christian, conceited of himself, and strong in his own Will and Righteousness, and overcome with blind Zeal and Passion, either dispised as a low and common thing, or opposed as a Novelty, un∣der many hard Names and opprobrious Terms; denying, in his ignorant and angry Mind, any fresh Manifestation of God's Power and Spirit in Man in these days, though never more needed to make true Christians: Not unlike those Jews of Old that reject∣ed the Son of God at the very same time that they blindly profes∣sed to wait for the Messiah to come; because, alas, he appeared not among them according to their Carnal Mind and Expectation. This brought forth many abusive Books, which filled the grea∣ter sort with Envy, and lesser with Rage, and made the way and progress of this Blessed Testimony Straight and Narrow in∣deed to those that received it. However, God owned his own Work, and this Testimony did effectually Reach, Gather, Com∣fort and Establish the Weary and Heavy Leaden, the Hungry and Thirsty, the Poor and Needy, the Mournful and Sick of many Ma∣ladys, that had spent all upon Phisitians of no Value, and waited for Relief from Heaven; Help only from above: Seeing upon a serious Tryal of all things, nothing else would do but Christ himself, the Light of his Countenance, a Touch of his Garment and Help from his Hand, who cured the poor Womans Issue, raised the Centurions Servant, the Widows Son, the Rulers Daughter, and Peter's Mother, and like Her, they no sooner felt his Power and Efficacy upon their Souls; but they gave up to obey him in a Testimony to his Power, and with resigned Wills and faithful Hearts, through all Mockings, Contradictions, Beatings, Prisons, and many other Jeopardies that attended them for his Blessed Name Sake. And truly, they were very many and very Great; so that in all Humane Probabili they must have been swallowed up Quick of the Proud and Bosterous Waves that swelled and beat against
them; but that the God of all their tender Mercies was with them in his Glorious Authority, so that the Hills often Fled and the Mountains melted before the Power that filled them; working mightily for them as well as in them, one ever following the other. By which they saw plainly, to their exceeding great Confirmation and Comfort, that all things were possible with him with whom they had to do. And that the more that which God required seemed to cross Man's Wisdom, and ex∣pose them to Man's Wrath, the more God appeared to help and carry them through all to his Glory: Insomuch that if e∣ver any People could say in Truth, Thou art our Sun and our Shield, our Rock and Sanctuary, and by thee we have leaped over a Wall, and by thee we have run through a Troop, and by thee we have put the Armies of the Aliens to Flight, these People had Right to say it. And as God had delivered their Souls of the warisom Burthens of Sin and Vanity, and enriched their poverty of Spi∣rit, and satisfied their great Hungar and Thirst after Eternal Righteousness, and filled them with the Good Things of his own House, and made them Stewards of his Manifold Gifts; so they went forth to all Quarters of these Nations, to Declare to the Inhabitants thereof, what God had done for them; what they had found, and where and how they had found it; viz. The way to Peace with God: Inviting them to come and see and taste, for themselves, the Truth of what they Declared unto them. And as their Testimony was to the Principle of God in Man, the precious Pearl and Leven of the Kingdom, as the only bles∣sed means appointed of God to Quicken, Convince and Sanctifie Man; so they opened to them what it was in it self, and what it was given to them for: How they might know it from their own Spirit, and that of the Subtil appearance of the Evil one; and what it would do for all those whose minds are turned off from the Vanity of the World and its Lifeless ways and Teach∣ers, and ad-hear to this blessed Light in themselves, which dis∣covers and condemns Sin in all its appearances, and shows how to overcome it, if minded and obeyed in its holy Manifestati∣ons and Convictions: Giving Power to such to Avoid and Re∣sist those things that do not please God, and to grow Strong in Love, Faith, and Good Works: That so Man, whom Sin hath made as a Wilderness, over-run with Briers and Thorns, might become as the Garden of God, cultivated by his divine Power, and replenisht with the most Virtuous and Beautiful Plants of God's own Right Hand Planting, to his Eternal Praise. But these Experimental Preachers of Glad Tydings of God's Truth and Kingdom could not run when they List, or Pray or Preach when they Pleased, But as the Christ their Redeemer pre∣pared and moved them by his own Blessed Spirit, for which they waited in their Services and Meetings, and Spoak as that gave
them utterance, and which was as those having Authority, and not like the Dreaming, Dry and formal Pharisees. And so it plainly appeared to the serious Minded, whose Spiritual Eye the Lord Jesus had in any measure opened; so that to one was given the Word of Exhortation, to another the Word of Reproof, to another the Word of Consolation, and all by the same Spirit and in the good Order thereof, to the Convincing and Edifying of many. And truly, they waxed Strong and Bold through Faithfulness; and by the Power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus became very Fruitful; thousands, in a short time, being turned to the Truth through their Testimony in Ministry and Sufferings, insomuch as in most Counties, and many of the considerable Towns of Eng∣land, Meetings were settled, and daily there were added such as should be saved. For they were Diligent to Plant and to Wa∣ter, and the Lord blessed their Labours with an Exceeding great Increase; notwithstanding all the opposition made to their blessed Progress, by false Rumors, Calumnies and bitter Persecutions; not only from the Powers of the Earth, but from every one that listed to injure and abuse them: So that they seemed indeed to be as poor Sheep appointed to the Slaughter, and as a People killed all the Day long. It were fitter for a Volumn than a Preface, but so much as to repeat the Contents of their cruel Sufferings from Professors as well as from Prophaine, and from Magistrates as well as the Rabble, that it may well be said of this abused and despised Peo∣ple, they went forth Weeping and sowed in Tears, bearing Testimo∣ny to the Precious Seed, the Seed of the Kingdom, which stands not in Words, the Finest the Highest that Man's Wit can use, but in Power; the Power of Christ Jesus, to whom God the Fa∣ther hath given all Power in Heaven and in Earth, that he might rule Angels above, and Men below; who impowred them, as their Work witnesseth, by the many that were turned through their Ministry from Darkness to the Light, and out of the Broad into the Narrow Way, bringing People to a Weighty, Serious and God-like Conversation; the Practice of that Doctrine which they Taught. And as without this Secret Divine Power there is no Quickning and Regenerating of dead Souls, so the want of this Generating and begetting Power and Life, is the Cause of the little Fruit that the many Ministrys that have been, and are in the World bring forth. O that both Ministers and People were sensible of this! My Soul is often troubled for them, and Sorrow and Mourning compass me about for their Sakes. O! that they were Wise, O! that they would consider, and lay to Heart the things that truly and substantially make for their lasting Peace.
Two things are to be briefly toucht upon, the Doctrine they Taught, and the Example they lead among all People. I have already toucht upon their Fundamental Principle, which is as the Corner stone of their Fabrick: And to speak eminently and properly, their Characteristick, or main distinguishing Point or Principle, viz. the Light of Christ within, as God's Gift for Man's Salvation. This I say, is as the Root of the goodly Tree of Doctrines that grew and branched out from it, which I shall now mention in their Natural and Experimental Order. First, Repentance from dead Works to serve the Living God. Which comprehends three Operations. First, a sight of Sin. Secondly, A Sense and Godly Sorrow for it. Thirdly, An Amend∣ment for the Time to come. This was the Repentance they preached and pressed, and a Natural result from the Principle they turned all People unto. For of Light came Sight; and of Sight came Sense and Sorrow; and of Sense and Sorrow, came A∣mentment of Life: Which Doctrine of Repentance leads to Justifi∣cation; that is, Forgiveness of the Sins that are past through Christ the alone Propitiation and the Sanctification or Purgation of the Soul from the defiling Nature and Habits of sin present; which is justifi∣cation in the compleat Sense of that Word; comprehending both justification from the Guilt of the Sins that are past, as if they had never been commited, through the Love and Mercy of God in Christ Jesus; and the Creatures being made inwardly just through the Cleansing and Sanctifying Power and Spirit of Christ revealed in the Soul; which is commonly called Sanctification.. From hence sprang a Second Doctrine they were led to declare, as the Mark of the Price of the High Calling of all true Christians, viz. Perfection from sin, according to the Scriptures of Truth, which testifie it to be the end of Christ's coming and the Nature of his Kingdom, and for which his Spirit was given. But they ne∣ver held a Perfection in Wisdom and Glory in this Life, or from Natural Infirmities or Death, as some have with a weak or ill mind, imagined and insinuated against them. This they called a Redeemed State, Regeneration, or the New-Birth: Teaching every where, according to their Foundation, that without this Work were known, there was no inheriting the Kingdom of God. Third, To an acknowledgment of Eternal Rewards and Pu∣nishment, as they have good Reason; for else of all People, cer∣tainly they must be the most Miserable: Who for about Forty Years, have been exceeding great Sufferers for their Profession, and in some Cases, treated worse then the worst of Men; yea, as the Refuge and Off-scowering of all things.
This was the Purport of their Doctrine and Ministry; which, for the most part, is what other Professors of Christianity pretend to hold in Words and Forms, but not in the Power of Godliness; that has been long lost by Mens departing from that Principle and Seed of Life, that is in Man and which Man has not regarded, but lost the Sense of; and in and by which he can only be quickned in his Mind to serve the living God in Newness of Life. For as the Life of Religion was lost, and the generality lived and Worshipped God af∣ter their own Wills, and not after the Will of God, nor the mind of Christ, which stood in the Works and Fruits of the Holy Spirit; so that which they prest, was not Notion but Experience, no For∣mality but Godliness; as being sensible in themselves, through the Work of God's Righteous Judgments, that without Holiness no Man should ever see the Lord with Comfort. Besides these Doctrines, and out of them, as the larger Branches, there sprang forth several particular Doctrines, that did exemplifie and further explain the Truth and Efficacy of the General Doctrine before observed, in their Lives and Examples. As, I. Communion and loving one another. This is a noted Mark in the Mouth of all sorts of People concerning them. They will meet, They will help and stick one to another. Whence it is common to hear some say, Look how the Quakers love and take care of one ano∣ther. Others less Moderate will say, The Quakers love none but themselves, and if loving one another and having an Intimate Com∣munion in Religion, and constant care to meet to Worship God and help one another, be any Mark of Primitive Christianity, they had it, Blessed be the Lord, in an ample manner. II. To love Enemies: This they both Taught and Practised: For they did not only refuse to be revenged for Injuries done them, and condemned it as of an Ʋnchristian Spirit, but they did freely For∣give, yea, Help and Relieve those that had been Cruel to them, when it was in their Power to have been even with them; of which ma∣ny and singular Instances might be given: Endeavouring, through Patience, to overcome all Injustice and Oppression, and Preaching this Doctrine as Christian for others to follow. III. The Sufficiency of Truth speaking, according to Christ's own form of Words, of Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, among Christians without Swearing, both from Christ's express Prohibition to Swear at all. Mat. 5. And for that they being under the Tye and Bond of Truth in themselves, there was both no Necessity for an Oath, and it would be a Reproach to their Christian Veracity to Assure their Truth by such an Extraordinary way of Speaking: But offering at the same time, to be punnisht to the full, for false Speaking, as o∣thers for Perjury, if ever guilty of it; and hereby they exclude, with all True, all False and Prophane Swearing; for which the Land did and doth Mourn, and the great God was and is not a little offended with it.
IV. Not Fighting but Suffering, is another Testimony peculiar to this People: They affirm that Christianity teacheth People To beat their Swords into Plough Shears, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, and to learn War no more, that so the Wolf may lie down with the Lamb, and the Lyon with the Calf, and nothing that destroys be entertained in the Hearts of People; exhorting them to employ their Zeal against Sin, and turn their Anger against Satan, and no longer War one against another; because, all Wars and Fightings come of Mens own Hearts Lusts, according to the Apostle James, and not of the Meek Spirit of Christ Jesus who is Captain of another Warfare, and which is carried on with other Weapons. Thus, as Truth speaking succeeded Swearing, so Faith and Truth succeed∣ed Fighting, in the Doctrine and Practise of this People. Nor ought they for this to be Obnoxious to Civil Government, since if they cannot Fight for it, neither can they Fight against it; which is no mean security to the State: Nor is it reasonable that People should be blamed for not doing more for others than they can do for them∣selves. And Christianity set aside, if the Costs and Fruits of War were well considered, Peace, with its Inconveniencies, is generally Preferable. But though they were not for Fighting, they were for submitting to Government; and that, not only for Fear, but for Con∣science Sake, where Government doth not interfere with Conscience: Believing it to be an Ordinance of God, and where it is justly ad∣ministred, a great Benefit to Minkind: Tho' it has been their Lot, through blind Zeal in some, and Interest in others, to have felt the Strokes of it with greater Weight and Rigour than any other Perswasion in this Age; whilst they, of all others (Religion set a∣side) have given the Civil Magistrate the least occasion of Trouble in the Discharge of his Office. V. Another part of the Character of this People is, They refuse to pay Tythes, or Maintenance to a National Ministry, and that for two Reasons; The one is, that they believe all compelled Mainte∣nance, even to Gospel Ministers, to be Ʋnlawful, because expresly contrary to Christ's Command, who said, Freely you have receiv∣ed, freely give: At least, that the Maintenance of Gospel Ministers should be free and not forced. The other Reason of their Refu∣sal is, Because those Ministers are not Gospel ones, in that the Holy Ghost is not their Foundation, but Humane Arts and Parts: So that it is not matter of Humor or Sullenness, but pure Conscience to∣wards God, that they cannot help to support National Ministers where they dwell, which are but too much and too visibly become ways of Worldly Advantage and Preferment. VI. Not to respect Persons, was another of their Doctrines and Practices, for which they were often Buffeted and Abused. They Affirmed it to be sinful to give Flattering Titles, or to use Vain Gestures and Complements of Respect; tho' to Virtue and Authority they ever made a Difference, but after their Plain and Homely Manner, yet sincere and substantial way; well remembering the
Example of Mordecai and Elihu, but more especially the Command of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who forbad his Followers to call Men Rabby, which implies Lord and Master, also the fa∣shionable Greetings and Salutations of those Times; that so Self-love and Honour, to which the proud Mind of Man is incident, in his fallen Estate, might not be Indulged but Rebuked. They also used the Plain Language of Thou and Thee to a sin∣gle Person, whatever was his Degree among Men. And indeed the Wisdom of God was much seen, in bringing forth this People in so Plain an Appearance; for it was a Close and Distinguishing Test upon the Spirit of those they came among; shewing their Insides and what predominated, notwithstanding their High and Great Profession of Religion. This, among the rest, sounded so harsh to many of them, and they took it so ill, that they would say, Thou me, Thou my Dog: If thou thouest me, I'le thou thy Teeth down thy Throat, forgetting the Language they use to God in their own Prayers, and the common Stile of the Scriptures, and that it is an absolute and essential Propriety of Speech: And what good had their Religion done them, who were so sensibly toucht with Indignation for the use of this Plain, Honest, and True Speech? VI. They recommended Silence by their Example, having very few words upon all Occasions: They were at a Word in Dealing; nor could their Customers many Words tempt them from it; having more regard for Truth than Custom, to Example then Gain, they sought Solitude; but when in Company, they would neither use nor willingly hear Ʋnnecessary as well as Ʋnlawful Discourses; whereby they preserved their Minds pure and undisturbed from unprofita∣ble Thoughts and Diversions: Nor could they humour the Custom of Good Night, Good Morrow, God Speed; for they knew the Night was Good, and the Day was Good, without wishing of ei∣ther; and that in the other Expression, the Holy Name of God was too lightly and unthinkingly used, and therefore taken in Vain. Besides, they were Words and Wishes of Course, and are usually as little meant, as are Love and Service in the Custom of Cap and Knee; and superfluity in those as well as in other things was Bur∣thensom to them; and therefore They did not only decline to use them, but found themselves often prest to reprove the Practice. For the same reason they forbore Drinking to People, or Pledging of them, as the manner of the World is: A Practice that is not only Unnecessary, but they thought Evil in the Tendencies of it; being a Provocation to Drinking more than did People Good, as well as that it was in it self Vain and Heathenish. VII. Their way of Marriage is peculiar to them; and is a di∣stinguishing Practice from all other Societies professing Christianity. They say that Marriage is an Ordinance of God, and that God only can rightly join Man and Woman in Marriage. Therefore they use
neither Priest nor Magistrate, but the Man and Woman concern'd take each other as Husband and Wife in the presence of divers Credible Witnesses, promising unto each other with God's Assistance, to be Loving and Faithful in that Relation till Death shall separate them. But, antecedent to all this, They first present themselves to the Monthly Meeting for the Affairs of the Church, where they reside, There declaring their Intentions to take one another as Man and Wife, if the said Meeting have nothing material to ob∣ject against it. They are constantly askt the necessary Questions, as in Case of Parents, or Guardians if they have acquainted them with their Intention, and have their Consent, &c. The Method of the Meeting is to take a Minute thereof, and to appoint Proper Per∣sons to enquire of their Conversation and Clearness from all others, and whether they have discharged their Duty to their Parents or Guardians; and make report thereof the next Monthly Meeting; where the same Parties are desired to give their Attendance. In case it appears they proceeded Orderly, the Meeting passes their Proposal, and so Records it in their Meeting Book; and in Case the Woman be a Widow and hath Children, due care is there taken, that Provision also be made by her for the Orphans be∣fore the said Marriage; advising the Parties concerned to appoint a convenient Time and place, and to give fitting Notice to their Relations, and such Friends and Neighbours, as they desire should be the Witnesses of their Marriage: Where they take one ano∣ther by the Hand, and by Name promising Reciprocally af∣ter the Manner before expressed. Of all which Proceedings, a Narative, in a way of Certificate, is made, to which the said Par∣ties first set their Hands, thereby making it their Act and Deed; and then divers of the Relations, Spectators and Auditors set their Names as Witnesses of what they Said and Signed. Which Certi∣ficate, is afterward Registred in the Record belonging to the Meet∣ing, where the Marriage is Solemnized. Which Regular Me∣thod has been, as it deserves, adjudged in Courts of Law a good Marriage, where it has been Disputed and Contested, for want of the accustomed Formality of Priest and Ring, &c. which Ce∣remonies they have Refused, not out of Humour, but Conscience reasonably grounded, in as much as no Scripture Example tells us, that the Priest had any other part of Old Time, than that of a Witness among the rest, before whom the Jews used to take one another: And therefore this People look upon it as an Imposi∣on, to advance the Power and Profits of the Clergy. And for the use of the Ring, it is enough to say that it was an Heathen and vain Custom. and never in Practice among the People of God, Jews or Primitive Christans. The words of the Usual form, as With my Body I thee Worship, &c. are hardly defensible: In short, they are more Careful, Exact and Regular than any Form now used, and it is Free of the inconveniencies other Methods are attended with. Their Care and Checks being so many, and such, as no Clandestine Marriages can be perform'd among them.
VIII. It may not be unfit to say something here of their Births and Burials, which make up so much of the Pomp and Solemnity of too many called Christians. For Births, the Parents Name their own Children, which is usually some days after they are Born, in the presence of the Midwife (if she can be there) and those that were at the Birth, &c. who afterward sign a Certificate, for that purpose prepared, of the Birth and Name of the Child, or Children, which is Recorded in a proper Book, in the Monthly Meeting, to which the Parents belong; avoiding the accustomed Cerimonies and Feastivals. IX. Their Burials are performed with the same Simplicity. If the Corps of the Deceased be near any publick Meeting Place, it is usually carried thither, for the more convenient Reception of those that Accompany it to the Ground they Bury in, and it so falls out sometimes, that while the Meeting is gathering for the Bu∣rial, some or other have a Word of Exhortation, for the sake of the People there met together: After which, the Body is borne away by the Young Men, or those that are of their Neighbourhood, or that were most of the Intimacy of the Deceased Party: The Corps being in a plain Coffin, without any Covering or Furniture upon it. At the Ground, they pause some time before they put the Body into its Grave, that if any one there should have any thing upon them to exhort the People, they may not be dissappointed, and that the Relations may the more Retiredly and Solemnly take their last leave of the Corps of their departed Kindred, and the Spectators have a Sense of Mortality, by the occasion then given them to re∣flect upon their own Latter End. Otherways, they have no set Rites or Ceremonies on those Occasions; neither do the Kindred of the Deceased ever wear Mourning; they looking upon it as a Wordly Ceremony and piece of Pomp, and that what Mourning is fit for a Christian to have at the Departure of a beloved Relation or Friend, should be worn in the Mind which is only sensible of the Loss, and the Love they had to them, and Remembrance of them, to be outwardly exprest by a respect to their Advice, and care of those they have left behind them, and their Love of that they Loved. Which Conduct of theirs, though unmodish or un∣fashionable, leaves nothing of the Substance of things neglect∣ed or undone; and as they aim at no more, so that simplicity of Life is what they observe with great Satisfaction, though it sometimes happens not to be without the Mockeries of the vain World they live in. These things gave them a Rough and Disagreeable Appearance with the Generality; who thought them Turners of the World upside down, as indeed, in some Sense they were; but in no o∣ther than that wherein Paul was so charged, viz. To bring things back into their Primitive and right Order again. For these and such like Practices of theirs were not the Result of Humour, as some have fancied, but a Fruit of Inward Sense, which God,
through his Fear, had begotten in them. They did not consider how to contradict the World, or distinguish themselves; being none of their Business, as it was not their Interest, no, it was not the Result of Consultation, or a framed design to declare or re∣commend Schism or Novelty. But God having given them a sight of themselves, they saw the whole World in the same Glass of Truth; and sensibly discerned the Affections and Passions of Men, and the Rise and Tendency of Things. What gratified the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye and the Pride of Life which are not of the Father, but of the World; and from thence Sprang in that Night of Darkness and Apostacy, which hath been over People, through their Degeneration from the Light and Spirit of God, these and many other vain Customs; which are seen by the Heavenly day of Christ which dawns in the Soul, to be, ei∣ther wrong in their Original, or, by Time and Abuse, Hurtful in their Practice. And though these things seemed Trivial to some, and rendered this People Stingy and conceited in such Persons Opinions; there was and is more in them than they were aware of. It was not very easie to our Primitive Friends, to make themselves Sights and Spectacles, and the Scorn and Derision of the World; which they easily foresaw must be the Consequence of so Ʋnfashionable a Conversation in it. But herein was the Wis∣dom of God seen in the Foolishness of these things; First, That they discovered the Satisfaction and Concern that People had in and for the Fashions of this World, notwithstanding their Pre∣tences to another; in that any disappointment about them came so very near them; that the greatest Honesty, Virtue, Wisdom and Ability, were unwelcom without them. Secondly, It seasonably and profitably divided Conversation; for making their Society uneasie to their Relations and Acquaintance, it gave them the op∣portunity of more Retirement and Solitude, wherein they met with better Company, even the Lord, God their Redeemer, and grew strong in his Love, Power and Wisdom, and were thereby better qualified for his Service; and the success abundantly show'd it: Blessed be the Name of the Lord. And though they were not Great and Learned in the Esteem of this World (for then they had not wanted Followers upon their own Credit and Authority) yet they were generally of the most Sober of the several Perswasions they were in, and of the most Repute for Religion; and many of them of good Capacity, Sub∣stance and Account among Men. And also some among them neither wanted for Parts, Learn∣ing nor Estate; though then, as of Old, not many Wise, nor No∣ble, &c. were called, or at least received the Heavenly Call; be∣cause of the Cross that attended the Profession of it in Sincerity: But neither do Parts or Learning make Men the better Christi∣ans, though the better Orators and Disputants; and it is the Ig∣norance of People about the Divine Gift that causes that vulgar
and mischievous mistake. Theory and Practice, Expression and Enjoyment; Words, and Life; are two things. Oh! 'tis the Pe∣nitent, the Reformed, the Lowly, the Watchful, the Self-denying and Holy Soul that is the Christian; and that Frame is the Fruit and Work of the Spirit, which is the Life of Jesus; whose Life, though hid in God the Father, is shed abroad in the Hearts of them that truly Believe. Oh! that People did but know this to cleanse them, to circumcise them, to quicken them, and to make them New Creatures indeed; Re-created or Regenerated after Christ Jesus unto good Works. That they might live to God and not to themselves; and offer up living Prayers and living Praises, to the living God, through his own living Spirit, in which he is only to be Worshipped in this Gospel Day. Oh! that they that read me could but feel me; for my Heart is affected with this Merciful Visitation of the Father of Lights and Spirits, to this poor Na∣tion, and the whole World through the same Testimony. Why should the Inhabitants thereof reject it? Why should they loose the Blessed Benefit of it? Why should they not turn to the Lord with all their Hearts, and say from the Heart, Speak Lord, for now thy poor Servants hear. Oh! that thy will may be done, thy Great, thy Good and Holy will in Earth as it is in Heaven: Do it in us, do it upon us, do what thou wilt with us, for we are thine and desire to glorifie thee our Creator, both for that, and be∣cause thou art our Redeemer; for thou art redeeming us from the Earth; from the Vanities and Pollutions of it, to be a Peculiar People unto thee. Oh! this were a Brave Day for England, if so she could say in Truth. But alas, the Case is otherwise, for which some of thine Inhabitants, O Land of my Nativity! have mourned over thee with bitter Wailing and Lamentation. Their Heads have been indeed as Waters, and their Eyes as Fountains of Tears, because of thy Transgression and Stiffneckedness; becuse thou wilt not Hear, and Fear and Return to the Rock, even thy Rock, O England! from whence thou wert Hewen. But be thou warned, O Land of great Profession, to receive him into thy Heart; Behold at that Door it is, he hath stood so long Knock∣ing, but thou wilt yet have none of him. Oh! be thou awak∣ned, least Jerusalem's Judgments do swiftly overtake thee, be∣cause of Jerusalems Sins that abound in thee. For she abounded in Formality, but made void the Weighty things of God's Law as thou daily doest. She withstood the Son of God in the Flesh, and thou resisteth the Son of God in the Spirit. He would have gathered her as an Hen gathereth her Chickens under her Wings, and she would not; so would he have gathered thee out of thy Life-less Profession, and have brought thee to inherit Substance, to have known his Pow∣er and Kingdom, for which he often knockt within, by his Grace and Spirit, and without by his Servants and Witnesses; but thou wouldest not be gathered: But on the Contrary, as Jerusalem of old persecuted the Manifestation of the Son of God in the
Flesh, and Crucified him and Whipt and Imprisoned his Servants; so hast thou, O Land, Crucified to thy self afresh the Lord of Life and Glory, and done dispite to his Spirit of Grace; slighting the Fatherly Visitation, and persecuting the blessed Dispensers of it by thy Laws and Magistrates; though they have Early and Late pleaded with thee in the Power and Spirit of the Lord; in Love and Meekness, that thou mightest know the Lord and serve him, and become the Glory of all Lands. But thou hast Evilly entreated and requited them. Thou hast set at naught all their Counsel, and would have none of their Reproof, as thou shouldest have done. Their appearance was too Straight, and their qualifications were to Mean for thee to receive them; who like the Jews of Old, that cryed, Is not this the Car∣penters Son, and are not his Brethren among us; which of the Scribes, of the Learned (the Orthodox) believe in him? Prophesying their fall in a year or two, and making and executing of severe Laws to bring it to pass; by endeavouring to terrifie them out of their Holy way, or distroying them for abiding Faithful to it. But thou hast seen how many Governments that rise against them, and determined their Downfal, have been overturned and extin∣guished, and that they are still preserved, and become a great and a considerable People, among the Middle sort of thy nume∣rous Inhabitants. And notwithstanding the many difficulties without and within, which they have Laboured under, since the Lord God Eternal first gathered them, they are an encreasing Peo∣ple, the Lord still adding unto them, in divers Parts, such as shall be saved, if they persevere to the End. And to thee; were they and are they lifted up as a Standard, and as a City set upon a Hill, and to the Nations round about thee, that in their Light, thou may'st come to see Light, even in Christ Jesus, the Light of the World; and therefore thy Light, and Life too, if thou wouldst but turn from thy many evil ways, and receive and obey it. For in the Light of the Lamb, must the Nations of them that are saved walk, as the Scriptures Testify. Remember, O Nation of great Profession! How the Lord has waited upon thee since the Days of Reformation, and the many Mercies and Judgments with which he has pleaded with Thee; and awake and arise out of thy deep Sleep, and yet hear (his Word in thy Heart) that thou may'st live. Let not this thy day of Visitation pass over thy Head, nor neglect thou so great Salvation as is this which is come to thy House, Oh England! For why should'st thou die, Oh Land that God desires to Bless? Be assured it is he that has been in the mid'st of this People, in the mid'st of thee; and no Delusion, as thy mistaken Teachers have made thee believe. And this thou shalt find by their Marks and Fruits, if thou wilt consider them in the Spirit of Moderation. For,
I. They were changed Men themselves before they went about to change others. Their Hearts were rent as well as their Gar∣ments; and they knew the Power and Work of God upon them. And this was seen by the great Alteration it made, and their stricter Course of Life, and more Godly Conversation, that im∣mediately followed upon it. II. They went not forth or Preached in their own Time or Will, but in the Will of God, and Spoke not their own studdied Matter, but as they were opened and moved of his Spirit, with which they were well acquainted in their own Conversion; which cannot be exprest to Carnal Men so as to give them any intelligible account; for to such it is as Christ said, like the blow∣ing of the Wind, which no Man knows whence it cometh, or whether it goeth: Yet this Proof and Seal went along with their Ministry, that many were turned from their Life-less Professions, and the E∣vil of their Ways, to the knowledge of God, and an Holy Life, as thousands can witness. And as they Freely received what they had to say from the Lord, so they Freely administred it to others. III. The Bent and Stress of their Ministry was Conversion to God, Regeneration and Holiness; not Schemes of Doctrines and Verbal Creeds, or new Forms of Worship; but a leaving off in Religion the Superfluous, and reducing the Ceremonious and For∣mal part, and pressing earnestly the Substantial, the Necessary and Proffitable part; as all upon a serious Reflection must and do accknowledge. IV. They directed People to a Principle, by which all that they asserted, Preached and Exhorted others to, might be wrought in them and known, through Experience, to them to be true; which is a high and distinguishing Mark of the Truth of their Ministry; both that they knew what they said, and were not afraid of coming to the Test. For as they were bold from Cer∣tainty, so they required Conformity upon no Humane Authority, but upon Conviction, and the Conviction of this Principle, which they asserted was in them that they Preached unto, and unto that directed them, that they might examine and prove the Rea∣ality of those things which they had affirmed of it, and its Mani∣festation and Work in Man. And this is more than the many Ministries in the World pretend to. They declare of Religion, say many things true; in words of God, Christ, and the Spirit; of Holiness and Heaven; that all Men should Repent and mend their Lives, or they will go to Hell, &c. but which of them all pretend to speak of their own Knowledge and Experience? Or ever directed Men to a Divine Principle, or Agent, placed of God in Man, to help him; and how to know it, and wait to feel its Power to work that good and accceptable Will of God in them.
Some of them indeed have Spoke of the Spirit, and the Ope∣rations of it to Sanctification, and Performance of Worship to God; but where and how to find it and wait in it to perform, was yet as a Mistery reserved for this further degree of Refor∣mation. So that this People did not only in words, more than equally press Repentance, Conversion and Holiness, but did it knowingly and experimentally; and directed those to whom they preach'd, to a sufficient Principle, and told them where it is, and by what Tokens they might know it, and which way they might experience the Power and Efficacy of it to their Soul's Happiness. Which is more then Theory and Speculations, upon which most other Ministries depend; for here is certainly, a bottom upon which Man may boldly appear before God in the great Day of Account. V. They reached to the Inward State and Condition of Peo∣ple, which is an Evidence of the Virtue of their Principle, and of their Ministring from it, and not their own Imaginations, Glos∣ses or Comments upon Scripture. For nothing reaches the Heart, but what is from the Heart, or pierces the Conscience, but what comes from a living Conscience. Insomuch as it hath often happened, where People have under Secrecy revealed their State or Condition to some choice Friends, for Advice or Ease, they have been so particularly directed in the Ministry of this People, that they have challenged their Friends with discovering their Secrets, and telling the Preachers their Cases. Yea, the very Thoughts and Purposes of the hearts of many have been so plainly detected; that they have (like Nathaniel) cryed out of this inward ap∣pearance of Christ, Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. And those that have embraced this Divine Principle, have found this Mark of its Truth and Divinity (that the Woman of Samaria did of Christ when in the Flesh, to be the Messiah,) viz. It had told them all that ever they did; showed them their insides, the most inward secrets of their Hearts, and laid Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet; of which Thousands can, at this day give in their Witness. So that nothing has been affirmed by this People, of the Power and Virtue of this Heavenly Principle, that such as have turned to it have not found true, and more; and that one half had not been told to them of what they have seen of the Power, Pu∣rity, Wisdom, Mercy and Goodness of God herein. VI. The Accomplishments with which this Principle fitted, even some of the meanest of this People, for their Work and Service: Furnishing some of them with an Extraordinary Ʋnder∣standing in Divine Things, and an admirable Fluency and Taking way of expression, which gave occasion to some to wonder, saying of them, as of their Master, is not this such a Mechanick's Son, how came he by this Learning? As from thence others took occasion to suspect and insinuate they were Jesuites in Dis∣guise;
who have had the Reputation of learned Men for an Age past; though there was not the least ground of Truth for any such Reflection. VII. That they rise Low, and Dispised and Hated, as the Pri∣mitive Christians did, and not by the help of Worldly Wisdom or Power, as former Reformations, in part did: But in all things it may be said, this People were brought forth in the Cross, in a Contradiction to the Ways, Worship, Fashion and Customs of this World; yea, against Wind and Tide, that so no Flesh might Glory before God. They could have no design to themselves in this Work, thus to expose themselves to Scorn and Abuse; to spend and be spent: Leaving Wife and Children, House and Land, and all that can be accounted dear to Men, with their lives in their Hands, being daily in Jeopardy, to declare this Primitive Message, 1 Jo. 1.5. revived in their Spirits, by the good Spirit and Power of God. viz. That God is Light, and in him is no dark∣ness at all; and that he has sent his Son a Light into the World to enlighten all Men in order to Salvation; and that they that say they have Fellowship with God and are his Children and People, and yet walk in Darkness, viz. in Disobedience to the Light in their Consciences, and after the Vanity of this World, they lie and do not the Truth. But that all such as love the Light and bring their Deeds to it, and walk in the Light, as God is Light, the blood of Jesus Christ his Son should cleanse them from all Sin. VIII. Their known great Constancy and Patience in Suffering for their Testimony, in all the Branches of it, and that, sometimes unto Death, by Beatings, Bruisings, long and crowded Imprison∣ments, and Noisom Dungeons. Four of them in New England Dying by the Hands of the Executioner, purely for Preaching amongst that People; besides Banishments and Excessive Plun∣ders and Sequestrations of their Goods and Estates, almost in all parts; not easily to be expressed, and less to be endured, but by those that have the support of a good and glorious Cause; refusing Deliverance by any indirect ways or means, as often as it was offered to them. IX. That they did not only, not show any disposition to Re∣venge, when it was at any time in their Power; but forgave their cruel Enemies; shewing Mercy to those that had none for them. X. Their Plainness with those in Authority: not unlike the Antient Prophets, not fearing to tell them to their Faces of their Private and Publick Sins, and their Prophecies to them of their Afflictions and Downfall, when in the Top of their Glory; also of some National Judgments, as of the Plague, and Fire
of London, in express Terms, and likewise particular ones to divers Persecutions, which accordingly overtook them; and which were very remarkable in the Places where they dwelt, and in time they may be made publick for the Glory of God. Thus Reader, thou seest this People in their Rise, Principles, Ministry and Progress, both their General and Particular Testi∣mony, by which thou maist be informed how and upon what foot they Sprung and became so considerable a People. It re∣mains next that I shew also their Care, Conduct and Discipline, as a Christian and Reformed Society, that they might be found living up to their own Principles and Profession. And this, the rather, because they have hardly suffered more in their Character from the Ʋnjust Charge of Error, than by the false Imputation of Disorder: Which Calumny indeed has not failed to follow all the true steps that were ever made to Reformation, and under which Reproach none suffered more than the Pri∣mitive Christians themselves, that were the Honour of Christi∣anity, and the great Lights and Examples of their own and succeeding Ages. This People encreasing daily both in Town and Country, an Holy Care fell upon some of the Elders among them, for the Benefit and Service of the Church. And the first Business in their View, after the Example of the Primitive Saints, was the Exercise of Charity, to supply the Necessities of the Poor, and answer the like Occasions: Wherefore Collections were early and liberally made for that, and divers other Services in the Church, and intrusted with Faithful Men, fearing God, and of good Report, who were not weary in well-doing; adding often of their own, in large Proportions, which they never brought to account, or desired should be known, much less re∣stored to them, that none might want, nor any Service be re∣tarded or disappointed. They were also very careful, that every one that belonged to them, answered their Profession in their Behaviour among Men, upon all Occasions; that they lived Peaceably, and were in all things good Examples. They found themselves engaged to re∣cord their Sufferings and Services; and in case of Marriage, which they could not perform in the usual Methods of the Nation, but among themselves; they took care that all things were clear be∣tween the Parties and all others, and it was then rare that any one entertain'd such Inclination to a Person on that account, till he or she had communicated it secretly to some very Weighty and Eminent Friends among them, that they might have a sense of the Matter; looking to the Council and Unity of their Bre∣thren, as of great Moment to them. But because the Charge of the Poor, the Number of Orphans, Marriages, Sufferings and other Matters multiplied, and that it was good that the
Churches were in some way and Method, of proceeding in such Affairs among them, to the end they might the better corres∣pond upon occasion, where a Member of one Meeting, might have to do with one of another: It pleased the Lord in his Wisdom and Goodness, to open the Understanding of the first Instrument of this Dispensation of Life, about a Good and Or∣derly way of Proceeding; and he felt an Holy Concern to visit the Churches in Person throughout this Nation, to begin and establish it among them; and by his Epistles the like was done in other Nations and Provinces abroad; which he also after∣wards Visited, and helped in that Service, as shall be observed when I come to speak of him. Now the Care, Conduct and Discipline, I have been speaking of, and which is now practised among this People, is as fol∣loweth. III. This Godly Elder, in every County where he travelled, exhorted them, that some out of every Meeting of Worship, should meet together once in the Month, to confer about the Wants and Occasions of the Church. And as the Case requi∣red, so those Monthly Meetings were fewer or more in number in every respective County; Four or Six Meetings of Worship, usually making one Monthly Meeting of Business. And according∣ly the Brethren met him from place to place, and began the said Meetings, viz. For the Poor, Orphans orderly Walking, Inte∣grity to their Profession, Births, Marriages, Burials, Sufferings &c. And that these Monthly Meetings should, in each County make up one Quarterly Meeting, where the most Zealous and Eminent Friends of the County should assemble to Communicate, Advise and Help one another, especially when any Business seem∣ed difficult, or a Monthly Meeting was tender of determining a Matter. Also these Quarterly Meetings should digest the Reports of the Monthly Meetings, and prepare one for the County, against the Yearly Meeting; in which the Quarterly Meetings resolve, which is held Yearly in London; where the Churches in this Nation, and other Nations, and Provinces Meet, by chosen Members of their Respective Counties, both mutually to com∣municate their Church Affairs, and to advise and be advised in any depending Case to Edification. Also to provide a requisite Stock, for the discharge of general Expences for general Services in the Church, not needful to be here particularized. At these Meetings any of the Members of the Churches may come if they please, and speak their Minds freely, in the Fear of God, to any matter; but the Mind of each Meeting therein represented is chiefly understood, as to perticuler Cases, in the Sense delivered by the Persons deputed or chosen for that Ser∣vice.
During their Yearly Meeting, to which their other Meetings referr in their Order and Resolve themselves; care is taken by a Select Number, for that service chosen by the General Assembly, to draw up the Minutes of the said Meeting, upon the several matters that have been under Consideration therein, to the end that the Respective Quarterly and Monthly Meetings may be in∣formed of all Proceedings, together with a general Exhortation to Holiness, Ʋnity and Charity: Of all which Proceedings in Yearly, Quarterly and Monthly Meetings, due Record is kept by some One appointed for that Service, or that hath voluntarily undertaken it. These Meetings are opened, and usually con∣cluded in their Solemn waiting upon God, who is sometimes graciously pleased to answer them with as signal Evidences of his Love and Presence, as in any other their Meetings of Wor∣ship. It is further to be Noted, that in these Solemn Assemblies, for the Church's Service, there is no one presides among them after the manner of the Assemblies of other People; Christ only be∣ing their President, as he is pleased to appear in Life and Wis∣dom in any one or more of them, to whom, whatever be their Capacity or Degree, the rest adhere with a Firm Ʋnity, not of Authority but Conviction, which is the Divine Authority and way of Christ's Power and Spirit in his People: Making good his blessed Promise, That he would be in the Midst of his, where and whenever they were met together in his Name, even to the End of the World. So be it. Now it may be expected, I should here set down what sort of Authority is exercised by this People, upon such Members of their Society, as correspond not in their Lives with their Pro∣fession, and that are Refractory to this good and wholesom Or∣der settled among them; and the rather because they have not wanted their Reproach and Suffering from some Tongues, upon this occasion in a plentiful manner. The Power they exercise is such as Christ has given to his own People, to the End of the World, in the Persons of his Dis∣ciples, viz. To Oversee, Exhort, Reprove, and after long Suffer∣ing and Waiting upon the Disobedient and Refractory, to disown them, as any more of their Communion, or that they will any longer stand Charged in the Sight and Judgment of God or Men, with their Conversation or Behaviour as one of them, untill they Repent. The subject matter about which this Authority, in any of the fore∣going Branches of it, is Exercised; is First, in Relation to com∣mon and general Practice, and Secondly, about those things that more strictly referr to their own Character and Profession, and distinguish them from all other Professors of Christianity; avoid∣ing two Extreams upon which many Split, viz. Persecution and Libertinism. A Coercive Power to Whip People into the Temple,
that such as will not Conform, though against Faith and Con∣science, shall be punisht in their Persons or Estates; or leaving all loose and at large, as to Practice, unaccountable to all but God and the Magistrate. To which hurtful Extream, nothing has more contributed than the Abuse of Church Power, by such as suffer their Passions and private Interests to prevail with them to carry it to outward Force and Corporal Punishment. A Pra∣ctice they have been taught to dislike, by their extream Suf∣ferings, as well as their known Principle for an universal Liberty of Conscience. On the other hand, they equally dislike an Independency in So∣ciety. An unaccountableness in Practice and Conversation to the Terms of their own Communion, and to those that are the Members of it. They distinguish between Imposing any Practice that immediately regards Faith or Worship, (which is never to be done nor suffered or submitted unto) and requiring Christian Compliance with those Methods that only respect Church Business in its more Civil part and Concern, and that regard the Discreet and Orderly Maintenance of the Character of the Society as a Sober and Religious Community. In short, what is for the Pro∣motion of Holiness and Charity, that Men may Practice what they profess, live up to their own Principles, and not be at Li∣berty to give the Lie to their own Profession, without Rebuke. They compell none to them, but oblige those that are of them to walk Suitably, or they are denyed by them: That is all the Mark they set upon them, and the Power they Exercise, or Judge a Christian Society, can Exercise upon those that are the Members of it. The way of their Proceedings against such as have Lapst or Transgrest, is this. He is visited by some of them, and the matter of Fact laid Home to him, be it any evil Practice against known and general Virtue, or any Branch of their Particular Testimony, which he, in Common, professeth with them. They labour with him in much Love and Zeal for the good of his Soul, the Honour of God, and Reputation of their Profession, to own his Fault and condemn it, in as ample a Manner as the Evil or Scandal was given by him; which for the most part, is performed by some Written Testimony under the Partys Hand; and if it so happen that the Party prove Refractory, and is not willing to clear the Truth they profess, from the Reproach of his or her evil doing or Unfaithfulness, they, after repeated Entrea∣ties and due waiting for a Token of Repentance, give forth a Paper to disown such a Fact, and the Party offending; recording the same as a Testimony of their care for the Honour of the Truth they profess. And if he or she shall clear their Profession and themselves, by sincere Acknowledgment of their Fault, and Godly sorrow
for so doing, they are received and looked upon again as Mem∣bers of their Communion. For as God, so his true People up∣braid no Man after Repentance. This is the account I had to give of the People of God called Quakers, as to their Rise, Appearance, Principles and Practices, in this Age of the World, both with Respect to their Faith and Worship, Discipline and Conversation. And I Judge it very pro∣per in this place, because it is to Preface the Journal of the first Blessed and Glorious Instrument of this Work, and for a Testimony to him in his singular Qualifications and Services, in which he abundantly excelled in this day, and are worthy to be set forth as an Example to all succeeding Times; to the Glory of the Most High God, and for a just Memorial to that Worthy and Excellent Man, his Faithful Servant and Apostle to this Generation of the World. I am now come to the Third Head or Branch of my Preface, viz. The Instrumental Author. For it is Natural for some to say, Well, here is the People and Work, but where and who was the Man, the Instrument; he that in this Age was sent to begin this Work and People. I shall, as God shall enable me, declare who and what he was, not only by report of others, but from my own long and most inward Converse and intimate know∣ledge of him; for which my Soul blesseth God, as it hath often done; and I doubt not, but by that time I have discharged my self of this part of my Preface, my serious Readers will be∣lieve I had good Cause so to do. The Blessed Instrument of and in this day of God, and of whom I am now about to Write, was George Fox, distin∣guished from another of that Name, by that Other's addition of Younger to his Name in all his Writings; not that he was so in Years, but that he was so in the Truth, but he was also a Worthy Man, Witness and Servant of God in his time. But this George Fox was Born in Leicestershire, about the Year 1624. He descended of Honest and Sufficient Parents, who endeavoured to bring him up, as they did the rest of their Children, in the Way and Worship of the Nation; especially his Mother, who was a Woman accomplisht above most of her De∣gree in the place where she lived. But from a Child he ap∣peared of another Frame of Mind than the rest of his Bre∣thren; being more Religious, Inward, Still, Solid and Observing beyond his Years, as the Answers he would give, and the Que∣stions he would put upon occasion, manifested to the Astonish∣ment of those that heard him, especially in Divine Things. His Mother taking Notice of his Singular Temper, and the Gravity, Wisdom and Piety that very early shined through him,
refusing Childish and Vain Sports and Company, when very Young; she was Tender and Indulgent over him, so that from her he met with little Difficulty. As to his Employment he was brought up in Country Business, and as he took most de∣light in Sheep, so he was very skillful in them, an Employ∣ment that very well suited his mind in several Respects, both for its Innocency and Solitude; and was a just Figure of his af∣ter Ministry and Service. I shall not break in upon his own Account, which is by much the best that can be given, and therefore desire, what I can, to avoid saying any thing of what is said already, as to the per∣ticular Passages of his coming forth; but, in general, when he was somewhat above Twenty, he left his Friends, and visited the most Retired and Religious People in those Parts; and some there were short of few, if any, in this Nation, who waited for the Consolation of Israel Night and Day; as Zache∣rias, Anna and good Old Simeon did of Old Time. To these he was sent, and these he sought out in the Neighbouring Countrys, and among them he Sojourned till his more ample Ministry came upon him. At this time he taught and was an Example of Silence, endeavouring to bring them from Self-per∣formances, Testifying and turning to the Light of Christ within them, and encouraging them to wait in Patience to feel the Pow∣er of it to stir in their Hearts, that their Knowledge and Wor∣ship of God might stand in the Power of an Endless Life, which was to be found in the Light, as it was obeyed in the Mani∣festation of it in Man. For in the Word was Life, and that Life is the Light Men. Life in the Word, Light in Men, and Life in Men as the Light is obeyed; the Children of the Light living by the Life of the Word, by which the word begets them a∣gain to God, which is the Regeneration and New Birth, without which there is no coming unto the Kingdom of God; and which, whoever comes to, is greater than John, that is, than John's Dispensation, which was not that of the Kingdom, but the Consummation of the Legal, and Forerunning of the Gospel Times. Accordingly, several Meetings were gather∣ed in those Parts, and thus his Time was employed for some Years. In 1652. He being in his usual Retirement to the Lord upon a very High Mountain, in some of the hither parts of Yorkshire, as I take it, his Mind exercised towards the Lord, he had a Vi∣sion of the great Work of God in the Earth, and of the way that he was to go forth to begin it. He saw People as thick as Motes in the Sun, that should in time, be brought Home to the Lord; that there might be but one Shepherd and one Sheepfold in all the Earth. There his Eye was directed Northward, behold∣ing a great People that should receive him and his Message in those Parts. Upon this Mountain he was moved of the Lord
to sound out his Great and notable Day, as if he had been in a great Auditory, and from thence went North, as the Lord had shown him; and in every place where he came, if not before he came to it, he had his particular Exercise and Service shown to him, so that the Lord was his Leader indeed; for it was not in vain that he Travailled, God in most places sealing his Com∣mission with the Convincement of some of all sorts, as well Pub∣licans as sober Professors of Religion. Some of the first and most Eminent of them, which are at Rest, were Richard Farnsworth, James Nayler, William Dewsberry, Francis Howgil, Edward Burroughs, John Camm, John Audland, Richard Hub∣berthorn, T. Taylor, John Aldam, T. Holmes, Alexander Parker, William Simpson, William Caton, John Stubbs, Robert Widders, John Burnyeat, Robert Lodge, Thomas Salthouse, and many more Worthies, that cannot be well here Named, together with di∣vers yet living of the first and great Convincement, who after the knowledge of God's purging Judgments in themselves, and some time of waiting in silence upon him, to feel and receive Power from on High to speak in his Name, (which none else rightly can, though they may use the same Words.) They felt the Divine Motions, and were frequently drawn forth, e∣specially to visit the Publick Assemblies, to reprove, inform and exhort them, sometimes in Markets, Fairs, Streets, and by the High-way-side, calling People to Repentance, and to turn to the Lord with their Hearts as well as their Mouths; directing them to the Light of Christ within them, to see and examine and consider their ways by, and to eschew the Evil and do the Good and Acceptable Will of God. And they suffered great Hardships for this their Love, and Good-will, being often Stockt, Stoned, Beaten, Whipt and Imprisoned, though Honest Men and of Good Report where they lived, that had left Wives and Chil∣dren, and Houses and Lands to visit them with a living Call to Repentance. And though the Priests generally set themselves to oppose them, and write against them, and insinuated most False and Scandalous Stories to Defame them, stirring up the Ma∣gistrates to suppress them, especially in those Northern Parts; yet God was pleased so to fill them with his living Power, and give them such an open Door of utterance in his Service, that there was a mighty Convincement over those Parts. And through the tender and singular Indulgence of Judge Bradshaw and Judge Fell, who were wont to go that Circuit, in the Infancy of things, the Priests were never able to gain the point they laboured for, which was to have proceeded to Blood, and if possible, Herod like, by a Cruel exercise of the Civil Pow∣er, to have cut them off and rooted them out of the Country. Especially Judge Fell, who was not only a Check to their Rage in the Course of Legal Proceedings, but otherwise upon occasion, and finally countenanced this People; for his Wife receiving the Truth with the First, it had that Influence upon his Spirit,
being a Just and Wise Man, and seeing in his own Wife and Family, a full Confutation to all the popular Clamours against the Way of Truth, that he covered them what he could, and freely opened his Doors, and gave up his House to his Wife and her Friends, not valuing the Reproach of Ignorant or E∣vil Minded People, which I here mention, to His and her Ho∣nour, and which will be I believe, an Honour and a Blessing to such of their Name and Family, as shall be found in that Ten∣derness, Humility, Love and Zeal for the Truth and People of the Lord. That House was for some Years at first, till the Truth had opened its way in the Southern parts of this Island, an Emi∣nent Receptacle of this People. Others of good Note and Sub∣stance in those Northern Countrys, had also opened their Houses with their Hearts, to the many Publishers, that in a short time the Lord had raised to declare his Salvation to the People, and where Meetings of the Lord's Messengers were fre∣quently held, to communicate their Services and Exercises, and Comfort and Edify one another in their Blessed Ministry. But least this may be thought a Digression, having touch∣ed upon this before, I return to this Excellent Man: And for his Personal Qualities, both Natural, Moral and Divine as they appeared in his Converse with Brethren and in the Church of God; take as follows. I. He was a Man that God endued with a Clear and Won∣derful Depth, a discerner of others Spirits, and very much a Master of his own. And though the side of his Ʋnderstanding which lay next to the World, and especially the Expression of it might sound Ʋncouth and Ʋnfashionable to Nice Ears, his matter was nevertheless very profound; and would not only bear to be often considered, but the more it was so, the more Weighty and Instructing it appeared. And as abruptly and bro∣kenly as sometimes his Sentences would fall from him, about Divine Things, it is well known they were often as Texts to many fairer Declarations. And indeed it showed beyond all Contradiction that God sent him, that no Arts or Parts had a∣ny share in his matter or manner of his Ministry; and that so many Great, Excellent and Necessary Truths as he came forth to Preach to Mankind, had therefore nothing of Man's Wit or Wisdom to recommend them. So that as to Man he was an Original, being no Man's Copy. And his Ministry and Writ∣ings show they are from one that was not Taught of Man, nor had Learned what he said by Study. Nor were they No∣tional or Speculative, but sensible and Practical Truths, tend∣ing to Conversion and Regeneration, and the setting up the King∣dom of God in the Hearts of Men, and the way of it was his Work. So that I have many times been overcome in my self,
and been made to say, with my Lord and Master upon the like Occasion; I thank thee O Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou hast hid these things from the Wise and Prudent of this World, and revealed them to Babes, For many times hath my Soul bowed in an Humble Thankfulness to the Lord, that he did not choose any of the Wise and Learned of this World to be the first Messenger in our Age, of his blessed Truth to Men; but that he took one that was not of High Degree, or Elegant Speech, or learned after the way of this World, that his Mes∣sage and Work he sent him to do, might come with less Suspi∣cion or Jealousie of Humane Wisdom and Interest, and with more Force and Clearness upon the Consciences of those, that sincerely Sought the way of Truth in the Love of it. I say, beholding with the Eye of my mind which the God of Heaven had opened in me, the Marks of God's Finger and Hand visibly in this Te∣stimony, from the Clearness of the Principle, the Power and Ef∣ficacy of it in the Exemplary Sobriety, Plainness, Zeal, Steadi∣ness, Humility, Gravity, Punctuality, Charity and Circumspect care in the Government of Church Affairs, which shined in his and their Life and Testimony that God employed in this Work, it greatly confirmed me that it was of God, and engaged my Soul in a Deep Love, Fear, Reverence and Thankfulness for his Love and Mercy therein to Mankind; in which Mind I remain, and shall, I hope, to the end of my Daies. II. In his Testimony or Ministry, he much laboured to open Truth, to the Peoples Ʋnderstandings, and to bottom them up∣on the Principle, and Principal, Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, that by bringing them to something that was of God in themselves, they might the better know and judge of him and themselves. He had an Extraordinary Gift in opening the Scriptures. He would go to the Marrow of things, and show the Mind, Har∣mony and Fullfilling of them with much Plainness, and to great Comfort and Edification. The Mistery of the first and second Adam, of the Fall and Restoration, of the Law and Gospel, of Shadows and Substance, of the Servant and Sons State, and the fullfiling of the Scrip∣tures in Christ, and by Christ the True Light, in all that are his, through the Obedience of Faith, were much of the Sub∣stance and Drift of his Testimonies. In all which he was wit∣nessed to be of God, being sensibly felt to speak that which he had received of Christ, and was his own Experience, in that which never Ers nor Fails. But above all, he excelled in Prayer. The Inwardness and Weight of his Spirit, the Reverence and Solemnity of his Address and Behaviour, and the Fewness and Fulness of his Words, have
often struck, even Strangers, with Admiration, as they used to reach others with Consolation. The most Awfull, Living, Re∣verent Frame I ever Felt or Beheld, I must say was his in Prayer. And truly it was a Testimony he knew and lived neer∣er to the Lord than other Men; for they that know him most will see most reason to approach him with Reverence and Fear. He was of an Innocent Life, no Busie Body, nor Self Seeker, neither Touchy, nor Critical: What fell from him was very In∣offensive, if not very Edifying. So Meek, Contented, Modest, Ea∣sie, Steady, Tender, it was a pleasure to be in his Company. He exercised no Authority but over Evil, and that every where and in all; but with Love, Compassion and Long Suffering. A most Merciful Man, as ready to Forgive as unapt to take or give an Offence. Thousands can truly say, he was of an Excellent Spirit and Savour among them, and because thereof, the most Excel∣lent Spirits loved him with an unfained and unfading Love. He was an Incessant Labourer; for in his Younger time, be∣fore his many great and deep Sufferings and Travels had enfee∣bled his Body for Itinerant Services, he laboured much in the Word, and Doctrine and Discipline in England, Scotland and Ire∣land, turning many to God, and confirming those that were convinced of the Truth, and setling Good Order as to Church Affairs among them. And towards the Conclusion of his Tra∣velling Services, between the Years Seventy One, and Seventy Seven, he Visited the Churches of Christ in the Plantations in America, and in the Ʋnited Provinces, and Germany as his fol∣lowing Journal Relates, to the Convincement and Consolation of many. After that time he chiefly resided in and about the City of London, and besides the Services of his Ministry which were Frequent and Serviceable, he writ much both to them that are within, and those that are without the Communion. But the care he took of the Affairs of the Church in General was very great. He was often where the Records of the Affairs of the Church are kept, and the Letters from the many Meetings of God's People over all the World where settled, come upon Occasions, which Letters he had read to him, and Communicated them to the Meeting that is Weekly held there for such Services, he would be sure to stir them up to discharge them, especially in Suf∣fering Cases. Showing great Sympathy and Compassion upon all such Occasions, carefully looking into the Respective Cases, and endeavouring Speedy Relief according to the Nature of them. So that the Churches and any of the Suffering Members there∣of, were sure not to be forgotten or delayed in their Desires if he were there.
As he was Ʋnwearied, so he was Ʋndaunted in his Services for God and his People, he was no more to be moved to Fear than to Wrath. His Behaviour at Darby, Litchfield, Appleby, before Oliver Cromwell at Launston, Scarborough, Worcester and Westminster-Hall, with many other Places and Exercises, did abundantly evidence it to his Enemies as well as his Friends. But as in the Primitive Times, some rise up against the bles∣sed Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, even from among those that they had turned to the Hope of the Gospel, and who be∣came their greatest Trouble; so this Man of God had his share of Suffering from some that were convinced by him, who through prejudice or mistake run against him, as one that sought Dominion over Conscience; because he prest by his Pre∣sence or Epistles, a ready and zealous compliance with such good and wholesome things, as tended to an Orderly Conversation a∣bout the Affairs of the Church, and in their walking before Men. That which contributed much to this ill Work, was in some a begrudging of this Meek Man, the love and esteem he had and deserved in the Hearts of the People, and weakness in others, that were taken with their groundless Suggestions of Imposition and blind Obedience. They would have had every Man Independent, that as he had the Principle in himself, he should only stand and fall to that and no Body else; not considering that the Principle is One in all; and though the Measure of Light or Grace might dif∣fer, yet the Nature of it was the same, and being so, they struck at the Spiritual Ʋnity, which a People, guided by the same Principle, are naturally led into: So that what is an evil to One, is so to All, and what is Vertuous, Honest and of good Re∣port to One, is so to All, from the Sense and Savour of the one Ʋniversal Principle which is common to all, (and which the disaffected profess to be) the Root of all True Christian Fel∣lowship, and that Spirit into which the People of God drink and come to be Spiritually Minded, and of one Heart and one Soul. Some weakly mistook good Order in the Government of Church Affairs, for Discipline in Worship, and that it was so prest or recommended by Him and other Brethren: And they were rea∣dy to reflect the same things that Dissenters had very reason∣ably objected upon the National Churches, that have coercively pressed Conformity to their Respective Creeds and Worships: Whereas these things related wholly to Conversation, and the Outward (and as I may say) Civil part of the Church, that Men should walk up to the Principles of their Belief, and not be wanting in Care and Charity. But though some have stum∣bled and fallen through Mistakes, and an unreasonable Obstinan∣cy, even to a Prejudice; yet blessed be God, the Generality have returned to their First Love, and seen the Work of the Enemy,
that looses no Opportunity or Advantage by which he may check or hinder the Work of God, and disquiet the Peace of his Church, and chill the Love of his People to the Truth and one to ano∣ther; and there is hope of divers that are yet at a Distance. In all these Occasions, though there was no Person the Dis∣contented struck so sharply at, as this Good Man, he bore all their Weakness and Prejudice, and returned not Reflection for Reflection; but forgave them their weak and bitter Speeches, praying for them that they might have a Sense of their hurt, and see the Subtilty of the Enemy to Rend and Devide, and re∣turn into their First Love, that thought no Ill. And truly, I must say, that though God had visibly cloath∣ed him with a Divine Preference and Authority, and indeed his very Presence exprest a Religious Majesty; yet he never abused it, but held his Place in the Church of God with great Meak∣ness and a most engaging Humility and Moderation. For upon all Occasions, like his blessed Master, he was a Servant to all; holding and exercising his Eldership, in the Invisible Power that had gathered them, with Reverence to the Head and Care o∣ver the Body: And was received only in that Spirit and Pow∣er of Christ as the First and Chief Elder in this Age; who, as he was therefore worthy of double Honour, so for the same Reason it was given by the Faithful of this day; because his Authority was inward and not outward, and that he got it and kept it by the Love of God and Power of an Endless Life. I write my Knowledge and not Report, and my Witness is True, having been with him for Weeks and Months together on di∣vers Occasions, and those of the nearest and most exercising Na∣ture, and that by Night and by Day, by Sea and by Land; in this and in Foreign Countrys: And I can say, I never saw him out of his Place, or not a Match for every Service or Occa∣sion. For in all things he acquitted himself like a Man, yea a strong Man, a New and Heavenly minded Man. A Divine and a Naturalist, and all of God Almighty's making. I have been surprised at his Questions and Answers in Natural things; that whilst he was Ignorant of useless and Sophistical Science, he had in him the Foundation of useful and commendable Know∣ledge, and cherisht it every where. Civil beyond all Forms of Breeding, in his Behaviour. Very Temperate, eating Little, and sleeping Less, though a Bulky Person. Thus he Lived and Sojourned among us, and as he lived, so he died; feeling the same Eternal Power that had raised and preserved him in his last Moments. So full of assurance was he, that he Triumpht over Death; and so even to the last, as if Death were hardly worth Notice or a Mention: Recommend∣ing
to some with him, the Dispatch and Dispersion of an Epistle, just before Written to the Churches of Christ, throughout the World, and his own Books; but above all, Friends, and of all Friends, those in Ireland and America, twice over. Saying, mind poor Friends in Ireland and America. And to some that came in and enquired how he found him∣self, he answered, Never heed, the Lord's Power is over all Weakness and Death, the Seed reigns, Blessed be the Lord: Which was about Four or Five Hours before his Departure out of this World. He was at the great Meeting near Lombard-street on the First day of the Week, and it was the Third follow∣ing about Ten at Night when he left us; being at the House of H. Goldney in the same Court. In a good Old Age he went, after having lived to see his Childrens Children to many Genera∣tions in the Truth. He had the Comfort of a short Illness, and the Blessing of a clear Sense to the last; and we may truly say, with a Man of God of Old, that being Dead, he yet Speaketh; and though absent in Body, he is Present in Spirit; neither Time nor Place being able to interrupt the Communion of Saints, or dissolve the Fellowships of the Spirits of the Just. His Works praise him, because they are to the Praise of him that worked by him; for which his Memorial is, and shall be Blessed. I have done, as to this part of my Preface, when I have left this short Epitaph to his Name. Many Sons have done virtuously in this Day, but Dear George thou Excellest them All. And now, Friends, you that profess to walk in the way, this Blessed Man was sent of God to turn us into, suffer I be∣seech you the word of Exhortation, as well Fathers as Children, and Elders as Young Men. The Glory of this Day and Foun∣dation of the Hope that has not made us ashamed since we were a People, you know is that Blessed Principle of Light and Life of Christ which we Profess, and Direct all People to, as the great Instrument and Agent of Man's Conversion to God: It was by this we were first Touched, and effectually enlight∣ned as to our Inward State, which put us upon the Considera∣tion of our Latter End, causing us to set the Lord before our Eyes, and to Number our Days, that we might apply our Hearts to Wisdom. In that Day we judged not after the Sight of the Eye, or after the Hearing of the Ear, but according to the Light and Sense this Blessed Principle gave us; we judged and acted in reference to Things and Persons, our selves and others, yea, towards God our Maker. For being quickned by it in our Inward Man, we could easily discern the difference of things, and feel what was Right, and what was Wrong, and what was Fit and what not, both in reference to Religion and Civil Concerns. That being the ground of the Fellowship of all Saints, it was in that our Fellowship stood. In this we de∣sired
to have a Sense one of another, acted towards one ano∣ther, and all Men, in Love, Faithfulness and Fear. In the feeling of the Motions of this Principle we drew near to the Lord, and waited to be prepared by it, that we might feel those Drawings and Movings, before we approached the Lord in Prayer, or open'd our Mouths in Ministry. And in our Be∣ginning and Ending with this, stood our Comfort, Service and Edification. And as we run faster, or fell short we made Bur∣thens for our selves to bear; our Services finding in our selves a Rebuke instead of an Acceptance, and in lieu of Well done, who has required this at your Hands? In that day we were an Ex∣ercised People, our very Countenances and Deportment declared it. Care for others was then much upon us, as well as for our selves, especially the Young Convinced. Often had we the Bur∣then of the Word of the Lord to our Neighbours, Relations and Acquaintance; and sometimes Strangers also, We were in Tra∣vail for one anothers Preservation: Not seeking, but shunning Occasions of any Coldness or Misunderstanding, treating one ano∣ther as those that believed and felt God present. Which kept our Conversation Innocent, Serious and Weighty, guarding our selves against the Cares and Friendships of the World. We held the Truth in the Spirit of it, and not in our own Spirits, or after our own Wills and Affections. They were bowed and brought into Subjection, in so much that it was visible to them that knew us, we did not think our selves at our own Dispose, to go where we List, or say or do what we List, or when we List. Our Liberty stood in the Liberty of the Spirit of Truth, and no Pleasure, no Profit, no Fear no Favour could draw us from this retired, strict and watch∣ful Frame. We were so far from seeking occasions of Com∣pany, that we avoided them what we could; persuing our own Business with Moderation, instead of medling with other Peo∣ples Ʋnnecessarily. Our Words were Few and Savoury, our Looks Composed and Weighty, and our whole Deportment very Observable. True it is, that this Retired and strict sort of Life from the Liberty of the Conversation of the World, exposed us to the Censures of many, as Humourists, Conceited and Self-righteous Persons, &c. But it was our Preservation from many Snares, to which others were continually exposed by the Prevalency of the lust of the Eye, the lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, that wanted no Occasions or Temptations to excite them abroad in the Con∣verse of the World.
I cannot forget the Humility and Chast Zeal of that Day. Oh! how Constant at Meetings, how Retired in them, how firm to Truth's Life, as well as Truth's Principles; and how Entire and Ʋnited in our Communion, as indeed became those that profess One Head, even Christ Jesus the Lord. This being the Testimony and Example the Man of God, before mentioned, was sent to Declare and Leave amongst us, and we having Embraced the same as the Merciful Visitation of God to us, the Word of Exhortation at this time is, that we continue to be found in the Way of this Testimony with all Zeal and Integrity, and so much the more, by how much the Day draweth near. And First, as to you, my Beloved and much Honoured Bre∣thren in Christ, that are in the Exercise of the Ministry: Oh, feel Life in the Ministry! Let Life be your Commission, your Well-spring and Treasury in all such Occasions, else you well know, there can be no begetting to God, since nothing can quicken or make People alive to God, but the life of God: And it must be a Ministry in and from Life, that enlivens any People to God. We have seen the Fruit of all other Ministrys by the few that are turned from the Evil of their Ways. It is not our Parts, or Memory, the repetition of former Openings in our own will and time, that will do God's Work. A dry Do∣ctrinal Ministry, however sound in Words, can reach but the Ear, and is but a Dream at the Best: There is another Sound∣ness, that is soundest of all, viz. Christ the power of God. This is the Key of David, that Opens and none Shuts, and Shuts, and none can Open; as the Oil to the Lamp, and the Soul to the Body, so is that to the best of Words. Which made Christ to say, My Words they are Spirit, and they are Life; that is, they are from Life, and therefore they make you alive, that receive them. If the Disciples that had lived with Jesus, were to stay at Jerusalem till they received it; so must we wait to receive, before we Minister, if we will turn People from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's power to God. I fervently bow my Knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you may always be like minded, that you may ever wait Reverently for the coming and opening of the Word of Life, and tend upon it in your Ministry and Service, that you may serve God in his Spirit. And be it little, or be it much, it is well; for much is not too much, and the least is enough, if from the motion of God's Spirit; and with∣out it, verily, never so little is too much, because to no pro∣fit. For it is the Spirit of the Lord immediately, or through the Ministry of his Servants, that teacheth his People to profit; and
to be sure, so far as we take him, along with us in our Ser∣vices, so far we are profitable and no farther. For if it be the Lord that must work all things in us and for our selves; much more is it the Lord, that must work in us for the Con∣version of others. If therefore it was once a Cross to us to Speak, though the Lord required it at our Hands; let it never be so to be silent, when he does not. It is one of the most dreadful Sayings in the Book of God, That he that adds to the Words of the Prophecy of this Book, God will add the Plagues written in this Book. To keep back the Counsel of God, is as Terrible; for he that takes away from the Words of the Prophecy of this Book, God shall take a∣way his part out of the Book of Life. And truly, it has great Caution in it to those, that use the Name of the Lord, to be well assured, the Lord Speaks, that they may not be found of the Number of those, that add to the Words of the Testimony of Prophecy, which the Lord giveth them to bear; nor yet to mince or diminish the same, both being so very offensive to God. Wherefore, Brethren, let us be careful neither to out-go our Guide, nor yet loiter behind him; since he that makes Haste, may miss his Way, and he that stays behind, loose his Guide: For even those, that have Received the Word of the Lord, had need wait for Wisdom, that they may see how to divide the Word aright; which plainly implieth that it is possible for one, that hath received the Word of the Lord, to miss in the Di∣vision and Application of it, which must come from an Impati∣ency of Spirit, and a Self-working, which makes an unsound and dangerous Mixture; and will hardly beget a right minded li∣ving People to God. I am earnest in this, above all other Considerations, as to publick Brethren, well knowing how much it concerns the present and future State, and preservation of the Church of Christ Jesus, that has been gathered and built up by a Living and Powerful Ministry, that the Ministry be held, preserved and continued in the Manifestations, Motions and Supplies of the same Life and Power from time to time. And where ever it is observed, that any one does Minister more from Gifts and Parts, than Life and Power, though they have an Inlightned and Doctrinal Ʋnderstanding; let them in time be advised and admonished for their Preservation, because insensibly such will come to depend upon a Self-sufficiency; to forsake Christ the living Fountain, and to hew out unto them∣selves Cisterns that will hold no living Waters; and by degrees draw others from waiting upon the Gift of God in themselves, and to feel it in others, in order to their Strength and Refresh∣ment
to wait upon them, and to turn from God to Man again, and so to make Shipwrack of the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and of a good Conscience towards God; which are on∣ly kept by that Divine Gift of life, that begat the one and a∣waken'd and sanctified the other in the Beginning. Nor is it enough that we have known the Divine Gift, and in it have reached to the Spirits in Prison, and been the Instruments of the Convincing of others of the way of God, if we keep not as low and poor in our selves, and as depend∣ing upon the Lord as ever; since no Memory, no Repetitions of former Openings, Revelations or Enjoyments will bring a Soul to God, or afford Bread to the Hungry, or Water to the Thir∣sty, unless Life go, with what we say, and that must be wait∣ed for. O that we may have no other Fountain, Treasury or Depen∣dence! that none may presume at any rate to Act of themselves for God! Because they have long acted from God, that we may not supply want of waiting with our own Wisdom, or think that we may take less Care, and more liberty in speak∣ing, than formerly; and that where we do not feel the Lord by his Power to open us and enlarge us, whatever be the Expe∣ctation of the People, or has been our Customary Supply and Cha∣racter, we may not exceed or fill up the time with our own. I hope, we shall ever Remember, who it was that said, Of your selves you can do nothing, our sufficiency is in Him: And if we are not to speak our own Words, or take Thought what we should say to Men in our Defence, when exposed for our Testimony, surely, we ought to speak none of our own Words, or take Thought what we shall say in our Testimony and Mi∣nistry in the Name of the Lord to the Souls of the People; for then of all Times, and of all other Occasions should it be ful∣filled in us; for it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of my Fa∣ther that speaketh in you. And indeed, the Ministry of the Spirit must and does keep its Analogy and Agreement with the Birth of the Spirit; that as no Man can Inherit the Kingdom of God, unless he be born of the Spirit; so no Ministery can beget a Soul to God, but that which is from the Spirit. For this, as I said before, the Disci∣ples waited before they went forth; and in this our Elder Bre∣thren, and Messengers of God in our Day, waited, visited and reached to us. And having begun in the Spirit, let none ever hope or seek to be made perfect in the Flesh: For what is the Flesh to the Spirit, or the Chaff to the Wheat? And if we keep in the Spirit, we shall keep in the Ʋnity of it, which is the ground of true Fellowship. For by Drinking into that one Spi∣rit, we are made one People to God, and by it we are con∣tinued
in the Ʋnity of the Faith, and the Bond of Peace. No Envying, no Bitterness, no Strife can have place with us. We shall watch always for Good, and not for Evil over one ano∣ther, and rejoice exceedingly, and not begrudge at one anothers increase in the Riches of the Grace, with which God replenish∣eth his Faithful Servants. And, Brethren, as to you is committed the Dispensation of the Oracles of God, which give you frequent Opportunities, and great Place with the People among whom you Travail, I be∣seech you that you would not think it sufficient to declare the Word of Life in their Assemblies, however Edifying and Comfortable such opportunities may be to you and them: But as was the Practice of the Man of God before mentioned, in great Measure, when among us, inquire the State of the several Churches you Visit; who among them are Afflicted or Sick, who are Tempted; if any are Ʋnfaithful or Obstinate, and endeavour to Issue those things in the Wisdom and Power of God, which will be a glorious Crown upon your Ministry. As that prepares your way in the Hearts of the People to receive you as Men of God, so it gives you Credit with them to do them good by your Advice in other Respects. The Afflicted will be Com∣forted by you, the Tempted Strengthened, the Sick Refreshed, the Ʋnfaithful Convicted and Restored, and such as are Obstinate Softned and fitted for Reconciliation, which is Clenching the Nail, and applying and Fastning the general Testimony by that par∣ticular Care of the several Branches of it, in reference to them more immediately concerned in it. For though Good and Wise Men and Elders too, may reside in such places, who are of Worth and Importance in the general, and in other Places; yet it does not always follow, that they may have the Room they deserve in the hearts of the People they live among; or some particular occasion may make it unfit for him or them to use that Authority. But you that Travail as God's Messengers, if they receive you in the Greater, shall they refuse you in the Less? And if they own the general Testimony, can they withstand the particular Application of it in their own Cases? Thus, ye will shew your selves Workmen indeed, and carry your Business before you, to the praise of his Name that hath called you from Darkness to Light, that you might turn o∣thers from Satan's Power unto God and his Kingdom, which is within. And Oh that there were more of such Faithful La∣bourers in the Vineyard of the Lord! Never more need since the day of God! Wherefore I cannot but Cry and Call aloud to you, that have been long Professors of the Truth, and know the Truth in the convincing Power of it, and have had a sober Conversation a∣mong Men, yet content your selves only to know Truth for
your selves; to go to Meetings, and Exercise an ordinary Cha∣rity in the Church, and an honest Behaviour in the World, and limit your selves within those Bounds, feeling little or no con∣cern upon your Spirits for the Glory of the Lord in the pro∣spirity of his Truth in the Earth, more than to be glad that o∣thers succeed in such Service; Arise ye in the Name and Pow∣er of the Lord Jesus! Behold, how white the Fields are unto Harvest in this and other Nations, and how few Able and Faithful Labourers there are to work therein! Your Country Folks, Neighbours and Kindred want to know the Lord and his Truth, and to Walk in it. Does nothing lie at your Door upon their Account? Search and see, and loose no time, I be∣seech you, for the Lord is at Hand. I do not Judge you, there is one that Judgeth all Men, and his Judgment is true: You have mightily increased in your outward Substance; may you equally increase in your inward Riches, and do good with both, while you have a day to do Good. Your Enemies would once have taken what you had from you, for his Names Sake, in whom you have believed; wherefore he has given you much of the World in the Face of your Enemies. But Oh let it be your Servant and not your Master, your Diversion rather than your Business! Let the Lord be chiefly in your Eye, and ponder your Ways, and see if God has nothing more for you to do; and if you find your selves short in your Account with him, then wait for his Preparation, and be ready to re∣ceive the word of Command, and be not weary of well doing, when you have put your Hand to the Plow; and assuredly you shall Reap (if you faint not) the Fruit of your Heavenly La∣bour in God's Everlasting Kingdom. And you, Young Convinced Ones, be you Entreated and Ex∣horted to a Diligent and Chast waiting upon God, in the way of his Blessed Manifestation and appearance of himself to you. Look not out, but within: Let not anothers Liberty be your Snare. Neither Act by Imitation, but Sense and Feeling of God's Power in your selves: Crush not the tender Buddings of it in your Souls, nor over run in your desires, and your warm∣ness of Affections the Holy and Gentle Motions of It. Remem∣ber it is a still Voice that Speaks to us in this Day, and that it is not to be heard in the Noises and Hurries of the Mind; but is distinctly understood in a retired Frame. Jesus loved and chose out Solitudes; often going to Mountains, to Gardens and Sea-sides to avoid Crowds and Hurries, to shew his Disci∣ples it was good to be Solitary, and sit loose to the World. Two Enemies lie near your States, Imagination and Liberty, but the plain, practical, Living, Holy Truth, that has convinced you will preserve you, if you mind it in your selves, and bring all Thoughts, Imaginations and Affections to the Test of it, to see if they are wrought in God, or of the Enemy, or your own selves: So will a true Tast, Discerning and Judgment
be preserved to you, of what you should do and leave un∣done: And in your diligence and Faithfulness in this way you will come to inherit Substance; and Christ, the Eternal Wis∣dom, will fill your Treasury. And when you are Converted, as well as Convinced, then confirm your Brethren, and be rea∣dy to every good Word and Work, that the Lord shall call you to; that you may be to his Praise, who has chosen you to be partakers with the Saints in Light of a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, an Inheritance incorruptible, in Eternal Habitations. And now, as for you that are the Children of God's People, a Great Concern is upon my Spirit for your good; and often are my Knees Bowed to the God of your Fathers for you, that you may come to be partakers of the same Divine Life and Power, that has been the Glory of this Day; that a Genera∣tion you may be to God, an Holy Nation and a Peculiar People, Zealous of Good Works, when all our Heads are laid in the Dust. Oh you Young Men and Women, let it not suffice you, that you are the Children of the People of the Lord! you must also be born again, if you will inherit the Kingdom of God. Your Fathers are but such after the Flesh, and could but beget you into the likeness of the first Adam; but you must be begotten into the likeness of the second Adam by a Spiritual Generation. And therefore look carefully about you, Oh ye Children of the Children of God, Consider your Standing, and see what you are in Relation to this Divine Kindred, Family and Birth! Have you obeyed the Light, and received and walked in the Spirit, that is the incorruptible Seed of the Word and Kingdom of God, of which you must be born again: God is no respecter of Per∣sons. The Father cannot save or answer for the Child, the Child for the Father, but in the Sin thou Sinnest, thou shalt die; and in the Righteousness thou doest, through Christ Jesus, thou shalt live; for it is the Willing and Obedient that shall eat the Good of the Land. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, such as all Nations and People Sow, such they shall reap at the hand of the just God. And then your many and great Priviledges, above the Children of other People, will add weight in the scale a∣gainst you, if you choose not the way of the Lord. For you have had Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, and not only good Doctrine, but good Example; and which is more, you have been turned to and acquainted with a Principle in your selves, which others have been ignorant of; and you know, you may be as Good as you please, without the Fear of Frowns and Blows, or being turned out of doors and forsaken of Father and Mother for God's Sake, and his Holy Religion, as has been the Case of some of your Fathers in the day they first entred into this Holy Path: And if you, after hearing and seeing the Won∣ders that God has wrought in the deliverance and perservation of them, through a Sea of Troubles, and the manifold Temporal, as well as spiritual Blessings, that he has filled them with in the
sight of their Enemies, you should neglect and turn your backs upon so great and so near a Salvation, you would not only be most ungreatful Children to God and them, but must expect that God will call the Children of those that knew him not, to take the Crown out of your Hands, and that your lot will be a dreadful Judgment at the hand of the Lord. But Oh that it may never be so with any of you! The Lord forbid, saith my Soul. Wherefore, Oh ye Young Men and Women, look to the Rock of your Fathers! chuse the God of your Fathers: There is no other God but him; no other Light but his; no other Grace but his, nor Spirit, but his to Convince you, Quicken and Comfort you; to Lead, Guide and Preserve you to God's Everlasting Kingdom: So will you be Possessors, as well as Professors of the Truth; embracing it not only by Education but Judgment and Conviction, from a Sense begotten in your Souls, through the ope∣ration of the Eternal Spirit and Power of God in your hearts, by which you may come to be the Seed of Abraham through Faith, and the circumcision not made with Hands, and so heirs of the promise made to the Fathers of an Incorruptible Crown: That (as I said before) a Generation you may be to God, hold∣ing up the Profession of the blessed Truth in the Life and Power of it. For Formality in Religion is Nauseous to God and good Men; and the more so, where any Form or Appearance has been new and peculiar, and begun and practised upon a Principle, with an Uncommon Zeal and Strictness. Therefore I say, for you to fall flat and formal, and continue the profession without that Salt and Savour, by which it is come to obtain a good Report among Men, is not to answer God's Love, nor your Parents Care, nor the mind of Truth in your selves, nor in those that are with∣out; who tho' they will not obey the Truth, have Sight and Sense enough to see if they do that make a Profession of it. For where the Divine Virtue of it is not felt in the Soul, and waited for, and lived in, imperfections will quickly break out, and shew themselves, and detect the Unfaithfulness of such Per∣sons, and that their insides are not seasoned with the Nature of that holy Principle which they profess. Wherefore, Dear Children, let met intreat you to shut your Eyes at the Temptations and Allurements of this low and pe∣rishing World, and not suffer your affections to be captivated by those Lusts and Vanities that your Fathers, for Truths Sake, long since turned their Backs upon: But as you believe it to be the Truth, receive it into your Hearts, that you may become the Children of God: So that it may never be said of you, as the Evangelist Writes of the Jews of his time, That Christ, the true Light, came to his own, but his own received him not; but to as many as received him, to them he gave Power to become the Children of God; which were born, not of Blood, nor of the
Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. A most close and comprehensive Passage to this occasion: You exactly and peculiarly answer to those professing Jews, in that you bear the Name of God's People, by being the Children and wear∣ing of the Form of God's People: So that he by his Light in you, may be said to come to his own, and if you obey it not, but turn your Back upon it, and walk after the Vanities of your Minds, you will be of those that receive him not, which, I pray God, may never be your Case and Judgment; but that you may be throughly sensible of the many and great Obligations you lie under to the Lord for his Love, and your Parents for their Care: And with all your Heart and all your Soul, and all your Strength turn to the Lord, to his Gift and Spirit in you, and hear his Voice and obey it, that you may Seal to the Testimony of your Fathers, by the Truth and Evidence of your own Experience; that your Childrens Children may bless you, and the Lord for you, as those that delivered a faithful Example, as well as Record of the Truth of God unto them. So will the Gray Hairs of your Dear Parents yet alive, go down to the Grave with Joy, to see you the poste∣rity of Truth, as well as theirs, and that not only their Natures but Spirit shall live in you when they are gone. I shall conclude this Preface with a few Words to those that are not of our Communion, into whose hands this may come, e∣specially those of our own Nation. Friends, As you are the Sons and Daughters of Adam, and my Brethren after the Flesh, often and earnest have been my De∣sires and Prayers to God on your behalf, that you may come to know him that has Made you to be your Redeemer and Restorer to the Image that, through Sin, you have lost, by the power and Spirit of his Son Jesus Christ, whom he hath given for the Light and Life of the World. And Oh that you, who are called Christians, would receive him into your Heart! for there it is you want him, and at that Door he stands knocking, that you should let him in, but you do not open to him; You are full of o∣ther Guests, so that a Manger is his Lot among you Now, as well as of Old: Yet you are full of Profession, as were the Jews when he came among them, who knew him not, but rejected and evilly intreated him. So that if you come not to the Possession and Experience of what you profess, all your Formality in Reli∣gion will stand you in no stead in the Day of God's Judgment. I beseech you ponder with your selves your Eternal Conditi∣on, and see what Title, what Ground and Foundation you have for your Christianity: If more than a Profession, and an Historical Belief of the Gospel. Have you known the Baptism of Fire, and the Holy Ghost, and the Fan of Christ that winnows away the Chaff; The Carnal Lusts and Affections? That Divine Leven of the Kingdom, that being received, Levens the whole Lump of
Man, sanctifying him throughout in Body, Soul and Spirit? If this be not the Ground of your Confidence, you are in a Misera∣ble Estate. You will say perhaps, that though you are Sinners, and live in the daily Commission of Sin, and are not Santified, as I have been Speaking, yet you have Faith in Christ, who has borne the Curse for you, and in him you are Compleat by Faith; his Righ∣teousness being imputed to you. But my Friends, let me intreat you not to deceive your selves, in so Important a Point, as is that of your Immortal Souls. If you have true Faith in Christ, your Faith will make you Clean, it will Sanctifie you; for the Saints Faith was their Victory: By this they over came Sin within, and Sinful Men without. And if thou art in Christ thou walkest not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, whose Fruits are Manifest. Yea, thou art a New Creature, New Made, New Fashioned after God's Will and Mold: Old things are done away, and behold, all things are become New: New Love, Desires, Will, Affections and Practices. It is not any longer Thou that livest, Thou Disobedient, Carnal, World∣ly One; but it is Christ that liveth in thee, and to live is Christ and to die is thy Eternal Gain; because thou art assured, That thy Corruptible shall put on Incorruption, and thy Mortal, Immorta∣lity; and that thou hast a Glorious House Eternal in the Heavens that will never wax Old or pass away. All this follows being in Christ, as Heat follows Fire and Light the Sun. Therefore have a Care how you presume to Rely upon such a Notion, as that you are in Christ, whilst in your old fallen Na∣ture. For what Communion hath Light with Darkness, or Christ with Belial? Hear what the beloved Disciple tells you: If we say we have fellowship with God, and walk in Darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth. That is, if we go on in a sinful way, are Captivated by our Carnal Affections, and are not Converted to God, we walk in Darkness, and cannot possibly have any fellowship with God. Christ Cloths them with his Righteousness that receive his Grace in their Hearts, and deny themselves, and take up his Cross daily, and follow him. Christ's Righteousness makes Men inwardly Ho∣ly, of Holy Minds, Wills and Practices. It is nevertheless Christs, because we have it; for it is ours, not by Nature, but by Faith and Adoption: It is the Gift of God: But still tho' not ours, as of or from our selves, for in that Sense it is Christ's, for it is of and from him, yet it is ours; and must be ours in Possession, Efficacy and Enjoyment to do us any Good, or Christ's Righteousness will pro∣fit us nothing. It was after this manner, That he was made to the primitive Christians, Righteousness, Sanctification, Justifi∣cation and Redemption; and if ever you will have the Comfort, Kernel and Marrow of the Christian Religion, thus you must come to learn and obtain it.
Now, my Friends, by what you have Read, and will Read in what Follows, you may perceive, that God has visited a Poor People among you with this saving Knowledge and Testimony; whom he has upheld and encreased to this Day, notwithstand∣ing the fierce opposition they have met withal. Despise not the meanness of this Appearance: It was, and yet is (we know) a day of small things, and of small Account with too many; and many hard and ill Names are given to it; but it is of God, it came from him because it leads to him. This we know, but we can∣not make another know it, as we know it, unless he will take the same way to know it, that we took. The World talks of God; but what do they do? They pray for Power, but re∣ject the Principle in which it is. If you would know God and Worship and serve God, as you should do, you must come to the means he has ordained and given for that purpose. Some seek it in Books, some in Learned Men, but what they look for, is in themselves, but they overlook it. The Voice is too still, the Seed too small, and the Light shineth in Darkness. They are abroad, and so cannot divide the Spoil; but the Woman, that lost her Sil∣ver found it at Home, after she had light her Candle and swept her House. Do you so too, and you shall find what Pilate wan∣ted to know, viz. Truth. The light of Christ within, who is the Light of the World, (and so a Light to you, that tells you the Truth of your Con∣dition) leads all, that take heed unto it, out of Darkness into God's marvellous Light; for Light grows upon the Obedient. It is sown for the Righteous, and their way is a shining Light, that shines forth more and more to the perfect day. Wherefore, O Friends, Turn in, Turn in, I beseech you! Where is the Poison, there is the Antidote: There you want Christ, and there you must find him; and blessed be God, there you may find him. Seek and you shall find, I testifie for God: But then you must seek aright, with your whole Heart, as Men that seek for their Lives, yea, for their Eternal Lives: Diligently, Humbly, Patiently, as those that can taste no Pleasure, Comfort or Sa∣tisfaction in any thing else, unless you find him whom your Souls want, and desire to know and love above all. O it is a Travail, a Spiritual Travail! Let the Carnal, Profane World think and say as it will. And through this Path you must walk to the City of God, that has Eternal Foundations, if ever you will come there. Well! And what does this blessed Light do for you? Why, 1. it sets all your sins in order before you: It detects the Spirit of this World in all its Bates and Allurements, and shews how Man came to fall from God, and the fallen Estate he is in. 2. It begets a Sense and Sorrow, in such as believe in it, for this fearful Laps. You will then see him Distinctly, whom you have Pierced him, and all the Blows and Wounds you have given him by your Disobedi∣ence;
and how you have made him to serve with your Sins, and you will Weep and Mourn for it, and your Sorrow will be a Godly Sorrow. 3. After this it will bring you to the Holy Watch, to take Care that you do so no more, that the Enemy surprise you not a∣gain: Then Thoughts, as well as Words and Works, will come to Judgment, which is the way of Holiness, in which the Redeemed of the Lord do Walk. Here you will come to love God above all, and your Neighbours as your selves. Nothing Hurts, Nohing Harms, Nothing makes Afraid on this Holy Mountain: Now you come to be Christ's indeed, for you are his in Nature and Spirit, and not your own. And when you are thus Christ's, then Christ is yours, and not before: And here Communion with the Father and with the Son you will know, and the Efficacy of the Blood of Cleansing, even the Blood of Jesus Christ, that Imma∣culate Lamb, which speaketh better things than the Blood of A∣bel, and which cleanseth from all Sin the Consciences of those that, through the living Faith, come to be sprinkled with it from dead Works to serve the living God. To Conclude, Behold the Testimony and Doctrine of the People called Quakers! Behold their Practice and Discipline! And behold the blessed Man and Men that were sent of God in this Excellent Work and Service! All which will be more particularly expressed in the Ensuing Annals of the Man of God; which I do heartily recommend to my Readers most serious Perusal, and beseech Al∣mighty God, that his Blessing may go along with it, to the Con∣vincing of many, as yet Strangers to this Holy Dispensation, and also to the Edification of the Church of God in General: Who, for his manifold and repeated Mercies and Blessings to his Peo∣ple in this day of his great Love, is worthy ever to have the Glory, Honour, Thanksgiving and Renown; and be it rendred and ascribed, with Fear and Reverence, through him in whom he is well pleased, his bloved Son and Lamb, our Light and Life, that fits with him upon the Throne, World without End. Amen, Says One that God has long since Mercifully favoured with his Fatherly Visitation, and who was not Disobedient to the Hea∣venly Vision and Call, to whom the Way of Truth is more Lovely and Precious than ever, and that knowing the Beauty and Benefit of it above all Worldly Treasure, has chosen it for his Chiefest Joy, and therefore recommends it to thy Love and Choice, because he is with great Sincerity and Affection thy Souls Friend. William Penn. London, Printed and Sold by T. Sowle, at the Crooked Billet in Holly-well-lane, Shoreditch, and near the Meeting-House in White-hart-court in Grace-church-street, 1694.
A JOURNAL, OR Historical Account OF THE Life, Travels, Sufferings, And CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCES, &c. OF GEORGE FOX. THAT all may know the Dealings of the Lord with me, and the various Exercises, Trials and Troubles, through which he led me, in order to prepare and fit me for the Work, unto which he had appointed me; and may thereby be drawn to admire and glorify his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness; I think fit (before I proceed to set forth my Publick Travels in the Service of Truth) briefly to mention, how it was with me in my Youth; and how the Work of the Lord was begun, and gradually carried on in me, even from my Childhood. I was born in the Month called July, in the Year 1624.Drayton in Leice∣stershire, the Place of G. F's Birth. at Drayton in the Clay, in Leicestershire. My Father's Name was Christopher Fox: He was by Profession a Weaver, an honest Man; and there the was a Seed of God in him. The Neighbours called him Righteous Christer. My Mother was an upright Woman; her Maiden-name was Mary Lago, of the Family of the Lago's, and of the Stock of the Martyrs.
In my very Young Years, I had a Gravity and stayedness of Mind and Spirit, not usual in Children; insomuch, that when I have seen Old Men carry themselves lightly and wantonly towards each other, I have had a Dislike thereof risen in my Heart, and have said within my self; If ever I come to be a Man, surely, I should not do so, nor be so wanton. When I came to Eleven Years of Age, I knew Pureness and Righ∣teousness: For while I was a Child, I was taught how to walk to be kept pure. The Lord taught me to be faithful in all Things, and to act faithfully two ways; viz. Inwardly to God, and Outwardly to Man; and to keep to Yea and Nay in all Things. For the Lord shewed me, that though the People of the World have Mouths full of Deceit, and changeable Words, yet I was to keep to Yea and Nay in all Things; and that my Words should be few and savory, sea∣soned with Grace: And that I might not Eat and Drink to make my self Wanton, but for Health; using the Creatures in their Service, as Servants in their Places, to the Glory of him that harh created them: they being in their Covenant, and I being brought up into the Covenant, as sanctified by the Word, which was in the Beginning, by which all things are upheld; wherein is Ʋnity with the Creation. But People, being Strangers to the Covenant of Life with God, they Eat and Drink to make themselves wanton with the Creatures, devouring them upon their own Lusts, and living in all Filthiness, loving foul ways, and devouring the Creation; and all this in the World, in the Pollutions thereof without God: And therefore I was to shun all such. Afterwards, as I grew up, my Relations thought to have made me a Priest; but others perswaded to the Contrary. Whereupon I was put to a Man, that was a Shoo-maker by Trade, and that dealt in Wooll and used Grazing, and sold Cattel; and a great deal went through my Hands. While I was with him, he was blest: But after I left him, he broke, and came to nothing. I never wronged Man or Woman in all that Time: For the Lord's Power was with me, and over me, to preserve me. While I was in that Service, I used in my Dealings the Word [Verily,] and it was a common Saying among People, that knew me, If George says verily, there is no altering him. When Boys and rude People would laugh at me, I let them alone, and went my Way: But People had generally a Love to me, for my Innocency and Honesty. When I came towards Nineteen Years of Age, I being upon Bu∣siness at a Fair, one of my Cousins, whose Name was Bradford, (being a Professor, and having another Professor with him) came to me, and asked me to drink part of a Jug of Beer with them; and I, being Thirsty, went in with them: For I loved any, that had a Sense of Good, or that did seek after the Lord. And when we had drunk a Glass a piece, they began to drink Healths, and called for more Drink; agreeing together, That he that would not drink, should pay all. I was grieved, that any, that made Profession of Reli∣gion, should offer to do so. They grieved me very much, having never had such a thing put to me before, by any sort of People.
Wherefore I rose up to be gone; and putting my Hand into my Pocket, I took out a Groat, and laid it down upon the Table before them, and said, If it be so, I'll leave you. So I went away: And when I had done, what Business I had to do, I returned home: But did not go to Bed that Night, nor could not Sleep; but sometimes walked up and down, and sometimes prayed, and cryed to the Lord, who said unto me; Thou seest,☜ how Young People go together into Vanity and Old People into the Earth; and thou must forsake all, both Young and Old, and keep out of all, and be as a Stranger unto all. Then at the Command of God,  on the Ninth Day of the Seventh Month, 1643. I left my Relations,Lutter∣worth. Northam∣pton. Newport-pagnel in Bucks. Barnet. and brake off all Familiarity or Fellowship with Young or Old. And I passed to Lutterworth, where I stay'd some Time: And from thence I went to Northampton, where also I made some stay: Then passed from thence to Newport-Pagnel in Buckinghamshire; where, after I had stay'd a while, I went unto Barnet, and came thither in the Fourth Month, called June, in the Year, 1644. And as I thus travelled through the Countries,  Pro∣fessors took notice of me, and sought to be acquainted with me; but I was afraid of them: For I was sensible, they did not Possess, what they Profess'd. Now during the time, that I was at Barnet, a strong Temptation to Despair came upon me: and then I saw, how Christ was Tempted; and mighty Troubles I was in. And sometimes I kept my self retired in my Chamber, and often walked solitary in the Chace there, to Wait upon the Lord. And I wondered, why these Things should come to me, and I looked upon my self, and said, Was I ever so before? Then I thought, because I had forsaken my Relations, I had done amiss against them. So I was brought to call to Mind all my Time, that I had spent, and to consider, whether I had wrong'd any? But Temptations grew more and more, and I was tempted almost to Despair. And when Satan could not effect his Design upon me that way, then he laid Snares for me, and Baits to draw me to commit some Sin, whereby he might take advantage to bring me to Despair. I was about Twenty Years of Age, when these Exercises came upon me; and some Years I continued in that Condition, in great Troubles; and fain I would have put it from me. And I went to many a Priest to look for Com∣fort, but found no Comfort from them. From Barnet I went to London, where I took a Lodging,London. and was under great Misery and Trouble there: For I looked upon the great Professors of the City of London, and I saw all was dark, and under the Chain of Darkness. And I had an Uncle there, one Pickering, a Baptist (and they were tender then:) Yet I could not impart my Mind to him, nor join with them: For I saw all, Young and Old, where they were. Some tender People would have had me stayed, but I was fearful, and returned homewards in Leicestershire again,Leicester∣shire. having a Regard upon my Mind unto my Parents and Relations, lest I should grieve them, who, I understood, were troubled at my Absence. When I was come down into Leicestershire, my Relations would have had me Married: But I told them, I was but a Lad, and I must get Wisdom. Others would have had me into the Auxiliary Band,
among the Soldiery;  Coventry. but I refused: and I was grieved, that they proffered such Things to me, being a tender Youth. Then I went to Coventry, where I took a Chamber for a while at a Professor's House, till People began to be acquainted with me; for there were many tender People in that Town. And after some time, I went into my own Country again,Leicester∣shire. and was there about a Year, in great Sorrows and Troubles, and walked many Nights by my self. Then the Priest of Drayton (the Town of my Birth) whose Name was Nathaniel Stevens, would come often to me, and I went often to him; and another Priest sometimes would come with him: And they would have given place to me, to hear me; and I would ask them Questions, and reason with them. And this Priest Stevens asked me a Question, viz. Why Christ cryed out upon the Cross, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? And why he said, If it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; yet not my Will, but thine be done? And I told him; At that time, the Sins of all Mankind were upon him, and their Iniquities and Transgressions, with which he was wounded; which he was to bear, and to be an Offering for them, as he was Man, but died not, as he was God. And so, in that he died for all Men, and tasted Death for every Man, he was an Offering for the Sins of the whole World. (This I spake, being at that time in a measure sensible of Christ's Sufferings, and what he went through.) And the Priest said, It was a very good, full Answer; and such an one, as he had not heard. And at that time, he would applaud and speak highly of me to others: And what I said in Discourse to him on the Week-days, that he would Preach of on the First-days; for which I did not like him. And this Priest afterwards became my great Persecutor. Mansetter in War∣wick-shire.After this, I went to another Ancient Priest at Mansetter in War∣wick-shire, and reasoned with him about the Ground of Despair and Temptations; but he was ignorant of my Condition: And he bid me Take Tobacco, and Sing Psalms. Tobacco was a thing I did not love; and Psalms I was not in an Estate to Sing: I could not Sing. Then he bid me come again, and he would tell me many Things. But when I came again, he was angry and pettish: For my former Words had displeased him. And he told my Troubles, and Sorrows and Griefs to his Servants, so that it was got among the Milk-Lasses; which grieved me, that I should open my Mind to such an one. I saw, they were all Miserable Comforters: And this brought my Trou∣bles more upon me.Tam∣worth. Then I heard of a Priest living about Tamworth, who was accounted an Experienced Man; and I went Seven Miles to him: But I found him but like an Empty, hollow Cask. Then I heard of one called Doctor Cradock of Coventry; and I went to him, and I asked him the Ground of Temptations and Despair; and how Trou∣bles came to be wrought in Man? He asked me, Who was Christ's Father and Mother? I told him, Mary was his Mother, and that he was supposed to be the Son of Joseph; but he was the Son of God. Now as we were walking together in his Garden, the Ally being nar∣row, I chanced, in turning, to set my Foot on the side of a Bed; at which the Man was in such a Rage, as if his House had been on Fire. And thus all our Discourse was lost, and I went away in
Sorrow, worse than I was, when I came. I thought them Miserable Comforters: And I saw, they were all as Nothing to me; for they could not reach my Condition. After this I went to another, one Macham, a Priest in high Account: And he would needs give me some Physick, and I was to have been let Blood: But they could not get one drop of Blood from me, either in Arms or Head (though they endeavoured it) my Body being, as it were, dried up with Sorrows, Grief and Troubles, which were so great upon me, that I could have wished, I had never been born to see Vanity and Wickedness; or that I had been born Blind, that I might never have seen Wicked∣ness nor Vanity; and Deaf, that I might never have heard vain and wicked Words, or the Lord's Name blasphemed. And when the time, called Christmas, came, while others were Feasting and Sport∣ing themselves, I would have gone, and looked out poor Widows from House to House, and have given them some Money. And when I was invited to Marriages (as I sometimes was) I would go to none at all; but the next day or soon after I would go, and visit them: And if they were Poor, I gave them some Money; for I had, where∣with both to keep my self from being Chargeable to others, and to administer something to the Necessities of Others. About the beginning of the Year, 1646.  as I was going to Coven∣try, and entring towards the Gate, a Consideration arose in me, how it was said, That All Christians are Believers,Coventry. both Protestants and Papists. And the Lord opened to me, that if all were Believers, then they were all born of God, and passed from Death to Life; and that none were true Believers, but such: And though Others said, they were Believers, yet they were not. At another time, as I was walk∣ing in a Field on a First-day Morning, the Lord opened unto me, That being bred at Oxford or Cambridge, was not enough to fit and qualifie Men to be Ministers of Christ: And I stranged at it, because it was the common Belief of People. But I saw it clearly, as the Lord opened it to me, and was satisfied; and admired the Goodness of the Lord, who had opened this thing unto me that Morning: Which struck at Priest Stevens his Ministry, namely, that To be bred at Ox∣ford or Cambridge, was not enough to make a Man fit to be a Minister of Christ. So that which opened in me, I saw, struck at the Priest's Ministry. But my Relations were much troubled at me, that I would not go with them to hear the Priest: For I would get into the Or∣chard, or the Fields, with my Bible, by my self. And I told them, did not the Apostle say to Believers, That they needed no Man to teach them, but as the Anointing teacheth them? And though they knew, this was Scripture, and that it was true; yet they would be grieved, because I could not be subject in this Matter, to go to hear the Priest with them: For I saw, that a true Believer was another thing, than they looked upon it to be. And I saw, that being bred at Oxford or Cambridge, did not qualifie or fit a Man to be a Minister of Christ; and what then should I follow such for? So neither them, nor any of the Dissenting People, could I join with; but was as a Stranger to all, relying wholly upon the Lord Jesus Christ.
At another time it was opened in me, That God, who made the World, did not dwell in Temples made with Hands. This, at the first, seemed a strange Word, because both Priests and People use to call their Temples or Churches, dreadful Places, and Holy Ground, and the Temples of God. But the Lord shewed me, so that I did see clearly, that he did not dwell in these Temples, which Men had commanded and set up; but in People's Hearts. For both Stephen and the Apostle Paul bore Testimony, That he did not dwell in Temples made with Hands; not even in that, which he had once commanded to be built; since he put an End to it: But that his People were his Temple; and he dwelt in them. This opened in me, as I walked in the Fields to my Relations House. And when I came there, they told me, That Nath Stevens, the Priest, had been there, and told them, He was afraid of me, for going after New Lights. And I smiled in my self, knowing, what the Lord had opened in me concerning him and his Brethren: But I told not my Relations; who though they saw beyond the Priests, yet they went to hear them, and were griev∣ed, because I would not go also. But I brought them Scriptures, and told them, There was an Anointing within Man, to teach him; and that the Lord would teach his People himself. And I had great Open∣ings concerning the Things written in the Revelations; and when I spake of them, the Priests and Professors would say, That was a sealed up Book; and would have kept me out of it. But I told them, Christ could open the Seals; and that they were the nearest things to us: For the Epistles were written to the Saints, that lived in for∣mer Ages; but the Revelations were written of things to come. After this I met with a sort of People, that held, Women have no Souls; (adding in a light manner) no more than a Goose. But I re∣proved them, and told them, that was not right: For Mary said, My Soul doth magnify the Lord, and my Spirit hath rejoyced in God my Saviour. And removing again to another Place, I came among a People, that relied much on Dreams. And I told them; Except they could distin∣guish between Dream and Dream, they would mash or confound al∣together: For there were Three sorts of Dreams; for Multitude of Business sometimes caused Dreams: And there were Whisperings of Satan in Man in the Night-Season; and there were Speakings of God to Man in Dreams. But these People came out of these Things, and at last became Friends. Now though I had great Openings, yet great Trouble and Tempta∣tion came many Times upon me; so that when it was Day, I wished for Night, and when it was Night, I wished for Day. And by reason of the Openings I had in my Troubles, I could say as David said, Day unto Day uttereth Speech, and Night unto Night sheweth Know∣ledge. And when I had Openings, they answered one another, and answered the Scriptures: For I had great Openings of the Scri∣ptures. And when I was in Troubles, one Trouble also answered to anoth. About the beginning of the Year 1647. I was moved of the Lord to go into Darbyshire,Darbyshire. where I met with some Friendly People, and had many Discourses with them. Then passing further, into the
Peak-Country, I met with more friendly People,  Peak-Country. Leicester∣ire. Notting∣hamshire. and with some in empty, high Notions. And travelling on through some Parts of Leicestershire, and into Nottinghamshire, there I met with a tender People, and a very Tender Woman, whose Name was Ebeth Hootton; and with these I had some Meetings and Discourses. B my Troubles continued, and I was often under great Temptations; and I fasted much, and walked abroad in solitary Places many Days, and often took my Bible, and went and sate in hollow Trees, and lonesome Places, till Night came on; and frequently, in the Night, walked mournfully about by my self: For I was a Man of Sorrows in the Times of the first Workings of the Lord in me. Now, during all this Time I was never joined in Profession of Re∣ligion with any, but gave up my self to the Lord; having forsaken all evil Company, and taken leave of Father and Mother, and all other Relations, and travelled up and down as a Stranger in the Earth, which Way the Lord inclined my Heart; taking a Chamber to my self in Town, where I came, and tarrying sometimes a Month, some∣times more, sometimes less in a Place: For I durst not stay long in any Place, being afraid both of Professor and Profane, lest, being a tender Young-Man, I should be hurt by conversing much with either. For which Reason I kept my self much as a Stranger, seeking hea∣venly Wisdom, and getting Knowledge from the Lord; and was brought off from outward Things, to rely wholly on the Lord alone. And though my Exercises and Troubles were very great, yet were they not so continual, but that I had some Intermissions; and was sometimes brought into such an Heavenly Joy, that I thought, I had been in Abraham's Bosom. As I cannot declare the Misery I was in, it was so great and heavy upon upon me; so neither can I set forth the Mercies of God unto me in all my Misery. Oh! the everlasting Love of God to my Soul, when I was in great Distress! when my Troubles and Torments were great, then was his Love exceeding great. Thou, Lord, makest a fruitful Field a barren Wilderness, and a bar∣ren Wilderness a fruitful Field! thou bringest down and settest up! Thou killest and makest alive! all Honour and Glory be to thee, O Lord of Glory! The Knowledge of thee in the Spirit is Life: But that Knowledge which is fleshly, works Death. And while there is this Knowledge in the Flesh, Deceit and Self will conform to any thing, and will say Yes, yes, to that it doth not know. The Knowledge which the World hath, of what the Prophets and Apostles spake, is a fleshly Knowledge; and the Apostates from the Life, in which the Prophets and Apostles were, have gotten their Words, the Holy Scriptures, in a Form, but not in their Life, nor Spirit, that gave them forth. And so they all lie in Con∣fusion, and are making Provision for the Flesh, to fulfil the Lusts thereof; but not to fulfil the Law and Command of Christ in his Power and Spirit: For that, they say, they cannot do; but to fulfil the Lusts of the Flesh, that they can do with Delight.
Now after I had received that Opening from the Lord, that To be bred at Oxford or Cambridge, was not sufficient to fit a Man to be a Minister of Christ, I regarded the Priests less, and looked more af∣ter the Dissenting People. And among them I saw, there was some Tenderness: And many of them came afterwards to be Convinced; for they had some Openings. But as I had forsaken all the Priests, so I left the Separate Preachers also, and those called the Most-Experi∣enced People: For I saw, there was none among them all, that could speak to my Condition. And when all my hopes in them, and in all Men was gone, so that I had nothing outwardly to help me, nor could tell what to do; Then, O! then I heard a Voice, which said,☞ "There is one, even Christ Jesus, that can speak to thy Condition: And when I heard it, my Heart did leap for Joy. Then the Lord did let me see, why there was none upon the Earth, that could speak to my Condition? namely, that I might give him all the Glory. For all are concluded under Sin, and shut up in Ʋnbelief, as I had been; that Jesus Christ might have the Pre-heminence; who en∣lightens, and gives Grace, and Faith and Powe. Thus when God doth work, who shall let it? And this I knew experimentally. My Desires after the Lord grew stronger, and Zeal in the pure know∣ledge of God, and of Christ alone, without the help of any Man, Book or Writing. For though I read the Scriptures, that spake of Christ, and of God; yet I knew him not, but by Revelation, as he, who hath the Key, did open, and as the Father of Life drew me to his Son by his Spirit. And then the Lord did gently lead me along, and did let me see his Love, which was Endless and Eternal, and surpasseth all the Knowledge, that Men have in the natural State, or can get by History, or Books. And that Love did let me see my self, as I was without him; and I was afraid of all Company: For I saw them perfectly, where they were, through the Love of God, which let me see my self. And I had not Fellowship with any Peo∣ple, Priests nor Professors, nor any sort of separated People; but with Christ, who hath the Key, and opened the Door of Light and Life un∣to me. And I was afraid of all Carnal Talk and Talkers; for I could see nothing but Corruptions, and the Life lay under the Burden of Corruptions. And when I my self was in the Deep, under all shut up, I could not believe, that I should ever Overcome; my Troubles, my Sorrows and my Temptations were so great, that I thought many times, I should have despaired, I was so tempted. But when Christ opened to me, how he was tempted by the same Devil, and had Overcome him, and bruised his Head; and that through him and his Power, Light, Grace and Spirit, I should Overcome also; I had Confidence in him. So he it was, that opened to me, when I was shut up, and had not hope, nor Faith. Christ it was (who had en∣lightened me) that gave me his Light to believe in, and gave me Hope, which is himself, Revealed himself in me, and gave me his Spirit, and gave me his Grace, which I found sufficient in the Deeps and in Weakness. Thus in the deepest Miseries, and in the greatest Sorrows and Temptations, that many times beset me, the Lord in his Mercy did keep me. And I found, that there were Two Thirsts in me; the one after the Creatures, to have gotten Help and
Strength there; and the other after the Lord, the Creator, and his Son Jesus Christ. And I saw, all the World could do me no good. If I had had a King's Diet, Palace and Attendance, all would have been as nothing: For nothing gave me Comfort, but the Lord by his Power. And I saw Professors, Priests and People were whole and at ease in that Condition, which was my Misery; and they loved that, which I would have been rid of. But the Lord did stay my Desires upon himself, from whom my help came, and my care was cast upon him alone. Therefore all Wait patiently upon the Lord, whatsoever Condition you be in; wait in the Grace and Truth, that comes by Jesus: For if ye so do, there is a Promise to you, and the Lord God will fulfil it in you. And Blessed are all they indeed, that do indeed hunger and thirst after Righteousness; they shall be sa∣tisfied with it: I have found it so, praised be the Lord, who filleth with it, and satisfieth the desires of the hungry Soul. O let the House of the Spiritual Israel say, His Mercy endureth for ever! It is the great Love of God, to make a Wilderness of that, which is plea∣sant to the outward Eye and fleshly Mind; and to make a fruitful Field of a barren Wilderness: This is the great Work of God. But while People's Minds do run in the Earthly, after the Creatures, and changeable Things, and changeable Ways and Religions, and changeable, uncertain Teachers, their Minds are in Bondage, and they are brittle and changeable, and tossed up and down with windy Doctrines and Thoughts, and Notions and Things; their Minds being from the unchangeable Truth in the inward Parts, the Light of Jesus Christ, which would keep their Minds to the Unchangeable, who is the Way to the Father; who in all my Troubles did pre∣serve me by his Spirit and Power, praised be his Holy Name for ever! Again I heard a Voice, which did say, Thou Serpent! Thou dost seek to destroy the Life; but canst not: For the Sword, which keepeth the Tree of Life, shall destroy thee. So Christ, the Word of God, that bruised the Head of the Serpent, the Destroyer, preserved me; my inward Mind being joined to his good Seed, that bruised the Head of this Serpent, the Destroyer. And this inward Life did spring up in me, to answer all the Opposing Professors and Priests, and did bring in Scriptures to my Memory to refute them with. At another time I saw the great Love of God; and I was filled with admiration at the Infiniteness of it. And then I saw, what was Cast out from God; and what Entred into God's Kingdom: And how by Jesus, the Opener of the Door by his Heavenly Key, the Entrance was given. And I saw Death, how it had passed upon all Men, and oppressed the Seed of God in Man, and in me: And how I in the Seed came forth; and what the Promise was to. Yet it was so with me, that there seemed to be Two Pleading in me; and Questionings arose in my Mind about Gifts and Prophecies: and I was tempted again to Despair, as if I had sinned against the Holy Ghost. And I was in great Perplexity and Trouble for many Days; Yet I gave up my self to the Lord still. And one day, when I had been walking solitarily abroad, and was come home, I was taken up in the Love of God, so that I could not but admire the greatness of his Love: And while I
was in that Condition, it was opened unto me by the Eternal Light and Power, and I therein clearly saw, That all was done, and to be done in and by Christ; and how he conquers and destroys this Tempter, the Devil, and all his Works, and is a top of him; And that all these Troubles were good for me, and Temptations for the Trial of my Faith, which Christ had given me. And the Lord opened me, that I saw through all these Troubles and Temptations: My living Faith was raised, that I saw, All was done by Christ, the Life, and my Be∣lief was in him. And when at any time my Condition was vailed, my secret Belief was stayed firm, and Hope underneath held me, as an Anchor in the bottom of the Sea, and Anchored my Immortal Soul to its Bishop, causing it to swim above the Sea, the World, where all the raging Waves, foul Weather, Tempests and Temp∣tations are. But oh! then did I see my Troubles, Trials and Temp∣tations more than ever I had done. As the Light appeared, all ap∣peared, that is out of the Light, Darkness, Death, Temptations, the Ʋnrighteous, the Ʋngodly; all was manifest and seen in the Light: Then, after this, there did a pure Fire appear in me: Then I saw, how he sate as a Refiner's Fire, and as the Fuller's Sope. And then the Spiritual Discerning came into me, by which I did discern my own Thoughts, Groans and Sighs; and what it was, that did vail me, and what it was, that did open me. And that which could not abide in the Patience, nor endure the Fire, in the Light I found to be the Groans of the Flesh (that could not give up to the Will of God) which had vailed me; and that could not be patient in all Trials, Troubles, and Anguishes and Perplexities, and could not give up Self to die by the Cross, the Power of God, that the Living and Quick∣ned might follow him, and that that, which would cloud and vail from the Presence of Christ, that which the Sword of the Spirit cuts down, and which must die, might not be kept alive. And I dis∣cern'd the Groans of the Spirit, which did open me, and made Inter∣cession to God: In which Spirit is the true Waiting upon God, for the Redemption of the Body, and of the whole Creation. And by this true Spirit, in which the true Sighing is, I saw over the false Sighings and Groanings. And by this Invisible Spirit I discerned all the false Hearing, and the false Seeing, and the false Smelling, which was a top, above the Spirit, quenching and grieving it; and that all they, that were there, were in Confusion and Deceit, where the false Asking and Praying is, in Deceit and a top, in that Nature and Tongue, that takes Gods holy Name in vain, and wallows in the Egyptian Sea, and asketh, but hath not; for they hate his Light, and resist the Holy Ghost, and turn the Grace into Wantonness, and rebel against the Spirit, and are erred from the Faith they should ask in, and from the Spirit they should pray by: He that knoweth these things in the true Spirit, can witness them. The divine Light of Christ manifesteth all things, and the spiritual Fire tryeth all things, and severeth all things. Several things did I then see, as the Lord opened them to me: For he shewed me that, which can live in his holy Refining Fire, and that can live to God under his Law. And he made me sensible, how the Law and the Prophets were until John; and how the least in the Everlasting Kingdom of God, is greater than
John. The pure and perfect Law of God is over the Flesh, to keep it, and its Works, which are not perfect, under, by the perfect Law: And the Law of God, that is perfect, answers the perfect Principle of God in every one: And this Law the Jews, and the Prophets, and John were to perform and do. None knows the Giver of this Law, but by the Spirit of God; neither can any truly read it, or hear its Voice, but by the Spirit of God: He that can receive it, let him. John, who was the greatest Prophet, that was born of a Woman, did bear Witness to the Light, which Christ, the Great heavenly Prophet, hath Enlightned every Man, that cometh into the World, with∣al, that they might believe in it, and become the Children of Light, and so have the Light of Life; and not come into Condemnation. For the true Belief stands in the Light, that condemns all Evil, and the Devil, who is the Prince of Darkness, who would draw out of the Light into Condemnation. And they that walk in this Light, come to the Mountain of the House of God, established above all Mountains, and to God's Teaching, who will teach them his ways. These things were opened to me in the Light. And I saw the Mountains burning up, and the Rubbish; and the rough and crooked Ways and Places made smooth and plain, that the Lord might come into his Tabernacle. These things are to be found in Man's Heart: But to speak of these things being within, seemed strange to the rough and crooked, and mountainous Ones. Yet the Lord saith, O Earth, hear the Word of the Lord! The Law of the Spirit crosseth the fleshly Mind, Spirit and Will, which lives in Disobedience, and doth not keep within the Law of the Spirit. And I saw, this Law was the pure Love of God, which was upon me, and which I must go through; though I was troubled, while I was under it: For I could not be dead to the Law, but through the Law, which did judge and condemn that, which is to be condemned. I saw, many talked of the Law, who had never known the Law to be their School-master: And many talked of the Gospel of Christ, who had never known Life and Immortality brought to Light in them by it. You that have been under that School-master, and the Condemnation of it, know these things (for tho' the Lord in that day opened these things unto me in secret, they have since been pub∣lished, by his Eternal Spirit, as on the House top.) And as you are brought into the Law, and through the Law to be dead to it, and witness the Righteousness of the Law fulfilled in you; ye will after∣wards come to know, what it is, to be brought into the Faith, and through Faith from under the Law. And abiding in the Faith, which Christ is the Author of, ye will have Peace and Access to God. But if ye look out from the Faith, and from that which would keep you in the Victory, and look after fleshly Things or Words, ye will be brought into Bondage to the Flesh again; and to the Law, which takes hold upon the Flesh and Sin, and worketh Wrath, and the Works of the Flesh will appear again. The Law of God takes hold upon the Law of Sin and Death: But the Law of Faith, or the Law of the Spirit of Life, which is the Love of God, and which comes by Jesus (who is the end of the Law for Righteousness-sake) this makes free from the Law of Sin and Death. This Law of Life fleshly-minded
Men do not know; yet they will tempt you, to draw you from the Spirit into the Flesh, and so into Bondage. Therefore ye, who know the Love of God, and the Law of his Spirit, and the freedom that is in Jesus Christ, stand fast in him, in that divine Faith, which he is the Author of in you; and be not entangled with the Yoke of Bondage. For the Ministry of Christ Jesus, and his Teaching, bringeth into Liberty and Freedom: But the Ministry that is of Man, and by Man, and which stands in the Will of Man, bringeth into Bondage, and under the shadow of Death and Dark∣ness. And therefore none can be a Minister of Christ Jesus, but in the Eternal Spirit, which was before the Scriptures were given forth: For if they have not his Spirit, they are none of his. Though they may have his Light to condemn them, that hate it; yet they can never bring any into Unity and Fellowship in the Spirit, except they be in it. For the Seed of God is a burdensome Stone to the selfish, fleshly, earthly Will, which reigns in its own Knowledge and Un∣derstanding, that must perish, and in its Wisdom, that is Devilish. And the Spirit of God is grieved, and vexed, and quenched with that which brings into the fleshly Bondage; and that which wars against the Spirit of God, must be mortified by it: For the Flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other. The Flesh would have its Liberty; and the Spirit would have its Liberty: But the Spirit is to have its Liberry; and not the Flesh. If therefore ye quench the Spirit, and join to the Flesh, and be Servants of it, then ye are judged and tor∣mented by the Spirit: But if ye join to the Spirit, and serve God in it, ye have Liberty, and Victory over the Flesh, and its Works. Therefore keep in the daily Cross, the Power of God, by which ye may witness all that to be Crucified, which is contrary to the Will of God, and which shall not come into his Kingdom. These things are here mentioned and opened for Information, Exhortation and Comfort to others, as the Lord Opened them unto me in that day. And in that day I wondred, that the Children of Israel should mur∣mur for Water and Victuals; for I could have fasted long without murmuring, or minding Victuals. But I was judged sometimes, that I was not contented to be sometimes without the Water and Bread of Life, that I might learn to know, how to Want, and how to Abound. Lancashire.And I heard of a Woman in Lancashire, that had Fasted Two and twenty Days: And I traveled to see her; but when I came to her, I saw, that she was under a Temptation. And when I had spoken to her what I had from the Lord, I left her; her Father being one high in Profession.Ducken∣field. Manche∣ster. And passing on, I went among the Professors at Duck∣enfield and Manchester, where I stay'd a while, and declared Truth among them: And there were some Convinced, who received the Lord's Teaching, by which they were confirmed, and stood in the Truth. But the Professors were in a Rage, all pleading for Sin and Imperfection; and could not endure to hear talk of Perfection, and of an holy and sinless Life. But the Lord's Power was over all; though they were chained under Darkness and Sin, which they pleaded for, and quenched the tender Thing in them.
About this time there was a great Meeting of the Baptists,1647. Broughton in Leice∣ster-shire. at Broughton in Leicester-shire, with some that had separated from them; and People of other Notions went thither: And I went thither also. Not many of the Baptists came; but abundance of other People were there. And the Lord opened my Mouth, and his Everlasting Truth was declared amongst them; and the Power of the Lord was over them all. For in that day the Lord's Power began to spring, and I had great Openings in the Scriptures, and several were Con∣vinced in those Parts, and were turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God; and his Power they did receive, and by it many were raised up to praise God. And when I reasoned with Professors and other People, some were Convinced, and did stand. Yet I was under great Temptations sometimes, and my in∣ward Sufferings were heavy; but I could find none to open my Con∣dition to, but the Lord alone, unto whom I cryed Night and Day. And I went back into Nottingham-shire,Notting∣ham-shire. and there the Lord shewed me, that the Natures of those things, which were hurtful without, were within in the Hearts and Minds of Wicked Men. The Natures of Dogs, Swine, Vipers, of Sodom and Egypt, Pharaoh, Cain, Ishmael, Esau, &c. the Natures of these I saw within, though People had been looking without. And I cryed to the Lord, saying, Why should I be thus, seeing I was never addicted to commit those Evils? And the Lord answered, That it was needful, I should have a sense of all Con∣ditions; how else should I speak to all Conditions? And in this I saw the Infinite Love of God. I saw also, that there was an Ocean of Darkness and Death; but an infinite Ocean of Light and Love, which flowed over the Ocean of Darkness: And in that also I saw the Infinite Love of God; and I had great Openings. And as I was walking by the Steeple-house side, in the Town of Mansfield,Mansfield. the Lord said unto me, That which People do trample upon, must be thy Food. And as the Lord spake, he opened it to me, how that People and Professors did trample upon the Life, even the Life of Christ was tramled upon; and they fed upon Words, and fed one another with Words; but trampled upon the Life: And trampled under Foot the Blood of the Son of God (which Blood was my Life;) and they lived in their airy Notions, talking of him. It seemed strange to me at the first, that I should feed on that, which the high Professors trampled upon; but the Lord opened it clearly to me by his Eternal Spirit and Power. Then came People from far and near to see me: And I was fearful of being drawn out by them; yet I was made to speak, and open things to them. There was one Brown, who had great Prophecies and Sights upon his Death-bed of me. And he spake openly, of what I should be made Instrumental by the Lord to bring forth. And of others he spake, that they should come to nothing: Which was fulfilled on some, that then were something in shew. And when this Man was buried, a great Work of the Lord fell upon me, to the admiration of many, who thought I had been Dead: And many came to see me for about fourteen Days time; for I was very much altered in Countenance and Person, as if my Body had been New-moulded or changed. And while I was in that Condition,
I had a sense and discerning given me by the Lord,1647. Nottin∣ghamshire. through which I saw plainly, that when many People talked of God and of Christ, &c. the Serpent spake in them: But this was hard to be born. Yet the Work of the Lord went on in some, and my Sorrows and Troubles began to wear off, and Tears of Joy dropped from me, so that I could have wept Night and Day with Tears of Joy to the Lord, in Humility and Brokenness of Heart. And I saw into that, which was without End, and things which cannot be uttered, and of the Great∣ness and Infinitness of the Love of God, which cannot be exprest by Words. For I had been brought through the very Ocean of Darkness and Death, and through the Power, and over the Power of Satan, by the Eternal, Glorious Power of Christ; even through that Dark∣ness was I brought, which covered-over all the Word, and which chained down all, and shut up all in the Death. And the same Eter∣nal Power of God, which brought me through these Things, was that, which afterwards shook the Nations, Priests, Professors and People. Then could I say, I had been in Spiritual Babylon, Sodom, Egypt and the Grave; but by the Eternal Power of God I was come out of it, and was brought over it, and the Power of it, into the Power of Christ. And I saw the Harvest WHITE, and the Seed of God lying thick in the Ground, as ever did Wheat, that was sown out∣wardly; and none to gather it: And for this I mourned with Tears. And a Report went abroad of me, That I was a Young Man, that had a discerning Spirit: Whereupon many came to me, from far and near, Professors, Priests and People; and the Lord's Power brake forth: And I had great Openings and Prophecies; and spake unto them of the Things of God, and they heard with Attention and Si∣lence; and went away, and spread the Fame thereof. Then came the Tempter, and set upon me again, charging me; That I had sin∣ned against the Holy Ghost: But I could not tell in what. And then Paul's Condition came before me, how, after he had been taken up into the Third Heavens, and seen things not lawful to be uttered, a Messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him again. Thus by the Pow∣er of Christ I got over that Temptation also. In the Year 1648, as I was sitting in a Friend's House in Nottin∣ghamshire (for by this time the Power of God had opened the Hearts of some to receive the Word of Life and Reconciliation) I saw, there was a great Crack to go throughout the Earth, and a great Smoke to go, as the Crack went; and that after the Crack there should be a great Shaking: This was the Earth in People's Hearts, which was to be shaken, before the Seed of God was raised out of the Earth. And it was so; for the Lord's Power began to shake them, and great Meetings we began to have, and a mighty Power and Work of God there was amongst People, to the Astonishment of both People and Priests. And there was a Meeting of Priests and Professors at a Justice's House, and I went among them. And there they discoursed, how Paul said, He had not known Sin, but by the Law, which said, Thou shalt not lust: And they held that to be spoken of the outward Law. But I told them, Paul spake that, after he was Convinced: For he had the outward Law before, and was bred up in it, when he was in
the Lust of Persecution; but this was the Law of God in his Mind, which he served, and which the Law in his Members warred against: For that which he thought had been Life to him, proved Death. So the more sober of the Priests and Professors yielded, and consented, that it was not the Outward Law, but the Inward, which shewed the Inward Lust, which Paul spake of, after he was Convinced: For the outward Law took hold upon the outward Action; but the Inward Law upon the Inward Lust. After this I went again to Mansfield,Mansfield. where was a great Meeting of Professors and People: And I was moved to Pray. And the Lord's Power was so great, that the House seemed to be shaken. And when I had done, some of the Professors said, It was now, as in the Days of the Apostles, when the House was shaken, where they were: After I had prayed, one of the Professors would pray; which brought Deadness and a Vail over them: And others of the Professors were grieved at him, and told him, It was a Temptation upon him. Then he came to me, and desired, that I would pray again: But I could not pray in Man's Will. Soon after there was another great Meeting of Professors, and a Captain (whose Name was Amor Stoddard) came in: And they were discoursing of the Blood of Christ. And as they were dis∣coursing of it, I saw, through the immediate Opening of the Invi∣sible Spirit, the Blood of Christ. And I cryed out among them, and said; Do ye not see the Blood of Christ? See it in your Hearts, to sprinkle your Hearts and Consciences from Dead Works, to serve the Living God: For I saw it, the Blood of the New Covenant, how it came into the Heart. This startled the Professors, who would have the Blood only without them, and not in them. But Captain Stoddard was reached, and said; Let the Youth speak; hear the Youth speak; when he saw, they endeavoured to bear me down with many Words. There were also a Company of Priests that were looked upon to be tender (one of their Names was Kellet) and several People, that were tender, went to hear them. And I was moved to go after them, and bid them, Mind the Lord's Teaching in their inward Parts. That Priest Kellet was against Parsonages then; but afterwards he got a great One, and turned a Persecutor. Now, after I had had some Service in these Parts,Derbyshire, Leicester∣shire. I went through Derbyshire into my own Country Leicestershire again, and several tender People were Convinced. And passing thence, I met with a great Company of Professors in Warwickshire, who were Praying,Warwick∣shire. and Expounding the Scriptures in the Fields; and they gave the Bible to me, and I opened it on the Fifth of Matthew, where Christ expounded the Law: And I opened the In∣ward State to them, and the Outward State; and they fell in∣to a feirce Contention, and so parted: But the Lord's Power got Ground. Then I heard of a great Meeting to be at Leicester, for a Dispute,Leicester. wherein both Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists and Common-Prayer-Men were said to be all concerned. The Meeting was in a Steeple-house; and thither I was moved by the Lord God to go, and
be amongst them.1648. Leicester. And I heard their Discourse and Reasonings, some being in Pews, and the Priest in the Pulpit; abundance of Peo∣ple being gathered together. At last one Woman asked a Question out of Peter, What that Birth was, viz. A being born again of Incor∣ruptible Seed, by the Word of God, that liveth and abideth for ever? And the Priest said to her, I permit not a Woman to speak in the Church; though he had before given liberty for any to speak. Whereupon I was wrapt up, as in a Rapture, in the Lord's Power; and I stepped up in a Place, and asked the Priest; Dost thou call this Place (the Steeple-house) a Church? Or dost thou call this mixt Mul∣titude a Church? For the Woman asking a Question, he ought to have answered it, having given liberty for any to speak. But he did not answer me neither; but asked me, What a Church was? I told him, The Church was the Pillar and Ground of Truth, made up of living Stones, living Members, a spiritual Houshold, which Christ was the Head of: But he was not the Head of a mixt Multitude, or of an old House made up of Lime, Stones and Wood: This set them all on Fire. The Priest came down out of his Pulpit, and others out of their Pews, and the Dispute there was marr'd. But I went to a great Inn, and there disputed the thing with the Priests and Professors of all sorts; and they were all on a Fire. But I maintained the true Church, and the true Head thereof, over the Heads of them all, till they all gave out, and fled away. And there was one Man, that seemed loving, and appeared for a while to join with me; but he soon turned against me, and joined with a Priest, in pleading for Infant's Baptism; tho' he himself had been a Baptist before: And so left me alone. Howbeit there were several Convinced that day: and the Woman, that asked the Question aforesaid, was Convinced, and her Family: And the Lord's Power and Glory shined over all. Notting∣ham-shire.After this I returned into Nottingham-shire again, and went into the Vale of Beavor. And as I went, I preached Repentance to the People:Vale of Beavor. And there were many Convinced in the Vale of Beavor, in many Towns; for I stayed some Weeks amongst them. And one Morning, as I was sitting by the Fire, a great Cloud came over me, and a Temptation beset me: And I sate still. And it was said; All things come by Nature; And the Elements and Stars came over me; so that I was in a manner quite clouded with it: But inasmuch as I sate still, and said nothing, the People of the House perceived no∣thing. And as I sate still under it, and let it alone, a living Hope arose in me, and a true Voice arose in me, which said; There is a living God, who made all things. And immediately the Cloud and Temptation vanished away, and Life rose over it all, and my Heart was glad, and I praised the living God. And after some time I met with some People, that had such a Notion, That there was no God, but that all things came by Nature. And I had great Dispute with them, and overturned them; and made some of them Confess, that there was a Living God: Then I saw, that it was good, that I had gone through that Exercise. And we had great Meetings in those Parts;Notting∣ham-shire. for the Power of the Lord broke through in that side of the Country. And returning into Nottingham-shire, I found there
a Company of shattered Baptists, and Others;1648. Notting∣ham-shire Mansfield. Darbyshire. Eton. and the Lord's Power wrought mightily, and gathered many of them. Then afterwards I went to Mansfield and there-a-way; where the Lord's Power was wonderfully manifested both at Mansfield, and other Towns there∣abouts. And in Darby-shire the mighty Power of God wrought in a wonderful manner. At Eton, a Town near Darby, there was a Meeting of Friends, where there was such a mighty Power of God, that they were greatly Shaken, and many Mouths were opened in the Power of the Lord God. And many were moved by the Lord to go to Steeple-houses, to the Priests and to the People, to declare the Everlasting Truth unto them. And at a certain time, when I was at Mansfield,Mansfield. there was a Sitting of the Justices, about hiring of Servants; and it was upon me from the Lord, to go and speak to the Justices, That they should not oppress the Servants in their Wages. So I walked towards the Inn, where they sate; but finding a Company of Fidlers there, I did not go in, but thought to come in the Morning, when I might have a more serious Opportunity to discourse them; not thinking that a seasonable time. But when I came again in the Morning, they were gone, and I was struck even blind, that I could not see. And I inquired of the Inn-keeper, where the Justices were to sit that day? And he told me, At a Town eight Miles off. And my Sight began to come to me again; and I went, and Ran thitherward, as fast as I could. And when I was come to the House, where they were, and many Servants with them, I exhorted the Justices, Not to op∣press the Servants in their Wages; but to do that which was Right and Just to them: And I exhorted the Servants, To do their Duties, and serve honestly, &c. And they all received my Exhortation kindly; for I was moved of the Lord therein. Moreover I was moved to go to several Courts, and Steeple-houses at Mansfield, and other Places, to warn them to leave off Oppression and Oaths, and to turn from Deceit, and to turn to the Lord, and do justly. Particularly at Mansfield, after I had been at a Court there, I was moved to go, and speak to one of the Wicked'st Men in the Country, one who was a Common Drunkard, a noted Whore-master, and a Rime-maker: And I reproved him, in the dread of the Mighty God, for his evil Courses. And when I had done Speaking, and left him, he came after me, and told me; That he was so smitten, when I spake to him, that he had scarce any Strength left in him. So this Man was Convinced, and turned from his Wickedness, and re∣mained an honest, sober Man, to the Astonishment of the People, who had known him before. Thus the Work of the Lord went forward, and many were turned from the Darkness to the Light, within the compass of these three Years, 1646, 1647, and 1648. And divers Meetings of Friends, in several Places, were then ga∣thered to Gods Teaching, by his Light, Spirit and Power: For the Lord's Power brake forth daily more and more, wonder∣fullly. Now was I come up in Spirit through the flaming Sword, into the Paradise of God. All things were New; and all the Creation gave another Smell unto me, than before, beyond what Words can utter.
I knew nothing,1648. Mansfield. but Pureness, and Innocency, and Righteousness, being renewed up into the Image of God by Christ Jesus; so that I say, I was come up to the State of Adam, which he was in, before he fell. The Creation was opened to me: And it was shewed me, how all things had their Names given them, according to their Na∣ture and Vertue. And I was at a stand in my Mind, whether I should practise Physick for the good of Mankind, seeing, the Nature and Vertues of the Creatures were so opened to me by the Lord. But I was immediately taken up in Spirit, to see into another or more sted∣fast State, than Adam's in Innocency, even into a State in Christ Jesus, that should never fall. And the Lord shewed me, that such as were faithful to him in the Power and Light of Christ, should come up into that State, in which Adam was before he fell: In which the admirable Works of the Creation, and the Vertues thereof may be known, through the Openings of that divine Word of Wisdom and Power, by which they were made. Great things did the Lord lead me into, and wonderful Depths were opened unto me, beyond what can by Words be declared: But as People come into subjection to the Spirit of God, and grow up in the Image and Power of the Al∣mighty, they may receive the Word of Wisdom, that opens all things, and come to know the hidden Ʋnity in the Eternal Be∣ing. Thus traveled I on in the Lord's Service, as the Lord led me. And when I came to Nottingham,Noting∣ham. Leicester∣shire. Clauson. Vale of Beavor. the mighty Power of God was there among Friends. From thence I went to Clauson in Leicester∣shire, in the Vale of Beavor, and the mighty Power of God was there also, in several Towns and Villages, where Friends were gathered. While I was there, the Lord opened to me Three Things, relating to those Three great Professions in the World, Physick, Divinity (so called) and Law. And he shewed me, that the Physicians and Doctors of Physick were out of the Wisdom of God, by which the Creatures were made; and so knew not the Vertues of the Creatures, because they were out of the Word of Wisdom, by which they were made. And he shewed me, that the Priests were out of the true Faith, which Christ is the Author of; the Faith which purifies and gives Victory, and brings People to have Access to God, by which they please God: Which Mystery of Faith is held in a pure Conscience. He shewed me also, that the Lawyers were out of the Equity, and out of the true Justice, and out of the Law of God, which went over the first Transgression, and over all Sin, and answered the Spi∣rit of God, that was grieved, and transgressed in Man. And that these three, the Physicians, the Priests, and the Lawyers, ruled the World out of the Wisdom, out of the Faith, and out of the Equity and Law of God; the one pretending the Cure of the Body, the other the Cure of the Soul, and the third the Property of the People. But I saw, they were all out, out of the Wisdom, out of the Faith, out of the Equity and perfect Law of God. And as the Lord opened these things unto me, I felt his Power went forth over all, by which all might be Reformed, if they would receive and bow unto it. The Priests might be Reformed, and brought into the true Faith, which was the Gift of God. The Lawyers might be Reformed, and
brought into the Law of God,1648. Vale of Beavor. which answers that of God (that is transgressed) in every one, and brings to love one's Neighbour as him∣self: This lets Man see, If he wrongs his Neighbour, he wrongs himself; and this teaches him To do unto others, as he would they should do unto him. The Physicians might be Reformed, and brought into the Wisdom of God, by whick all things were made and Crea∣ted; that they might receive a right Knowledge of the Creatures, and understand the Virtues of them, which the Word of Wisdom, by which they were made and are upheld, hath given them. Abun∣dance was opened concerning these things; how all lay out of the Wisdom of God, and out of the Righteousness and Holiness, that Man at the first was made in: But as all believe in the Light, and walk in the Light, which Christ hath enlightned every Man, that com∣eth into the World, withal, and so become Children of the Light, and of the Day of Christ, in his Day all things are seen, Visible and Invisible, by the Divine Light of Christ, the Spiritual, Heavenly Man, by whom all things were made and Created. Then I saw concerning the Priests, that although they stood in the Deceit, and acted by the dark Power, which both they and their People were kept under; yet they were not the greatest Deceivers spo∣ken of in the Scriptures: For these were not come so far, as many of them had come. But the Lord opened to me, who the greatest Deceiv∣ers were, and how far they might come; even such as came as far as Cain, to hear the Voice of God; and such as came out of Egypt, and through the Red Sea, and to praise God on the Banks of the Sea-shore; such as could speak by Experience of God's Miracles and Wonders; such as were come as far as Corah and Dathan, and their Company; such as came as far as Balaam, who could speak the Word of the Lord, who heard his Voice and knew it, and knew his Spirit; and could see the Star of Jacob, and the goodliness of Israel's Tent; the Second Birth, which no Enchantment could prevail against: These that could speak so much of their Experiences of God, and yet turned from the Spirit and the Word, and went into the Gainsaying; These were, and would be the great Deceivers, far beyond the Priests. Likewise a∣mong the Christians, such as should preach in Christ's Name, and should work Miracles, cast out Devils, and go as far as a Cain, a Core and a Balaam in the Gospel-times, These were and would be the great Deceivers; they that could speak some Experiences of Christ and God, but lived not in the Life. These were they, that led the World after them, who got the Form of Godliness, but denyed the Power; who inwardly ravened from the Spirit, and brought People into the Form; but persecuted them, that were in the Power (as Cain did) and ran greedily after the Error of Balaam, through Covetousness, loving the Wages of Unrighteousness, as Balaam did. These Followers of Cain, Core and Balaam have brought the World since the Apostles Days to be like a Sea. And such as these, I saw, might deceive now, as they had in former Ages: But it is impossible for them to deceive the Elect, who were chosen in Christ, who was, before the World be∣gan, and before Deceiver was: Though others may be deceived in their Openings and Prophecies, not keeping their Minds to the Lord Jesus Christ, who doth Open and Reveal to his.
And I saw the State of those both Priests and People, who in read∣ing the Scriptures cry out much against Cain, Esau, and Judas, and other wicked Men of former Times, mentioned in the Holy Scriptures; but do not see the Nature of Cain, of Esau, of Judas, and those Others in themselves. And these said, It was They, They, They, that were the bad People; putting it off from themselves: But when some of these came with the Light and Spirit of Truth to see into themselves, then they came to say, I, I, I, it is I my self, that have been the Ishmael, and the Esau, &c. For then they came to see the Nature of wild Ishmael in themselves; the Nature of Cain, of Esau, of Corah, of Balaam, and of the Son of Perdition in themselves, sitting above all that is called God in them. So I saw, it was the fallen Man, that was got up into the Scriptures, and was finding Fault with those before-mentioned; and with the back-sliding Jews, calling them the sturdy Oaks, and tall Cedars, and fat Bulls of Bashan, wild Heifers, Vipers, Serpents, &c. And charging them, that it was They, that closed their Eyes, and stopped their Ears, and hardned their Hearts, and were dull of Hearing: And that it was They, that hated the Light, and rebelled against it, and that quenched the Spirit, and vex∣ed and grieved it, and walked despightfully against the Spirit of Grace, and turned the Grace of God into Wantonness: And that it was They, that resisted the Holy Ghost; and They, that got the Form of Godliness, and turned against the Power: And that They were the inwardly Ravening Wolves, that had got the Sheep's Cloath∣ing: And that They were the Wells without Water, and Clouds with∣out Rain, and Trees without Fruit, &c. But when these (who were so much taken up with finding Fault with others, and thought them∣selves clear from these Things) came to look into themselves, and with the Light of Christ throughly to search themselves, they might see enough of this in themselves: and then the Cry could not be, It is He, or They, as before; but I, and We are found in these Conditions. I saw also, how People Read the Scriptures without a right Sense of them, and without duly applying them to their own States. For when they read, that Death reigned from Adam to Moses; and that the Law and the Prophets were until John; and that the least in the Kingdom is greater than John; they read these things without them, and applyed them to others without them (and the Things were true of others without them:) but they did not turn in to find the Truth of these things in themselves. But as these things came to be opened in me, I saw, Death reigned over them from Adam to Moses, from the Entrance into Trangression, till they came to the Ministration of Condemnation, which restrains People from Sin, that brings Death. Then when the Ministration of Moses is passed through, the Mini∣stry of the Prophets comes to be read and understood, which reaches through the Figures, Types and Shadows unto John, the greatest Pro∣phet born of a Woman; whose Ministration prepares the Way of the Lord, by bringing down the exalted Mountains, and making strait Paths. And as this Ministration is passed through, an Entrance comes to be known into the Everlasting Kingdom. So I saw plainly, that none could read Moses aright, without Moses's Spirit, by which
Moses saw, how Man was in the Image of God in Paradice, and how he fell, and how Death came over him, and how all Men have been under this Death. And I saw, how Moses received the pure Law, that went over all Transgressors; and how the clean Beasts, which were Figures and Types, were offered up, when the People were come into the righteous Law, that went over the first Transgression. And both Moses and the Prophets saw through the Types and Figures, and beyond them, and saw Christ the great Prophet, that was to come to fulfil them. And I saw, that none could read John's Words aright, and with a true Understanding of them, but in and with the same Divine Spirit, by which John spake them; and by his burning, shining Light, which is sent from God. For by that Spi∣rit their Crooked Natures might be made strait, and their Rough Natures smooth, and the Exacter and violent Doer in them might be thrown out: And they that had been Hypocrites, might come to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, and their Mountain of Sin and Earth∣liness might be laid low in them, and their Valley exalted in them; that there might be a Way prepared for the Lord in them: And then the least in the Kingdom is greater than John. But all must first know the Voice crying in their Wilderness, in their Hearts, which through Transgression were become as a Wilderness. Thus I saw, it was an easie matter to say, Death reigned from Adam to Moses; and, That the Law and the Prophets were until John; and, That the least in the Kingdom is greater than John: But none could know, how Death reigned from Adam to Moses, &c. but by the same Holy Spirit, which Moses and the Prophets, and John were in. They could not know the Spiritual Meaning of Moses, the Prophets and John's Words, nor see their Path and Travels, much less see through them, and to the end of them into the Kingdom; unless they had the Spirit and Light of Jesus: Nor could they know the Words of Christ, and of his Apostles, without his Spirit. But as Man comes through, by the Spirit and Power of God, to Christ (who fulfills the Types, Figures, Shadows, Promises and Prophecies, that were of him) and is led by the Holy Ghost into the Truth and Substance of the Scriptures, sitting down in him, who is the Author and End of them; then are they read, and understood, with profit and great Delight. Moreover, the Lord God let me see (when I was brought up into his Image, in Righteousness and Holiness, and into the Paradise of God) the State, How Adam was made a Living Soul: And also the Stature of Christ, the Mystery, that had been hid from Ages and Gene∣rations: Which things are hard to be uttered; and cannot be born by many. For of all the Sects in Christendom (so called) that I di∣scoursed withal, I found none, that could bear to be told, that any should come to Adam's Perfection, into that Image of God, and Righteousness, and Holiness, that Adam was in, before he fell; to be so clear and pure without Sin, as he was. Therefore, how should they be able to bear, being told, that any should grow up to the Measure of the Stature of the Fulness of Christ, when they cannot bear to hear, that any shall come, whilst upon Earth, into the same Power and Spirit, that the Prophets and Apostles were in? Though
it be a certain Truth, that none can understand their Writings aright, without the same Spirit, by which they were writ∣ten. Now the Lord God hath opened to me by his invisible Power, how that Every Man was enlightned by the Divine Light of Christ; and I saw it shine through all: And that they, that believed in it, came out of Condemnation, and came to the Light of Life, and became the Children of it: But they that hated it, and did not be∣lieve in it, were Condemned by it; though they made a Profession of Christ. This I saw in the pure Openings of the Light, without the help of any Man; neither did I then know, where to find it in the Scriptures (though afterwards, searching the Scriptures, I found it.) For I saw in that Light and Spirit, which was, before Scri∣pture was given forth, and which led the Holy Men of God to give them forth, That all must come to that Spirit, if they would know God or Christ, or the Scriptures aright, which They that gave them forth, were led and taught by. But I observed a Dulness and Drowzy Heaviness upon People, which I wondred at: For sometimes, when I would set my self to sleep, my Mind went over all to the Beginning, in that which is from Everlasting to Everlasting. And I saw, Death was to pass over this sleepy, heavy State. And I told People, they must come to wit∣ness Death to that sleepy, heavy Nature, and a Cross to it in the Power of God, that their Minds and Hearts might be on things above. And on a certain Time, as I was walking in the Fields, the Lord said unto me; Thy Name is written in the Lamb's Book of Life, which was before the Foundation of the World. And as the Lord spake it, I believed, and saw it in the New Birth. Then sometime after the Lord commanded me to go abroad into the World, which was like a briary, thorny Wilderness. And when I came in the Lord's mighty Power, with the Word of Life into the World, the World swelled, and made a Noise, like the great raging Waves of the Sea. Priests and Professors, Magistrates and People were all like a Sea, when I came to proclaim the Day of the Lord amongst them, and to preach Repentance to them. Now I was sent to turn People from Darkness to the Light, that they might receive Christ Jesus: For to as many as should receive him in his Light, I saw, that he would give Power to become the Sons of God: Which I had obtained by receiving Christ. And I was to direct People to the Spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures, by which they might be led into all Truth, and so up to Christ and God, as they had been, who gave them forth. And I was to turn them to the Grace of God, and to the Truth in the Heart, which came by Jesus; that by this Grace they might be taught, which would bring them Salvation, that their Hearts might be established by it, and their Words might be seasoned, and all might come to know their Salvation nigh. For I saw, that Christ had died for all Men, and was a Propitiation for all; and had enlightned all Men and Women with his divine and saving Light: And that none could be a true Believer, but who believed in it. I saw, that the
Grace of God, which brings Salvation, had appeared to all Men, and that the Manifestation of the Spirit of God was given to every Man, to profit withal. These Things I did not see by the help of Man, nor by the Letter (tho' they are written in the Letter;) but I saw them in the Light of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by his immediate Spirit and Power, as did the Holy Men of God, by whom the Holy Scriptures were written. Yet I had no slight esteem of the Holy Scriptures; but they were very precious to me: For I was in that Spirit, by which they were given forth; and what the Lord opened in me, I afterwards found was agreeable to them. I could speak much of these things, and many Volumes might be written; but all would prove too short to set forth the Infinite Love, Wisdom and Power of God, in prepairing, fitting and furnishing me for the Ser∣vice he had appointed me to; letting me see the Depths of Satan on the one Hand, and opening to me, on the other Hand, the divine Mysteries of his own Everlasting Kingdom. Now when the Lord God, and his Son Jesus Christ did send me forth into the World, to preach his Everlasting Gospel and Kingdom, I was glad, that I was Commanded To turn People to that Inward Light, Spirit and Grace, by which all might know their Salvation, and their Way to God; even that divine Spirit, which would lead them into all Truth, and which I infallibly knew, would never de∣ceive any. But with and by this divine Power and Spirit of God, and the Light of Jesus, I was to bring People off from all their own ways, to Christ the new and living Way; and from their Churches (which Men had made and gathered) to the Church in God, the general As∣sembly written in Heaven, which Christ is the Head of; And off from the World's Teachers, made by Men, to learn of Christ, who is the Way, the Truth and the Life, of whom the Father said, This is my beloved Son, hear ye him; and off from all the Worlds Wor∣ships, to know the Spirit of Truth in the inward Parts, and to be led thereby; that in it they might Worship the Father of Spirits, who seeks such to Worship him: Which Spirit they that Worshipped not in, knew not, what they Worshipped. And I was to bring People off from all the World's Religions, which are vain; that they might know the pure Religion, and might visit the Fatherless, the Widows and the Strangers, and keep themselves from the Spots of the World: And then there would not be so many Beggars; the sight of whom often grieved my Heart, to see so much Hard-heart∣edness amongst them, that professed the Name of Christ. And I was to bring them off from all the World's Fellowships, and Pray∣ings and Singings, which stood in Forms without Power; that their Fellowships might be in the Holy Ghost, and in the Eternal Spirit of God; that they might Pray in the Holy Ghost, and Sing in the Spirit, and with the Grace, that comes by Jesus; making Melody in their Hearts to the Lord, who hath sent his beloved Son to be their Savi∣our; and caused his heavenly Sun to shine upon all the World, and through them all, and his heavenly Rain to fall upon the Just and the Unjust (as his outward Rain doth fall, and his outward Sun doth shine on all) which is God's unspeakable Love to the World.
And I was to bring People off from Jewish Ceremonies, and from Heathenish Fables, and from Mens Inventions and windy Doctrines, by which they blowed the People about, this way and the other way, from Sect to Sect; and all their beggarly Rudiments, with their Schools and Colledges, for making Ministers of Christ, who are indeed Ministers of their own making, but not of Christ's. And all their Images and Crosses, and Sprinkling of Infants, with all their Holy-days (so called) and all their vain Traditions, which they had gotten up since the Apostles Days, which the Lord's Power was against: And in the Dread and Authority thereof was I moved to declare against them all; and against all that Preached, and not freely; as being such, as had not Received freely from Christ. Moreover, when the Lord sent me forth into the World, he for∣bad me To put off my Hat to any, High or Low. And I was requi∣red to Thee and Thou all Men and Women, without any respect to Rich or Poor, Great or Small. And as I traveled up and down, I was not to bid People Good Morrow, or Good Evening; neither might I Bow or Scrape with my Leg to any one: And this made the Sects and Professions to rage. But the Lord's Power carried me over all to his Glory; and many came to be turned to God in a little time: For the heavenly Day of the Lord sprang from on high, and brake forth apace; by the Light of which many came to see, where they were. But oh! the Rage that then was in the Priests, Magistrates, Pro∣fessors and People of all sorts; but especially in Priests and Professors! For tho' Thou to a single Person was according to their own Learn∣ing, their Accidence and Grammar Rules, and according to the Bible; yet they could not bear to hear it: And the Hat-Honour, because I could not put off my Hat to them, it set them all into a Rage. But the Lord shewed me, that it was an Honour below, which he would lay in the Dust, and stain it; an Honour which proud Flesh looked for, but sought not the Honour, which came from God only. That it was an Honour invented by Men in the Fall, and in the Alienation from God, who were offended, if it were not given them; and yet would be looked upon themselves as Saints, Church-members and great Christians: But Christ saith, How can ye believe, who receive Honour one of another, and seek not the Honour, that cometh from God only? And I (saith Christ) receive not Honour of Men: Shewing, that Men have an Honour, which Men will receive and give; but Christ will have none of it: This is the Honour, which Christ will not receive, and which must be laid in the Dust. Oh! the Rage and Scorn, the Heat and Fury that arose! Oh! the Blows, Punchings, Beatings and Imprisonments that we underwent, for not putting off our Hats to Men! For that soon tried all Mens Patience and Sobriety, what it was. Some had their Hats violently pluck'd off, and thrown away; so that they quite lost them. The bad Language and evil Ʋsage we received on this Account, is hard to be expressed; besides the Danger we were sometimes in of losing our Lives for this Matter, and that by the great Professors of Christianity; who thereby dis∣covered, that they were not true Believers. And though it was but a small thing in the Eye of Man; yet a wonderful Confusion it brought
among all Professors and Priests: But, blessed be the Lord, many came to see the Vanity of that Custom, of putting off the Hat to Men; and felt the weight of Truth's Testimony against it. About this time I was sorely exercised in going to their Courts to cry for Justice,  and in speaking and writing to Judges and Justices to do Justly; and in warning such, as kept publick Houses for Enter∣tainment, that they should not let People have more Drink, than would do them good: And in testifying against their Wakes or Feasts, their May-Games, Sports, Plays and Shews, which trained up People to Vanity and Loosness, and led them from the fear of God; and the Days they had set forth for Holy-days, were usually the times, wherein they most dishonoured God by these things. In Fairs also, and in Markets I was made to declare against their deceit∣ful Merchandize, and Cheating and Cozening; warning all to deal Justly, and to speak the Truth, and to let their Yea be yea, and their Nay be nay; and to do unto others, as they would have others do unto them: And fore-warning them of the Great and Terrible Day of the Lord, which would come upon them all. I was moved also to Cry against all sorts of Musick, and against the Mountebanes playing Tricks on their Stages; for they burdened the pure Life, and stirred up Peoples Minds to Vanity. I was much exercised too with School∣masters and School-mistresses, warning them to teach their Children Sobriety in the fear of the Lord; that they might not be nursed and trained up in Lightness, Vanity and Wantonness. Likewise I was made to warn Masters and Mistresses, Fathers and Mothers in private Families, to take care, that their Children and Servants might be trained up in the fear of the Lord; and that they themselves should be therein Examples and Patterns of Sobriety and Vertue to them. For I saw, that, as the Jews were to teach their Children the Law of God, and the Old Covenant, and to train them up in it; and their Servants, yea the very Strangers, were to keep the Sabbath amongst them, and be Circumcised, before they might eat of their Sacrifices; so all Christians, and all that made a Profession of Christianity, ought to Train up their Children and Servants in the New Covenant of Light, Christ Jesus, who is God's Salvation to the Ends of the Earth; that all may know their Salvation. And they ought to train them up in the Law of Life, the Law of the Spirit, the Law of Love and of Faith; that they might be made free from the Law of Sin and Death. And all Christians ought to be Circumcised by the Spi∣rit, which puts off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, that they may come to Eat of the heavenly Sacrifice, Christ Jesus, that true spi∣ritual Food, which none can, rightly feed upon, but they, that are Circumcised by the Spirit, Likewise I was Exercised about the Star-Gazers, who drew Peoples Minds from Christ, the bright and the Morning-Star; and from the Sun of Righteousness, by whom the Sun, and Moon and Stars, and all things else were made, who is the Wisdom of God, and from whom the right Knowledge of all things is received. But the black, Earthly Spirit of the Priest wounded my Life: And when I heard the Bell toll, to call People together to the Steeple-house, it struck at my Life: For it was just like a Market-Bell, to
gather People together,1649. Vale of Beavor. that the Priest might set forth his Ware to Sale. O the Vast Sums of Money, that are gotten by the Trade they make of selling the Scriptures, and by their Preaching, from the highest Bishop to the lowest Priest! What one Trade else in the World is Comparable to it? Notwithstanding that the Scriptures were given forth freely; and Christ commanded his Ministers to Preach freely; and the Prophets and Apostles denounced Judgment against all Covetous Hirelings, and Diviners for Money. But in this free Spirit of the Lord Jesus was I sent forth, to declare the Word of Life, and Reconciliation freely, that all might come up to Christ, who gives freely, and who renews up into the Image of God, which Man and Woman were in, before they fell; that they might sit down in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus. Notting∣ham.Now as I went towards Nottingham on a First-day in the Morning, with Friends to a Meeting there, when I came on top of a Hill, in sight of the Town, I espied the great Steeple-house; and the Lord said unto me; Thou must go cry against yonder great Idol, and against the Worshippers therein. So I said nothing of this to the Friends, that were with me; but went on with them to the Meeting, where the mighty Power of the Lord God was amongst us: In which I left Friends sitting in the Meeting; and I went away to the Steeple-house. And when I came there, all the People looked, like Fallow Ground; and the Priest (like a great Lump of Earth) stood in his Pulpit above: And he took for his Text these Words of Peter, [We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well, that ye take heed, as unto a Light, that shineth in a dark Place, until the day dawn, and the Day-star arise in your Hearts.] And he told the People, that this was the Scriptures, by which they were to Try all Doctrines, Religions and Opinions. Now the Lord's Power was so mighty upon me, and so strong in me, that I could not hold; but was made to cry out, and say; Oh no, It is not the Scriptures. But I told them what it was, namely the Holy Spirit; by which the Holy Men of God gave forth the Scriptures, whereby Opinions, Religions and Judgments were to be tried: For it led into all Truth, and so gave the knowledge of all Truth. For the Jews had the Scriptures, and yet resisted the Holy Ghost, and rejected Christ, the bright Morning-Star; and per∣secuted Christ and his Apostles, and took upon them to Try their Doctrines by the Scriptures; but erred in Judgment, and did not try them a-right; because they tried without the Holy Ghost. Now as I spake thus amongst them, the Officers came, and took me away, and put me into a nasty, stinking Prison; the smell whereof got so into my Nose and Throat, that it very much annoyed me. But that day the Lord's Power sounded so in their Ears, that they were amazed at the Voice, and could not get it out of their Ears for some time after; they were so reached by the Lord's Power in the Steeple-house. At Night they took me out of Prison, and had me before the Major, Aldermen and Sheriffs of the Town: And when I was brought before them, the Major was in a peevish, fretful Tem∣per; but the Lord's Power allay'd him. Then they examined me at large; and I told them, how the Lord had moved me to come. Then, after some Discourse had passed between them and
me, they sent me back to Prison again: But sometime after,1649. Notting∣ham. the Head-Sheriff, whole Name was John Reckless, sent for me to his House: And when I came in, his Wife met me in the Hall, and said, "Salvation is come to our House.☜ And she took me by the Hand, and was much wrought upon by the Power of the Lord God: And her Husband, and Children, and Servants were much changed; for the Power of the Lord wrought upon them. And I lodged at the Sheriff's House, and great Meetings we had in his House; and some Persons of considerable Condition in the World came to them, and the Lord's Power appeared eminently amongst them. And this Sheriff sent for the other Sheriff, and for a Woman, they had had Dealings with in way of Trade; and he told her before the other Sheriff, that they had wronged her in their Dealings with her (for the other Sheriff and he were Partners) and that they ought to make her Restitution: This he spake chearfully. But the other Sheriff denied it; and the Woman said, She knew nothing of it. But the friendly Sheriff said, it was so; and that the other knew it well enough: And then having discovered the Matter, and acknow∣ledged the Wrong done by them, he made Restitution to the Woman; and exhorted the other Sheriff to do the like. And the Lord's Power was with this Friendly Sheriff, and wrought a mighty Change in him; and great Openings he had. And on the next Market-day following, as he was walking with me in the Chamber, in his Slip∣pers, he said, I must go into the Market, and preach Repentance to the People: And accordingly he went in his Slippers into the Market, and into several Streets, and preached Repentance to the People. Several others also in the Town were moved to speak to the Major and Ma∣gistrates, and to the People, exhorting them to Repent. Hereupon the Magistrates grew very Angry, and sent for me from the Sheriff's House, and Committed me to the Common Prison.Notting∣ham Prison. When the Assize came on, there was one moved to come and offer up himself for me, Body for Body; yea Life also: But when I should have been brought before the Judge, the Sheriff's Man being somewhat long in fetching me to the Sessions-house, the Judge was risen, before I came. At which, I understood, the Judge was somewhat offended, and said; He would have admonished the Youth, if he had been brought be∣fore him: For I was then Imprisoned by the Name of A YOƲTH. So I was returned to Prison again, and put into the Common Goal. And the Lord's Power was great among Friends; but the People began to be very Rude: Wherefore the Governour of the Castle sent down Souldiers, and dispersed them; and after that they were quiet. But both Priests and People were astonished at the wonderful Power, that brake forth: And several of the Priests were made tender, and some did Confess to the Power of the Lord. Now, after I was set at Liberty from Nottingham-Goal (where I had been kept Prisoner a pretty long time) I traveled, as before, in the Work of the Lord. And coming to Mansfield-Woodhouse,Mansfield Wood-house. there was a distracted Woman under a Doctor's Hand, with her Hair loose all about her Ears; and he was about to let her Blood, she being first bound, and many People being about her, holding her by Vio∣lence: But he could get no Blood from her. And I desired them to
unbind her,1649. Mansfield. Woodhouse. and let her alone; for they could not touch the Spirit in her, by which she was tormented: So they did unbind her. And I was moved to speak to her, and in the Name of the Lord to bid her, Be quiet and still: And she was so. And the Lord's Power setled her Mind, and she mended; and afterwards Received the Truth, and Continued in it to her Death. And the Lord's Name was honoured; To whom the Glory of all his Works belongs. Many great and wonderful Things were wrought by the heavenly Power in those Days: For the Lord made bare his Omnipotent Arm, and manifested his Power to the Astonishment of many; by the healing Vertue where∣of many have been delivered from great Infirmities, and the Devils were made subject through his Name: Of which particular Instances might be given, beyond what this unbelieving Age is able to receive or bear. But blessed for ever be the Name of the Lord, and everlast∣ingly Honoured, and over all Exalted, and Magnified be the Arm of his Glorious Power, by which he hath wrought gloriously; and let the Honour and Praise of all his Works be ascribed to him alone. Now while I was at Mansfield-Woodhouse, I was moved to go to to the Steeple-house there, and declare the Truth to the Priest and People. But the People fell upon me in great Rage, and struck me down, and almost stifled and smothered me; and I was cruelly beaten and bruised by them with their Hands, Bibles and Sticks. Then they haled me out (though I was hardly able to stand) and put me into the Stocks, where I sate some Hours; and they brought Dog∣whips and Horse-whips, threatning to Whip me. And after some time, they had me before the Magistrate, at a Knight's House, where were many great Persons; who seeing, how evilly I had been used, after much Threatning, set me at Liberty: But the rude Peo∣ple stoned me out of the Town, for Preaching the Word of Life to them. And I was scarce able to go, or well to stand, by reason of the Ill Ʋsage I had received: Yet with much ado I got about a Mile from the Town; and then I met with some People, that gave me something to Comfort me, because I was inwardly bruised: But the Lord's Power soon healed me again. And that day some People were Convinced of the Lord's Truth, and turned to his Teaching; at which I rejoiced. Leicester-shire.Then went I out of Nottingham-shire into Leicester-shire, several Friends accompanying me. And there were some Baptists in that Country, whom I desired to see and speak with; because they were separated from the publick Worship. So one Oats, who was one of their Chief Teachers, and others of the Heads of them, with several others of their Company,Barrow. came to Meet us at Barrow; and there we discoursed with them. One of them said, What was not of Faith, was Sin. Whereupon I asked them, What Faith was? And how it was wrought in Man? But they turned off from that, and spake of their Baptism in Water. Then I asked them, Whether their Moun∣tain of Sin was brought down, and laid low in them? And their rough and crooked Ways made smooth and strait in them? For they looked upon the Scriptures, as meaning Outward Mountains and Ways: But I told them, they must find them in their own Hearts: Which they seemed to wonder at. And we asked them; Who bapti∣zed
John the Baptist? and who baptized Peter,1649. Barrow. John and the rest of the Apostles? and put them to prove by Scripture, that these were baptiz∣ed in Water: But they were silent. Then I asked them; Seeing , who betrayed Christ, and was called the Son of Perdition, had Hged himself, what Son of Perdition was that, which Paul spake of, that ste in the Temple of God, exalted above all that is called God? And hat Temple of God that was, in which this Son of Perdition sate? And whether he, that betrays Christ within in himself, be not one in Nature with that Judas, that betrayed Christ without? But they could not tell, what to make of this, nor what to say to it. So after we had had some Discourse together, we parted; and some of them were lov∣ing to us. On the First Day of the Week following we came to Bagworth,Bagworth. and went to a Steeple-House, where some Friends were got in; and the People locked them in, and themselves too, with the Priest. But af∣ter the Priest had done, they opened the Door, and we went in also; and had a Service for the Lord amongst them. Afterwards we had a Meeting in the Town, amongst several People that were in high Notions. Then passing from thence, I heard of a People, that were in Prison in Coventry for Religion.Coventry. And as I walked towards the Jail, the Word of the Lord came to me, saying;☜ MY LOVE WAS ALWAYS TO THEE, AND THOƲ ART IN MY LOVE. And I was ravished with the Sense of the Love of God, and greatly strengthned in my Inward Man. But when I came into the Jail, where those Prisoners were, a great Power of Darkness struck at me; and I sate still, having my Spirit gathered into the Love of God. At last these Prisoners began to Rant, and Va∣pour, and Blaspheme; at which my Soul was greatly grieved. They said, They were GOD: But another of them said, We could not bear such Things. So, when they were calm, I stood up and asked them, Whether they did such things by Motion, or from Scripture? and they said; from Scripture. Then, a Bible lying by, I asked them for that Scripture; and they shewed me that Place, where the Sheet was let down to Pe∣ter, and it was said to him, What was sanctified, he should not call Common or Ʋnclean. Now, when I had shewed them, That that Scripture made nothing for their purpose; they brought another Scripture, which spake of God's Reconciling all Things to himself, Things in Heaven, and Things in Earth. I told them, I owned that Scripture also; but shewed them, that that was nothing to their purpose neither: Then seeing they said, They were GOD, I asked them, If they knew, whether it would Rain to Morrow? They said, They could not tell. I told them, God could tell. Again, I asked them; If they thought, they should be always in that Condi∣tion, or should change? And they answered, They could not tell. Then said I unto them, God can tell, and God doth not change. You say, you are God; and yet you cannot tell, whether you shall Change, or no. So they were Confounded, and quite brought own for the time. Then after I had Reproved them for their blasphemous Expres∣sions, I went away: For I perceived, they were Ranters; and I had met with none before: And I admired the Goodness of the Lord in appearing so unto me, before I went amongst them. Not long after
this,1649. Coventry. one of these Ranters, whose Name was Joseph Salmon, put forth a Paper, or Book of Recantation; upon which they were set at Liberty. Ather∣stone.From Coventry I went to a Place called Atherstone; and it being their Lecture-day, I was moved to go to their Chappel to speak to the Priests and People: And they were generally pretty quiet; Only some few raged, and would have had my Relations to have bound me. I declared largely to them, how that God was come to Teach his People himself, and to bring them off from all their Man-made Teachers, to hear his Son: And some were Convinced there. Market-Bossoth.Then went I to a Place called Market-Bossoth, and there was a Lecture there also. And he that preached there that day, was Natha∣niel Stevens, who was Priest of the Town, where I was born. And he raged much, when I spake to him and to the People; and told the People, I was Mad: (tho' he had said before to one Colonel Purfoy, That there was never such a Plant bred in England;) and he bid the People, they should not hear me. So the People, being stirred up by this deceitful Priest, fell upon us, and stoned us out of the Town: Yet they did not do us much hurt. Howbeit some People were made Loving that day; and others were Confirmed, seeing the Rage of both Priests and Professors: And some cried out, that the Priest durst not stand to prove his Ministry. And as I traveled through Markets, Fairs and divers Places, I saw Death and Darkness in all People, where the Power of the Lord God had not shaken them.Leicester-shire. Twy-Cross. And as I was passing on in Leicester-shire, I came to a Place called Twy-Cross, where there were Excise-Men; and I was moved of the Lord to go to them, and warn them to take heed of Oppressing the Poor: And People were much affected with it. Now there was in that Town a great Man, that had long lain sick, and was given over by the Physicians; and some Friends in the Town desired me to go to see him. And I went up to him in his Chamber, and spake the Word of Life to him, and was moved to Pray by him; and the Lord was entreated, and Restored him to Health. But when I was come down the Stairs, into a lower Room, and was speaking to the Servants, and to some People that were there; a Serving-Man of his came Raving out of another Room, with a naked Rapier in his Hand, and set it just to my side. But I looked stedfastly on him, and said; Alack for thee, poor Creature! what wilt thou do with thy carnal Weapon? It is no more to me, than a Straw. The Standers by were much troubled, and he went away in a Rage, and full of Wrath: But when the News of it came to his Master, he turned him out of his Service. Thus the Lord's Power preserved me, and raised up the Weak Man; who afterwards was very Loving to Friends: And when I came to that Town again, both he and his Wife came to see me. After this I was moved to go into Darbyshire, where the mighty Power of God was among Friends.Darbyshire. Chester∣field. And I went to Chesterfield, where one Britland was Priest. He was one, that saw beyond the com∣mon sort of Priests; for he had been partly Convinced, and had spo∣ken much on behalf of Truth, before he was Priest there: But when the Priest of that Town died, he got the Parsonage, and choked
himself with it.1649. Chester∣field. So I was moved to speak to him and the People in the great Love of God, that they might come off from all Mens Teaching unto God's Teaching; and he was not able to gainsay. But they had me before the Major, and threatned to send me, with some others, to the House of Correction; and kept us in Custody, till it was late in the Night: And then the Officers, with the Watchmen, put us out of the Town, leaving us to shift, as we could. So I bent my Course towards Darby, having a Friend or two with me: And in our way we met with many Professors;Kidsey-park. and at Kidsey-Park many were Convinced. Then coming to Darby, I lay at a Doctor's House,1650. Darby. whose Wife was Convinced; and so were several more in the Town. And as I was walking in my Chamber, the Bell rung; and it struck at my Life at the very hearing of it. So I asked the Woman of the House, What the Bell rung for? And she said, There was to be a great Lecture there that day, and many of the Officers of the Army, and Priests and Preachers were to be there that Day, and a Colonel, that was a Preacher. Then was I moved of the Lord to go up to them: And when they had done, I spake to them, what the Lord Com∣manded me; and they were pretty quiet. But there came an Officer, and took me by the Hand, and said, I must go before the Magistrates; and the other Two that were with me. It was about the First Hour Afternoon, that we came before them. They asked me, Why we came thither? I said, God moved us so to do; and I told them, God dwells not in Temples made with Hands. I told them also, All their Preaching, Baptism and Sacrifices would never sanctifie them; and bid them, Look unto Christ in them, and not unto Men: For it is Christ, that sanctifies. Then they ran into many Words; but I told them, They were not to Dispute of God and Christ, but to Obey him. And the Power of God thundred amongst them, and they did fly like Chaff before it. They put me in and out of the Room often, hur∣rying me backward and forward often: For they were from the First Hour till the Ninth at Night in Examining me. And sometimes they would tell me in a deriding manner, That I was taken up in Rap∣tures. At last they asked me, Whether I was Sanctified? I answered, Yes; for I was in the Paradise of God. Then they asked me, If I had no Sin? I answered; Christ my Saviour has taken away my Sin; and in him there is no Sin. They asked, How we knew, that Christ did abide in us? I said, by his Spirit, that he hath given us. They temptingly asked, If any of us were Christ? I answered, NAY,☜ we were nothing; Christ was all. They said, If a Man steal, is it no Sin? I answered; All Unrighteousness is Sin. So when they had wearied themselves in Examining me, they Committed me and one other Man to the House of Correction in Darby for six Months, as Blas∣phemers; as may appear by the Mittimus, a Copy whereof here followeth:
To the Master of the House of Correction in Darby, Greeting. WE have sent you herewithal the Bodies of George Fox late of Mansfield in the County of Nottingham, and John Fretwell, late of Staniesby in the County of Darby Husbandman, brought before us this present Day, and charged with the avowed uttering and broaching of divers blasphemous Opinions, contrary to a late Act of Parliament, which upon their Examination before us, they have Confessed. These are therefore to require you, forthwith upon sight hereof, to receive them, the said George Fox and John Fretwell into your Custody, and them there∣in safely to keep during the space of Six Months, without Bail or Main∣prize, or until they shall find sufficient Security to he of the good Beha∣viour, or be thence delivered by Order from our Selves. Hereof you are not to fail. Given under our Hands and Seals this 30th Day of October, 1650. Ger. Bennet, Nath. Barton. Now did the Priests bestir themselves in their Pulpits to preach up Sin for term of Life; and much of their Work was, to plead for it: So that People said, Never was the like heard. Then after some time, he that was Committed with me, not standing faithful in his Testimony, got in with the Jailer, and by him made way to the Justice to have leave to go see his Mother; and so got his Liberty. And then they reported, that he should say, I had bewitched and de∣ceived him: But my Spirit was strengthned, when he was gone. Now the Priests and Professors, the Justices and the Jailer were all in a great Rage against me. The Jailer watched my Words and Acti∣ons, and would often ask me Questions to ensnare me; and some∣times he would ask me such silly Questions, as, Whether the Door was latched, or not? Thinking, to draw some suddain, unadvised Ans∣wer from me, from whence he might take Advantage to charge Sin upon me: But I was kept watchful, and chast, so that they could get no advantage of me; and they admired at it. Not long after my Commitment, I was moved to write both to the Priests and Magistrates of Darby. And first I directed these following Lines to the Priests.
O Friends, I was sent unto you to tell you, That if you had received the Gospel freely,1650. Darby-Prison. you would Minister it freely with∣out Money or Price: But you make a Trade and Sale, of what the Prophets and the Apostles have spoken; and so you corrupt the Truth. And you are the Men, that lead silly Women Captive, who are ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth: you have a Form of Godliness; but you deny the Power. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do you resist the Truth; being Men of corrupt Minds, reprobate concerning the Faith. But you shall proceed no further; for your Folly shall be made manifest to all Men, as theirs was. More-over the Lord sent me to tell you, that he doth look for Fruits. You asked me, if the Scripture was my Rule? but it is not your Rule, to rule your Lives by; but to talk of in Words. You are the Men, that live in Plea∣sures, Pride and Wantonness, in Fulness of Bread and abundance of Idleness: See if this be not the Sin of Sodom. Lot received the Angels: but Sodom was envious. You shew forth the vain Na∣ture: You stand in the Steps of them, that crucified MY SAVI∣OƲR, and mocked him: You are their Children; you shew forth their Fruit. They had the Chief Place in the Assemblies; and so have you: They loved to be called Rabbi; and so do you. G. F. That which I writ to the Magistrates, who committed me to Pri∣son, was to this effect: Friends, I Am forced, in tender Love unto your Souls, to write unto you, and to beseech you to Consider, what you do, and what the Commands of God call for. He doth require Justice and Mercy, to break every Yoke, and to let the Oppressed go free. But who calleth for Justice? or loveth Mercy? or contendeth for the Truth? Is not Judgment turned backward? and doth not Justice stand afar off? Is not Truth silenced in the Streets? or can Equity enter? And do not they that depart from Evil, make themselves a Prey? Oh! Consider what ye do, in Time, and take heed, whom ye do Imprison: For the Magistrate is set for the Punishment of Evil-doers, and for the Praise of them that do well. Now, I intreat you, in Time take heed, what you do: For surely, the Lord will come, and will make manifest both the Builders and the Work: And if it be of Man, it will fail; but if it be of God, nothing will overthrow it. Therefore I desire and pray, that you would take heed, and beware what you do; lest ye be found Fighters against God. G. F.
Now, after I had thus far cleared my Conscience to them, I waited in the holy Patience; leaving the Event to God, in whose Will I stood. And after some Time I was moved to write again to the Justices, that had Committed me to Prison, to lay their Evils before them, that they might Repent. One of them, that signed the Mit∣timus, to wit, Nathaniel Barton, was both a Colonel, a Justice and a Preacher: So I writ to them, as followeth; Friends, YOU did speak of the Good old Way, which the Prophet spake of; but the Prophet cryed against the Abominations, which you hold up. Had you the Power of God, ye would not persecute the Good Way. He that spake of the Good Way, was set in the Stocks: The People Cryed, Away with him to the Stocks, for speaking the Truth. Ah! foolish People, which have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not, without Understanding! Fear ye not me, saith the Lord, and will ye not tremble at my Presence! O your Pride and Abominations are odious in the Eyes of God! You (that are Preachers) have the chiefest Place in the Assemblies, and are called of Men Master; and such were and are against my Saviour and Maker: And they shut up the Kingdom of Heaven from Men, nei∣ther go in themselves, nor suffer others. Therefore ye shall receive the greater Damnation, who have their Places, and walk in their Steps. You may say, If you had been in the Days of the Prophets, or Christ, ye would not have persecuted them: Wherefore be ye Witnesses against your selves, that ye are the Children of them, seeing, ye now persecute the way of Truth. O consider, There is a true Judge, that will give every one of you a Reward according to your Works. O mind where you are, you that hold up the Abo∣minations, which the true Prophet cried against! O come down, and sit in the Dust! The Lord is coming with Power; and lie will throw down every one that is Exalted, that he alone may be Exalted. And as I had thus written unto them jointly; so after some respite of Time, I writ to each of them by himself. To Justice Bennet thus: Friend, THou that dost profess God and Christ in Words, see how thou dost follow him. To take off Burdens, and to visit them that be in Prison, and shew Mercy, and cloath thy own Flesh, and deal thy Bread to the Hungry; these are God's Commandments: To relieve the Fatherless, and to visit the Widows in their Afflictions, and to keep thy self unspotted of the World; this is pure Religion before God. But if thou dost profess Christ, and followest Covet∣ousness, and Greediness, and Earthly-mindedness, thou deniest him in Life, and deceivest thy self and others, and takest him for a Cloke:
Wo be to you Greedy Men, and Rich Men; weep and houl for your Misery, that shall come. Take heed of Covetousness and Extortion: God doth forbid that. Wo be to the Man, that Coveteth an Evil Covetousness, that he may set his Nest on high, and cover himself with thick Clay. O do not love that, which God doth forbid: His Servant thou art, whom thou dost obey, whether it be of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness. Think upon Lazarus and Dives: the one fared sumptuously every Day; the other was a Beg∣gar. See, if thou be not Dives? Be not deceived; God is not mock∣ed with vain Words: Evil Communication corrupteth good Manners. Awake to Righteousness, and sin not. G. F. That to Justice Barton was in these Words: Friend, THou that preachest Christ, and the Scriptures in Words, when any come to follow that, which thou hast spoken of, and to live the Life of the Scriptures, then they, that speak the Scriptures, but do not lead their Lives according thereunto, persecute them that do. Mind the Prophets, and Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, and all the Holy Men of God; what they spake, was from the Life: But they that had not the Life, but the Words, Persecuted and Im∣prisoned them that lived in the Life, which they had back-slidden from. G. F. Now, as I had written to the Justices and to the Priests, so it was upon me to write to the Major of Darby also; who (though he did not sign the Mittimus) had a Hand with the rest in sending me to Prison. And to him I writ after this manner: Friend, THou art set in Place to do Justice; but in Imprisoning my Body, thou hast done contrary to Justice, according to your own Law. O take heed of pleasing Men more, than God, for that's the way of the Scribes and Pharisees: They sought the Praise of Men more than God. Remember who said, I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in; I was in Prison, and ye visited me not. O Friend, thy Envy is not against me, but against the Power of Truth: I had no Envy to you; but Love: O take heed of Oppression; for The Day of the Lord is coming, that shall burn as an Oven; and all the Proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be as Stubble; and the Day that cometh, shall burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts; It shall leave them neither Root nor Branch. O Friend, if the Love of
God were in thee, thou would'st love the Truth, and hear the Truth spoken; and not Imprison unjustly: The Love of God beareth, and suffereth, and envieth no Man. If the Love of God had broken your Hearts, you would shew Mercy; but you do shew forth, what ruleth you. Every Tree doth shew forth its Fruit: you do shew forth your Fruits openly. For Drunkenness, Swearing, Pride and Vanity rule among you, from the Teacher to the People. O Friend, Mercy, and true Judgment, and Justice are Cried for in your Streets! Oppression, Ʋnmercifulness, Cruelty, Hatred, Pride, Pleasures, Wantonness and Fulness is in your Streets; but the Poor is not regarded. O take heed of the Wo: Wo be to the Crown of Pride! Wo be to them that drink Wine in Bowles, and the Poor is ready to perish. O remember Lazarus and Dives. One fared deli∣ciously every Day; and the other was a Beggar. O Friend, Mind these Things, for they are near; and see, whether thou be not the Man, that is in Dives his State. I writ also to the Court at Darby thus: I Am moved to write unto you, to take heed of Oppressing the Poor in your Courts, or laying Burdens upon poor People, which they cannot bear: And of false Oaths, or making them to take Oaths which they cannot perform. The Lord saith, I will come near to Judgment, and will be a swift Witness against the Sorcerers, against the false Swearers, and against the Idolaters, and against those that do oppress Widows and Fatherless: Therefore take heed of all these things betimes. The Lord's Judgments are all true and righteous, and he delighteth in Mercy: So love Mercy, Dear People, and Consider in Time. Likewise to the Ringers, who used to Ring the Bells in the Steeple-house, called S. Peter's in Darby, I sent these few Lines: Friends, TAke heed of Pleasures, and prize your Time now, while you have it; and do not spend it in Pleasures, nor Earthli∣ness. The Time may come, that you will say, You had Time, when it is past. Therefore look at the Love of God now, while you have Time; for it bringeth to loath all Vanities and worldly Pleasures. O Consider! Time is precious: Fear God and rejoyce in him, who hath made Heaven and Earth. Now, while I was there in Prison, divers of the Professors came unto me to discourse with me: And I had a Sense, before they spake, that they came to plead for Sin and Imperfection. And I ask∣ed them; Whether they were Believers, and had Faith? and they said, Yes. Then I asked them, In whom? and they said, In Christ. Then I replyed; If ye are true Believers in Christ, you are passed from Death to Life; and if passed from Death, then from
Sin, that bringeth Death: And if your Faith be true, it will give you Victory over Sin and the Devil, and purify your Hearts and Con∣sciences (for the true Faith is held in a pure Conscience) and it will bring you to please God, and give you Access to him again. But they could not endure to hear of Purity, and of Victory over Sin and the Devil: For they said, They could not believe, that any could be free from Sin on this Side the Grave. Then I bid them, give over bab∣ling about the Scriptures, which were Holy Mens Words; whilst they pleaded for Ʋnholiness. And at another Time another Company of Professors came; and they also began to plead for Sin. And I asked them, Whether they had Hope? And they said, Yes: God forbid, but we should have Hope. Then I asked them, What Hope is it that you have? Is Christ in you the Hope of your Glory? Doth it purify you, as he is Pure? But they could not abide to hear of being made pure here. Then I bid them, forbear talking of the Scriptures, which were the Holy Men's Words: For the Holy Men, that writ the Scriptures, pleaded for Holiness in Heart, Life and Conversa∣tion here; but since you plead for Impurity and Sin, which is of the Devil, what have you to do with the Holy Men's Words? Now the Keeper of the Prison, being an high Professor, was greatly enraged against me; and spake very wickedly of me: But it pleased the Lord one Day to strike him so, that he was in great Trouble, and under great Terrors of Mind. And as I was walk∣ing in my Chamber, I heard a doleful Noise; and standing still, I heard him say to his Wife: Wife, I have seen the Day of Judgment, and I saw GEORGE there, and I was afraid of him; because I had done him so much wrong, and spoken so much against him to the Ministers and Professors, and to the Justices, and in Taverns and Ale∣houses. After this, towards the Evening, he came up into my Chamber, and said to me; I have been as a Lion against you: But now I come like a Lamb, and like the Jailer, that came to Paul and Si∣las trembling. And he desired, that he might lie with me: I told him, that I was in his Power; he might do, what he would: But he said, Nay, he would have my Leave; and he could desire to be always with me, but not to have me as a Prisoner. And he said, He had been plagued, and his House had been plagued for my sake. So I suffered him to lie with me; and then he told me all his Heart, and said, He believed, what I had said of the true Faith and Hope, to be true: And he wondred, that the other Man, that was put into Prison with me, did not stand to it; and said, That Man was not right, but I was an honest Man. He confessed also to me; that at those Times, when I had asked him to let me go forth, to speak the Word of the Lord to the People, and he had refused to let me go, and I had laid the weight thereof upon him, that then he used to be under great Trouble, amazed and almost distracted for some time after; and in such a Condition, that he had little Strength left him. When the Morning came, he arose, and soon after went to the Justices, and told them; That he and his House had been plagued for my sake: and one of the Justices replied (as he reported to me) that the Plagues were on them too, for keeping me. This was Justice Bennet of Darby, who was the first that called us Quakers,
because I bid them, Tremble at the Word of the Lord. And this was in the Year 1650. After this the Justices gave leave, That I should have Liberty to walk a Mile. I perceived their End; and I told the Jailer, If they would set down to me, how far a Mile was, I might take the liberty of walking it sometimes: For I had a Sense, they thought, I would go away. And the Jailer Confest afterwards, that they did it with that Intent, to have me go away, to ease them of their Plague: But I told him, I was not of that Spirit. This Jailer had a Sister, who was a sickly young Woman; and she came up into my Chamer to Visit me; and after she had stay'd some time, and I had spoken the Words of Truth to her, she went down, and told them; That we were an Innocent People, and did none any hurt, but did good to all, even to them that hated us: And she desired them to be Tender towards me. Now forasmuch as, by reason of my Restraint, I had not the Op∣portunity of Traveling about, to declare and spread Truth through the Countries; it came upon me to Write a Paper, and send it forth to be spread abroad both amongst Friends, and other tender People, for the Opening of their Understandings in the Way of Truth, and directing them to the true Teacher in themselves. And it was as followeth: THE Lord doth shew unto Man his Thoughts, and discovereth all the secret Workings in Man. A Man may be brought to see his evil Thoughts, and running Mind, and vain Imaginations, and may strive to keep them down, and to keep his Mind in; but cannot Overcome them, nor keep his Mind within to the Lord. Now, in this State and Condition submit to the Spirit of the Lord, that shews them, and that will bring to Wait upon the Lord; and he that hath discovered them, will destroy them. Therefore stand in the Faith) of the Lord Jesus Christ (who is the Author of the true Faith) and mind him; for he will discover the Root of Lusts, and evil Thoughts, and vain Imaginations, and how they are begotten, conceived and bred; and then how they are brought forth, and how every evil Member doth work. He will discover every Prin∣ciple from its own Nature and Root. So mind the Faith of Christ, and the Anointing, which is in you, to be taught by it, which will discover all Workings in you: And as he teacheth you, so obey and forsake; else you will not grow up in the Faith, nor in the Life of Christ, where the Love of God is received. Now Love begetteth Love, its own Nature and Image: And when Mercy and Truth do meet, what Joy there is! And Mercy doth Triumph in Judgment: And Love and Mercy doth bear the Judgment of the World in patience. That which cannot bear the World's Judgment, is not the Love of God; for Love bear∣eth all things, and is above the World's Judgment; for the World's Judgment is but Foolishness. And though it be the World's Judg∣ment and Practice, to cast all the World's Filthiness, that is among themselves, upon the Saints; yet their Judgment is false. Now
the Chaste Virgins follow Christ, the Lamb, that takes away the Sins of the World: But they that are of that Spirit, which is not Chaste, will not follow Christ the Lamb in his Steps; but are disobedient to him in his Commands. So the fleshly Mind doth mind the Flesh, and talketh fleshly, and its Knowledge is fleshly, and not spiritual; but savours of Death, and not of the Spirit of Life. Now some Men have the Nature of Swine, wallowing in the Mire: And some Men have the Nature of Dogs, to bite both the Sheep and one ano∣ther: And some Men have the Nature of Lions, to tear, devour and destroy: And some Men have the Nature of Wolves, to tear and devour the Lambs and Sheep of Christ: And some Men have the Nature of the Serpent (that old Adversary) to sting, envenom and poison: He that hath an Ear to hear, let him hear, and learn these things within himself. And some Men have the Natures of other Beasts and Creatures, minding nothing, but earthly and visi∣ble things, and feeding without the fear of God. Some Men have the Nature of an Horse, to praunce and vapor in their Strength, and to be swift in doing Evil. And some Men have the Nature of Tall sturdy Oaks, to slourish and spread in Wisdom and Strength; who are strong in Evil, which must perish, and come to the Fire. Thus the Evil is but one in all, but worketh many Ways; and whatsoever a Man's or Woman's Nature is addicted to, that is Out∣ward, the Evil one will fit him with that, and will please his Nature and Appeite, to keep his Mind in his Inventions, and in the Crea∣tures from the Creator. O therefore let not the Mind go forth from God;  it do, it will be stained, and venomed and corrupted: And if the Mind go forth from the Lord, it is hard to bring it in again. Therefore take heed of the Enemy, and keep in the Faith of Christ. O! therefore mind that which is Eternal and Invisible, and him who is the Creator and Mover of all things: For the things that are made, are not made of things that do appear; for the visible covereth the invisible Sight in you. But as the Lord, who is Invisible, doth open you by his Invisible Power and Spirit, and brings down the carnal Mind in you; so the Invisible and Immortal things are brought to Light in you. O therefore you, that know the Light, walk in the Light! For there are Children of Darkness, that will talk or the Light, and of the Truth, and not walk in it; but the Children of the Light love the Light, and walk in the Light. But the Children of Darkness walk in Darkness, and hate the Light; and in them the earthly Lusts, and the carnal Mind choke the Seed of Faith, and that bringeth Oppression on the Seed, and Death over them. O therefore mind the pure Spirit of the Everlasting God, which will reach you to use the Creatures in their right place; and which iudgeth the Evil. To thee, O God, be all Glory and Honour, who art Lord of all Visibles and Invisibles! To thee be all Praise, who bringest out of the Deep to thy Self; O powerful God, who art worthy of all Glory! For the Lord, who created all, and gives Life and Strength to all, is over all, and Merciful to all. So thou, who hast made all, and art over all, to thee be all Glory! In thee is my Strength, Refreshments and Life, my Joy and my Gladness, my Rejoycing and Glorying for evermore! So to live and
walk in the Spirit of God, is Joy, and Peace, and Life; but the Mind going forth into the Creatures, or into any Visible Things from the Lord, this bringeth Death. Now when the Mind is got into the Flesh, and into Death, then the Accuser gets within, and the Law of Sin and Death, that gets into the Flesh; and then the Life suffers under the Law of Sin and Death: And then there is straitness and failings. For then the Good is shut up, and then the Self-Righteousness is set a top; and then Man doth work in the out∣ward Law, and he cannot Justify himself by the Law; but is Con∣demned by the Light: For he cannot get out of that State, but by abiding in the Light, and resting in the Mercy of God, and believing in him, from whom all Mercy doth flow: For there is Peace in rest∣ing in the Lord Jesus. This is the Narrow Way, that leads to him, the Life; but few will abide in it: Therefore keep in the Inno∣cency, and be obedient to the Faith in him. And take heed of Con∣forming to the World, and of Reasoning with Flesh and Blood, for that bringeth Disobedience; and then Imaginations and Questi∣onings do arise, to draw from Obedience to the Truth of Christ. But the Obedience of Faith destroyeth Imaginations, and Question∣ings, and Reasonings, and all the Temptations in the Flesh, and Buffetings, and lookings forth, and fetching up things that are past. But not keeping in the Life and Light, and not crossing the Corrupt Will by the Power of God, the Evil Nature grows up in Man; and then Burdens will come, and Man will be stained with that Nature. But Esau's Mountain shall be laid waste, and become a Wilderness, where the Dragons lie: But Jacob, the second Birth, shall be fruitful, and shall arise. For Esau is hated, and must not be Lord: but Jacob, the second Birth, which is perfect and plain, shall be Lord; for he is beloved of God. G. F. I writ another Paper also, much about the same time, and sent it forth amongst the Convinced People, as followeth: THE LORD is KING over all the Earth! Therefore all People, praise and glorifie your King in the true Obedience, in the Uprightness, and in the beauty of Holiness. O Consider, in the true Obedience the Lord is known, and an Understanding from him is received. Mark and consider in silence, in the Lowliness of Mind, and thou wilt hear the Lord speak unto thee in thy Mind: His Voice is sweet and pleasant; His Sheep hear his Voice, and they will not hearken to another: And when they hear his Voice, they Rejoice, and are Obedient; they also sing for Joy. Oh, their Hearts are filled with everlasting Triumph! They sing, and praise the Eternal God in Sion: their Joy shall never Man take from them. Glory to the Lord God for Evermore!
But many, that had been Convinced of the Truth, turned aside, because of the Persecution that arose: Whereupon I writ a few Lines for the Comfort and Encouragement of the Faithful, thus: COme ye Blessed of the Lord, and Rejoice together! Keep in Unity and Oneness of Spirit; Triumph above the World! Be joyful in the Lord; reigning above the World, and above all things that draw from the Lord: that in Clearness, Righteousness, Pureness and Joy, you may be preserved to the Lord. O hear, O hearken to the Call of the Lord, and come out of the World, and keep out of it for evermore! And come, Sing together, ye Righteous Ones, the Song of the Lord, the Song of the Lamb; which none can learn, but they, who are Redeemed from the Earth, and from the World. Now while I was in the House of Correction, my Relations came to see me; and being troubled for my Imprisonment, they went to the Justices, that cast me into Prison, and desired to have me home with them; offering to be bound in One hundred Pounds, and others of Darby in fifty Pounds a piece with them, that I should come no more thither to declare against the Priests. So I was had up before the Justices; and because I would not consent, that they, or any should be bound for me (for I was Innocent from any Ill Behaviour, and had spoken the Word of Life and Truth unto them) Justice Bennet rose up in a rage: and as I was kneeling down to Pray to the Lord to forgive him, he ran upon me, and struck me with both his Hands, Crying; Away with him Jailer: Take him away Jailer. Whereupon I was had back again to Prison, and there kept, until the time of my Commitment for Six Months was Expired. But I had now the Liberty of walk∣ing a Mile by my self; which I made use of, as I felt freedom. And sometimes I went into the Market, and Streets, and warned the People to Repent of their Wickedness; and so returned to Prison again. And there being Persons of several sorts of Religion in the Prison, I sometimes went, and visited them in their Meetings on the First-days. After I had been before the Justices, and they had required Sureties for my good Behaviour (which I could not Consent should be given, to blemish my Innocency) It came upon me to write to the Justices again; which I did as followeth: Friends, SEE what it is in you, that doth Imprison; and see, who is Head in you: and see, if something do not Accuse you? Con∣sider, you must be brought to Judgment. Think upon Lazarus and Dives: the one fared sumptuously every day; the other a Beg∣gar: And now you have time, prize it, while you have it. Would you have me to be bound to my Good Behaviour? I am bound to my Good Behaviour; And do Cry for Good Behaviour of all People, to
turn from the Vanities, Pleasures and Oppression, and from the De∣ceits of this World: And there will come a time, that you shall know it. Therefore take heed of Pleasures, and Deceits, and Pride; and look not at Man, but at the Lord: for Look unto me, all ye Ends of the Earth, and be ye saved, saith the Lord. Some little time after, I writ to them again, thus: Friends, WOuld you have me to be bound to my Good Behaviour from Drunkenness, or Swearing, or Fighting, or Adultery, and the like? The Lord hath Redeemed me from all these things; and the Love of God hath brought me to loath all Wantonness, bles∣sed be his Name. They who are Drunkards, and Fighters, and Swearers, have their Liberty without Bonds: And you lay your Law upon me, whom neither you, nor any other can justly accuse of these things; praised be the Lord! I can look at no Man for my Liberty, but at the Lord alone; who hath all Mens Hearts in his Hand. And after some time, not finding my Spirit clear of them, I writ to them again, as followeth: Friends, HAD you known, who sent me to you, ye would have re∣ceived me: for the Lord sent me to you, to warn you of the Woes, that are coming upon you; and to bid you, Look at the Lord, and not at Man. But when I had told you my Experience, what the Lord had done for me, then your Hearts were hardened, and you sent me to Prison; where you have kept me many Weeks. If the Love of God had broke your Hearts, then would ye see, what ye have done: Ye would not have Imprisoned me, had not my Father suffered you; and by his Power I shall be loosed: For he openeth and shutteth; to him be all Glory! In what have I mis∣behaved my self, that any should be bound for me? All Mens Words will do me no good, nor their Bonds neither, to keep my Heart, if I have not a Guide within, to keep me in the upright Life to God. But I believe in the Lord, that through his Strength and Power I shall be preserved from Ungodliness and worldly Lusts. The Scripture saith, Receive Strangers; but you Imprison such. As you are in Authority, take heed of Oppression and Oaths, and Injustice and Gifts, or Rewards; for God doth loath all such. But love Mercy, and true Judgment and Justice; for that the Lord delghts in. I do not write with Hatred to you; but to keep my Conscience Clear: Take heed, how you spend your time.
I was moved also to write again to the Priests of Darby; which I did after this manner: Friends, YOU do profess to be the Ministers of Jesus Christ in Words, but you shew forth by your Fruits, what your Ministry is. Every Tree doth shew forth its Fruit: The Ministry of Jesus Christ is in Mercy and Love, to unloose them that be bound, and to bring out of Bondage, and to let them that are Captivated, go free. Now Friends, where is your Example (if the Scriptures be your Rule) to Imprison for Religion? Have you any Command for it from Christ? If that were in you, which you do profess, you would walk in their Steps, who spake forth those Words, the Scriptures, which you do profess. But he is not a Jew, who is one outward, whose Praise is of Men; but he is a Jew, who is one inward, whose Praise is of God. But if you do build upon the Prophets and Apostles in Words, and pervert their Life, remember the Woes, which Jesus Christ spake against such. They that spake the Pro∣phets words, but denied Christ, they professed a Christ to come; but had they known him, they would not have Crucified him. The Saints, whom the Love of God did Change, were brought there∣by to walk in Love and Mercy; for he that dwelleth in Love, dwel∣leth in God. But where Envy, Pride and Hatred doth rule, the nature of the World doth rule, and not the nature of Jesus Christ. I write with no hatred to you; but that you may weigh your selves, and see, how you pass on your Time. Thus having cleared my Conscience to the Priests, it was not long, before a Concern came upon me again, to write again to the Justices, which I did as followeth: I am moved to Warn you to take heed of giving way to your own Wills. Love the Cross, and satisfy not your own Minds in the Flesh; but prize your Time, while you have it, and walk up to that you know, in Obedience to God: and then you shall not be Condemned for that you know not; but for that you do know, and do not obey. Consider betimes, and weigh your selves, and see where you are, and whom you serve. For if ye blaspheme God, and take his Name in vain; if ye Swear and Lie; if ye give way to Envy, Hatred, Covetousness and Greediness, Pleasures and Wan∣tonness, or any other Vices, be assured then, that ye do serve the Devil: But if ye fear the Lord, and serve him, ye will loath all these things. He that loveth God, will not blaspheme his Name: but where there is Opposing of God, and serving the Devil, that Profession is sad and miserable O prize your Time, and do not love that which God doth forbid; Lying, Wrath, Malice, Envy, Hatred, Gree∣diness, Covetousness, Oppression, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Whoredom and all Ʋnrighteousness God doth forbid. So Consider, and be not de∣ceived;
Evil Communication corrupts good Manners. Be not de∣ceived, God will not be mocked with vain Words: The Wrath of God is Revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness. Therefore Obey that which doth Convince you of all Evil, and telleth you, that you should do no Evil: It will lead to Repentance, and keep you in the Fear of the Lord. O look at the Mercies of God, and prize them; and do not turn them into Wantonness. O Eye the Lord, and not earthly things! Besides this, I writ the following to Colonel Barton, who was both a Justice, and a Preacher, as was hinted before. Friend, DO not Cloak and Cover thy self; there is a God, who know∣eth thy Heart, and will Ʋncover thee: He seeth thy Way. Wo be to him, that Covereth, and not with my Spirit, saith the Lord. Dost thou do contrary to the Law, and then put it from thee? Mercy and true Judgment thou neglectest: look what was spoken against such. My Saviour said to such, I was Sick and in Prison, and ye visited me not; I was hungry, and ye fed me not; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in. And when they said, When saw we thee in Prison, and did not come to thee, &c. He replied; In∣asmuch as ye did it not to one of these little ones, ye did it not to me. Friend, thou hast Imprisoned me for bearing Witness to the Life and Power or Truth; and yet professest to be a Minister of Christ: But if Christ had sent thee, thou wouldest bring out of Prison, and out of Bondage, and wouldest receive Strangers. Thou hast been wanton upon Earth, thou hast lived plenteously, and nourished thy Heart, as in a Day of Slaughter: thou hast killed the Just. O look, where thou art, and how thou hast spent thy Time! O re∣member thy self, and now, while thou hast Time, prize it; and do not slight the free Mercy of God, and despise the long-suffering of God, which is great Salvation: But mind that in thee, which doth Convince thee, and would not let thee Swear, nor Lie, nor take God's Name in vain. Thou knowest, thou shouldest do none of these Things; Thou hast learned, that which will Condemn thee: Therefore obey the Light, which doth Convince thee, and forsake thy Sins, and look at the Mercies of God; and prize his Love in sparing thee, till now. The Lord saith, Look un∣to me, all ye Ends of the Earth, and be ye saved; and, Cease from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils. And Friend, prize thy Time, and see whom thou servest: For his Servant thou art, whom thou dost obey, whether of Sin unto Death, or Obedience unto Righteousness. If thou servest God, and fearest him, thou wilt not blaspheme his Name, nor Curse, nor Swear, nor take his Name in vain, nor follow Pleasures and Wantonness, Whoredom and Drun∣kenness, or Wrath, or Malice, or Revenge, or Rashness, or Headiness, Pride or Gluttony, Greediness, Oppression or Covetousness, or foolish Jesting, or vain Songs; God doth forbid these things, and all Un∣righteousness.
If thou professest God; and actest any of these Things, thou takest him for a Cloak, and servest the Devil. Consi∣der with thy self, and do not love that which God doth hate. He that loveth God, keepeth his Commandments. The Devil will tell thee, It is an hard thing, to keep God's Commandments: but it is an easie thing, to keep the Devil's Commandments, and to live in all Unrighteousness and Ungodliness, turning the Grace of God into Wantonness. But let the Unrighteous Man forsake his Ways, and turn unto me, saith the Lord, and I will have Mercy: Turn ye, why will ye die? saith the Lord. Howl, ye Great Ones, for the Plagues are pouring out upon you! Howl, ye Oppressors, for Recompence and Vengeance is coming upon you! Wo unto them, that Covetously Join one House to another; and bring one Field so nigh unto another, that the Poor can get no more Ground, and that ye may dwell upon the Earth alone: These things are in the Ears of the Lord of Hosts. Wo unto him that Covetously getteth evil-gotten Goods into his House, that he may set his Nest on high, to escape from the Power of Evil. While I was yet in the House of Correction, there came unto me a Trooper, and said; As he was sitting in the Steeple-house, hearing the Priest, exceeding great Trouble came upon him; and the Voice of the Lord came to him saying; Dost thou not know,☜ that my Ser∣vant is in Prison? Go to him for direction. So I spake to his Condi∣tion, and his Understanding was opened. And I told him; That which shewed him his Sins, and troubled him for them, would shew him his Salvation: For he that shews a Man his Sin, is the same, that takes it away. Now, while I was speaking to him, the Lord's Power opened him, so that he began to have a good Understanding in the Lord's Truth, and to be sensible of God's Mercies; and began to speak boldly in his Quarters amongst the Souldiers, and to others, con∣cerning Truth (for the Scriptures were very much opened to him) insomuch that he said; His Colonel was as Blind as Nebuchadnezar, to cast the Servant of the Lord into Prison. Upon this his Colonel had a Spight at him; and at Worcester-Fight, the Year after, when, the Two Armies lying near one another, Two came out from the King's Army, and challenged any Two of the Parliament-Army to fight with them; his Colonel made Choice of him and another, to Answer the Challenge. And when in the Encounter his Companion was slain, he drave both his Enemies within Musquet-shot of the Town, without firing a Pistol at them: This, when he returned, he told me with his own Mouth. But when the Fight was over, he saw the Deceit and Hypocrisy of the Officers: And being sensible, how wonderfully the Lord had preserved him, and seeing also to the End of Fighting, he laid down his Arms. Now the Time of my Commitment to the House of Correction being very neat out, and there being many new Souldiers Raised, the Commissioners would have made me Captain over them: And the Sol∣diers cried, They would have none but me. So the Keeper of the
House of Correction was Commanded to bring me up before the Com∣missioners and Souldiers, in the Market-place; and there they proffered me that Preferment (as they called it) asking me, If I would not take up Arms for the Common-wealth against Charles Steward? I told them, I knew, from whence all Wars did arise, even from the Lust, according to James his Doctrine: and that I lived in the Vertue of that Life and Power, that took away the Occasion of all Wars. But they courted me to accept of their Offer, and thought, I did but Complement with them. But I told them, I was come into the Covenant of Peace, which was before Wars and Strifes were. They said, They offered it in Love and Kindness to me, be∣cause of my Vertue; and such like flattering Words they used. But I told them, If that was their Love and Kindness, I trampled it under my Feet. Then their Rage got up, and they said; Take him away Jailer, and put him into the Dungeon amongst the Rogues and Fellons.Darby-Dungeon. So I was had away and put into a lousy, stinking Place, without any Bed, amongst thirty Fellons; where I was kept almost half a Year, unless it were at Times: For they would sometime let me walk in the Garden, having a Belief of me, that I would not go away. Now, when they had gotten me into Darby-Dungeon, it was the Belief and saying of People, that I should never come out: But I had Faith in God, and believed, I should be delivered in his Time: For the Lord had said to me before, That I was not to be re∣moved from that Place yet, being set there for a Service, which he had for me to do. After it was bruited abroad, That I was in Darby-Dungeon, my Relations came to see me again; and they were much troubled, that I should be in Prison: For they looked upon it, to be a great shame to them, for me to lie in Jail. It was a strange thing then, to be Imprisoned for Religion: And some thought, I was Mad, because I stood for Purity, and Righteousness, and Perfection. Among others that came to see me, and discourse with me, there came a certain Person from Nottingham, a Souldier, and that had been a Baptist (as I understood) and with him came several others. And in Discourse this Person said to me, Your Faith stands in a Man, that died at Jerusalem, and there was never any such thing. I was ex∣ceedingly grieved, to hear him say so; and I said to him: How! Did nor Christ suffer without the Gates of Jerusalem through the Pro∣fessing Jews, and Chief Priests, and Pilate? And he denied, that ever Christ suffered there outwardly. Then I asked him, Whether there were not Chief Priests, and Jews, and Pilat there outwardly? And when he could not deny that, then I told him: As certainly as there was a Chief Priest, and Jews, and Pilat there outwardly; so certainly was Christ persecuted by them, and did suffer there out∣wardly under them. Yet from this Man's Words was a Slander raised upon us, That the Quakers should deny Christ, that suffered and died at Jerusalem: Which was all utterly false; and the least Thought of it never entred our Hearts; but it was a meer Slander cast upon us, and occasioned by this Person's Words. The same Person also said; That never any of the Prophets, nor Apostles, nor Holy Men of God suffered any thing Outwardly; but all their DunSufferings
were Inward.1651. Darby-Dungeon. But I instanced to him many of the Prophets and Apo∣stles, how they suffered, and by whom they suffered: And so was the Power of the Lord brought over his wicked Imaginations and Whimsies. There came also another Company to me, that pretended, They were Triers of Spirits: And I asked them; What was the first Step to Peace? And what it was, by which a Man might see his Salvation? And they were presently up in the airy Mind, and said, I was Mad. Thus they came to Try Spirits, who did not know them∣selves, nor their own Spirits. In this Time of my Imprisonment, I was exceedingly exercised about the Proceedings of the Judges and Magistrates in their Courts of Judicature. And I was moved to write to the Judges, concerning their putting Men to Death for Cattel, and Money, and small Mat∣ters; and to shew them, how Contrary it was to the Law of God in old Time: for I was under great Suffering in my Spirit because of it, and under the very Sense of Death; but standing in the Will of God, an heavenly Breathing arose in my Soul to the Lord. Then did I see the Heavens opened, and I rejoiced, and gave Glory to God. So I writ to the Judges, as followeth: I Am moved to write unto you to take heed, of putting Men to Death for stealing Cattel, or Money, &c. for the Thieves in the old Time were to make Restitution; and if they had not where∣with, they were to be sold for their Theft. Mind the Laws of God in the Scriptures, and the Spirit that gave them forth; and let them be your Rule in executing Judgment: And shew Mercy, that you may receive Mercy from God, the Judge of all. And take heed of Gifts and Rewards, and of Pride; for God doth forbid them, and they do blind the Eyes of the Wise. I do not write to give liberty to Sin; God hath forbidden it: But that you should Judge ac∣cording to his Laws, and shew Mercy: For he delighteth in true Judgment, and in Mercy. I beseech you to mind these Things, and prize your Time, now you have it; and Fear God, and Serve him: for he is a Consuming Fire. Besides this, I writ another Letter to the JUDGES, to this effect: I Am moved to write unto you, That ye do true Justice to every Man, and see, that none be Oppressed, nor Wronged; nor no Oaths Imposed: for the Land mourneth because of Oaths, and Adulteries, and Sorceries, and Drunkenness, and Prophaneness. O Consider, ye that be Men set in Authority: Be moderate, and in Lowliness Consider these things. Shew Mercy to the Fatherless, and to the Widos, and to the Poor: And take heed of Rewards or Gifts; for they do blind the Eyes of the Wise: The Lord doth loath all such. Love Mercy and true Judgment, Justice and Righ∣teousness;
for the Lord delighteth in such. Consider these Things in Time, and take heed, how ye do spend your Time. Now ye have Time, prize it; and shew Mercy, that ye may receive Mercy from the Lord: For he is coming to Try all Things, and will plead with all Flesh, as by Fire. Moreover, I laid before the Judges, what an hurtful thing it was, that Prisoners should lie so long in Jail; shewing, how that they learned Badness one of another, in talking of their bad Deeds: and therefore speedy Justice should be done. For I was a tender Youth, and dwelt in the Fear of God; and I was grieved to hear their bad Language; and was often made to reprove them for their wicked Words, and evil Carriage towards each other. And People did ad∣mire, that I was so preserved and Kept; for they could never catch a Word or Action from me, to make any thing of against me, all the time, that I was there: For the Lord's Infinite Power upheld and preserved me all that time; to him be Praises and Glory for ever! Now, while I was here in Prison, there was a young-Woman in the Jail for Robbing her Master of some Money: and when she was to be Tried for her Life, I writ to the Judge and to the Jury about her, shewing them; How contrary it was to the Law of God in old Time, to put People to Death for Stealing: and moving them to shew Mercy. Yet she was Condemned to die, and a Grave was made for her; and at the Time appointed, she was carried forth to Execution. Then I writ a few Words, Warning all People to beware of Greediness or Covetousness, for it leads from God; but that all should Fear the Lord, and avoid all Earthly Lusts, and prize their Time, while they have it: This I gave to be read at the Gal∣lows. And though they had her upon the Ladder, with a Cloath bound over her Face, ready to be turned off; yet they did not put her to Death, but brought her back again to Prison: And in the Prison she afterwards came to be Convinced of God's Everlasting Truth. There was also in the Jail, while I was there, a Prisoner, a Wicked, Ʋngodly Man, who was reputed a Conjurer; and he threat∣ned, how he would talk with me, and what he would do to me: but he never had Power to open his Mouth to me. And on a time, the Jailer and he falling out, he threatned the Jailer, That he would Raise the Devil, and break his House down; so that he made the Jai∣ler afraid. Then I was moved of the Lord, to go in his Power, and Rebuke him in it; and to say unto him: Come let's see, what thou canst do; and do thy worst. And I told him, The Devil was Raised high enough in him already; but the Power of God Chained him down: So he sluk away, and went from me. Now the Time of Worcester-Fight coming on, Justice Bennet sent the Constables to press me for a Souldier, seeing I would not volun∣tarily accept of a Command: And I told them, That I was brought off from outward Wars. They came down again to give me Press-Money; but I would take none. Then I was brought up to
Sergeant Holes, and kept there a while;1651. Darby-Prison. and then I was taken down again. Then, after a while, the Constables fetched me up again, and then I was brought before the Commissioners; and they said I should go for a Souldier: But I told them, I was dead to it. They said, I was Alive: I told them, where Envy and Hatred is, there is Confusion. They proffered me Money twice; but I would not take it: Then they were Wroth, and I was Committed Close Prisoner, without Bail or Mainprize. Whereupon I writ to them again, di∣recting my Letter to Colonel Barton (who was a Preacher) and the rest, that were concerned in my Commitment: And I writ thus: YOU, who are without Christ, and yet use the Words, which he and his Saints have spoken, Consider, neither he nor his Apostles did ever Imprison any; but my Saviour is Merciful even to the Ʋnmerciful and Rebellious. He doth bring out of Prison and Bondage: But Men, while the carnal Mind doth rule, do Oppress and Imprison. My Saviour saith, Love your Enemies, and do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you: For the Love of God doth not persecute any; but loveth all, where it dwelleth: He that hateth his Brother, is a Mur∣derer. You profess to be Christians, and one of you a Minister of Jesus Christ; yet you have Imprisoned me, who am a Servant of Jesus Christ. The Apostles never Imprisoned any; but were Impri∣soned themselves: Take heed of speaking of Christ in Words, and denying him in Life and Power. O Friends, the Imprisoning my Body is to satisfy your Wills; but take heed of giving way to your Wills, for that will hurt you. If the Love of God had broken your Hearts, ye would not have Imprisoned me; but my Love is to you, as to all my Fellow-Creatures: and that you may Weigh your selves, and see, how you stand, is this written. About this Time I was moved to give forth the following Lines, to go amongst the Convinced and Tender People, to ma∣nifest the Deceits of the World, and how the Priests have deceived the People:
To all you, that love the Lord Jesus Christ with a pure and naked Heart, amd the Generation of the Righ∣teous. CHRIST was ever hated; and the Righteous for his sake. Mind, who they were, that did ever hate them: He that was born after the Flesh, did persecute him, that was born after the Spirit; and so it is now. And mind, who were the Chiefest against Christ; even the great Learned Men, the Heads of the Peo∣ple, Rulers and Teachers, that did profess the Law and the Pro∣phets, and looked for Christ. They looked for an outwardly-Glori∣ous Christ, to hold up their outward Glory: But Christ spake against the Works of the World; and against the Priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees, and their hypocritical Profession. He that is a Stranger to Christ, is an Hireling: but the Servants of Jesus Christ are Freemen. The false Teachers always laid Burdens upon the Peo∣ple: and the true Servants of the Lord did speak against them. Jeremiah did speak against Hirelings, and said, It was an horrible thing; and said, What will ye do in the End? for the People and Priests were given to Covetousness. Paul did speak against such, as did make Gain upon the People; and exhorted the Saints to turn away from such, as were Covetous Men and Proud Men, such as did love Pleasures more than God; such as had a Form of Godliness, but denied the Power thereof. For of this sort (said he) are they, that Creep into Houses, and lead Captive silly Women, who are ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth; Men of corrupt Minds, Reprobate concerning the Faith: and as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so (said he) do these Resist the Truth: but they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made ma∣nifest unto all Men. Moses forsook Honours and Pleasures, which he might have enjoyed. The Apostle in his time saw this Corrup∣tion entring, which now is spread over the World, of having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power. Ask any of your Teachers, whether you may ever Overcome your Corruptions or Sins? None of them doth believe that; but as long as Man is here, he must (they say) carry about with him the Body of Sin. Thus Pride is kept up, and that Honour and Master-ship, which Christ denied; and all Unrighteousness: Yet Multitudes of Teachers; Heaps of Teachers; the Golden Cup full of Abominations! Paul did not preach for Wages; but laboured with his Hands, that he might be an Example to all them that follow him. O People, see who follow Paul! The Prophet Jeremiah said, The Prophets prophesie falsly, and the Priests bear rule by their means; but now the Priests bear Rule by the Means they get from the People: take away their Means, and they will bear Rule over you no longer. They are such, as the Apostle said, Intruded into those things, which they
never saw, being vainly puffed up with a fleshly Mind; and, as the Scriptures declare of some of old, They go in the way of Cain, (who was a Murderer) and in the way of Balaam, who coveted the Wages of Ʋnrighteousness. The Prophet Micah also cried against the Judges, that Judged for Reward; and the Priests, that taught for Hire; and the Prophets, that prophesied for Money; and yet leaned on the Lord, saying; Is not the Lord amongst us? Gifts do blind the Eyes of the Wise: And the Gift of God was never pur∣chased with Money. All the holy Servants of God did ever cry against Deceit: and where the Lord hath manifested his Love, they do loath it, and that Nature, which holdeth it up. Again a Concern came upon me to write unto the Magistrates of Darby, which I did as followeth: Friends, I desire you to consider in time, whom ye do Imprison: for the Magistrate is set for the punishment of Evil-Doers, and for the Praise of them that do well But when the Lord doth send his Mes∣sengers unto you, to warn you of the Woes, that will come upon you, except you Repent; then you persecute them, and put them into Prison, and say; We have a Law, and by our Law we may do it. For you indeed Justifie your selves before Men; but God knoweth your Hearts: He will not be worshipped with your Forms and Professions, and Shews of Religion. Therefore Consider, ye that talk of God, how ye are subject to him; for they are his Children, that do his Will. What doth the Lord require of you, but To do Justice, to love and shew Mercy, to walk humbly with him, and to help the Widows and Fatherless to their Right? But instead there∣of ye Oppress the Poor. Do not your Judges Judge for Rewards, and your Priests Teach for Hire? The time is coming, that he who seeth all things, will discover all your Secrets. And know this assuredly, The Lord will deliver his Servants out of your Hands, and he will recompence all your unjust Dealings towards his People. I desire you to Consider of these things, and search the Scriptures, and see, whether any of the People of God did ever Imprison any for Religion; but were themselves Imprisoned. I de∣sire you to Consider, how it is written, that when the Church is met together, they may all Prophesy, one by one; that all may hear, and all may learn, and all may be comforted: And then, If any thing be Revealed to him, that sitteth by, let the first hold his Peace. Thus it was in the true Church; and thus it ought now to be. But it is not so in your Assemblies: but he that Teaches for Hire, may speak, and none may Contradict him. Again, Consider the Liberty, that was given to the Apostles, even among the unbelieving Jews; when after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue said unto them: Ye Men and Brethren, if ye have any Word of Exhortation for the People, say on. I desire you to Consider in Stilness, and strive not against the Lord: for he is stronger than
you. Though ye hold his People fast for a time; yet when he cometh, he will make known, who are his: for his Coming is like the Refiner's Fire, and like Fuller's Sope. Then the Stone, that is set at nought of you Builders, shall be the Head-Stone of the Corner. O Friends, lay these things to Heat, and let them nor seem light things to you, I wrote unto you in Love, to mind the Laws of God, and your own Souls, and do, as the Holy Men of God did. Great was the Exercise and Travel in Spirit, that I went under during my Imprisonment here, because of the Wickedness that was in this Town: for though there were some Convinced there, yet for the generality they were an hardened People. And I saw the Visita∣tion of God's Love pass away from them; and I mourned over them. And it came upon me to give forth the following Lines, as a Lamentation for them: O Darby! As the Waters run away, when the Flood-Gates are up; so doth the Visitation of God's Love pass away from thee, O Darby! Therefore look, where thou art, and how thou art grounded; and Consider, before thou art utterly forsaken. The Lord moved me Twice, before I came to Cry against the Deceits and Vanities, that are in thee; and to warn all to look at the Lord, and not at Man. The Wo is against the Crown of Pride, and the Wo is against Drunkenness and vain Pleasures, and against them that make a Profession of Religion in Words, and are high and lofty in Mind, and live in Oppression and Envy. O Darby! thy Profession and Preaching stinks before the Lord. Ye do profess a Sabbath in Words, and Meet together, dressing your selves in fine Apparel; and you uphold Pride. Thy Women go with stretched-forth Necks, and wanton Eyes, &c. which the true Prophet of old Cryed against. Your Assemblies are odious, and an Abomination to the Lord: Pride is set up, and bowed down to; Covetousness abounds; and he that doth wickedly, is honoured: So Deceit doth bear with Deceit; and yet they profess Christ in Words. O the Deceit, that is within thee! It doth even break my Heart to see, how God is dishonoured in thee, O Darby! Now, after that I had seen the Visitation of God's Love pass away from this Place, I knew, that my Imprisonment here would not conti∣nue long: But I saw, that when the Lord should bring me forth, it would be, as the letting of a Lion out of a Den amongst the Wild Beasts of the Forrest. For all Professions stood in a Beastly Spirit and Nature, pleading for Sin, and for the Body of Sin and Imperfection, as long as they lived: And they all kick'd, and yelled, and roar'd, and raged, and ran against the Life and Spirit, which gave forth the Scriptures, which they professed in words. And so it was; as will appear hereafter.
There was a great Judgment upon the Town; and the Magistrates were uneasie about me, and could not agree, what to do with me. One while they would have sent me up to the Parliament: another while they would have Banished me to Ireland. At first they called me a Deceiver, and a Seducer, and a Blasphemer: afterwards, when God had brought his Plagues upon them, then they said, I was an Honest, Vertuous Man. But their good Report, and bad Report, their well-speaking or their ill-speaking was nothing to me: for the one did not lift me up, nor the other cast me down: Praised be the Lord! At length they were made to turn me out of Jail, about the be∣ginning of Winter in the Year 1651; after I had been a Priso∣ner in Darby almost a Year; whereof Six Months in the House of Correction, and the rest of the Time in the Common Jail and Dungeon. Thus being set at Liberty again, I went on (as before) in the Work of the Lord, passing through the Country, first, into my own Country of Leicestershire, and had Meetings as I went;Leicester∣shire. and the Lord's Spirit and Power accompanied me. Afterwards I went near to Burton upon Trent, where some were Convinced;Burton upon Trent. Bushel-House. and so to Bushel-House, where I had a Meeting. And I went up into the Country, where there were friendly People: But there was an outragious, wicked Professor, who had an intent to have done me a Mischief; but the Lord prevented him: Blessed be the Lord! And as I was walking along, with several Friends, I lifted up my Head, and saw Three Steeple-house-Spires; and they struck at my Life. And I asked Friends, What Place that was? and they said, Lichfield.Lichfield. Immediately the Word of the Lord came to me, that I must go thi∣ther. So being come to the House, we were going to, I wish'd Friends, that were with me, to walk into the House; saying nothing to them, whither I was to go. And as soon as they were gone, I stept away, and went by my Eye over Hedge and Ditch, till I came within a Mile of Lichfield; where, in a great Field, there were Shepherds keeping their Sheep. Then was I commanded by the Lord to pull off my Shoos. And I stood still (for it was Winter:) And the Word of the Lord was like a Fire in me. So I put off my Shoos, and left them with the Shepherds; and the poor Shepherds trem∣bled, and were astonished. Then I walked on about a Mile, till I came into the City; and as soon as I was got within the City, the Word of the Lord came to me again, saying; Cry, Wo unto the bloody City of Lichfield! So I went up and down the Streets, Crying with a loud Voice, WO TO THE BLOODY CITY OF LICHFIELD! And it being Market-Day, I went into the Market-Place, and to and fro in the several Parts of it, and made stands, Crying as before, WO TO THE BLOODY CITY OF LICHFIELD! And no one laid Hands on me. But as I went thus Crying through the Streets, there seemed to me to be a Channel of Blood running down the Streets, and the Market-Place ap∣peared like a Pool of Blood. Now, when I had declared, what was upon me, and felt my self Clear, I went out of the Town in Peace; and returning to the Shepherds, gave them some Money, and took my Shoos of them again. But the Fire of the Lord was so in my Feet,
and all over me,1651. Lichfield. that I did not matter to put on my Shoos any more; and was at a stand, whether I should or no; till I felt freedom from the Lord so to do: and then, after I had washed my Feet, I put on my Shoes again. After this, a deep Consideration came upon me, Why, or for what reason, I should be sent to Cry against that City, and call it THE BLOODY CITY? For though the Parliament had the Minster one while, and the King another while, and much Blood had been shed in the Town, during the Wars be∣tween them; yet that was no more, than had befallen many other Places. But afterwards I came to understand, that in the Emperor Diocletian's Time a Thousand Christians were Martyred in Lichfield. So I was to go, without my Shoos, through the Channel of their Blood, and into the Pool of their Blood in the Market-Place, that I might Raise up the Memorial of the Blood of those Martyrs, which had been shed above a Thousand Years before, and lay Cold in their Streets. So the Sense of this Blood was upon me, and I obeyed the Word of the Lord. Ancient Records testify, how many of the Christian Britains suffered there. And much I could write of the Sense I had of the Blood of the Martyrs, that hath been shed in this Nation for the Name of Christ, both under the Ten Persecutions, and since; but I leave it to the Lord, and to his Book, out of which all shall be Judged: For his Book is a most certain, true Record, and his Spirit a true Recorder. Then passed I up and down through the Countries, having Meetings amongst friendly People in many Places: But my Relations were of∣fended at me.Nottin∣ghamshire. Mansfield. Darbyshire. Yorkshire. Doncaster Balby. Wakefield So after some Time I came into Nottinghamshire again, and to Mansfield, and went into Darbyshire, visiting Friends. Then passing into Yorkshire, I preached Repentance through Doncaster, and several other Places; and after came to Balby, where Richard Farns∣worth and several others were convinced. So traveling through the Countries to several Places, preaching Repentance, and the Word of Life to the People, I came into the Parts about Wakefield, where James Naylor lived; and he and Thomas Goodyear came to me, and were both Convinced, and received the Truth. William Dewsbury also and his Wife, with many more, came to me, who were Con∣vinced, and received the Truth. From thence I passed through the Country towards Captain Pursloe's house by Selby,Selby. and visited one John Leek, who had been to visit me in Darby-Prison, and was Convinced. I had an Horse, but was fain to leave him, not know∣ing, what to do with him: for I was moved to go to many great Houses, to admonish and exhort the People to turn to the Lord, Thus passing on,Beverly. I was moved of the Lord to go to Beverly-Steeple-house, which was then a Place of high Profession. And being very Wet with Rain, I went first to an Inn; and as soon as I came to the Door, a Young-woman of the House came to the Door, and said, What! is it you? Come in, said she, as if she had known me before: for the Lord's Power bowed their Hearts. So I refreshed my self, and went to Bed: And in the Morning, (my Cloaths being still wet) I got rea∣dy, and having paid, for what I had had in the Inn, I went up to the Steeple-house, where was a Man preaching. And when he had done, I was moved to speak to him, and to the People, in the mighty Power
of God; and turned them to their Teacher, Christ Jesus:1651. Yorkshire. And the Power of the Lord was so strong, that it struck a mighty Dread amongst the People. And the Major came down to me, and spake a few Words to me: but none of them had any Power to meddle with me. So I passed away out of the Town: And in the Afternoon went to another Steeple-house, about Two Miles off: And when the Priest had done, I was moved to speak to him, and to the People very largely, shewing them the Way of Life and Truth, and the Ground of Election and Reprobation. The Priest said, he was but a Child, and could not dispute with me: I told him, I did not come to dispute; but to hold forth the Word of Life and Truth unto them, that they might all know the One Seed, which the Promise of God was to, both in the Male and in the Female. Here the People were very loving, and would have had me come again on a Week-day, and preach among them: But I directed them to their Teacher, Christ Jesus, and so passed away; and the next Day went to Crantsick,Crantsick. to Captain Pursloe's, who accompanied me to Justice Hotham's. This Justice Hotham was a pretty tender Man, one that had had some Ex∣periences of God's Workings in his Heart. After I had had some Dis∣course with him of the things of God, he took me into his Closet; where sitting together, he told me; he had known that Principle these Ten Years, and was glad, that the Lord did now publish it abroad to the People. After a while there came a Priest to visit him, with whom also I had some Discourse concerning Truth. But his Mouth was quickly stopt: for he was nothing but a Notionist, and not in Possession, of what he talked of. While I was here, there came a Great Woman of Beverly, to speak with Justice Hotham about some Business; and in Discourse she told him, That the last Sabbath-day (as she called it) there was an Angel or Spirit came into the Church at Beverly, and spake the wonderful things of God, to the astonishment of all that were there: And when it had done, it passed away; and they did not know, whence it came, nor whither it went: But it astonished all, both Priest, Professors and Magistrates of the Town. This Relation Justice Hotham gave me af∣terwards; and then I gave him an Account, how I had been that Day at Beverly-Steeple-house; and had declared Truth to the Priest and People there: There was in the County thereabouts some Noted Priests, and Doctors, that Justice Hotham had acquaintance with, and he would fain have them speak with me; and offered to send for them, under pretence of some Business he had with them: but I wish'd him not to do so. Now when the First Day of the Week was come, Justice Hotham walked out with me into the Fields; and then, Captain Pursloe com∣ing up after us, Justice Hotham left us, and returned home; but Captain Pursloe went with me into the Steeple-house. And when the Priest had done, I spake to both Priest and People; and declared to them the Word of Life and Truth, and directed them, where they might find their Teacher, the Lord Jesus Christ. Some of the People were Convinced there that Day, and received the Truth, and stand fast in it; and have a fine Meeting there-a-ways to this Day.
In the Afternoon I went to another Steeple-house, about Three Miles off, where preached a great High-Priest, called a Doctor (being one of them, whom Justice Hotham would have sent for, to have spo∣ken with me.) So I went into the Steeple-house, and stayed, till the Priest had done (Now the Words, which he took for his Text, were these; Ho, every One that Thirsteth, come ye to the Waters, and he that hath no Money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy Wine and Milk without Money and without Price.) Then was I moved of the Lord God to say unto him; Come down, thou deceiver; Dost thou bid People, Come freely, and take of the Water of Life freely, and yet thou takest Three hundred Pounds a Year of them, for preaching the Scri∣ptures to them! Mayest not thou blush for shame! Did the Prophet Isaiah and Christ do so, who spake the Words, and gave them forth freely? Did not Christ say to his Ministers, whom he sent to preach, Freely ye have received, freely give? So the Priest, like a Man ama∣zed, hastned away. And after he was gone, and had left his Flock, I had as much Time, as I could desire, to speak to the People. And I directed them from the Darkness to the Light, and to the Grace of God, that would Teach them, and bring them Salvation; and to the Spirit of God in their Inward Parts, which would be a free Teacher unto them. Then, having Cleared my self amongst that People, I returned to Justice Hotham's House that Night; who when I came in, took me in his Arms, and said: His House was my House, for he was exceeding glad at the work of the Lord, and that his Power was Re∣vealed. Then he told me, Why he went not with me to the Steeple-house in the Morning, and what Reasonings he had in himself about it: for he thought, if he had gone with me to the Steeple-house, the Officers would have put me to him; and then he should have been so put to it, that he should not have known, what to have done: But he was glad, he said, when Captain Pursloe came up to go with me. Yet neither of them was drest, nor had their Bands about their Necks. And it was a strange thing then, to see a Man come into a Steeple-house without a Band: Yet Captain Pursloe went in with me without his Band; the Lord's Power and Truth had so affected him, that he minded it not. From hence I passed on through the Country, and came at Night to an Inn, where was a Company of rude People; and I bid the Woman of the House, if she had any Meat, to bring me some: But because I said Thee and Thou to her, she looked strangely on me. Then I asked her, if she had any Milk? and she said, No. I was sensible, she spake falsly: And seeing a Churn standing in the Room, and being willing to try her further, I asked her; If she had any Cream? she denied, that she had any. Now there stood a Churn in the Room, and a little Boy playing about it, put his Hands into it, and pulled it down; and threw all the Cream on the Floor before my Eyes. Thus was the Woman manifested to be a Liar. The Woman was amazed, and blest her self, and took up the Child, and whipt it sorely: But I reproved her for her Lying and Deceit. After the Lord had thus discovered her Deceit and Perversness, I walked out of the House, and went away, till I came to a Stack of Hay, and lay in
the Hay-Stack that Night, in Rain and Snow;1651. York. it being but Three Days before the Time called Christmas. The next day I came into York, where were several People, that were very tender. And upon the First-Day of the Week following I was Commanded of the Lord, to go to the great Minster, and speak to Priest Bowles and his Hearers in their great Cathedral. Ac∣cordingly I went: and when the Priest had done, I told them; I had something from the Lord God to speak to the Priest and People. Then say on quickly, said a Professor, that was among them; for it was Frost and Snow, and very Cold Weather. Then I told them; This was the Word of the Lord God unto them, that they lived in Words; but God Almightly looked for Fruits amongst them. As soon as the Words were out of my Mouth, they hurried me out, and threw me down the Steps: but I got up again without hurt, and went to my Lodging again; and several were Convinced there. For the very Groans, that arose from the Weight and Oppression, that was upon the Spirit of God in me, would open People, and strike them; and make them Confess, That the Groans, which brake forth through me, did reach them: For my Life was burthened with their Profession without Possession, and Words without Fruit. Now after I had done my present Service in York, and that several were Convinced there, and received the Truth of God, and were turned to his Teaching; I passed out of York, and looked towards Cleaveland. And I saw, there was a People, that had tasted of the Power of God; and I saw then, there was a Seed in that Country, and that God had an humble People there. So I passed onwards that Night; and a Papist overtook me, and talked to me of his Religion, and of their Meetings: and I let him speak all that was in his Mind. That Night I stayed at an Ale-house; and the next Morning I was moved of the Lord to speak the Word of the Lord to this Papist. So I went to his House, and declared against his Religion, and all their Superstitious Ways; and told him, that God was come to teach his People himself. This put the Papist into such a Rage, that he could not then endure to stay in his own House. The next day I came to Burraby, where there was a Priest,Burraby. and several Friendly People Met together: Many of the People were Con∣vinced, and have continued faithful ever since; and there is a great Meeting of Friends in that Town. The Priest also was forced to Confess to Truth, though he Came not into it. The day following I passed to Cleaveland, amongst those People,Cleave∣land. that had tasted of the Power of God: They had formerly had great Meet∣ings, but were then all shattered to pieces; and the Heads of them turned Ranters. I told them, That after they had had such Meet∣ings, they did not Wait upon God to feel his Power, to gather their Minds Inward, that they might feel his Presence and Power a∣mongst them in their Meetings, to sit down therein, and Wait up∣on him: for they had spoken themselves dry; they had spent their Portions, and not living in that, which they spake of, they were now become DRY. They had some kind of Meetings still: but they took Tobacco, and drank Ale in their Meetings; and were grown light and loose. But my Message unto them from the Lord
was,1651. Cleave∣land. That they should all come together again, and Wait to feel the Lord's Power and Spirit in themselves, to gather them to Christ, that they might be taught of him, who says, Learn of me. For when they had declared, that which the Lord had opened to them, then the People were to receive it; and both the Speakers and Hearers were to live in that themselves. But when these had no more to declare, but went to seek Forms without Life; that made themselves dry and barren, and the People also: and from thence came all their Loss: for the Lord renews his Mercies and his Strength to them that Wait upon him. The Heads of these People came to nothing: but most of the People came to be Convinced, and received God's everlasting Truth, and continue a Meeting to this day; sitting under the Teaching of the Lord Jesus Christ, their Saviour. Upon the First day of the next Week the Word of the Lord came to me to go to the Steeple-house there; which I did. And when the Priest had done, I spake the Truth to him and the People, and directed them to their Teacher within, Christ Jesus, their free Teacher, that had bought them. The Priest came to me; and I had a little Dis∣course with him: but he was soon stopt, and silent. Then, being Clear of the Place, I passed away, having had several Meetings a∣mongst those People. Though at this time the Snow was very deep; yet I kept traveling: And going through the Country, came to a Market-Town, where I met with many Professors, with whom I had much Reasoning; and I asked them many Questions, which they were not able to Answer; but said, They had never had such deep Questions put to them in all their Lives. Stath.From them I went to another Place called Stath, where also I met with many Professors, and some Ranters. I had great Meetings amongst them, and a great Convincement there was, and many received the Truth: amongst whom One was an Ancient Man of an hundred Years of Age; Another was a Chief Constable; and a third was a Priest, whose Name was Philip Scafe: Him the Lord, by his free Spirit, did afterwards make a free Minister of his free Gospel. The Priest of this Town was a lofty Priest, and did much Oppress the People for his Tithes: for if they went a Fishing many Leagues off, he would make them pay the Tithe-Money, of what they made of their Fish; though they catched them at a great distance, and carried them as far as Yarmouth to sell. Now I was moved to go to the Steeple-house there, to declare the Truth, and lay open the Priest. And when I had spoken to the Priest, and laid his Oppressing of the People upon him, he fled away. The Chief of the Parish were very light and vain: So after I had spoken the Word of Life to them, I turned away from them, because they did not receive it; and left them. But the Word of the Lord, which I had declared amongst them, stuck with some of them; so that at Night some of the Heads of the Parish came to me: and most of them were Con∣vinced and satisfied, and confest to the Truth. Thus the Truth began to spread up and down that Country, and great Meetings we had;
at which the Priest began to rage,1651. Stath. and the Ranters began to be stir∣red: and they sent me word, that they would have a Dispute with me; both the Oppressing Priest, and the Leader of the Ranters. A day was set, and the Ranter came with his Company: and another Priest, a Scotch Man, came; but not the Oppressing Priest of Stath. Philip Scafe, who had been a Priest, and was Convinced, was with me; and a great Number of People were met. When we were set∣led, the Ranter, whose Name was T. Bushel, told me; He had had a Vision of me, that I was sitting in a great Chair, and that he was to come and put off his Hat, and bow down to the Ground before me; and he did so: and many other flattering Words he spake. I told him, It was his own Figure: and said unto him, Repent thou Beast. He said, it was Jealousy in me to say so. Then I asked him the Ground of Jealousy, and how it came to be bred in Man? And the Nature of a Beast, what made it? And how that was bred in Man? For I saw him directly in that Nature of the Beast; and therefore I would have known of him, how that Nature came to be bred in him? I told him, He should give me an Account of things done in the Body, be∣fore we came to discourse of things done out of the Body. So I stopt up his Mouth, that he could say no more; and all his Fellow-Ranters were silenced: for he was the Head of them. Then I called for the Oppressing Priest; but he came not: Only the Scotch Priest came; but his Mouth was soon stopt with a very few Words; he being out of the Life of what he did profess. Then had I a good Opportunity with the People: and I laid open the Ranters, ranking them with the old Ranters in Sodom. And the Priests I manifested to be of the same stamp with their Fellow-Hirelings, the false Prophets of old, and the Priests that then bore rule over the People by their Means, seeking for their Gain from their Quarter, Divining for Money, and Teaching for filthy Lucre: and so I brought all the Prophets, and Christ, and the Apostles over the Heads of the Priests, shewing, how the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles had long since discovered them by their Marks and Fruits. Then I directed People to their Inward Teacher, Christ Jesus their Saviour; and I preached up Christ in the Hearts of his People, when all these Mountains were laid low. The People were all quiet, and the Gainsayers Mouths were stopped: for though they broiled inwardly, yet the Power bound them down, that they could not break out. After the Meeting was over, this Scottish Priest desired me to walk with him a top of the Cliffs. Whereupon I called a Brother-in-Law of his, who was in some measure Convinced, and desired him to go with me, telling him; I was willing to have some Body by, to hear, what we said; lest the Priest, when I was gone, should report any thing of me, which I did not say. So we went together; and as we walked, the Priest asked me many things concerning the Light, and concerning the Soul: To all which I answered him fully. When he had done questioning, we parted; and he went his way: and as he wnt, meeting with the other Priest, Philip Scafe, that was Con∣vinced, he brake his Cain against the Ground in Madness, and said, If ever he met with me again, he would have my Life, or I should have his; adding, that he would give his Head, if I was not knockt down
within a Month. By this Friends suspected, his intent was, in desi∣ring me to walk with him alone, either to have Thrust me down from off the Cliff, or to have done me some other Mischief: And that when he saw himself frustrated in that, by my having one with me, that made him rage so. But I feared neither his Prophecies, nor his Threats: for I feared God Almighty. But some Friends, through their Affection to me, feared much, that this Priest would do me some Mischief, or set on Others to do it. Yet after some Years, this very Scotch Priest, and his Wise also came to be Convinced of the Truth; and about Twelve Years after this I was at their House. After this there came another Priest to a Meeting, where I was, (one that was in Repute above all the Priests in the Country) and as I was speaking in the Meeting, That the Gospel was the Power of God, and how it brought Life and Immortality to Light in Men, and so was turning People from Darkness to the Light; this high-flown Priest said, The Gospel was Mortal. I told him, The true Minister said, The Gospel was the Power of God; and would he make the Power of God Mortal? Upon that, the other Priest, Philip Scafe, that was Convinced, and had felt the Immortal Power of God in him∣self, took him up, and reproved him; and so a great Dispute arose between them: the Convinced Priest holding, that the Gospel was Immortal; and the other Priest holding, that it was Mortal. But the Lord's Power was too hard for this Opposing Priest, and stopp'd his Mouth: And many People were Convinced, seeing the Darkness, that was in the Opposing Priest, and the Light that was in the Con∣vinced Priest. Then another Priest sent to have a Dispute with me, and Friends went with me to the House, where he was: But when he under∣stood, we were come, he slipt out of the House, and hid himself un∣der an Hdge. The People went to seek him, and found him; but could not get him to come to us. Then I went to a Steeple-house hard by there, where the Priest and People were in a great rage: This Priest had threatned Friends, what he would do; but when I came there, he would not stand, but fled: for the Lord's Power came over him and them. Yea, the Lord's Everlasting Power was over the World, and did reach to the Hearts of People, and made both Priests and Professors tremble. It shook the earthly and airy Spirit, in which they held their Profession of Religion and Worship;☞ so that it was a dreadful thing unto them, when it was told them, "The Man in Leathern Breeches is come. At the hearing thereof the Priests in ma∣ny Places would get out of the way; they were so struck with the dread of the Eternal Power of God: and Fear surprized the Hypocrites. Whitby. Scarbo∣rough. Wowls. Malton.From this Place we passed to Whitby and Scarborough, where we had some Service for the Lord; and there are large Meetings settled there since. From thence I passed over the Wowls to Malton, where we had great Meetings; as we had also at the Towns thereabouts. At one of those Towns there was a Priest sent me a Challenge, to dispute with me: But when I came, he would not come sorth. So I had a good Opportunity with the People, and the Lord's Power seized up∣on them: And one, who had been a Wild, drunken Man, was reached therewith, so that he came to me as lowly, as a Lamb; though he and
his Companions had before sent for Drink,1651. Yorkshire. to make the rude People drunk, on purpose, that they might abuse us. So when the Priest would not come forth, I was moved to go to the Steeple-house there; and the Priest was Confounded, and the Lord's Power came over all. On the First-day following, there came one of the highest Inde∣pendent-Professors, a Woman, who had let in such a Prejudice against me, that she said, before she came, She could willingly have gone to see me hang'd. But when she came, she was Convinc'd; and remains a Friend. Then I turned to Malton again,Malton. and very great Meetings there were; to which several People more would have come, but durst not for fear of their Relations: for it was thought a strange thing then, to preach in Houses, and not go to the Church (as they call'd it;) so that I was much desired, to go and speak in the Steeple-houses. One of the Priests writ to me, and invited me to preach in his Steeple-house; calling me his Brother: Another Priest, a noted Man, kept a Lecture there. Now the Lord had shewed me, while I was in Dar∣by-Prison, That I should speak in Steeple-houses, to gather People from thence; and a Concern sometimes would come upon my Mind about the Pulpits, that the Priests lolled in. For the Steeple-houses and Pul∣pits were offensie to my Mind, because both Priests and People called them the Huse of God, and Idolized them; reckoning, that God dwelt there in the outward House: whereas they should have looked for God and Christ to dwell in their Hearts, and their Bodies to be made the Temples of God: for the Apostle said, God dwelleth not in Temples made with Hands: But by reason of the People's Idolizing those Places, it was counted an heinous thing to declare against them. Now when I came into the Steeple-house, there were not passing Eleven Hearers; and the Priest was preaching to them. But after it was known in the Town, that I was in the Steeple-house, it was soon filled with People. When the Priest, that preacht that day, had one, he sent the other Priest, that had Invited me thither, to bring me up into the Pulpit: but I sent back Word to him, that I needed not to go into the Pulpit. Then he sent to me again, desiring me to go up into it; for (he said) it was a better Place, and there I might be seen of the People. I sent him Word again, I could be seen and heard well enough, where I was; and that I came not there to hold up such Places, nor their Maintenance and Trade. Upon my saying so, they began to be angry, and said, These False Prophets were to come in the last Times. Their saying so, grieved many of the People; and some began to murmur at it. Whereupon I stood up, and desired all to be quiet: and stepping upon an High Seat, I declared unto them the Marks of the false Prophets; and shewed, That they were already come: and set the true Prophets, and Christ and his Apo∣stles over them; and manifested, these to be out of the Steps of the true Prophets, and of Christ and his Apostles. And I directed the People to their Inward Teacher, Christ Jesus, who would turn them from the Darkness to the Light. And having opened divers Scriptures to them, I directed them to the Spirit of God in themselves, by which they might come to him; and by which they might also
come to know,1651. Pickering. who the false Prophets were. So having had a large time among them, I departed in Peace. After some time, traveling in the Country, I came to Pickering, where in the Steeple-house the Justices held their Sessions; Justice Robinson being Chairman: and I had a Meeting in the School-house at the same time; and abundance of Priests and Professors came to it, asking Questions; which were Answered to their Satisfaction. And it being Sessions-time, four Chief-Constables, and many other Poople were Convinced that day. And word was carried to Justice Robinson, that his Priest was Overthrown and Convinced; whom he had a Love to, more than to all the Priests besides. After the Meet∣ing was done, we went to an Inn, and Justice Robinson's Priest was very lowly and loving; and would have paid for my Dinner: but I would by no means suffer it. Then he offered, that I should have his Steeple-house to preach in; But I denied it, and told him and the People, That I came to bring them off from such things to Christ. The next Morning I went up, with the Four Chief-Constables, and some others, to visit Justice Robinson; who met me at his Chamber∣door. I told him, I could not honour him with Man's Honour; and he said, He did not look for it. So I went into his Chamber, and opened te him the State of the false Prophets, and of the true Pro∣phets; and set the true Prophets, and Christ, and the Apostles over the other; and directed his Mind to Christ his Teacher; and opened to him the Parables, and how Election and Reprobation stood; as that Reprobation stood in the first Birth, and Election stood in the second Birth: I shewed also, what the Promise of God was to, and what the Judgment of God was against. He Confessed to it all; and was so opened with the Truth, that when another Justice, that was pre∣sent, made some little Opposition; he Informed him. At our parting he said, It was very well, that I did exercise that Gift, which God had given me: And he took the Chief-Constables aside, and would have given them some Money, to have given me, saying; He would not have me be at any Charge in their Country: but they told him, That they themselves could not get me to take any Money; and so accept∣ing his Kindness, refused his Money. From thence I passed up into the Country, and the Priest that cal∣led me Brother (in whose School-house I had the Meeting at Pickering) went along with me. When we came into a Town to bait, the Bells rang: Whereupon I asked, What the Bells rang for? And they said, for me to preach in the Steeple-house. After some Time I felt Drawings that way: And as I walked to the Steeple-house; I saw, the People were gathered together in the Steeple-house-yard. The Old Priest would have had me gone into the Steeple-house; but I said, Nay, it was no matter: But it was something strange to the People, that I would not go into that, which they called the House of God. Then I stood up in the Steeple-house-yard, and declared to the People, That I came not to hold up their Idol-Temples, nor their Priests, nor their Tithes, nor their Augmentations, nor their Priests-wages, nor their Jewish and Heathenish Ceremonies and Tradi∣tions (for I denyed all these) and told them, that that piece of
Ground was no more Holy, than another Piece of Ground.1651. Yorkshire. And I shewed them, that the Apostles going into the Jews Synagogues and Temples, which God had Commanded, was To bring People off from that Temple, and those Synagogues, and from the Offerings and Tithes, and Covetous Priests of that Time. And that such, as came to be Convinced of the Truth, and Converted to it, and believed in Jesus Christ, whom the Apostles preached; they met together after∣wards in Dwelling-Houses. And that all who preach Christ, the Word of Life, ought to preach freely, as the Apostles did; and as he had Commanded. So I was sent of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth to preach freely; and to bring People off from these outward Temples made with Hands, which God dwelleth not in; that they might know their Bodies to become the Temples of God and of Christ: And to draw People off from all their Superstitious Ceremonies, and Jewish and Heathenish Customs, Traditions and Doctrines of Men; and from all the World's Hireling-Teachers, that take Tithes and great Wages, preaching for Hire, and divining for Money, whom God and Christ never sent, as themselves confess, when they say; They never heard God's Voice, nor Christ's Voice. Therefore I ex∣horted the People to come off from all these things, and directed them to the Spirit and Grace of God in themselves, and to the Light of Jesus in their own Hearts; that they might come to know Christ, their Free Teacher, to bring them Salvation, and to open the Scriptures to them. Thus the Lord gave me a good Opportunity amongst them, to open things largely unto them; and all was qui∣et, and many were Convinced: Blessed be the Lord. I passed on to another Town, where there was another great Meet∣ing, and the Old Priest before-mentioned went along with me; and there came Professors of several sorts to it. Now I sate on an Hay-stack, and spake nothing for some Hours: for I was to famish them from Words. And the Professors would ever and anon be speaking to the Old Priest, and asking him, When I would begin? and when I would speak? And he bad them Wait; and told them, That the People waited upon Christ a long while, before he spake. At last I was moved of the Lord to speak; and they were struck by the Lord's Power, and the Word of Life reached to them, and there was a General Con∣vincement amongst them. From hence I passed on, the Old Priest being still with me, and several others. And as we went along, some People called to the Old Priest, and said; Mr. Boyes, We owe you some Money for Tithes, pray come and take it. But the Old Priest threw up his Hands, and said; He had enough, he would have none of it; they might keep it: And, he praised the Lord, he had enough. At length we came to this Old Priest's Steeple-house in the Moors: And when we were come into it, the Old Priest went before me,The Moors. and held open the Pulpit-Door; but I forbad him, and told him, I should not go into it. This Steeple-house was very much painted; and I told him and the People, That the painted Beast had a painted House. Then I opened to them the Rise of all those Houses, and their Superstitious Ways; shewing them, that as the End of the Apo∣stles going into the Temple and Synagogues, which God had Com∣manded,
was not to hold them up;1651. Yorkshire, in the Moors. but to bring them to Christ, the Substance: So the End of my coming there, was not, to hold up these Temples, Priests and Tithes, which God had never Commanded; but to bring them off from all these things, to Christ the Substance. So I shewed them the True Worship, which Christ had set up: and distinguished unto them Christ the True Way, from all the false Ways; opening the Parables to them, and turning them from the Darkness to the true Light, that by it they might see themselves and their Sins, and Christ their Saviour; that believing in him, they might be saved from their Sins. After this we went to one Birdet's House, where I had a great Meeting; and this Old Priest accompanied me still, leaving his Steeple-house: For he had been looked upon as a famous Priest, above Com∣mon-prayer-Men, and Presbyters, and Independents too. Before he was Convinced, he would have gone sometimes into their Steeple-houses, and have preached: For he had been a zealous Man in his Way. And when they have Complained of him to Justice Hotham, he would bid them, Distrein his Horse, for travelling on the Lord's Day (as he call'd it:) But Hotham did that only to put them off; for he knew, the Priest used no Horse, but travelled on Foot. Crantsick.Now came I up through the Country again towards Crantsick, to Captain Purslo's and Justice Hotham's, who received me kindly; be∣ing glad, that the Lord's Power had so appeared; and that Truth was spread, and so many had received it; and that Justice Robinson was so Civil. And Justice Hotham said; If God had not raised up this Principle of Light and Life, which I preached, the Nation had been over-run with Ranterism; and all the Justices in the Nation could not have stopped it with all their Laws: Because (said he) they would have said, as we said, and done as we Commanded; and yet have kept their own Principle still. But this Principle of Truth (said he) overthrows their Principle and the Root and Ground thereof; and therefore (he said) he was glad, the Lord had raised up this Prin∣ciple of Life and Truth. Holder∣ness.From thence I travelled up into Holderness, and came to a Justice's House, whose Name was Pearson; where there was a very tender Woman, that believed in the Truth, and was so affected therewith, that she said; She could have left all, and have followed me. Oram.Thence I went to Oram, to one George Hartise's; where many of that Town were Convinced. On the first-Day I was moved to go into the Steeple-house, where the Priest had got another Priest to help him: And a many Professors and Contenders were got together. But the Lord's Power was over all, and the Priests fled away, and a great deal of good Service I had for the Lord amongst the People. And some of those great Professors were Convinced, and became honest faithful Friends; being Men of Account in the Place. The next day Friends and friendly People having left me, I tra∣veled alone, declaring the Day of the Lord amongst People in the Towns,Patring∣ton. where I came; and warning them to Repent. And as I tra∣veled one day, I came towards Night into a Town called Patring∣ton;
and as I walked along the Town,1652. Patring∣ton. I warned both Priest and People (for the Priest was in the Street) to Repent, and turn to the Lord. Now it grew dark, before I came to the End of the Town; and a Multitude of People gathered about me, and I declared the Word of Life unto them. And when I had cleared my self, I went to an Inn, and desired them to let me have a Lodging; but they would not. Then I desired them to let me have a little Meat, or Milk, and I would pay them for it; but they would not. So I walk∣ed out of the Town, and a Company of Fellows follow'd me, and asked me; What News? And I bid them Repent, and fear the Lord. After I was gone a pretty way out of the Town, I came to another House, and I desired the People of that House to let me have a little Meat, and Drink, and Lodging for my Money; but they would not neither, but denied me. Then I went to another House, and desired the same; but they refused me also. By this time it was grown so dark, that I could not see the High-way; but I discerned a Ditch, and got a little Water, and refreshed my self. Then I got over the Ditch; and being weary with traveling, I sate down amongst the Furz-bushes, till it was day. About break of Day I got up, and pas∣sed on the Fields; and a Man came after me with a great Pike-Staff, and went along with me to a Town: And he raised the Town upon me, with the Constable and Chief-Constable, before the Sun was up. So I declared God's Everlasting Truth amongst them, warning them of the day of the Lord, that was coming upon all Sin and Wickedness; and exhorted them to Repent. But they seized on me, and had me back again to Patrington, about three Miles, guarding me with Watch-Bills, and Pikes, and Staves and Halberds. Now when I was come back to Patrington, all the Town was in an Ʋproar; and the Priest and Constables were consulting together: So I had another Op∣portunity to declare the Word of Life amongst them, and warn them to Repent. At last a Professor, a tender Man, called me into his House, and there I took a little Milk and Bread; having not eaten for some Days before. Then they guarded me about Nine Miles to a Justice; and when I was come near his House, there came a Man riding after us, and asked me, Whether I was the Man, that was apprehended? And I asked him, Wherefore he asked? And he said, For no hurt; and I told him, I was: So he rode away to the Justice before us. The Men, that guarded me, said; It was well, if the Justice was not drunk, before we got to him: for he used to be drunk early. Now when I was brought in before him, because I did not put off my Hat, and said Thou to him, he asked the Man, that rode thither before me, Whether I was not mazed, or fond? But the Man told him, No; it was my Principle. Then I warned him to Repent, and come to the Light, which Christ had enlightned him withal; that by it he might see all his evil Words and Actions, that he had spoken and acted (his ungodly Ways he had walked in, and his ungodly Words he had spo∣ken) and to return to Christ Jesus, whilst he had time; and that whilst he had Time, he should prize it. Ay, Ay, said he, the Light, that is spoken of in the third of John: I desired him, that he would mind it, and obey it. And as I admonished him, I laid my Hand upon him; and he was brought down by the Power of the Lord:
And all the Watch-men stood amazed. Then he took me into a little Parlour with the other Man, and desired to see, what I had in my Pockets, of Letters, or Intelligence; and I plucked out my Linnen, and shewed him, that I had no Letters: So he said, He is not a Va∣grant by his Linnen: and then he set me at Liberty. Then I went back to Patrington again, with that Man, that had ridden before me to the Justice; for he lived at Patrington. When I came there, he would have had me have had a Meeting at the Cross: But I said, It was no matter, his House would serve. Then he desired me to go to Bed, or lie down upon a Bed: Which he did, that they might say, they had seen me in a Bed, or upon a Bed; for they had got up a Re∣port, that I would not lie on any Bed, because at that time I lay many times without Doors. Now when the First-day of the Week was come, I went to the Steeple-house, and declared the Truth to the Priest and People: and the People did not molest me; for the Power of God was come over them. Then presently after I had a great Meeting at that Man's House, where I lay: And many that day were Convinced there of the Lord's Everlasting Truth; who stand faithful Witnesses for it to this day. And they were exceeding sorry and grieved, that they did not Receive me, nor give me Lodging, when I was there before. York-shire.From hence I Traveled through the Country, even to the fur∣thest part thereof; Warning People, both in Towns and in Coun∣try-Villages, to Repent; and directing them to Christ Jesus their Teacher. On the First-day of the Week I came to one Colonel Overton's House, and had a great Meeting of the Prime of the People of that Country; where many things were opened out of the Scriptures, which they had never heard before in all their Lives: and many were Convinced, and received the Word of Life, and were settled in the Truth of God. Patring∣ton.Then I returned to Patrington again, and visited those Friends, that were Convinced there; by whom I understood, that a Taylor, and some wild Blades in that Town had occasioned my being carried before the Justice. The Taylor came to ask me forgiveness, fearing, I would Complain of him: The Constables also were afraid, lest I should trouble them: But I forgave them all, and warned them to turn to the Lord, and to amend their Lives. Now that which made them the more afraid, was this: When I was in the Steeple-house at Oram not long before, there came a Professor, and gave me a Push on the Breast in the Steeple-house, and bid me, Get me out of the Church: Alas, poor Man, said I, dost thou call the Steeple-house the Church? The Church is the People, whom God hath purchased with his Blood, and not the House. It happened, that Justice Hotham came to hear of this Man's Abuse done to me; and sent his Warrant for him, and bound him over to the Sessions: So affected was he with the Truth; and so Zealous to keep the Peace. And indeed, this Ju∣stice Hotham had asked me before, whether any People had meddled with me, or abused me? But I was not to tell him any thing of that kind; but was to forgive all.
From Patrington I went to several Great Men's Houses, warning them to Repent: Some Received me lovingly, and some slighted me. Thus I passed on through the Country: And at Night came to another Town, where I desired Lodging and Meat, and I would pay for it: But they would not Lodge me, except I would go to the Constable, which was the Custom (they said) of all Lodgers at Inns, if Strangers. I told them, I should not go: for that Custom was for suspicious Persons; but I was an Innocent Man. So, after I had warned them to Repent, and declared unto them the Day of their Visitation, and directed them to the Light of Christ and Spirit of God, that they might come to know Salvation, I passed away; and the People were something tendered, and troubled afterwards. But when it grew dark, I spied an Hay-Stack, and went, and sate under it all Night, till Morning. The next Day I passed into Hull,Hull. admonishing and warning Peo∣ple, as I went, to turn to Christ Jesus, that they might receive Sal∣vation. That Night I got a Lodging; but was very sore with tra∣veling on Foot so far. Afterward, passing through the Country, I came to Balby,Balby. and visited Friends up and down in those Parts; And then passed into the Edge of Nottinghamshire, visiting Friends there:Notting∣hamshire. Lincoln∣shire. Trent. and so passed into Lincolnshire, and visited Friends there. And on the First-day of the Week I went to a Steeple-house on this side of Trent; and in the Afternoon I went to another Steeple-house on the other side of Trent, declaring the Word of Life to the People, and directing them to their Teacher, Christ Jesus, who died for them,☜ that they might hear him, and receive Salvation by him. Then I went further into the Country, and had several Meetings there-aways. And at one Meeting, where I was, there came a Great Man, and a Priest, and many Professors: but the Lord's Power came over them all; and they went their ways peaceably. And there came a Man to that Meet∣ing, who had been at a Meeting before; and he raised a false Accu∣sation against me, and made a Noise up and down the Country, re∣porting, that I said; I was Christ; which was utterly false. And when I came to Gainsborough,Gains∣borough. where a Friend had been declaring Truth in the Market, the Town and Market-People was all in an Up∣roar: So I went into a Friendly Man's House, and the People rushed in after me; so that the House was filled with Professors, and Dispu∣ters, and rude People. And this false Accuser came in before them all, and accused me openly before all the People, That I said, I was Christ; and he had got Witnesses to prove the same: Which set the People into such a Rage, that they had much ado to keep their Hands off me. Then was I moved of the Lord God to stand up upon the Table, in the Eternal Power of God, and tell the People, That Christ was in them, except they were Reprobates; and that it was Christ, the Eternal Power of God, that spake in me at that time unto them: NOT, that I was CHRIST. And the People were generally sa∣tisfied, except himself, and a Professor, and his own false Witnesses. And I called the Accuser, Judas; and was moved to tell him, That he was Judas, and Judas his End should be his; and that that was the Word of the Lord, and of Christ through me to him. So
the Lord's Power came over all,1652. Gains∣borough. and quieted the Minds of the People, and they departed in Peace. But this Judas went away, and short∣ly after hanged himself; and a Stake was driven into his Grave. And afterwards the Wicked Priests raised a Scandal upon us, and re∣ported, That a Quaker had hanged himself in Lincolnshire, and had a Stake driven through him. This Falshood they printed to the Nation, adding Sin to Sin; which the Truth and we were clear of: for he was no more a Quaker, than the Priest, that printed it; but was one of their own People. But notwithstanding this wicked Slander, by which the Adversary designed to defame us, and turn Peoples Minds against the Truth we held forth, many in Lincolnshire re∣ceived the Gospel, being Convinced of the Lord's Everlasting Truth, and sate down therein under the Lord's heavenly Teach∣ing. Yorkshire. Warns∣worth.After this I passed in the Lord's Power into Yorkshire, and came to Warnsworth, and went to the Steeple-house in the Fore-noon; but they shut the Door against me: Yet after a while they let in Thomas Aldam, and then shut it again; and the Priest fell upon him, asking him Questions. At last they opened the Door, and I went in: and as soon as I was come in the Priests sight, he left Preaching, though I said nothing to him; for he was in a great Maze, and asked me, What have you to say? and presently Cried out, Come, come, I will prove them false Prophets in Matthew: But he was so Confounded, he could not find the Chapter. Then he fell on me, asking me many Questions; and I stood still all this while, not saying any thing a∣mongst them. At last I said; Seeing, here are so many Questions asked, I may Answer them. But as soon as I began to speak, the Peo∣ple violently rushed upon me, and thrust me out of the Steeple-house again, and lockt the Door on me. And as soon as they had done their Service, and were come forth, the People ran upon me, and knockt me sorely with their Staves, threw Clods and Stones at me, and abused me much: the Priest also, being in a great rage, laid violent Hands on me himself. But I warned them and him of the Terrible Day of the Lord, and exhorted them to Repent, and turn to Christ. And being filled with the Lord's refreshing Power, I was not sensible of much hurt I had received by their Blows. In the Afternoon I went to another Steeple-house; but the Priest had done, before I got thither: So I preached Repentance to the Peo∣ple, that were left, and directed them to their inward Teacher, Je∣sus Christ. Balby. Doncaster.From hence I went to Balby, and so to Doncaster, where I had formerly preach'd Repentance on the Market-day; which had made a Noise and Alarm in the Country. On the First-day I went to the Steeple-house; and after the Priest had done, I spake to him and the People, what the Lord God had Commanded me. And they were in a great Rage, and hurried me out, and threw me down, and haled me before the Magistrates; and a long Examination they made of me, and much Work I had with them: And they threatned my Life, if ever I came there again; and that they would leave me to the Mercy of the People. Nevertheless I declared Truth amongst them, and directed them to the Light of Christ in them; testifying unto
them, That God was come to teach his People himself,1652. Doncaster. whether they would hear, or whether they would forbear. After a while they put us out (for some Friends were with me) among the rude Multitude; and they stoned us down the Streets. And there was an Inn-keeper, that was a Bayliff, came and took us into his House: and they brake his Head, that the Blood ran down his Face, with the Stones, that they threw at us: So we stay'd a while in his House, and shewed the more sober People the Priest's Fruits. Then we went away to Balby,Balby. about a Mile off; and the rude People laid wait for us, and sto∣ned us down the Lane: But blessed be the Lord, we did not re∣ceive much hurt. The next first-Day I went to Tickhill,Tickhill. whither the Friends of that Side gathered together, and there was a Meeting; and a mighty Brokenness by the Power of God there was amongst the People. I went out of the Meeting, being moved of God to go to the Steeple-house: And when I came there, I found the Priest, and most of the Chief of the Parish together in the Chancel. So I went up to them, and began to speak; but they immediately fell upon me: and the Clark up with his Bible, as I was speaking, and struck me on the Face with it, so that my Face gushed out with Blood; and I bled exceeding∣ly in the Steeple-house. Then the People cried, Let us have him out of the Church. And when they had got me out, they beat me exceeding∣ly; and threw me down, and threw me over an Hedge: And after∣wards dragged me through an House into the Street, stoning and beating me, as they dragged me along; so that I was all-over be∣smeared with Blood and Dirt. And they got my Hat from me, which I never got again. Yet when I was got upon my Legs again, I declared to them the Word of Life, and shewed them the Fruits of their Teacher; and how they dishonoured Christianity. So after a while I got into the Meeting again amongst Friends: And the Priest and People coming by the House, I went forth with Friends into the Yard, and there I spake to the Priest and People; and the Priest scof∣ed at us, and called us Quakers. But the Lord's Power was so over them, and the Word of Life was declared in such Authority and Dread to them, that the Priest fell a Trembling himself; and one of the People said, Look how the Priest trembles and shakes, he is turned a Quaker also. So when the Meeting was over, Friends departed; and I went without my Hat to Balby, about Seven or Eight Miles.Balby. And Friends were much abused that Day by the Priest and his People; Insomuch that some moderate Justices hearing of it, Two or Three of them came, and sate at the Town, to hear and examine the Business. And he that had shed my Blood, was afraid, of having his Hand cut off, for striking me in the Church (as they called it:) but I forgave him, and would not appear against him. In the beginning of this Year,Yorkshire. West-Rid∣ing. 1652 great Rage got up in Priests and People, and in some of the Magistrates in the West-Riding of Yorkshire, against the Truth and against Friends; insomuch that the Priest of Warnsworth procured a Warrant from the Justices against me and Thomas Aldam, which was to be executed in any part of the West-Riding of Yorkshire.☜ At the same Time I had a Vision of a Bear and Two great Mastiff-Dogs; that I should pass by them, and
they should do me no hurt: and it proved so.1652. West-Riding. For the Constable took Thomas Aldam, and carried him to York; and I went with Thomas Aldam Twenty Miles towards York: and the Constable had the War∣rant for me also, and said, He saw me; but he was loth to trouble Men, that were Strangers: but Thomas Aldam was his Neighbour. So the Lord's Power restrained him, that he had not Power to meddle with me. And we came to Lieutenant Roper's, where we had a great Meeting of many Considerable Men; and the Truth was powerfully declared amongst them, and the Scriptures wonderfully opened, and the Parables and Sayings of Christ were expounded, and the State of the Church in the Apostles Days was plainly set forth, and the Apo∣stacy since from that State discovered. And the Truth had great Do∣minion that Day, so that those Great Men, that were present, did generally Confess to it, saying; They believed, that this Principle must go over the whole World. There were at this Meeting James Naylor, Thomas Goodyear and William Dewsbury, who had been Con∣vinced the Year before; and Richard Farnsworth also. And the Con∣stable stay'd with Thomas Aldam, till the Meeting was over: And then went towards York-prison; but did not meddle with me. WakefieldFrom hence I went to Wakefield: and on the First Day after I went to a Steeple-house, where James Naylor had been a Member of an Independent-Church; but upon his receiving Truth, he was Ex∣communicated. When I came in, and the Priest had done, the People called upon me to come up to the Priest; which I did: But when I began to declare the Word of Life to them, and to lay open the Deceit of the Priest, they rushed upon me on a suddain, and thrust me out at the other Door, and fell a punching and beating me, and Cried; Let us have him to the Stocks: But the Lord's Power was over them, and restrained them, that they were not suffered to put me in. So I passed away to the Meeting, where were a great many Pro∣fessors and friendly People gathered, and a great Convincement there was that Day: For the People were mightily satisfied, that they were directed to the Lord's Teaching in themselves. Here we got some Lodging: for Four of us had lain abroad under an Hedge the Night before, there being then few Friends in that Place. The same Day Richard Farnsworth went to another great Steeple-house, belonging to a great High-priest, and declared the Word of Truth unto the People; and a great Service he had amongst them: For the Lord's Dread and Power was mightily over all. The Priest of that Church, which James Naylor had been a Mem∣ber of, whose Name mas Marshal, raised many Wicked Slanders up∣on me, as, That I carried Bottles about with me, and made People drink of my Bottles, and that made them follow me. And, That I rid upon a great Black Horse, and was seen in one Country upon my Black Horse in one Hour, and in the same Hour in another Country Threescore Miles off; and That I should give a Fellow Money to follow me, when I was on my Black Horse: With these Hellish Lies he fed his People, to make them think Evil of the Truth, which I had declared amongst them. But by these Lies of his, he preached many of his Hearers away from him: For I was then on Foot, and travelled on foot, and had no Horse at that Time; and that the People gene∣rally
knew. But the Lord soon after met with this Envious Priest,1652. High-town. and Cut him off in his Wickedness. After this I came to a Town called High-Town, where dwelt a Woman, who had been Convinced a little before; and we went to her House, and had a Meeting: and the Towns-people gathered toge∣ther, and we declared the Truth to them, and had some Service for the Lord amongst them; and they passed away again peaceably. But there was a Widow-woman in the Town, whose Name was Green, who being filled with Envy, went to one, that was called a Gentle∣man in the Town (who was reported to have killed Two Men and One Woman) and Informed him against us; though he was no Officer. The next Morning we drew up some Queries, to be sent to the Priest: And when we had done, and were just going away, some of the Friendly People of the Town came running up to the House, where we were, and told us; That this Murdering Man had sharpened a Pike to stab us, and was coming up with his Sword by his Side. We were just passing away, and so missed him. But we were no sooner gone, but he came to the House, where we had been; and the Peo∣ple generally Concluded, If we had not been gone, he would have murdered some of us. That Night we lay in a Wood, and were very Wet; for it Rained exceedingly. In the Morning I was moved to come back to that Town again; and then they gave us a full Relation of this wicked Man. From hence we passed to Bradford, and came to an House,Bradford. where we met with Richard Farnsworth again; from whom we had parted a little before. When we came in, they set Meat before us; but as I was going to Eat, the Word of the Lord came to me, saying; Eat not the Bread of such, as have an Evil Eye. Immediately I arose from the Table, and ate nothing: The Woman of the House was a Baptist. So after I had exhorted the Family, To turn to the Lord Jesus Christ, and hearken to his Teachings in their own Hearts, We departed thence. And as we travelled through the Country, preaching Repentance to the People, we came into a Market-town on the Market-day; and there was a Lecture there that Day: And I went into the Steeple-house, where were many Priests, and Professors, and People. The Priest, that preached, took for his Text those Words of Jeremiah, Chap. 5. ver 31. My People love to have it so: Leaving out the foregoing Words, viz. The Prophets prophesy falsly, and the Priests bear Rule by their Means. So I shewed the People his Deceit; and directed them to Christ, the true Teacher within; declaring unto them, that God was come to Teach his People himself, and to bring them off from all the World's Teachers and Hirelings; that they might come to receive freely from him. Then warning them of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon all Flesh, I passed from thence without much Opposition. At Night we came to a Country-house; and there was no Ale-house near. They desired us to stay there all Night; which we did, and had good Service for the Lord, declaring his Truth amongst them.
1652. Yorkshire.The next Day we passed on: For the Lord had said unto me; If but one Man or Woman were Raised up by his Power, to stand and live in the same Spirit, that the Prophets and Apostles were in, who gave forth the Scriptures,☞ that Man or Woman should shake all the Country in their Profession for Ten Miles round. For People had the Scriptures, but were not in that same Light, and Power, and Spirit, which they were in, that gave forth the Scriptures: and so they neither knew God, nor Christ, nor the Scriptures aright; nor had they Ʋnity one with another, being out of the Power and Spirit of God. There∣fore as we passed along, we Warned all People, where-ever we met them, of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon them. Pendle-hill.As we travelled on, we came near a very great and high Hill, called Pendle-hill, and I was moved of the Lord, to go up to the Top of it; which I did with much ado, it was so very Steep and High. When I was come to the Top of this Hill, I saw the Sea bordering upon Lancashire: And from the Top of this Hill the Lord let me see, in what Places he had a Great People to be gathered. As I went down, I found a Spring of Water in the Side of the Hill, with which I refreshed my self; having eaten or drunk but little in several Days before. At Night we came to an Inn, and declared Truth to the Man of the House, and writ a Paper to the Priests and Professors, declaring the Day of the Lord, and that Christ was come to teach People himself, by his Power and Spirit in their Hearts, and to bring People off from all the World's Ways and Teachers, to his own free Teaching, who had bought them, and was the Saviour of all them, that be∣lieved in him. The Man of the House spread the Paper abroad, and was himself mightily affected with the Truth. Here the Lord opened unto me, and let me see a Great People in white Raiment by a River∣side, coming to the Lord: And the Place that I saw them in, was a∣bout Wentzerdale and Sedbergh. The next Day we travelled on, and at Night got a little Fern or Brakins to lay under us, and lay upon a Common. Next Morning we reached to a Town, and there Richard Farnsworth parted from me; and then I travelled alone again.Wentzer∣dale. So I came up Wentzerdale, and at the Market-Town in that Dale there was a Lecture on the Market-day; and I went into the Steeple-house. And after the Priest had done, I Proclaimed the Day of the Lord to the Priest and People; Warn∣ing them to turn from the Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they might come to know God and Christ aright, and to receive his Teaching, who teacheth freely. And largely and freely did I declare the Word of Life unto them, and had not much Persecution there. Afterwards I passed up the Dales, Warn∣ing People to fear God; and preaching the Everlasting Gospel to them. And in my way I came to a Great House, where there was a School-master; and they got me into the House. And I asked them Questions about their Religion and Worship: and afterward I de∣clared the Truth to them. They had me into a Parlour, and lockt me in, pretending that I was a Young Man, that was Mad, and had got away from my Relations; and that they would keep me, till they
could send to my Relations.1652. Wentzer∣dale. But I soon Convinced them of their Mistake in that, and they let me forth; and would have had me to stay there: But I was not to stay there. Then having exhorted them to Repentance, and directed them to the Light of Christ Jesus, that through it they might come unto him, and be saved; I passed from them, and came in the Night to a little Ale-house on a Common, where there was a Company of Rude Fellows drinking. And be∣cause I would not drink with them, they got up their Clubs, and were striking at me: but I reproved them, and brought them to be somewhat Cooler; and then I walked out of the House upon the Com∣mon in the Night. After some time one of these drunken Fellows came out, and would have come close up to me, pretending to whisper to me: but I perceived, he had a Knife; wherefore I kept off from him, and bid him Repent, and fear God. So the Lord by his Power preserved me from this Wicked Man; and he went into the House again. The next Morning I went on through other Dales,Yorkshire Dales. Warning and Exhorting People every where, as I passed, to Repent and turn to the Lord: and several were Convinced. At one House, that I came to, the Man of the House (whom I afterwards found to be a Kinsman of John Blakelin's) would have given me Money; but I would not Receive it. As thus I traveled on through the Dales, I came to another Man's House, whose Name was Tennant: And I was moved to speak to the Family, and declare God's Everlasting Truth to them. And as I was turning away from them, I was moved to turn again, and speak to the Man himself: And he was Convinced, and his Family, and lived and died in the Truth. Thence I came to Major Bousfield's, who received me, as did also several others; and some that were then Convinced, have stood faithful ever since.Grysedale. I went also thro' Gryse∣dale, and several other of those Dales; in which some were Con∣vinced. And I went into Dent, where many were Convinced also.Dent. But from Major Bousfield's I came to Richard Robinson's, and decla∣red the Everlasting Truth to him. The next day I went to a Meeting at Justice Benson's, where met a a People, that were separated from the publick Worship This was the place, that I had seen, where a People came forth in white Rai∣ment. A large Meeting it was, and the People were generally Con∣vinced; and continue a large Meeting still of Friends near Sedburgh:Near Sed∣burgh. Which was then first gathered through my Ministry in the Name of Jesus. In the same Week there was a great Fair, at which Servants used to be hired: And I went and declared the day of the Lord through the Fair. And after I had done so, I went into the Steeple-house-Yard; and many of the People of the Fair came thither to me, and abundance of Priests and Professors. There I declared the Ever∣lasting Truth of the Lord, and the Word of Life for several Hours; shewing, that the Lord was come to Teach his People himself, and to bring them off from all the World's Ways and Teachers, to Christ the true Teacher, and the true Way to God. I laid open their Teachers, shewing, that they were like them, that were of Old con∣demned by the Prophets, and by Christ, and by the Apostles: And I
exhorted the People to come off from the Temples made with Hands;1652. Near Sed∣burgh. and Wait to receive the Spirit of the Lord, that they might know themselves to be the Temples of God. Not one of the Priests had power to open his Mouth against what I declared: But at last a Cap∣tain said, Why will you not go into the Church? for this is not a fit place to preach in, said he. But I told him, I denied their Church. Then stood up one Francis Howgill, who was a Preacher to a Con∣gregation: He had not seen me before; yet he undertook to Answer that Captain; and soon put him to Silence. Then said this Francis Howgill of me; This Man speaks with Authority, and not as the Scribes. After this I opened to the People, That that Ground and House was no holier, than another Place; and that that House is not the Church but the People; whom Christ is the Head of. Then after a while the Priests came up to me, and I warned them to Repent: One of them said, I was Mad; and so they turned away. But many People were Convinced there that day, and were glad at the hearing of the Truth declared, and received it with Joy. Amongst these was one cal∣led Captain Ward, who received the Truth in the love of it, and lived and dyed in it. Westmor∣land. Firbank-Chappel.The next First-day I came to Firbank-Chappel in Westmorland, where Francis Howgill before named, and one John Audland had been preaching in the Morning: The Chappel was full of People, so that many could not get in. And Francis Howgill said, He thought, I lookt into the Chappel, and his Spirit was ready to fail; the Lord's Power did so surprize him: But I did not look in. They made haste, and had quickly done at that time: and they and some of the People went to their Dinners; but abundance stay'd, till they came again. Now John Blakelin, and others came to me, and desired me not to Reprove them publickly; for they were not Parish-Teach∣ers, but pretty Tender Men. I could not tell them, whether I should or no (though I had not at that time any Drawings to de∣clare publickly against them;) but I said, They must leave me to the Lord's Movings. So while the others were gone to Dinner, I went to a Brook, and got me a little Water; and then came, and sate down on the Top of a Rock hard by the Chappel. In the After∣noon the People gathered about me, with several of their Preachers; it was judged, there were above a Thousand People: amongst whom I declared God's everlasting Truth and Word of Life freely and largely, for about the space of three Hours, directing all to the Spirit of God in themselves; that they might be turned from the Darkness to the Light, and believe in it, that they might become the Child∣ren of it: and might be turned from the Power of Satan, which they had been under, unto God; and by the Spirit of Truth might be led into all Truth, and sensibly understand the words of the Pro∣phets, and of Christ, and of the Apostles; and might all come to know Christ to be their Teacher to instruct them, their Counsellor to direct them, their Shepherd to feed them, their Bishop to oversee them, and their Prophet to open divine Mysteries to them; and might know their Bodies to be prepared, sanctified and made fit Temples for God and Christ to dwell in. And in the openings of the heaven∣ly Life, I opened unto them the Prophets, and the Figures and Sha∣dows,
and directed them to Christ, the Substance.1652. Westmor∣land. Firbank-Chappel. Then I opened the Parables and Sayings of Christ, and things that had been long hid; shewing the intent and scope of the Apostles Writings, how that their Epistles were written to the Elect. And when I had opened that State, I shewed also the State of the Apostacy, that hath been since the Apostles days; how the Priests have gotten the Scri∣pture (but are not in that Spirit, which gave them forth) and have put them into Chapter and Verse, to make a Trade of the Holy Mens Words: And how that the Teachers and Priests now are found in the steps of the false Prophets, Chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees of old, and are such, as the true Prophets, Christ and his Apostles cried against, and so are judged and condemned by the Spirit of the true Prophets, and of Christ, and of his Apostles; and that none, who was in that Spirit, and guided by it now, could own them. Now there were many old People, who went into the Chappel, and looked out at the Windows; thinking it a strange thing, to see a Man preach on an Hill or Mountain, and not in their Church (as they called it;) whereupon I was moved to open to the People, That the Steeple-house (and the Ground whereon it stood,) was no more holy, than that Mountain; and that those Temples, which they called the dreadful Houses of God, were not set up by the Command of God and of Christ; nor their Priests called, as Aaron's Priesthood was; nor their Tithes appointed by God, as those amongst the Jews were: but that Christ was come, who ended both the Temple and its Wor∣ship, and the Priests and their Tithes; and all now should hearken unto him: for he said, Learn of me; and God said of him, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. So I de∣clared unto them, that the Lord God had sent me to preach the Everlasting Gospel and Word of Life amongst them; and to bring them off from all these Temples, Tithes, Priests and Rudiments of the World, which had gotten up since the Apostles days, and had been set up by such, as had erred from the Spirit and Power, that the Apostles were in. Very largely was I opened at this Meeting, and the Lord's Convincing Power accompanied my Ministry, and reached home unto the Hearts of the People; whereby many were Convinced that day, and all the Teachers of that Congregation (who were many) were Convinced of God's everlasting Truth that day. After the Meeting was over, I went to John Audland's, and from thence to Preston-Patrick-Chappel,Preston-Patrick-Chappel. where a great Meeting was ap∣pointed; to which I went, and had a large opportunity amongst the People, to preach the Everlasting Gospel to them, opening to them (as to others on the like occasion) that the End of my coming into that Place, was not to hold it up; no more than the Apostles going into the Jewish Synagogues and Temple was, to uphold those: But to bring them off from all such things (as the Apostles brought the Saints of old from off the Jewish Temple and Aaron's Priesthood) that they might come to witness their Bodies to be the Temples of God, and Christ in them to be their Teacher.
1652. Kendal.From this Place I went to Kendal, where a Meeting was appointed in the Town-Hall: in which I declared the Word of Life amongst the People, shewing them; How they might come to the saving know∣ledge of Christ, and to have a right Understanding of the Holy Scriptures: and opening to them, what it was, that would lead them into the way of Reconciliation with God; and what would be their Condemnation. After the Meeting I stay'd a while in the Town; and several were Convinced there, and many appeared loving. One, whose Name was Cock, met me in the Street, and would have given me a Roll of Tobacco (for People then were much given to smoking Tobacco:) I accepted his love; but did not receive the Tobacco. Under-barrow.From thence I went to Ʋnder-barrow, to one Miles Bateman's, and several People going along with me, great Reasonings I had with them; especially with Edward Burrough. At Night the Priest came, and many Professors to the House; and a great deal of Disputing I had with them. Supper being provided for the Priest and the rest of the Company, I had not freedom to eat with them; but told them, If they would appoint a Meeting for the next day at the Steeple-house, and acquaint the People with it, I might meet them. They had a great deal of Reasoning about it; some being for it, and some against it. In the Morning I walked out (after I had spoken again to them concerning the Meeting:) and as I walked upon a Bank by the House, there came several poor People, Travellers, asking Relief, who I saw were in Necessity: and they gave them nothing; but said, they were Cheats. It grieved me to see such hard-heartedness amongst Professors; whereupon, when they were gone in to their Breakfast, I ran after the Poor People about a quarter of a Mile, and gave them some Money. Mean while some of them, that were in the House, coming out again, and seeing me a quarter of a Mile off, said; I could not have gone so far in such an Instant, if I had not had Wings. Hereupon the Meeting was like to have been put by: for they were filled with such strange Thoughts concerning me, that many of them were against having a Meeting with me. I told them, I ran after those poor People to give them some Money; being grieved at their hard-heartedness, who gave them nothing. Then came Miles and Stephen Hubbersty; and they being more simple-hearted Men, would have the Meeting held. So to the Chappel at Ʋnder-barrow I went: and the Priest came, and a great Meeting there was, and the Way of Life and Salvation was opened; and after a while the Priest fled away. And many of Crook and Ʋnder-barrow were Convinced that day, and received the Word of Life; and stood fast in it under the Teaching of Christ Jesus. Now after I had declared the Truth to them for some Hours, and the Meeting was ended; the Chief-Consta∣ble, and some other Professors fell to Reasoning with me in the Chap∣pel-Yard: Whereupon I took a Bible, and opened to them the Scri∣ptures, and dealt tenderly with them, as one would do with a Child. And they that were in the Light of Christ, and Spirit of God, knew when I spake Scripture, though I did not mention Chapter and Verse after the Priest's Form unto them.
From hence I went along with an ancient Man,1652. Under-barrow. whose Heart the Lord had opened; and he invited me to his House: His Name was James Dickinson. He was Convinced that day, and received the Truth, and lived and died in it. From his House I came the next day to James Taylor's of Newton in Cartmell, in Lancashire. And on the First-day of the Week,Lancashire. Newton in Cartmell. I went to the Chappel, whee one Priest Camelford used to preach; and after he had done, I began to speak the Word of Life to the People. But this Priest Camelford was in such a Rage, and did so fret, and was so peevish, that he had no patience to hear; but stirred up the rude Multitude, and they rudely haled me out, and struck and punched me, and threw me Headlong over a Stone-Wall: yet, blessed be the Lord, his Power preserved me. He that did this Violence to me, was a wicked Man, one John Knipe, whom afterwards the Lord cut off. But there was a Youth in the Chappel, writing after the Priest; and I was moved to speak to him, and he came to be Convinced, and re∣ceived a part of the Ministry of the Gospel: His Name was John Brathwait. Then went I up to an Ale-house, whither many People resorted betwixt the time of their Morning and Afternoon-Preaching; and I had a great deal of Reasoning with the People there, declaring to them; That God was come to Teach his People himself, and to bring them off from all false Teachers, such as the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles cryed against. And many received the Word of Life at that time, and abode in it. In the Afternoon I went about two or three Miles to another Steeple-house or Chappel, called Lyndal. And when the Priest had done, I spake to him and the People, what the Lord commanded me: and there were great Opposers; but afterwards they came to be Con∣vinced. After this I went to one Captain Sands, who with his Wife seemed somewhat affected with Truth: and if they could have held the World and Truth together, they would have received it; but they were Hypocrites, and he a very Chaffy, light Man. Wherefore I reproved him for his Lightness, and for his Jesting; telling him, It was not seemly in a great Professor, as he was. Thereupon he told me, He had a Son, who upon his Death-bed had also reproved him for it, and warned him of it. But he neither regarded the Admoni∣tion of his dying Son, nor the Reproofs of God's Spirit in him∣self. From hence I went to Ʋlverstone,Ulver∣stone. Swarth∣more. and so to Swarthmore to Judge Fell's; whether came up one Lampitt, a Priest, who I perceived had been, and still was an high Notionist. With him I had a great deal of Reasoning: for he would talk of high Notions and Perfe∣ction; and thereby deceived the People. He would have owned me; but I could not own nor join with him: he was so full of Filth. He said, He was above John; and made, as though he knew all things. But I told him; Death reigned from Adam to Moses; and that he was under Death, and knew not Moses: for Moses saw the Paradise of God; but he knew neither Moses, nor the Prophets, nor John. For that crooked and rough Nature stood in him, and the Mountain of Sin and Corruptions; and the Way was not prepared
in him for the Lord.1652. Swarth∣more. He confessed, he had been under a Cross in things; but now he could sing Psalms, and do any thing. I told him; Now he could see a Thief, and join Hand in Hand with him: But he could not preach Moses, nor the Prophets, nor John, nor Christ, except he were in the same Spirit, that they were in. Now Margaret Fell had been abroad in the Day-time; and at Night her Children told her, that Priest Lampitt and I had dis-agreed: which did some-what trouble her, because she was in a Profession with him; (but he hid his dirty Actions from them.) At Night we had a great deal of Reasoning; and I declared the Truth to her and her Family. The next day Lampitt came again, and I had a great deal of Discourse with him before Margaret Fell, who then clearly discerned the Priest; and a Convincement of the Lord's Truth came upon her, and her Family. Within a day or two there was a day to be observed for an Humiliation; and Margaret Fell asked me to go with her to the Steeple-house at Ʋlverstone,Ulver∣stone. (for she was not wholly come off from them:) I replied, I must do, as I am ordered by the Lord. So I left her, and walked into the Fields; and the Word of the Lord came to me, saying; Go to the Steeple-house after them. When I came, the Priest Lampitt was singing with his People: But his Spirit was so foul, and the Matter they sung, so Ʋnsuitable to their States, that after they had done singing, I was moved of the Lord to speak to him and the People. The Word of the Lord to them was; He is not a Jew, that is one Outward; but he is a Jew, that is one Inward, whose Praise is not of Man, but of God. Then, as the Lord opened further; I shew∣ed them, That God was come to Teach his People by his Spirit, and to bring them off from all their old Ways and Religions, Churches and Worships: for all their Religions, and Worships and Ways was but talking of other Mens Words; but they were out of the Life and Spirit, which they were in, who gave them forth. Then cried out one, called Justice Sawrey; Take him away: But Judge Fell's Wife said to the Officers; Let him alone: Why may not he speak, as well as any other? Lampitt also, the Priest (in Deceit) said, Let him speak. So at length, when I had declared a pretty while, this Ju∣stice Sawrey caused the Constable to put me out; and then I spake to the People in the Grave-yard. Aldenham.Upon the First-Day after, I was moved to go to Aldenham-Steeple-house: And when the Priest had done, I spake to him; but he got away. Then I declared the Word of Life to the People, and warned them to Return to the Lord. Ramside.From thence I passed to Ram-side, where was a Chappel, in which one Thomas Lawson used to preach, who was a high sort of a Priest: and he very lovingly spake to his People in the Morning, of my Com∣ing in the Afternoon; by which means very many People were ga∣thered together. When I came, I saw, there was no Place so Con∣venient to declare to the People there, as the Chappel; wherefore I went into the Chappel, and all was quiet: And the Priest Thomas Lawson went not up into his Pulpit, but left all the Time to me. And the Ever∣lasting Day of the Eternal God was proclaimed that Day, and the Everlasting Truth was largely declared; which reached and entred
into the Hearts of People, and many received the Truth in the Love of it. And this Priest came to be Convinced, and left his Chappel;1652. Firbank. Chappel. and threw off his Preaching for Hire, and came to preach the Lord Jesus and his Kingdom freely. After that, some rude People cast Scandals upon him, and thought to have done him a Mischief; but he was carried over all, and grew in the Wisdom of God mightily, and proved very serviceable in his Place. Then returned I to Swarthmore again,Swarth∣more. Dalton. Steeple-house. and on the next First-Day went to Dalton-Steeple-house; where after the Priest had done, I de∣clared the Word of Life to the People, that they might be turned from the Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of Satan to God; and might come off from their Superstitious Ways, and from their Teachers made of Man, to Christ the true and living Way, to be taught of him. From thence I went into the Island of Walnah:Island of Walnah. and after the Priest had done, I spake to him; but he got away. Then I spake to the People, and declared the Truth unto them; but they were something Rude. Then went I to speak with the Priest at his House; but he would not be seen: The People said, he went to hide himself in the Hay-mow; and they went to look for him there, but could not find him. Then they said, he was gone to hide himself in the standing Corn; but they could not find him there neither. So I went to James Lancaster's, who was Convinced in the Island; and from thence I returned to Swarthmore again,Swarth∣more. where the Lord's Power seized upon Margaret Fell and her Daughter Sarah, and seve∣ral of them. Then I went to Becliff, where Leornard Fell was Convinced,Becliff. and became a Minister of the Everlasting Gospel: And several others were Convinced there, and came into obedience to the Truth. Here the People said, They could not tell how to dispute; and would fain have put on some other to hold Talk with me: but I bid them, Fear the Lord; and not in a light way hold a Talk of the Lord's Words, but put the Things in practice. And I directed them to the Divine Light of Christ, and his Spirit in their Hearts, which would let them see all the Evil Thoughts, Words and Actions, that they had thought, spoken and acted; by which Light they might see their Sin, and by which Light they might also see their Saviour, Christ Jesus, to save them from their Sins. This, I told them, was their first Step to Peace, even to stand still in the Light, that shewed them their Sins and Transgressions; by which they might come to see, how they were in the fall of Old Adam, in the Darkness and Death, Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, and without God in the World: And by the same Light they might see Christ, that died for them, to be their Redeemer and Saviour, and their Way to God. After this I went to a Chappel beyond Gleaston; which was built,Chappel beyond Gleaston. but never Priest had preached in it. Thither all the Country up and down came; and a quiet, peaceable Meeting it was, in which the Word of Life was declared amongst the People, and many were con∣vinced of the Truth about Gleaston.
1652. Swarth∣more. Westmor∣land on Kendal-side.From thence I returned to Swarthmore again; where after I had staid a few Days, and most of the Family were Convinced, I went from thence back again into Westmorland, where Priest Lampitt had been amongst the Professors on Kendal-Side, and had mightily In∣censed them against me; telling them, I held many strange Things. So I met with them, that he had so Incensed, and sate up all Night with them at James Dickinson's, and answered all their Objections: And then they were both throughly satisfied with the Truth, that I had declared, and dissatisfied with him, and his Lies that he had di∣vulged; so that he clearly lost the best of his Hearers and Followers, who hereby came to see his Deceit, and forsook him. Then I passed on to John Audland's and Gervase Benson's, and had great Meetings amongst those People, that had been Convinced before: And to John Blakelin's and Richard Robinson's, and had mighty Meet∣ings there; and so up towards Grisedale. Soon after Judge Fell being come home, Margaret Fell his Wife sent to me, desiring me to return thither: And I feeling Freedom from the Lord so to do,Swarth∣more. went back through the Country to Swarth∣more. Where when I came, I found, the Priests and Professors, and that envious Justice Sawrey had much Incensed Judge Fell and Captain Sands against the Truth, by their Lies: But when I came to speak with him, I answered all his Objections; and so throughly sa∣tisfied him by the Scriptures, that he was Convinced in his Judgment. Then he asked me, If I was that George Fox, whom Justice Robinson spake so much in Commendation of amongst many of the Parliament Men? I told him, I had been with Justice Robinson, and with Justice Hotham in Yorkshire, who were very Civil and Loving to me; and that they were Convinced in their Judgments by the Spirit of God, that the Principle, which I bore Testimony to, was the Truth, and they did see over and beyond the Priests of the Nation: So that they, and many others, were now come to be wiser than their Teachers. After we had discoursed a pretty Time together, Judge Fell himself was satisfied also, and came to see, by the Openings of the Spirit of God in his Heart, over all the Priests and Teachers of the World; and did not go to hear them for some Years, before he died: for he knew, it was the Truth, that I declared; and that Christ was the Teacher of his People, and their Saviour: And he would sometimes wish, that I were a while with Judge Bradshaw to discourse with him. There came to Judge Fell's that Captain Sands before-mentioned, endeavou∣ring to Incense the Judge against me; for he was an evil-minded Man, and full of Envy against me: And yet he could speak high things, and use the Scripture-words, and say, Behold, I make all things new. But I told him, Then he must have a New God; for his God was his Belly. Besides him, thither came also that envious Justice John Sawrey: And I told him, His Heart was rotten, and he was full of Hypocrisy to the Brim. Several other People also came, whose States the Lord gave me a discerning of; and I spake unto their Con∣ditions. And while I was in those Parts, Richard Farnsworth and James Naylor came thither to see me, and the Family; and Judge Fell being satisfied, that it was the Way of Truth, notwithstanding all their Opposition let the Meeting be kept at his House: And a great Meeting was
settled there in the Lord's Power, to the tormenting of the Priests and Professors; which hath continued there near Forty Years, until the Year 1690. that a New Meeting-house was erected near it. Now after I had stay'd a while,Under∣barrow. and the Meeting there was well settled, I departed from thence, and went to Ʋnderbarrow, where I had a great Meeting. From thence I went to Kellet,Kellet. and had a great Meeting at Robert Withers, to which several came from Lancaster, and some from York; and many were Convinced there. Then on the Market-day I went to Lancaster,Lancaster and spake through the Market in the dreadful Power of God; declaring the Day of the Lord to the Peo∣ple, and crying out against all their deceitful Merchandize: And I preached Righteousness and Truth unto them, which they should all follow after, and walk and live in; directing them, how and where they might find and receive the Spirit of God, to guide them there-into. After I had cleared my self in the Market, I went to my Lodging, whither several People came to me; and ma∣ny were Convinced there, who have stood faithful to the Truth. On the First-Day following, in the Forenoon, I had a great Meet∣ing in the Street at Lancaster, amongst the Souldiers and People, unto whom I declared the Word of Life, and the Everlasting Truth: And I opened unto them, That all the Traditions they had lived in, and all their Worships and Religions, and the Profession they made of the Scriptures, was good for nothing, while they lived out of the Life and Power, which they were in, who gave forth the Scriptures. And I directed them to the Light of Christ, the heavenly Man, and to the Spirit of God in their own Hearts, that they might come to be ac∣quainted with God and with Christ, and receive him for their Teacher, and know his Kingdom set up in them. In the Afternoon I went up to the Steeple-house at Lancaster, and de∣clared the Truth both to the Priest and People; laying open before them the Deceits they lived in; and directing them to the Power and Spirit of God, which they wanted. But they haled me out, and sto∣ned me along the Street, till I came to John Lawson's House. On another First-Day I went to another Steeple-house by the Water∣side, where one Whitehead was Priest; to whom, and to the People I declared the Truth in the dreadful Power of God. And there came to me a Doctor, who was so full of Envy, that he said, He could find in his Heart, to run me through with his Rapier, though he was hanged for it the next Day: Yet this Man came afterwards to be Convinced of the Truth, so far as to be loving to Friends. And some People were Convinced there-abouts, who willingly sate down under the Ministry of Christ, their Teacher: And a Meeting was settled there in the Power of God, which has continued to this Day. After this I returned into Westmorland,Westmor∣land. Kendal. and spake through Kendal upon a Market-day: And so dreadful was the Power of God, that was upon me, that People flew, like Chaff, before me into their Houses. I warned them of the Mighty Day of the Lord, and exhorted them to hearken to the Voice of God in their own Hearts, who was now Come to Teach his People himself. And when some Opposed, many People took my part; insomuch, that at last some of the People fell
to Fighting about me: but I went to them, and spake to them; and they parted again. And several were Convinced. On the First-Day after I had a very large Meeting in Ʋnder-barrow at Miles Bateman's House, where I was moved to declare, That all People in the Fall were gone from the Image of God, Righteousness and Holiness, and were become as Wells without the Water of Life, as Clouds without the heavenly Rain, as Trees without the heavenly Fruit; and were degenerated into the Nature of Beasts, and of Serpents, and of tall Cedars, and of Oaks, and of Bulls, and of Heifers: So that they might read the Natures of these Creatures within, as the Prophet described them to the People of Old, that were out of Truth. I opened unto them, how some were in the Nature of Dogs and Swine, biting and rending; some in the nature of Briars, Thistles and Thorns; some like the Owls and Dragons in the Night; some like the wild Asses and Horses, snuffing up the Wind; and some like the Mountains and Rocks, and crooked and rough Ways. Wherefore I exhorted them to read these things within, in their own Natures, as well as without: And that, when they read without of the wandring Stars, they should look within, and see, how they have wandred from the bright and Morning-Star. And they should consider, that as the Fallow Ground in their Fields must be plowed up, before it would bear Seed to them; so must the Fallow Ground of their Hearts be plowed up, before they could bear Seed to God. Now all these Names and Things, I shewed them, were spoken of and to Man and Woman, since they fell from the Image of God; but as they do come to be renewed again into the Image of God, they come out of the Natures of these things, and so out of the Names thereof. Many more such things were declared to them, and they were turned to the Light of Christ, by which they might come to know Christ, and to receive him; and might witness him to be their Substance and their Way, their Salvation and true Teacher. And many were Convinced at that Time. Now after I had travelled up and down in those Countries, and had had great Meetings,Swarth∣more. Ulverston. I came to Swarthmore again. And when I had visited Friends a while in those Parts; I heard of a great Meeting the Priests were to have at Ʋlverstone, on a Lecture-Day. Whereupon I went down to it, and went into the Steeple-house in the Dread and Power of the Lord: And when the Priest had done, I spake among them the Word of the Lord, which was as an Hammer, and as a Fire amongst them. And though Lampit (the Priest of the Place) had been at variance with most of the Priests before; yet against the Truth he and they all joined together. But the mighty Power of the Lord was over all; and so won∣derful was the Appearance thereof, that Priest Bennet said, The Church shook; Insomuch that he was afraid, and trembled: and after he had spoken a few Confused Words, he hastened out, for fear the Steeple-house would fall on his Head. There were many Priests got together there; yet they had no Power as yet, to Persecute.
When I had cleared my Conscience amongst them, I went up to Swarthmore again; whither came up four or five of the Priests:1652. Swarth∣more. And coming to discourse, I asked them; Whether any one of them could say, he ever had the Word of the Lord to go and speak to such or such a People? None of them durst say, He had: But one of them burst out into a Passion, and said, He could speak his Experi∣ences, as well as I. I told him, Experience was one thing: but to receive and go with a Message, and to have a Word from the Lord, as the Prophets and Apostles had and did, and as I had done to them; this was another thing. And therefore I put it to them again; Could any of them say, he had ever had a Command or Word from the Lord immediately at any time? but none of them could say so. Then I told them; The false Prophets, and false Apostles, and Antichrists could use the Words of the true Prophets, and true Apostles, and of Christ, and would speak of other Mens Experiences; though they themselves never knew nor heard the Voice of God and Christ: and such as They, might get the good Words and Experiences of others: This puzzled them much, and laid them open. For at another time, when I was discoursing with several Priests at Judge Fell's House, and he was by, I asked them the same Question, Whether any of them ever heard the Voice of God or Christ, to bid him go to such or such a People, to declare his Word or Message unto them? for any one (I told them) any that could but read, might declare the Experiences of the Prophets and Apostles, which were recorded in the Scriptures. Hereupon one of them, whose Name was Thomas Taylor, an anci∣ent Priest, did ingenuously Confess before Judge Fell, That he had never heard the Voice of God, nor of Christ, to send him to any People; but he spake his Experiences, and the Experiences of the Saints in former Ages; and That he preached. This very much Confirmed Judge Fell in the Perswasion he had, That the Priests were wrong; for he had thought formerly, as the generality of People then did, That they were sent from God. This Thomas Taylor was Convinced at this time,Westmor∣land. Cross-land. and traveled with me into Westmorland. And coming to Crossland-Steeple-house, we found the People gathered together there. And the Lord opened Thomas Taylor's Mouth amongst the People (though he was Con∣vinced but the day before) so that he declared amongst them, How he had been, before he was Convinced; and like the good Scribe, that was Converted to the Kingdom, he brought forth things new and old to the People, and shewed them, how the Priests were out of the Way: Which did torment the Priests. Some little discourse I had with them, but they sled away; and a precious Meeting there was, wherein the Lord's Power was over all, and the People were directed to the Spirit of God, by which they might come to know God and Christ, and to understand the Scriptures aright. After this I passed on, visiting Friends, and had very large Meetings in Westmorland. Now began the Priests to Rage more and more, and as much as they could to stir up Persecution. Whereupon James Naylor and Francis Howgill were cast into Prison in Appleby-Jail, at the insti∣gation of the malicious Priests; some of whom prophesied, That within a Month we should be all scattered again, and come to nothing.
But blessed for ever be the Worthy Name of the Lord, the Work of the Lord went on and prospered.1652. Westmor∣land For about this time John Audland and Francis Howgill, and John Camm, and Edward Burrough, and Richard Hubberthorn and Miles Hubbersty, and Miles Halhead with several others, being endued with Power from on high, came forth into the Work of the Ministry, and approved themselves faithful Labourers therein; traveling up and down, and preaching the Gospel freely: by means whereof Multitudes were Convinced, and many ef∣fectually turned to the Lord. Amongst these Christopher Taylor was one, who was Brother to Thomas Taylor before-mentioned; and had been a Preacher to a People, as well as his Brother: But after they had received the knowledge of the Truth, they soon came into Obe∣dience thereunto; and left their Preaching for Hire or Rewards. And having received a part of the Ministry of the Gospel, they preach∣ed Christ freely; being often sent by the Lord to declare his Word in Steeple-houses, and in Markets: and great Sufferers they were. Lancashire. UlverstoneAfter I had visited Friends in Westmorland, I returned into Lanca∣shire, and went to Ʋlverstone, where — Lampitt was Priest: who though he had preached of a People, that did own the Teachings of God, and had said; That Men and Women should come to declare the Gospel; yet afterwards, when it came to be fulfilled, he persecu∣ted both it and them. To this Priest's House I went, where abun∣dance of Priests and Professors ere got together after their Lecture; with whom I had great Disputings concerning Christ and the Scri∣ptures: for they were loth to let their Trade go down, which they made of preaching Christ's, and the Apostles and Prophets Words. But the Lord's Power went over the Heads of them all, and his Word of Life was held forth amongst them; though many of them were exceeding Envious and Devillish. Yet after this, many Priests and Professors came to me from far and near: of whom, they that were Innocent and Simple-minded, were satisfied, and went away refreshed; but the fat and full were fed with Judgment, and sent empty away: for that was the Word of the Lord to be divided to them. Now when Meetings were set up, and we Met in private Houses, then began Lampitt the Priest to Rage: And he said, We forsook the Temple, and went to Jeroboam's Calves-houses: So that many Pro∣fessors began to see, how he was declined from that, which he had formerly hld and preached. Hereupon the Case of Jeroboam's Calves was opened to the Professors, Priests and People; and it was declared and manifested unto them, That their Houses (which they called Churches) were more like Jeroboam's Calves-houses, even the Old Mass-houses, which were set up in the darkness of Popery, and which they, who called themselves Protestants, and professed to be more enlightned than the Papists, did still hold up; although God had never commanded them: Whereas that Temple, which God had commanded at Jerusalem, Christ came to end the Service of; and they that received and believed in him, their Bodies came to be the Temples of God, and of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost to dwell in them, and to walk in them. And all such were gathered
into the Name of Jesus, whose Name is above every Name;1652. Ulver∣stone. and there is no Salvation by any other Name under the whole Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus. And they that were thus gathered, met together in several Dwelling-houses, which were not called the Temple, nor the Church; but their Bodies were the Temples of God, and the Believers were the Church, which Christ was the Head of. So that Christ was not called the Head of an Old House, which was made by Mens Hands; neither did he come to purchase and sanctify, and redeem with his Blood an Old House, which they called their Church; but the People, which he is the Head of. Much work I had in those Days with Priests and People, concerning their Old Mass-houses, which they called their Churches: for the Priests had persuaded the People, that it was the House of God; whereas the Apostle says, Whose House we are, &c. Heb. 3.6. So the People are God's House, in whom he dwells. And the Apostle saith; Christ purchased his Church with his own Blood; and Christ calls his Church his Spouse, and his Bride, the Lamb's Wife: So that this Title Church and Spouse, was not given to an Old House; but to his People, the true Be∣lievers. After this on a Lecture-day I was moved to go to the Steeple-house at Ʋlverstone, where were abundance of Professors, Priests and People. I went up near to Priest Lampitt, who was blustering on in his Preaching: And after the Lord had opened my Mouth to speak, John Sawrey the Justice came to me, and said; If I would speak according to the Scriptures, I should speak. I stranged at him for speaking so to me, for I did speak according to the Scriptures; and I told him, I should speak according to the Scriptures, and bring the Scriptures to prove, what I had to say: for I had something to speak to Lampitt and to them. Then he said: I should not speak; Contradicting him∣self, who had said just before, I should speak, if I would speak ac∣cording to the Scriptures: which I did. Now the People were quiet, and heard me gladly; until this Justice Sawrey (who was the first Stirrer up of cruel Persecution in the North) incensed them against me, and set them on to hale, beat and bruise me. Then on a sudden the People were in a Rage; and they fell upon me in the Steeple-house before his Face, and knock'd me down, and kicked me, and trampled upon me, he looking on: And so great was the Ʋproar, that some People tumbled over their Seats for fear. At last he came, and took me from the People, and led me out of the Steeple-house, and put me into the Hands of the Constables and other Officers; bidding them Whip me, and put me out of the Town. Then they led me about a quarter of a Mile, some taking hold by my Collar, and some by my Arms and Shoulders, and shook and dragg'd me along. And there being many Friendly People come to the Market, and some of them come to the Steeple-house to hear me, divers of these they knocked down also, and brake their Heads; so that the Blood ran down from several of them. And Judge Fell's Son running after, to see what they would do with me, they threw him into a Ditch of Water; some of them crying, Knock the Teeth out of his Head. Now when they had haled me to the Common-Moss-side, a Multitude of People following, the Constables and other Officers gave me some Blows over
my Back with their Willow-Rods, and so thrust me among the rude Multitude: who (having furnished themselves some with Staves, some with Hedge-stakes,Common. and others with Holm or Holly-bushes) fell upon me, and beat me on my Head, Arms and Shoulders, till they had amazed me; so that I fell down upon the Wet Common. And when I recovered my self again, and saw my self lying in a Watry Common, and the People standing about me; I lay still a little while: And the Power of the Lord sprang through me, and the Eternal Re∣freshings refreshed me; so that I stood up again in the strengthening Power of the Eternal God. And stretching out my Arms amongst them, I said with a loud Voice, Strike again; here are my Arms, my Head and my Cheeks. There was in the Company a Mason, a Professor, but a rude Fellow; He with his walking Rule-Staff gave me a Blow with all his might, just over the back of my Hand, as it was stretched out; with which blow my Hand was so bruised, and my Arm so be∣nummed, that I could not draw it unto me again: so that some of the People cried out, He hath spoil'd his Hand for ever having any use of it more. But I looked at it in the Love of God (for I was in the Love of God to them all, that had persecuted me) and atter a while the Lord's Power sprang through me again, and through my Hand and Arm, so that in a Moment I recovered Strength in my Hand and Arm in the fight of them all. Then they began to fall out a¦mong themselves; and some of them came to me, and said; If I would give them Money, they would secure me from the rest. But I was moved of the Lord to declare to them all the Word of Life, and shewed them their false Christianity, and the Fruits of their Priest's Ministry; telling them: they were more like Heathens and Jews, than true Christians.Ulver∣stone-Market. Then was I moved of the Lord to come up again through the midst of the People, and go up into Ʋlverstone-Market. And as I went, there met me a Man, a Souldier, with his Sword by his Side; Sir, said he to me, I see, you are a Man, and I am ashamed and grieved, that you should be thus abused: and he offered to Assist me, in what he could. But I told him, The Lord's Power was over all: So I walked through the People in the Market, and none of them had power to touch me then. But some of the Mar∣ket-People abusing some Friends in the Market, I turned me about, and saw this Souldier among them with his naked Rapier; whereupon I ran in amongst them, and catching hold of his Hand, that his Rapier was in, I bid him, Put up his Sword again, if he would go along with me: for I was willing to draw him out from the Company, lest some Mischief should be done. Yet a few days after seven Men fell upon this Souldier, and beat him cruelly, because he had taken part with Friends and me: For it was the manner of the Persecutors of that Country, for twenty or forty People to run upon one Man. And they fell so upon Friends in many Places, that they could hardly pass the High-ways;Swarth∣more. stoning, beating and breaking their Heads. Now when I came up to Swarthmore, I found the Friends there dressing the Heads and Hands of Friends and Friendly People, which had been broken or hurt that day by the Professors and Hearers of Lampitt, the Priest. My Body and Arms were yellow, black and blue, with the Blows and Bruises I received amongst them that day: And now began the Priests to
prophesy again, That within half a Year we should be all put down and gone.1652. Walney-Island. About two Weeks after this I went into Walney-Island, and James Naylor went with me; and we stay'd one Night at a little Town on this side, called Cockan, and had a Meeting there, where there was one Convinced. After a while there came a Man with a Pistol;Cockan. whereupon the People ran out of Doors. He called for me: and when I came out to him, he snapp'd his Pistol at me; but it would not go off. This caused the People to make a great Bustle about him; and some of them took hold of him, to prevent his doing Mis∣chief. Bu I was moved in the Lord's Power to speak to him: and he was so struck by the Power of the Lord, that he trembled for fear; and went and hid himself. Thus the Lord's Power came over them all, though there was a great Rage in the Country. The next Morning I went over in a Boat to James Lancaster's; and as soon as I came to Land, there rushed out about Forty Men with Staves, Clubs and Fishing-poles; and fell upon me, beating and punch∣ing me, and endeavoured to thrust me backward into the Sea. And when they had thrust me almost into the Sea, and I saw, they would have knock'd me down there in the Sea, I went up into the Middle of them: but they laid at me again, and knock'd me down, and stunn'd me. When I came to my self, I looked up and saw James Lancaster's Wife throwing Stones at my Face, and her Husband James Lancaster, was lying over me, to keep the Blows and the Stones from off me. For the People had persuaded James Lancaster's Wife, that I had bewitched her Husband; and had promised her, That if she would let them know, when I came thither, they would be my death. And having got knowledge of my Coming, many of the Town rose up in this manner with Clubs and Staves to kill me: but the Lord's Power preserved me, that they could not take away my Life. At length I got up upon my Feet; but they beat me down again into the Boat: which James Lancaster observing, he presently came into the Boat to me, and set me over the Water from them; but while we were on the Water within their Reach, they struck at us with long Poles, and threw Stones after us. By that time we were come to the other side, we saw them beating James Naylor: for whilst they had been beating of me, he walked up into a Field, and they never minded him, till I was gone; then they fell upon him, and all their Cry was, Kill him, Kill him. Now when I was come over to the Town again, on the other side of the Water, the Townsmen rose up with Pitchforks, Flails and Staves to keep me out of the Town, crying, Kill him; knock him on the Head; bring the Cart, and carry him away to the Church-yard. So after they had abused me, they drove me a pretty way out of the Town, and there left me. Then went James Lancaster back again, to look after James Naylor; and I being now left alone, went to a Ditch of Water; and having washed my self (for they had all bedirted and besmeared my Face, Hands and Cloaths with Miry Dirt and Wet) I walked about three Miles to Thomas Hutton's House, where lodged Thomas Lawson the Priest, that was Convinced. And when I came in, I could hardly speak to them, I was so bruised; only I told them, where I left James Naylor: whereupon they took
each of them an Horse,1652. Cockan. and went and brought him thither that Night. The next day Margaret Fell hearing of it, sent an Horse for me; but so sore I was with the Bruises I had, that I was not able to bear the shaking of the Horse without much pain. When I was come to Swarthmore,Swarth∣more. Justice Sawrey, and one Justice Thompson of Lan∣caster, granted forth a Warrant against me; but Judge Fell coming home, it was not served upon me: for he was out of the Country all this time, that I was thus abused and cruelly used. But when he came home, he sent forth Warrants into the Isle of Walney, to apprehend all those Riotous Persons: whereupon some of them fled the Country. James Lancaster's Wife was afterwards Convinced of the Truth, and Repented of the Evil she had done me; and so did some others of those bitter Persecutors also: but the Judgments of God fell upon some of them, and Destruction is come upon many of them since. Judge Fell asked me to give him a Relation of my Persecution: but I told him; They could do no otherwise in the Spirit wherein they were; and that they manifested the Fruits of their Priest's Ministry, and their Profession and Religion to be wrong. So he told his Wife, I made no∣thing of it; and that I spake of it as Man, that had not been concerned. For indeed, the Lord's Power healed me again. Yelland.After I was recovered, I went to Yelland, where there was a great Meeting. In the Evening there came a Priest to the House, with a Pistol in his Hand, under pretence to light a Pipe of Tobacco; and the Maid of the House seeing the Pistol, told her Master: who there∣upon clapping his Hands on both the Door-Posts, told him, He should not come in there. And while he stood there, keeping the Door-way, he looked up, and spied over the Wall a Company of Men coming, some armed with Staves, and one with a Musket. But the Lord God prevented their Bloody Design; so that seeing themselves discovered, they went their way, and did no harm. Lancaster.The time for the Sessions at Lancaster being come, I went to Lan∣caster with Judge Fell; who on the way told me, He had never had such a Matter brought before him before, and he could not well tell, what to do in the Business. I told him: when Paul was brought before the Rulers, and the Jews and Priests came down to Accuse him, and laid many false things to his Charge, Paul stood still all that while. And when they had done, Festus the Governour, and King Agrippa beck∣ned to him to speak for himself; which Paul did, and cleared him∣self of all those false Accusations: And so he might do by me. Being come to Lancaster, and Justice Sawrey and Justice Thompson having granted a Warrant to apprehend me; though I was not apprehended by it,Lancaster-Sessions. yet hearing of it, I appeared at the Sessions; where there ap∣peared against me about Forty Priests. These had chosen one Mar∣shal, Priest of Lancaster, to be their Orator; and had provided one young Priest, and two Priests Sons to bear Witness against me; who had sworn before-hand, that I had spoken Blasphemy. When the Justices were set, they heard all, that the Priests and their Witnesses could say and charge against me; their Orator Marshal sitting by, and explaining their Sayings for them: But the Witnesses were so Con∣founded, that they discovered themselves to be false Witnesses. For
when the Court had Examined one of the Witnesses upon Oath,1652. Lancaster-Sessions. and then began to Examin another of them, he was at such loss, he could not Answer directly; but said, the other could say it. Which made the Justices say to him; Have you sworn it, and given it in al∣ready upon your Oath, and now say, That he can say it? It seems, you did not hear those words spoken your self, though you have sworn it. There were then in Court several People, who had been at that Meeting, wherein the Witnesses swore, I spake those blasphemous Words, which the Priests accused me of; and these, being Men of Integrity and Reputation in the Country, did declare and affirm in Court, That the Oath, which the Witnesses had taken against me, was altogether false; and that no such Words, as they had sworn against me, were spoken by me at that Meeting: For indeed, most of the serious Men of that side of the County, that were then at the Sessions, had been at that Meeting, and had heard me both at that Meeting, and at other Meetings also. This was taken notice of by Colonel VVest, who being a Justice of the Peace, was then upon the Bench; and hav∣ing long been weak in Body, blessed the Lord, and said; The Lord had healed him that day: adding, That he never saw so many sober People and good Faces together in all his Life. And then turning himself to me, he said in the open Sessions; George, If thou hast any thing to say to the People, thou may'st freely declare it. And I was moved of the Lord to speak: and as soon as I began, Priest Marshal, the Orator for the rest of the Priests, went his way. That which I was moved to declare, was this: That the Holy Scriptures were given forth by the Spirit of God; and all People must first come to the Spirit of God in themselves, by which they might know God and Christ, of whom the Prophets and the Apostles learnt; and by the same Spirit know the Holy Scriptures: for as the Spirit of God was in them, that gave forth the Scriptures; so the same Spirit of God must be in all them, that come to know and understand the Scriptures. By which Spirit they might have Fellowship with the Son, and with the Father, and with the Scriptures, and with one another: And without this Spirit they can know neither God, nor Christ, nor the Scriptures, nor have right Fellowship one with another. I had no sooner spoken these Words, but about half a dozen Priests, that stood behind my Back, burst out into a passion; and one of them, whose Name was Jackus, amongst other things that he spake against the Truth, said: That the Spirit and the Letter were inseparable. I replied, Then every one, that hath the Letter, hath the Spirit; and they might buy the Spirit with the Letter of the Scriptures. This plain dis∣covery of Darkness in the Priest moved Judge Fell and Colonel VVest to Reprove them openly, and tell them, That according to that Position, they might carry the Spirit in their Pockets, as they did the Scriptures. Upon this the Priests being Confounded and put to silence, rusht out in a Rage against the Justices, because they could not have their bloody Ends upon me. So the Justices, seeing the Witnesses did not agree, and perceiving, that they were brought to Answer the Priests Envy, and finding, that all their Evidences were not sufficient in Law to make good their Charge against me, they discharged me. And after Judge Fell had spoken to Justice Sawrey and Justice Thompson con∣cerning
the VVarrant they had given forth against me, and shewed them the Errors thereof; He and Colonel West granted a Supersedeas, to stop the Execution thereof. Thus was I cleared in open Sessions of all those lying Accusations, which the malicious Priests had laid to my Charge: And Multitudes of People praised God that day; for it was a joyful Day to many. There was Justice Benson out of West∣morland, who was Convinced; and Major Ripan, that was Mayor of the Town of Lancaster, who was Convinced also. It was a day of Everlasting Salvation to hundreds of People: for the Lord Jesus Christ, the Way to the Father, and the free Teacher was exalted and set up, and his Everlasting Gospel was preached, and the Word of Eternal Life was declared over the heads of the Priests, and all such Money-Preachers. For the Lord opened many Mouths that Day to speak his Word to the Priests, and several friendly People and Professors reproved the Priests in their Inns, and in the Streets; so that they fell, like an old rotten House: and the Cry was among the People, That the Quakers had got the day, and the Priests were fallen. Many People were Convinced that day, amongst whom Thomas Briggs was one, who before had been averse from Friends and Truth; inso∣much, that discoursing on a time with John Lawson, a Friend, con∣cerning Perfection, Thomas Briggs said to him, Dost thou hold Per∣fection? and therewithal lift up his Hand, to have given the Friend a Box on the Ear. But this Thomas Briggs, being Convinced of the Truth that day, declared against his own Priest Jackus; and after∣wards became a faithful Minister of the Gospel, and stood so to the End of his Days. When the Sessions were over, James Naylor, who was present thereat, gave a brief Account of the Proceedings thereof in a Letter, which soon after he writ to Friends; which is here added for the Reader's further satisfaction in this Matter: DEar Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, my dear Love unto you all, desiring, you may be kept stedfast in the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the power of his Love, boldly to witness forth the Truth, as it is revealed in you by the mighty working of the Father: To him alone be everlasting Praise and Honour for evermore! Dear Friends, the Lord doth much manifest his Love and Power in these Parts. Upon the second day of the last Week my Brother George and I were at Lancaster: There were abundance of Friends from all parts; and a great sort, which sided with the Priests, giving out, They now hoped to see a stop put to that great Work, which had gone on so fast, and with such Power, that their Kingdom is much shaken. We were called before Judge Fell, Colonel West, Justice Sawrey, &c. to Answer, what was charged against George. There were Three Witnesses to Eight Particulars, but they were much Confused in themselves; which gave much Light to the Truth: whereby the Justices did plainly see, that it was Envy; and they divers times told them so. One of the Witnesses was a young Priest, who Confessed, He had not meddled, had not another Priest sent for him, and set him on Work. The other VVitnesses
were two Priests Sons: It was proved there by many, that heard one of them say; If he had power, he would make George deny his Profession, and that he would take away his Life. This was a single VVitness to one of the greatest Ʋntruths, that was charged against George; And the Justices told him, That they saw, because he could not take away his Life, he went about to take away his Liberty. There was one Priest chosen out of the whole number, as an Orator, to plead against us; who spared no pains to shew forth his Envy against the Truth: And when he could not prevail, he went down in a Rage; and there came up a Pack of them into the Room, among whom was one Jacus. George was then speaking in the Room (one of the Justices having wished him, if he had any thing to say, he would speak:) at which the said Priest Jacus was in such a Rage, that he brake forth into many high Expressions against the Truth spoken by my dear Brother George; amongst which this was one, That the Letter and the Spirit were inseparable. Hereupon the Justices stood up, and bid him, prove that, before he went any further. Then he seeing himself caught, would have denied it; and when he could not get off so, the rest of the Priests would have helped him to a Meaning for his VVords: But the Justices would admit no other Meaning, than the plain sense of the VVords; but told him, He had laid down a Position, and it was fit, he should prove it; pressing the Matter close upon him. Whereupon the Priests, being put to silence, went down in a greater Rage, than before; and some of them, after they were gone down, being asked, what they had done, Lyed and said, They could not get into the Room; thereby to hide their Shame, and keep the People in blindness. The Justices, Judge Fell and Colonel VVest were much Convinced of the Truth, and did set up Justice and Equity; and have much silenced the Rage of the People. Many bitter Spirits were at Lancaster, to see the Event; but went home, and cried: The Priests had lost the day: Everlasting Praises be to him, who fought the Batttel for us, who is our King for ever! There were Others called, who the VVit∣nesses confessed were in the Room, when the things charged on George were said to have been spoken; but they all, as one Man, denied, that any such Words were spoken: Which gave much Light to the Justices, and they durst trust, what they witnessed; for they said, they knew many of them to be honest Men. There was a VVarrant granted out against us at Appleby; but Justice Ben∣son told them, It was not according to Law; and so it ceased: As I hear, he is a faithful Man to the Truth. The Priests began to preach against the Justices, and said; They were not to meddle in these things, but to end Controversy betwixt Neighbour and Neighbour. They are not pleased with the Law, because it is not in the Statute to Imprison us, as the Priest, that pleaded against us, said: The Justices bid him Go put it into the Statute, if he could; he said, It should want no will of his. They are much afraid, that they shall loose all: They are much discontented in these parts; and some of them cry, All is gone. Dear Friends, dwell in Patience, and wait upon the Lord, who will do his own VVork. Look not at Man in the VVork; nor at Man, who opposeth the VVork: but rest in the
Will of the Lord, that so ye may be furnished with Patience, both to do and to suffer, what ye shall be called unto; that your End in all things may be his Praise. And take up his Cross freely, which keeps low the fleshly Man; that Christ may be set up and honoured in all things, and so the Light advanced in you, and the Judgment set up, which must give Sentence against all that opposeth the Truth; That the Captivity may be led Captive, and the Priso∣ner set free to seek the Lord; that Righteousness may rule in you, and Peace and Joy may dwell in you, wherein consisteth the King∣dom of the Father; to whom be all Praise for ever! Dear Friends, Meet often together: and take heed, of what Exalteth it self above its Brother; but keep low, and serve one another in Love for the Lord's sake. Let all Friends know, how it is with us: that God may have the Praise of all. Written from Kellet, the 30th Day of the 8th Month, 1652. J. N. At this Time I was in a Fast; and was not to Eat, until this Work of God, which then lay weighty upon me, was accomplished. But the Lord's Power was wonderfully set over all, and gave Truth and Friends Dominion therein over all, to his Glory: And his Gospel was freely preached that Day, over the Heads of about Forty Hire∣ling-Priests. I stayed Two or Three Days afterwards in Lancaster, and had some Meetings there: And the rude and baser sort of People plotted together to have drawn me out of the House, and to have thrown me over Lancaster-Bridge; but the Lord prevented them. Then they invented another Mischief, which was this: After a Meeting at Lancaster they brought down a distracted Man, and another with him with Bundles of Birchen-Rods, bound together like Besoms, with which they should have whipped me: But I was moved to speak to them i the Lord's mighty Power, which chained down the distra∣cted Man, and the other also; and made them calm and quiet. Then I bi him, throw his Rods into the Fire, and burn them; and he did so. Thus the Lord's Power being over them, they departed quietly. But the Priests, fretting to see themselves overthrown at the Sessi∣ons at Lancaster, got some of the Envious Justices to join with them; and at the following Assize at Lancaster informed Judge Windham against me. Whereupon the Judge made a Speech against me in open Court; and commanded Colonel West, who was Clerk of the Assize, to issue forth a Warrant for the apprehending of me: But Colonel West told the Judge of my Innocency, and spake boldly in my defence. Yet the Judge commanded him again, either to write a Warrant, or go off from his Seat: Then he told the Judge plainly, that he would not do it; but that he would offer up all his Estate, and his Body also for me. So he stopt the Judge; and the Lord's Power came over all: So that the Priests and Justices could not get their Envy executed. That same Night I came into Lancaster, it being the Assize-Time: and hearing of a Warrant to be given out against me, I judged it better to shew my self openly,Lancaster Assize. than for my Adversaries to seek me. So I went to Judge Fell's and Colonel West's Chambers: And as soon as I
came in, they smiled on me; and Colonel West said, What!1652. Lancaster Assize. are you come into the Dragon's Mouth? I stayed in Town, till the Judge went out of Town; and I walked up and down the Town, but no one meddled with me, nor questioned me. Thus the Lord's blessed Power, which is over all, caed me through and over this Exercise; and gave Dominion over his Enemies, and enabled me to go on in his glo∣rious Work and Service for his great Name's-sake. For though the Beast maketh War against the Saints; yet the Lamb hath got, and will get the Victory. From Lancaster I returned to Robert Wither's, and from thence I went to Thomas Leper's to a Meeting in the Evening;Meeting at T. Le∣pers. and a very blessed Meeting we had there. After the Meeting was done, I walk∣ed in the Evening to Robert Withers's again. And no sooner was I gone, but there came a Company of disguised Men to Thomas Leper's with Swords and Pistols; who suddenly entring the House, put out the Candles, and swung their Swords about amongst the People of the House; so that the People were fain to hold up the Chairs before them, to save themselves from being cut and wounded. At length they drove all the People of the House out of the House, and then searched the House for me; who, it seems, was the only Person they looked for: for they had laid wait before in the High-way, by which I should have gone, if I had ridden to Robert Withers's. And not meeting with me on the VVay, they thought to have found me in the House; but the Lord prevented them. Soon after I was come in at Robert Withers, some Friends came from the Town, where Thomas Leper lived, and gave us a Relation of this wicked Attempt: And the Friends were afraid, lest they should come, and search Robert Withers's House also for me, and do me a Mischief: But the Lord restrained them, that they came not. Though these Men were in disguise; yet the Friends perceived some of them to be French-men, and supposed them to be Servants belong∣ing to one called Sir Robert Bindlas: For some of them had said, that in their Nation they used to Tye the Protestants to Trees, and whip them, and destroy them. And his Servants used often to abuse Friends, both in their Meetings, and going to and from their Meetings. They once took Richard Hubberthorn and several others out of the Meeting, and carried them a good way off into the Fields; and there bound them, and left them bound in the Winter-Season. And at another Time one of his Servants came to Francis Flemming's House, and thrust his naked Rapier in at the Door and Windows: But there being at the House a Kinsman of Francis Flemming's, one who was not a Friend, he came with a Cudgel in his Hand, and bid the Serving∣man put up his Rapier: which when the other would not, but va∣poured at him with it, and was Rude; he knock'd him down with his Cudgel, and took his Rapier from him: And had it not been for Friends, he would have Run him through with it. So the Friends preserved his Life, that would have destroyed theirs. From Robert Withers's I went to visit Justice West,To Justice Wests, o∣ver the Sands. Richard Hub∣berthorn accompanying me. And not knowing the Way, nor the Danger of the Sands, we Rid, where (as we were afterwards told) no Man ever rid before; swimming our Horses over a very dangerous Place. When we were come in, Justice West asked us, If we did
not see Two Men riding over the Sands?Justice Wests. I shall have their Cloaths anon, said he, for they cannot escape Drowning; and I am the Coroner. But when we told him, that we were the Men, be was astonished at it; and wondred, how we escaped Drowning. Upon this the envi∣ous Priests and Professors raised a slanderous Report concerning me, That neither Water could drown me, nor could they draw Blood of me; and that therefore surely I was a Witch (for indeed, sometimes when they beat me with great Staves, they did not much draw my Blood, though they bruised my Body oft-times very sorely.) But all these Slanders were nothing to me with respect to my self, (though I was concerned on the Truth's behalf, which, I saw, they endeavoured by these Means to prejudice People against) for I considered, that their fore-Fathers, the Apostate-Jews, called the Master of the House Beelzebub; and these Apostate-Christians from the Life and Power of God, could do no less to his Seed. But the Lord's Power carried me over their Slanderous Tongues, and their bloody, murtherous Spirits; who had the Ground of Witchcraft in themselves, which kept them from coming to God and to Christ. Having visited Justice West, I went to Swarthmore, visiting Friends there-aways;Swarth∣more. and the Lord's Power was over all the Persecutors there. And I was moved to write several Letters to the Magistrates, Priests and Professors there-abouts, who had raised Persecution be∣fore. That which I sent to Justice Sawrey, was after this manner: Friend, THOU wast the first Beginner of all the Persecution in the North: Thou wast the Beginner and the Maker of the Peo∣ple Tumultuous: Thou wast the first Stirrer of them up against the Righteous Seed, and against the Truth of God; and wast the first strengthner of the Hands of Evil-doers against the Innocent and Harmless: And thou shalt not prosper. Thou wast the first Stirrer up of Strikers, Stoners, Persecutors, Stockers, Mockers and Impri∣soners in the North, and of Revilers, Slanderers, Railers and false Accusers, and Scandal-Raisers: This was thy Work, and this thou stirredst up! So thy Fruits declare thy Spirit. Instead of stirring up the pure Mind in People, thou hast stirred up the VVicked, Malici∣ous and Envious; and taken Hand with the Wicked. Thou hast made the People's Minds envious up and down the Country: This was thy Work. But God hath shortned thy Days, and limited thee, and set thy Bounds, and broken thy Jaws, and discovered thy Reli∣gion to the Simple and Babes, and brought thy Deeds to Light. How is thy Habitation fallen, and become the Habitation of Devils! How is thy Beauty lost, and thy Glory withered! How hast thou shewed thy End, that thou hast served God but with thy Lips, and thy Heart far from him, and thou in the Hypocrisy! How hath the Form of thy Teaching declared it self to be the Mark of the false Prophets, whose Fruit declares it self! for by their Fruits they are known. How are the Wise Men turned backward! View thy Ways, and take notice, with whom thou hast taken part. That of God in
thy Conscience will tell thee:1652. Swarth∣more. The Ancient of Days will reprove thee. How hath thy Zeal appeared to be the Blind Zeal; a Perse∣cutor, which Christ and his Apostles forbad Christians to follow! How hast thou strengthened the Hands of Evil-doers, and been a Praise to them, and not to them that do well! How like a Mad∣man, and a Blind-man didst thou turn thy Sword backward against the Saints, against whom there is no Law! How wilt thou be gnawed and burned one Day, when thou shalt feel the Flame and have the Plagues of God poured upon thee, and thou begin to gnaw thy Tongue for Pain, because of the Plagues! Thou shalt have thy Reward according to thy Works: Thou canst not escape; the Lord's righteous Judgment will find thee out, and the Witness of God in thy Conscience shall answer it. How hast thou caused the Heathen to Blaspheme, and gone on with the Multitude to do Evil, and joined hand in hand with the wicked! How is thy latter End worse than thy Beginning, who art come with the Dog to bite, and art turned as a Wolf, to devour the Lambs! How hast thou discovered thy self to be a Man more fit to be kept in a place to be nurtured, than to be set in a Place to nurture! How wast thou exalted and puffed up with Pride! And now art thou fallen down with Shame, that thou comest to be covered with that, which thou stirredst up, and broughtest forth. Let not John Sawrey take the VVords of God into his Mouth, till he be Reformed: Let him not take his Name into his Mouth, till he depart from Iniquity. Let not him and his Teacher make a Profession of the Saints VVords, except they intend to proclaim themselves Hypocrites, whose Lives are so contrary to the Lives of the Saints; whose Church hath made it self manifest to be a Cage of Ʋnclean Birds. You having a Form of Godliness, but not the Power, have made them that be in the Power, your Derision, your By-word, and your Talk at your Feasts. Thy ill Savour, John Sawrey, the Country about have smelled, and of thy unchristian Car∣riage all that fear God have been ashamed; and to them thou hast been a Grief: In the Day of Account thou shalt know it, even in the Day of thy Condemnation. Thou wast mounted up, and hadst set thy Nest on high; but never gottest higher, than the Fowls of the Air: But now thou art run amongst the Beasts of Prey, and art fal∣len into the Earth; so that Earthliness and Covetousness hath swal∣lowed thee up: and thy Conceitedness would not carry thee through, in whom was found the selfish Principle, which hath blinded thy Eye. Thy Back must be bowed down always; for thy Table is already become thy Snare. G. F. This Justice Sawrey, who was the first Persecutor in that Country, was afterward drowned. I writ also to VVilliam Lampit, who was the Priest of Ʋlverston; and thus it was upon me to write unto him:
THE Word of the Lord to thee, O Lampitt! who art a De∣ceiver, surfetted and drunk with the Earthly Spirit, rambling up and down in the Scriptures, and blending thy Spirit amongst the Saints Conditions; who hadst a Prophecy, as thy Father Balaam had, but art erred from it, as thy Father did: One whose Fruit hath withered (of which I am a Witness;) and many who have known thy Fruit, have seen the End of it, that it is withered: and do see, where thou art, in the blind World, a blind Leader of the Blind; a Beast wallowing and tumbling in the Earth, and in the Lust, one that is erred from the Spirit of the Lord; who art of old or∣dained for Condemnation: Who art in the Seat of the Pharisees, art called of Men Master, standest Praying in the Synagogues, and hast the Chief Seat in the Assemblies; a right Hypocrite in the steps of the Pharisees, and in the way of thy Fathers, the Hypocrites, which our Lord Jesus Christ cried Wo against. Such with the Light thou art seen to be, and by the Light art Comprehended: which is thy Condemnation, who hatest it; and will be so Eternally, except thou Repent. To thee this is the Word of God: for in Christ's Way thou art not, but in the Pharisees; as thou may stread, Mat. 23. and all that own Christ's Words, may see thee there. Christ who died at Jerusalem, cried Wo against such as thou art; and Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. The Wo remains upon thee, and from under it thou canst never come; but through Judg∣ment, Condemnation and true Repentance. To thee this is the VVord of God: To that of God in thy Conscience I do speak, which will witness the Truth, of what I write, and will Condemn thee. And when thou art in thy Torment (though now thou swellest in thy Vanity, and livest in Wickedness) remember, thou wast warned in thy Life-time, when the Eternal Condemnation is stretched over thee, thou shalt witness this to be the VVord of the Lord God unto thee. And if ever thy Eye should see Repentance, thou would'st witness me to have been a Friend of thy Soul. G. F. Having thus cleared my Conscience to the Justice, and to the Priest of Ʋlverstone, who had raised the first Persecution in that Country; it was upon me to send this VVarning in Writing to the People of Ʋl∣verstone in general. COnsider, O People! who be within the Parish of Ʋlverston; I was moved of the Lord to come into your Publick Places to speak among you, being sent of God to direct your Minds to God, that you might know, where you might find your Teacher; that your Minds might be stayed alone upon God, and you might not gad abroad without you for a Teacher: for the Lord God alone will Teach his People, and he is coming to Teach them, and to gather his
People from Idols-Temples, and from the customary Worships, which all the World is trained up in. And God hath given to every one of you a Measure of his Spirit according to your Capa∣city; Liars, Drunkards, Whoremongers and Thieves, and who fol∣low filthy Pleasures, you all have this Measure in you. And this is the Measure of the Spirit of God, that shews you Sin, and shews you Evil, and shews you Deceit; which lets you see Lying is Sin, Theft, Drunkenness and Ʋncleanness, all these to be the Works of Darkness. Therefore mind your Measure (for nothing that is Un∣clean, shall enter into the Kingdom of God) and prize your Time, while you have it; lest the Time come, that you say with Sorrow, We had Time, but it is past. Oh, why will ye die! Why will ye chuse your own Ways! Why will ye follow the Course of the World! and why will ye follow Envy, Malice, Drunkenness and foolish Pleasures! Know ye not in your Consciences, that all these are Evil and Sin? and that such as act such things, shall ne∣ver enter into the Kingdom of God? Oh that ye would Consider, and see, how you have spent your Time, and mind, how ye do spend your Time, and observe, whom ye do serve: for the Wages of Sin is Death. Do not ye know, that whatsoever is more than Yea and Nay, cometh of Evil? Oh ye Drunkards, who live in Drunkenness, do ye think to escape the Fire and the Judgment of God! Though ye swell in Venom, and live in Lust for a while; yet God will find you out, and bring you to Judgment. Therefore love the Light, which Christ hath enlightened you withal, who saith, I am the Light of the World; and who doth enlighten every one, that cometh into the World. One loves the Light, and brings his Works to the Light, and there is no occasion at all of stumbling: the other hates the Light, because his Deeds are Evil, and the Light will reprove him. Thou that hatest this Light, thou hast it: Thou knowest, Lying is Evil, Drunkenness is Evil, Swearing is Evil; Whoredom, Theft and all Ʋngodliness, and all Ʋnrighteous∣ness is Evil: Christ Jesus hath given thee Light enough to let thee see, this is Evil. And this Light (if thou lovest it) will teach thee Holiness and Righteousness, without which none shall see God: but if thou hatest this Light, it is thy Condemnation. And thus are Christ's Words found to be true, and fulfilled among you: You that hate this Light, set up Hirelings, and Idols-Tem∣ples; and such Priests, as bear rule by their means; and such Shepherds as hold up such things; and such as are called of Men Masters, and have the chiefest Place in the Assemblies, whom Christ cried Wo against; Matt. 23. And such as go in the way of Cain, in Envy; and after the Error of Balaam for Wages, Gifts and Rewards; These have been your Teachers, and these you have held up. But who love the Light, are taught of God; and the Lord is coming to teach his People himself, and to gather his from the Hirelings, and from such as seek for their Gain from their Quarter, and from such as bear Rule by their Means: The Lord is opening the Eyes of foolish People, that they shall see such, as bear Rule over them. But all, whose Eyes are shut, are such as the Pro∣phet spake of, That have Eyes, and see not; but are foolish, upholding
such things. Therefore, poor People, as ye love your own Souls, consider the Love of God to your Souls, while ye have time; and do not turn the Grace of God into Wantonness. That which shews you Ʋngodliness and worldly Lusts, that should and would be your Teacher, if ye would hearken to it; for the Saints of Old witnessed the Grace of God to be their Teacher, which taught them to live Soberly and Godly in this present World. And ye that are not sober, this Grace of God hath appeared unto you; but you turn it into Wantonness, and so set up Teachers without you, who are not sober, not holy, not godly. Here you are left without Excuse, when the Righteous Judgment of God shall be revealed upon you all, who live Ungodlily. Therefore to the Light in you I speak; and when the Book of Conscience shall come to be opened, then shall you Wit∣ness, what I say to be true, and you all shall be judged out of it. So God Almighty direct your Minds (such of you especially, as love Honesty and Sincerity) that you may receive Mercy in the time of Need. Your Teacher is within you; look not forth: It will Teach you both lying in Bed, and going Abroad, to shun all Occasion of Sin and Evil. G. F. As the foregoing was directed To all the Inhabitants of Ulverston in general; so it was upon me to write also to those more particularly, that did most constantly follow W. Lampitt the Priest there. And unto these I writ thus: THE Word of the Lord God to all the People, that follow Priest Lampitt, who is a blind Guide. Ye are such, as are turned from the Light of Christ within, which he hath enlightned you withal: Ye are such, as follow that which Christ cried Wo against, that goes not in Christ's Way, but in the Pharisees Way; as ye may read Matt. 23. which our Lord Jesus Christ cried Wo against. He is the same yesterday, to day and for ever: but him ye own not, while ye follow such, as he cried Wo against; though under a Colour ye make a Profession, and Lampitt, your Priest, makes a Trade of Christ's and the Saint's Words, as his Fathers the Pharisees did make a Profession of the Prophets Words, and of Moses his Words. Wo was unto them, who had not the Life: so VVo is unto you, who have not the Life, that gave forth the Scri∣ptures; as your Fruits have made manifest. For when the Lord hath moved some to come amongst you, to preach the Truth freely, you have knock'd them down, beat, and punch'd and haled them out of your Assemblies. Such a People serves thee, O Lampitt, to make a prey upon; and these are thy Fruits: O let Shame, Shame strike thee and you all in the Faces, who make a Profession of Christ's Words, thou and they; and yet are Stoners, and Strikers, and Mockers, and Scoffers. Let all see, if this be not a Cage of Ʋnclean Birds spoken of in the Scriptures, which they, who had the Life of
the Scriptures spake of. And such a Company of People thou deceivest, and feedest them with thy Fancies, and makest a Trade of the Scriptures, and takest them for thy Cloak. But thou art manifest to all the Children of Light: for that Cloak will not cover thee; but thy Skirts are seen, and thy Nakedness appears. And the Lord made one to go Naked among you, a Figure of thy Nakedness, and of your Nakedness, and as a Sign amongst you, be∣fore your destruction cometh; that you might see, that you were Naked, and not covered with the Truth. To the Light in all your Consciences I do speak, which Christ Jesus doth enlighten you with∣al: It will shew you the Time you have spent, and all your Evil Deeds you have done in that Time; who follow such a Teacher, that acts contrary to this Light, and leads you into the Ditch. And when you are in the Ditch together, both Teacher and People, re∣member, ye were warned in your Life time. And if ever your Eye come to see Repentance, and you obey the Light of Jesus Christ in you, you will witness me to have been a Friend of your Souls, and that I have sought your Eternal Good, and written this in dear Love to you. And then will you own your Condemnation; which you must all own, before ye can come into that blessed Life, of which there is no End. But ye, who hate the Light, because your Deeds are evil, this Light is your Condemnation, and will be: And when your Condemnation is come upon you, remember, ye were warned. O that ye would love this Light, and hearken to it! It would teach you, both as you walk up and down about your Occasions, and as you lie upon your Beds, and would never let you speak a vain VVord: In loving it, you love Christ; in hating it, you bring the Condemnation thereof upon your selves. And to you this is the VVord of God, from under which you can never pass, nor ever escape the Terror of the Lord in the state you are in, who hate the Light. G. F. Amongst those, who were the Chief Hearers and Followers of this Priest Lampitt of Ʋlverston, there was one Adam Sands, who was a very wicked, false Man, and would have destroyed Truth and its Followers, if he could: To him I was moved to write thus: Adam Sands, TO the Light in the Conscience I appeal, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of Righteousness; the Lord will strike thee down! though now for a while in thy wickedness thou may'st Reign: And the Plagues of God are due to thee, who hardenest thy self in thy wickedness against the pure Truth of God. With the pure Truth of God, which thou hast resisted and persecuted, thou art to be threshed down, which is Eternal, and doth Comprehend thee: and with the Light, which thou despisest, thou art seen;
and it is thy Condemnation. Thou as one bruitish, and thy VVife, as an Hypocrite, and you both, as Murderers of the Just, in that which is Eternal, are seen and comprehended; and your Hearts searched and tried, and condemned by the Light. The Light in thy Consci∣ence will witness the Truth, of what I write to thee; and will let thee see, that thou art not born of God, but art from the Truth, in the Beastly Nature: And if ever thy Eye see Repentance, thou wilt witness me a Friend of thy Soul, and a seeker of thy Eter∣nal Good. G. F. This Adam Sands afterwards died miserably. I was moved also to write to Priest Tatham. THE Word of the Lord to thee, Priest Tatham, who art found out of the Doctrine of Christ; having the chiefest Place in the Assembly, and being called of Men Master, and standing Praying in the Synagogue in the Steps of the Pharisees, which our Lord Jesus Christ cried VVo against. In his VVay thou art not; but in the Way of the Scribes and Pharisees: as thou mayest read, Matth. 23. There Christ's VVords Judge thee, and the Scriptures of Truth Condemn thee. For thou art such an one, as sues Men at the Law for Tithes, and yet professest thy self to be a Minister of Christ; which Christ never impowered his to do: Neither did any of his Apostles or Ministers ever do so. Here I charge thee in the presence of the Living God to be out of their Doctrine; and that thou art one of those evil Beasts the Scripture speaks of, that mindest Earth∣ly Things, which the Life of the Scriptures is against. Thou art for Destruction in the State wherein thou standest; and it will be thy Portion eternally, if thou dost not Repent. To that of God in thy Conscience I speak, which will witness the Truth, of what I say. Thou art one, that goest in Cain's Way, in Envy, an Enemy to God, and from the Command of God: Thou art one that goest in Balaam's Way, from the Spirit of God, for Gifts and Rewards, the Wages of Unrighteousness. Thou Son of Balaam, thou art worse than thy Father: for though he loved the VVages of Ʋnrigh∣teousness, yet he durst not take it; but thou not only takest it, but suest Men at the Law, if they will not give it thee: which never did Minister of Jesus Christ. Therefore stop thy Mouth for ever, and never make mention of them, or profess thy self one of them: With the Light thou art seen and comprehended; who art light and vain, and speakest a Divination of thy own Brain, and deceivest the People. That in thy Conscience will witness what I say, and will Condemn thee; who art one that bearest Rule by thy Means, which the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry against, Jer. 5. and so thou holdest up the horrible and filthy thing, that is committed in the Land. And they, that do not Tremble at the VVord of the Lord, they are the
foolish People, that hold thee up; they are sottish Children, and have no Understanding: They are Wise to do Evil, but not to do Good; who are deceived by thee. And such an one thou art, that seekest for thy Gain from thy Quarter; a greedy dumb Dog, that never hath enough, as thy Practice makes manifest; which the Lord sent Isaiah to cry against, Isa. 56.11, 12. And thou art such an one, as the Lord sent Ezekiel to cry against, who feedest of the Fat, and Clothest with the VVooll, and makest a Prey upon the People. But the Lord is gathering his Sheep from thy Mouth, that to thee they shall be a Prey no longer. Thou Enemy of God, here this Prophecy is fulfilled upon thee, Ezek. 34. and thou art one of them; I charge it upon thee in the presence of the living God: A Hireling thou art; and they that put not into thy Mouth, thou preparest War against them. Thou hatest the Good, and lovest the Evil; which the Lord sent Micah to cry against, Mic. 3. Cover thy Lips, and stop thy Mouth for ever, thou Child of Darkness: for with the Light thou art comprehended, and seen to be among them, which the holy Men of God cryed W O against; and by the Spirit of the living God thou art judged. In the Light, which is thy Condemnation, thou art comprehended; thy Race is seen, and thy Compass known, who art out of the Commands of Christ, and out of the Doctrine and Life of the Apostles. Thou art proved and tryed, and to thee this is the VVord of the Lord, and to thee it shall be as an Hammer, a Fire and a Sword; and from under it thou shalt never come, un∣less thou Repent; who art with the Light to be Condemned, in that State wherein thou standest. And if ever thy Eye see Repentance, this thy Condemnation thou must own. G. F. I writ also to — Burton, Priest of Sedbergh, much what to the same purpose; he being in the same evil Ground, Nature and Practice, which the other Priests were in. Many other Epistles also and Pa∣pers I writ about that Time, as the Lord moved me thereunto, which I sent abroad among the Priests, Professors and People of all sorts, for the laying their Evil ways open before them, that they might see and forsake them; and opening the Way of Truth unto them, that they might come to walk therein: which are too many and large, to be inserted in this Place. Now after I had cleared my Conscience at that Time, to the Priests and People in those Parts near Swarthmore, I went again into Westmorland.Westmor∣land. And a Company of Men with Pikes and Staves laid wait for me at a Bridge in the Way; and they light on some Friends, but missed me. Afterwards they came to the Meeting with their Pikes and Staves: But Justice Benson being there, and many consi∣derable People besides, they were prevented from doing that Mis∣chief they intended. So they went away in a great Rage, but did not hurt any Body.
1652. Grayrigg.I went from the Meeting to Grayrigge, and had a Meeting there at Alexander Dixon's House; where the Priest (who was a Baptist, and a Chappel-Priest) came to the Meeting to oppose: but the Lord Con∣founded him by his Power. And some of the Priest's People tum∣bled down some Milk-Pales, which stood upon the Side of the House (the House being much crowded;) whereupon the Priest, after he and his Company were gone away, raised a Slander, That the Devil frighted him, and took away a Side of the House, while he was in the Meeting. And though this was an apparent and known Falshood, yet it served the Priests and Professors to feed on for a while: And so shameless they were, that they Printed it in a Book. Another Time this Priest came to another Meeting, and fell to Jan∣gling. First he said, The Scriptures were the Word of God. I told him: They were the Words of God, but not Christ, who is the Word; and bid him, prove by Scripture, what he said. Then he said, It was not the Scripture, that was the Word: and setting his Foot upon the Bible, he said; It was but Copies bound up together. Ma∣ny unsavory Words came from him: But after he was gone, we had a blessed Meeting; and the Lord's Power and Presence was preciously manifested and felt among us. Soon after he sent me a Challenge to meet him at Kendal: I sent him Word, He need not go so far as Kendal, for I would meet him in his own Parish. So the Hour being set, we Met, and abundance of rude People were gathered there toge∣ther (besides the baptized People, who were his own Members:) and they had intended to have done Mischief that Day; but God pre∣vented them. Now when we were Met, I declared the Day of the Lord to them; and directed them to Christ Jesus. Then the Priest out with his Bible, and said; It was the VVord of God. I told him it was the VVords of God; but not God, the VVord. His Answer was, He would prove the Scriptures to be the God, before all the Peo∣ple. So I let him go on, having a Man there, that could take down in writing, both what he said, and what I said. And when he could not prove it (for I kept him to Scripture-Proof, Chapter and Verse for it) the People gnashed their Teeth for Anger; and said, He would have me anon: But in going about to prove that one Error, he run into many. And when at length he saw, he could not prove it; then he said, He would prove it a God: So he toiled himself afresh, till he sweat again; but could not Prove, what he had Affirmed. And he and his Company were full of wrath: For I kept his Assertions on the Head of him and them all; and told them, I owned, what the Scri∣ptures said of themselves, namely, That they were the Words of God; but Christ was the Word. So the Lord's Power came over all; and they being confounded, went away, and the Lord disappointed their mischievous Intentions against me: and Friends were established in Christ, and many of the Priests Followers saw the Folly of their Teacher. After this, as I came through the Country visiting Friends, Priest Bennet of Cartmel sent a Challenge to dispute with me. Whereupon I came to his Steeple-house on the First-Day, and there found him Preach∣ing. When he had done, I spake to him and his People; but the Priest would not stand the Trial, but went his Way. After he was
gone, I had a great deal of Discourse with the People: And when I was come forth into the Steeple-house-yard, and was discoursing fur∣ther with the Professors, and declaring Truth unto them; One of them set his foot behind me, and Two of them ran against my Breast, and threw me down backwards against a Grave-stone, wickedly and maliciously, seeking to have spoiled me. But I got up again, and was moved of the Lord to speak to them. Then I went up to the Priest's House, and desired him to come forth, that I might discourse with him; seeing he had Challenged me: But he would not at all come out, or be seen. So the Lord's Power came over them all, which was greatly manifested at that Time. There was amongst the Priest's Hearers one Richard Roper, one of the bitterest Professors the Priest had; and he was very fierce and hot in his Contention: but after∣wards he came to be Convinced of God's Eternal Truth, and became a Minister thereof; and continued faithful to his Death. It was now about the beginning of the Year 1653,  when I re∣turned to Swarthmore: And going to a Meeting at Gleeston,Swarth∣more. a Pro∣fessor there challenged a Dispute with me. Whereupon I went to the House, where he was, and called him to come forth: but the Lord's Power was over him, so that he durst not meddle. Then I departed thence, and went and visited the Meetings of Friends in Lancashire,Lancashire and so came back to Swarthmore again.Swarth∣more. And great Openings I had from the Lord, not only of Divine and Spiritual Matters, but also of Outward Things, relating to the Civil Government. For being one Day in Swarthmore-Hall, when Judge Fell and Justice Benson were talking of the News in the News-Book, and of the Parliament that then was sitting (which was called the Long-Parliament) I was moved to tell them; That before that Day Two Weeks the Parliament should be broken up, and the Speaker pluck'd out of his Chair. And that Day Two Weeks Justice Benson coming thither again, told Judge Fell, That now he saw, George was a true Prophet; for Oliver had broken up the Parliament by that Time. About this Time I was in a Fast for about Ten Days, my Spirit being greatly exercised on Truth's behalf: for James Milner and Richard Myer went out into Imaginations, and a Company followed them. This James Milner, and some of his Company had true Openings at the first, but getting up into Pride and Exaltation of Spirit, they run out from Truth. I was sent for to them, and was moved of the Lord to go, and shew them their Goings forth: And they came to see their Folly, and Condemned it; and came into the Way of Truth again. After some Time I went to a Meeting at Arn-side,Arnside. where Richard Myer was. Now he had been long Lame of one of his Arms: And I was moved of the Lord to say unto him amongst all the People. Prophet Myer, stand up upon thy Legs (for he was sitting down:) And he stood up, and stretched out his Arm, that had been Lame a long time, and said; Be it known unto you, all People, that this Day I am healed. But his Parents could hardly believe it; but after the Meeting was done, had him aside, and took off his Doublet: and then they saw, it was true.Swarth∣more. He came soon after to Swarthmore-Meet∣ing, and there declared, how that the Lord had healed him. Yet after this the Lord commanded him to go to York with a Message
from him;1653. Swarthm. and he disobeyed the Lord: and the Lord struck him again, so that he died about three quarters of a Year after. Now were great Threatnings given forth in Cumberland, That if ever I came there again, they would take away my Life. When I heard it,Cumberland I was drawn to go into Cumberland again; and went to one Miles Wennington's, in the same Parish, from which those Threatnings came: but they had not Power to touch me then. Much about this Time too it was, that Anthony Pearson was Con∣vinced, who had been an Opposer of Friends. He came over to Swarthmore; and I being then at Colonel West's, they sent for me: and Colonel West said; Go, George, for it may be of great Service to the Man. So I went, and the Lord's Power reached him. About this Time also the Lord opened several Mouths to declare the Truth to Priests and People; so that divers were cast into Prison. And I went again into Cumberland, and Anthony Pearson and his Wife, and several Friends went along with me to Bootle,Bootle. where Anthony Pearson left me; and went on himself to Carlisle-Sessions: for he was a Ju∣stice of the Peace in Three Counties. Upon the First Day of the week I went into the Steeple-house at Bootle; and when the Priest had done, I began to speak. But the People were exceeding rude, and struck and beat me in the Steeple-house-yard: One gave me a very great blow over my Wrist, so that the People thought, he had bro∣ken my Hand to Pieces. The Constable was very willing to have kept the Peace, and would have set some of them by the Heels, that struck me, if I would have given way to it. After my Service at that time amongst them was over, I went to Joseph Nicholson's House; and the Constable went a little way with us, to keep off the rude Multitude from us. In the Afternoon I went up again; and then the Priest had got another Priest to help him, one that came from London, and was highly accounted of. Before I went into the Steeple-house, I sate a little upon the Cross, and Friends with me; but the Friends were moved to go into the Steeple-house, and I went in after them. The London-priest was preaching; who gathered up all the Scriptures he could think of, that spake of false Prophets, and Antichrists, and Deceivers, and threw them upon us: But when he had done, I Re∣collected all those Scriptures, and brought them back upon himself. Then the People fell upon me in a rude manner; but the Constable charged them to keep the Peace, and so made them quiet again. Then the Priest began to Rage, and said; I must not speak there: I told him, he had his Hour-Glass, by which he had preached; and he having done, the Time was free for me, as well as for him: for he was but a Stranger there himself. So I opened the Scriptures to them, and let them see, That those Scriptures, that spake of the false Prophets, and Antichrists and Deceivers, described them and their Generation, and belonged to them, who were found walking in their Steps, and bringing forth their Fruits; and not unto us, who were not guilty of such things. And I manifested to them, that they were out of the Steps of the true Prophets and Apostles; and shewed them clearly by the Fruits and Marks, that they were of those, whom those Scri∣ptures spake of, and not we. And I declared the Truth, and the Word of Life to the People, and directed them to Christ their
Teacher. And all was quiet, while I was speaking:1653. Bootel. But when I had done, and was come forth, the Priests were both of them in such a Fret and Rage, that they foamed at the Mouth for Anger against me. The Priest of the Place made an Oration to the People in the Steeple-house-Yard, and said; This Man hath gotten all the honest Men and Women in Lancashire to him; and now, said he, he comes here to do the same. Then said I unto him, What wilt thou have left? And what have the Priests left them, but such as themselves? For if it be the Honest, that receive the Truth, and are turned to Christ; then it must be the Dishonest, that follow thee, and such as thou art. Some also of the Priest's People did begin to plead for their Priest, and for Tithes. But I told them, It were better for them to plead for Christ, who had ended the Tithing-Priesthood and the Tithes, and had sent forth his Ministers to give freely, as they had received freely. So the Lord's Power came over them all, and put them to Silence; and restrained the rude People, that they could not do the Mischief they intended. And when I came down again to Joseph Nicholson's House, I saw a great hole in my Coat, which was cut with a Knife; but it was not cut through my Doublet, for the Lord had prevented their Mischief. And the next day there was a rude, wicked Man would have done Violence to a Friend; but the Lord's Power stopt him. Now was I moved to send James Lancaster, to Appoint a Meeting at one John VVilkinson's Steeple-house near Cockermouth; who was a Preacher in great repute, and had three Parishes under him; where∣fore I staid at Milholm in Bootel, till he came back again. In the mean time some of those they called the Gentry of the Country, had made a Plot against me, and had given a little Boy a Rapier, for him to do me a Mischief with it. And they came with the Boy to Joseph Nicholson's House to seek me: but the Lord had so ordered it, that I was not in the House, but was gone forth into the Fields. They met with James Lancaster, but did not much abuse him; and not finding me in the House, after a while they went away again. So I walked up and down in the Fields that Night, and did not go to Bed; as very often I used to do.Meeting near Cock∣ermouth. The next Morning we passed from thence, and came the next day to the Steeple-house, where James Lan∣caster had appointed the Meeting. There were at this Meeting Twelve Soldiers and their VVives, who were come thither from Carlisle; and the Country-People came in, like as it had been to a Fair. I lay at an House somewhat short of the Place, so that many Friends were got thither before me. And when I came there, I found James Lancaster speaking under a Yew-Tree; which was so full of People, that I feared, they would break it down. I looked about for a place to stand upon, to speak unto the People: for they lay all up and down, like People at a Leaguer. But after a while, that I was dis∣covered, a Professor came to me and asked; If I would not go into the Church? I seeing, there was no place abroad convenient to speak to the People from, told him, Yes: Whereupon the People rushed in; so that when I came in, the House and Pulpit was so full of People, that I had much ado to get in: and they that could not get in, stood
abroad about the VValls.1653. A Meeting near Cock∣ermouth. When the People were settled, I stood up upon a Seat: And the Lord opened my Mouth to declare his Ever∣lasting Truth, and his Everlasting Day; and to lay open all their Teachers, and their Rudiments, Traditions and Inventions, that they had been in, in the Night of Apostacy since the Apostles days: And I turned them to Christ the true Teacher, and to the true, Spiritual VVorship; directing them, where to find the Spirit and Truth, that they might Worship God therein. I opened Christ's Parables unto them, and directed them to the Spirit of God in themselves, that would open the Scriptures unto them. And I shewed them, how all might come to know their Saviour, and sit under his Teach∣ing; and come to be Heirs of the Kingdom of God, and know both God's and Christ's Voice, by which they might discover all the false Shepherds and Teachers they had been under, and be gathered to the true Shepherd, Priest, Bishop and Prophet Christ Jesus, whom God commanded all to hear. So when I had largely declared the VVord of Life unto them, for about the space of three Hours, I walked forth from amongst the People, and the People passed away very well sa∣tisfied. Among the rest a Professor followed me, praising and com∣mending me; and his Words were like a Thistle to me: At last I turned about, and bid him, Fear the Lord: Whereupon one, Priest Larkham of Cockermouth (for several Priests were got together on the Way, who came, after the Meeting was done) said to me, Sir, why do you judge so? you must not judge, said he. But I turned to him and said, Friend, dost not thou discern an Exhortation from a Judg∣ment? for I admonished him to fear God; and dost thou say, I judge him? So this Priest and I falling into Discourse, I manifested him to be amongst the false Prophets and covetous Hirelings. And several People being moved to speak unto them, he and two other of the Priests soon got away. When they were gone, John VVilkinson (who was Preacher of that Parish, and of two other Parishes in Cum∣berland) began to dispute against his own Conscience for several hours, till the People generally turned against him: for he thought to have Tired me out; but the Lord's Power tired him out, and the Lord's Truth came over him and them all. And Many hundreds were Con∣vinced that day, and received the Lord Jesus Christ, and his free Teaching with Gladness; of whom some have died in the Truth, and many stand there faithful Witnesses thereof. The Souldiers also were Convinced, and their VVives; and continued with me, till the First-day. Cockermouth.On the First-day I went to the Steeple-house at Cockermouth, where Priest Larkham lived: And when the Priest had done, I began to speak; and the People began to be Rude: but the Souldiers told them, We had broken no Law; and then they were quiet. Then I turned me to the Priest, and laid him open among the false Prophets and Hirelings: At which word the Priest went his way, and said, He calls me Hireling: which was true enough, and all the People knew it. Then some of the Great Men of the Town came to me, and said, Sir, We have no learned Men to dispute with you. I told them, I came not to dispute, but to declare the way of Salvation to them, and the way of Everlasting Life. And so I declared largely the way of Life
and Truth to them,1652. Brigham. and directed them to Christ their Teacher, that had died for them, and bought them with his Blood. When I had done, I passed away about Two Miles to another great Steeple-house of said John Wilkinson's, called Brigham; where the People, having been at the other Meeting, were mightily affected; and would have put my Horse into the Steeple-house-Yard: but I said, No; the Priest claims that; have him to an Inn. When I came into the Steeple-house-Yard, I saw the People coming in great Companies, as to a Fair; and abundance were already gathered in the Lanes, and about the Steeple-house. I was very Thirsty; and walked about a quarter of a Mile to a Brook, where I got some Water, and re∣freshed my Self. And as I came up again, I met the said Wilkinson; who, as I passed by him, said, Sir, will you preach to day? If you will, said he, I will not Oppose you in Word or Thought. I replied, Op∣pose, if thou wilt; I have something to speak to the People. And, said I, thou carried'st thy self foolishly the other day, and spakest a∣gainst thy Conscience and Reason; insomuch that thy Hearers cried out against thee. So I left him, and went on; for he saw, it was in vain to Oppose, the People were so affected with the Lord's Truth. When I came into the Steeple-house-Yard, a Professor came to me, and asked, If I would not go into the Church? (as he called it) And I see∣ing no convenient Place abroad, to stand to speak unto the People from, went in; and stood up in a Seat, after the People were settled. The Priest came in also; but did not go up to his Pulpit. So the Lord opened my Mouth, and I declared his Everlasting Truth, and Word of Life to the People; directing them to the Spirit of God in themselves, by which they might know God and Christ, and the Scriptures, and come to have heavenly Fellowship in the Spirit. And I declared to them, that Every one that cometh into the World, was enlightened by Christ the Life; by which Light they might see their Sins, and Christ, who was come to save them from their Sins, and died for them. And if they came to walk in this Light, they might therein see Christ to be the Author of their Faith, and the Finisher thereof; their Shepherd to feed them, their Priest to teach them, and their great Prophet to open divine Mysteries unto them, and to be always present with them: I opened also unto them, in the Openings of the Lord, the first Covenant, shewing them the Figures, and the Substance of those Figures; and so bringing them on to Christ, the New Covenant. I also manifested unto them, that there had been a Night of Apostacy since the Apostles days; but that now the Everlasting Gospel was preached again, which brought Life and Immortality to Light: And the day of the Lord was come, and Christ was come to teach his People himself by his Light, Grace, Power and Spirit. A fine opportunity the Lord gave me, to preach Truth among the People that day, for about three hours time; and all was quiet. And Many hundreds were Convinced that day: And some of them praised God and said; Now we know the first step to Peace. The said Preacher also said privately to some of his Hearers, that I had broken them, and overthrown them.
1653. A Village.After this I went to a Village, and many People accompanied me. And as I was sitting in an House full of People, declaring the Word of Life unto them, I cast mine Eye upon a Woman; and I discerned an Ʋnclean Spirit in her. And I was moved of the Lord to speak sharply to her; and told her, she was a Witch: Whereupon the Woman went out of the Room. Now I being a Stranger there, and knowing nothing of the Woman Outwardly, the People wondred at it; and told me afterwards, that I had discovered a great thing: for all the Country looked upon her to be a Witch. The Lord had given me a Spirit of discerning, by which I many times saw the States and Con∣ditions of People, and could Try their Spirits. For not long before, as I was going to a Meeting, I saw some Women in a Field, and I dis∣cerned them to be Witches: and I was moved to go out of my way into the Field to them, and declare unto them their Conditions; tell∣ing them plainly, They were in the Spirit of Witchcraft. At another time there came such an one into Swarthmore-Hall in the Meeting-time; and I was moved to speak sharply to her, and told her, she was a Witch: And the People said afterwards, she was generally accounted so. There came also at another time another Woman, and stood at a distance from me; and I cast mine Eye upon her and said: Thou hast been an Harlot: for I perfectly saw the Condition and Life of the Woman. The Woman answered and said, Many could tell her of her Outward Sins; but none could tell her of her Inward. Then I told her, Her Heart was not right before the Lord; and that from the In∣ward came the Outward. This Woman came afterwards to be Con∣vinced of God's Truth, and became a Friend. From the aforesaid Village we came up to Thomas Bewley's, near Coldbeck;Coldbeck. and from thence, having had some Service for the Lord there,At a Mar∣ket-Town. I passed to a Market-Town, where I had a Meeting at the Cross; and all was pretty quiet: and when I had declared the Truth unto them, and directed them to Christ their Teacher, some received the Truth. Then we passed further, and had another Meeting upon the Borders, in a Steeple-house-Yard, to which many Professors and Contenders came; but the Lord's Power was over all: and when the Word of Life had been declared amongst them, some received the Truth there also. Carlisle.From thence passing on we came to Carlisle, and the Pastor of the Baptists, with most of his Hearers came to me there to the Abbey; where I had a Meeting, and declared the Word of Life amongst them: and many of the Baptists, and of the Souldiers were Convinced. Af∣ter the Meeting was done, the Pastor of the Baptists (being an high Notionist, and a flashy Man) came to me, and asked me, What must be damned? I was moved immediately to tell him, That which spake in him, was to be damned. This stopt the Pastor's Mouth; and the Witness of God was raised up in him: and I opened to him the States of Election and Reprobation, so that he said; He never heard the like in his Life. He also came afterward to be Convinced. Then went I up to the Castle among the Souldiers; who beat a Drum, and called the Garrison together: And I preached the Truth amongst them, Directing them to the Lord Jesus Christ to be their
Teacher, and to the measure of his Spirit in themselves,1653. Carlisle. by which they might be turned from the Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God. And I warned them all, that they should do no Violence to any Man; but should shew forth a Christian-Life: telling them, that he, who was to be their Teacher, would be their Condemnation, if they were disobedient to him. So I left them, having no Opposition from any of them, except the Serjeants; who afterwards came to be Convinced. On the Market-day I went up into the Market, to the Market-Cross. Now the Magistrates had both threatned, and sent their Serjeants: And the Magistrates Wives had said, That if I came there, they would pluck the Hair from off my Head; and that the Serjeants should take me up. Nevertheless I obeyed the Lord God, and went upon the Cross; and there declared unto them, That the day of the Lord was com∣ing upon all their deceitful Ways and Doings, and deceitful Mer∣chandize; and that they should put away all Cozening and Cheat∣ing, and keep to Yea and Nay, and speak the Truth one to another: So the Truth, and the Power of God was set over them. And after I had declared the Word of Life to the People, the Throng being so great, that the Serjeants could not get to me, nor the Magistrates Wives come at me; I passed away quietly. Many People and Souldi∣ers came to me, and some Baptists, that were bitter Contenders; a∣mongst whom one of their Deacons, being an envious Man, and find∣ing the Lord's Power was over them, Cried out for very Anger. Whereupon I set my Eyes upon him, and spake sharply to him in the Power of the Lord: and he cried, Do not pierce me so with thy Eyes; keep thy Eyes off me. On the first day following, I went into the Steeple-house: And after the Priest had done, I preached the Truth to the People, and declared the Word of Life amongst them. The Priest got away; and the Magistrates desired me to go out of the Steeple-house: But I still declared the VVay of the Lord unto them, and told them; I came to speak the word of Life and Salvation from the Lord amongst them. The Power of the Lord was dreadful amongst them in the Steeple-house, so that the People trembled and shook, and they thought, the Steeple-house shook; and some of them feared, it would have fallen down on their Heads. The Magistrates VVives were in a Rage, and strove mightily to have been at me: but the Souldiers and friendly People stood thick about me. At length the rude People of the City rose, and came with Staves and Stones into the Steeple-house, crying; Down with these Round-headed Rogues: and they threw Stones. Whereupon the Governour sent a File or two of Musketeers into the Steeple-house, to appease the Tumult; and commanded all the other Souldiers out. So those Souldiers took me by the Hand in a friendly manner, and said; They would have me along with them then. When we came forth into the Street, the City was in an Ʋp∣roar; and the Governour came down: and some of those Souldiers were put in Prison for standing by me, and for me against the Towne People. There was a Lieutenant, that had been Convinced; and he came, and had me to his House, where there was a Baptists-Meeting, and thither came Friends also: and we had a very quiet Meeting;
and they heard the VVord of Life gladly, and many received it. The next day, the Justices and Magistrates of the Town being gathered together in the Town-hall, they granted a VVarrant against me; and sent for me to come before them. I was then gone to a Baptist's House; but hearing of it, I went up to the Hall to them, where many rude People were: some of whom had sworn strange false Things against me. I had a great deal of Discourse with the Magi∣strates, wherein I laid open the Fruits of their Priest's Preaching; and shewed them, how Void they were of Christianity: and that, though they were such great Professors (for they were Independents and Presbyterians) they were without the Possession of that which they professed.G. F. com∣mitted to Carlisle-Prison. So after a large Examination they Committed me to Prison as a Blasphemer, an Heretick and a Seducer; though they could not justly charge any such thing against me. The Jail at Carlisle had Two Jailers, an Ʋpper and an Ʋnder, which looked like Two great Bear-wards. Now when I was brought in, the Ʋpper-Jailer had me up into a great Chamber, and told me, I should have what I would in that Room. But I told him, he should not expect any Money from me, for I would neither lie in any of his Beds, nor eat any of his Victuals. Then he put me into another Room; where after a while I got something to lie upon. There I lay, till the Assizes came:Carlisle-Assize. and then all the Talk and Cry was, that I was to be Hanged. And the High-Sheriff, whose Name was VVilfrey Lawson, stirred them much up to take away my Life, and said; He would guard me to my Execution himself. They were in a black, dark Rage, and set three Musketeers for Guard upon me; one at my Chamber-door, another at the Stairs-foot, and a third at the Street-door: and none they would let come at me, except one sometimes, to bring me some necessary things. At Night they would bring up Priests to me, sometimes as late as the Tenth Hour in the Night; and they would be exceeding Rude and Divellish. There were a Company of bitter, Scotch Priests, Presbyterians, made up of Envy and Malice, who were not fit to speak of the things of God, they were so foul-mouthed: But the Lord by his Power gave me dominion over them all, and I let them see both their Fruits, and their Spirits. Great Ladies also (as they were called) came to see the Man, that they said was to die. Now, while both the Judge, Justices and Sheriff were contriving to∣gether, how they might put me to death; the Lord disappointed their Design by an unexpected way. For the Judge's Clark (as I was In∣formed) started a Question among them; which Confounded all their Counsels: So that after that they had not Power to call me before the Judge. Anthony Pearson being then in Carlisle, and perceiving, that they did not intend to bring me (as was expected) upon my Trial, he writ a Letter to the Judges, directed as followeth:
To the Judges of Assize and Jail-Delivery for the Northern Parts, sitting at Carlisle.1653. Carlisle-Assize. YOƲ are raised up to do Righteousness and Justice, and sent forth to punish him that doth Evil, and to encourage him that doth well, and to set the oppressed free. I am therefore moved to lay before you the Condition of him, who is called George Fox, whom the Magistrates of this City have cast into Prison, for Words that he is accused to have spoken, which they call Blasphemy. He was sent to the Jail, till he should be delivered by due Course of Law; and it was expected, he should have been proceeded against in the Common Law-Course at this Assizes. The Informations against him were delivered into Court; and the Act allows and appoints that way of Trial. How hardly and unchristianly he hath been hitherto dealt with, I shall not now mention: but you may consider, that nothing he is accused of, is nice and difficult. And, to my Knowledge, he utterly abhors and detests every Particular, which by the Act against Blasphemous Opinions is appointed to be pu∣nished; and differs as much from those People, against whom the Law was made, as Light from Darkness. Though he be Committed, Judgment is not given against him; nor have his Accusers been face to face, to affirm before him, what they have Informed against him: Nor was he heard, as to the Particulars of their Accusations: nor doth it appear, that any Word they charge against him, is within the Act. But indeed, I could not yet so much as see the Information, no not in Court, though I desired it both of the Clark of the Assizes and of the Magistrates Clark; nor hath he had a Copy of them. This is very hard: And that he should be so close restrained, that his Friends may not speak with him, I know no Law nor Reason for. I do therefore claim for him a due and lawful Hearing, and that he may have a Copy of his Charge, and freedom to Answer for himself; and that rather before you, than to be left to the Rulers of this Town, who are not competent Judges of Blasphemy: as by their Mittimus appears, who have Com∣mitted him upon an Act of Parliament; and mention Words, as spo∣ken by him at his Examination, which are not within the Act, and which he utterly denies. The Words mentioned in the Mittimus he de∣nies to have spoken; and hath neither professed nor avowed them. Anthony Pearson. But notwithstanding this Letter, the Judges were resolved not to suffer me to be brought before them; but reviling and Scoffing at me behind my back, left me to the Magistrates of the Town: giving them what Encouragement they could, to Exercise their Cruelty upon me. Whereupon (though I had been kept up so close in the Jailer's House, that Friends were not suffered to come at me; and Colonel Benson and Justice Pearson were denied to see me: yet) the next Day, after the Judges were gone out of Town, an Order was sent to the Jailer, to put me down into the Dungeon amongst the Moss-Troopers,Carlisle-Dungeon.
Thieves and Murtherers;1653. Carlisle-Dungeon. which accordingly he did. A Filthy, Na∣sty Place it was, where Men and Women were put together in a very uncivil manner; and never a House of Office to it.: And the Prisoners so lousy, that one Woman was almost eaten to death with Lice. Yet as bad as the Place was, the Prisoners were all made very loving and subject to me; and some of them were Convinced of the Truth, as the Publicans and Harlots were of old; so that they were able to confound a Priest, that might come to the Grates to dispute. But the Jailer was very Cruel, and the Ʋnder-Jailer very abusive both to me, and to Friends, that came to see me: For he would beat Friends with a great Cudgel, that did but come to the Window to look in upon me. I could get up to the Grate, where sometimes I took in my Meat; at which the Jailer was often offended. One Time he came in a great Rage, and fell a beating me with his great Cudgel, though I was not at the Grate at that time: and as he beat me, he cried, Come out of the Window, though I was then far enough from it. Now, while he struck me, I was made to sing in the Lord's Power; and that made him Rage the more. Then he went, and fetched a Fiddler, and brought him in where I was, and set him to play; thinking to vex me thereby: But while he played, I was moved in the everlast∣ing Power of the Lord God to sing; and my Voice drowned the Noise of the Fiddle, and struck and confounded them: and made them give over Fiddling, and go their ways. Justice Benson's Wife was moved of the Lord to come to visit me, and to Eat no Meat, but what she Eat with me at the Bars of the Dungeon-Window. She was afterwards herself Imprisoned at York, when she was great with Child, for speaking to a Priest; and was kept in Prison, and not suffered to go out, when the time of her Tra∣vail was come: so she was delivered of her Child in the Prison. She was an honest, tender Woman, and continued faithful to the Truth, until she died. Whilst I was in the Dungeon at Carlisle, one James Parnel, a little Lad of about Sixteen Years of Age, came to see me; and was Con∣vinced: And the Lord quickly made him a powerful Minister of the Word of Life, and many were turned to Christ by him; though he lived not long. For travelling into Essex in the Work of the Ministry, in the Year 1655, he was Committed to Colchester-Castle, where he endured very great Hardships and Sufferings; being put by the Cruel Jailer into a Hole in the Castle-wall, called the Oven, so high from the Ground, that he went up to it by a Ladder: which being six Foot too short, he was fain to climb from the Ladder to the Hole by a Rope, that was fastned above. And when Friends would have given him a Cord and a Basket, to have drawn up his Victuals in, the Inhu∣man Jailer would not suffer them; but forced him to go down and up by that short Ladder and Rope, to fetch his Victuals (which for a long time he did) or else he might have famished in the Hole. At length, his Limbs being much benummed with lying in that Place, yet being constrained to go down to take up some Victuals; as he came up the Ladder again with his Victuals in one hand, and catched at the Rope with the other, he missed the Rope; and fell down from a ve∣ry great height upon the Stones: by which Fall he was exceedingly
wounded in his Head and Arms, and his Body much bruised; and he died in a short Time after. And when he was dead, the wicked Pro∣fessors, to cover their own Cruelty, writ a Book of him, and said; He fasted himself to Death: Which was an abominable Falshood; and was manifested so to be by another Book, which was written in Answer to that, and was called, The Lamb's Defence against Lies. Now when I saw, that I was not like to be brought forth to a pub∣lick Hearing and Trial (although I had before Answered in Writing the particular Matters charged against me, at the Time of my first Ex∣amination and Commitment) I was moved to send forth the following Paper, as a publick Challenge to all those, that did belie the Truth and me behind my Back, to come forth, and make good their Charge. IF any in Westmorland, or Cumberland, or elswhere, that profess Christianity, and pretend to love God and Christ, are not satisfi∣ed concerning the things of God, which I, who am called George Fox, have spoken and declared, let them declare and publish their Dissa∣tisfaction in Writing; and not back-bite, nor lie, nor persecute in se∣cret: This I demand of you all in the presence of the living God, as ye will answer it to him. For the Exaltation of the Truth, and the Confounding of the Deceit is this given forth: To that of God in your Consciences I speak; declare or write your Dissatisfactions to any of them, whom you call Quakers, that Truth may be exalted, and All may come to the Light, with which Christ hath enlightned every one, that cometh into the World: that nothing may be hid in Darkness, in Prisons, Holes or Corners; but that all things may be brought to the Light of Christ, and by the Light of Christ may be tried. This am I moved of the Lord to write, and send forth to be set upon the Market-Crosses in Westmorland, and elswhere. To the Light of Christ in you I speak, that none of you may speak evil of the things of God, which you know not; nor act contrary to the Light, that gave forth the Scriptures: lest you be found Fighters against God, and the Hand of the Lord be turned against you. G. F. While I thus lay in the Dungeon at Carlisle, the Report, that was raised at the time of the Assize, That I should be put to Death, was gone out far and near; insomuch that the Parliament then sitting (which, I think, was called the Little-Parliament) hearing, That a Young-man at Carlisle was to die for Religion, caused a Letter to be sent down to the Sheriff and Magistrates concerning me. And much about the same Time I writ also to the Justices at Carlisle, that had cast me into Prison, and that persecuted Friends at the Instigation of the Priests, for Tithes; expostulating the Matter with them thus:
Friends, Thomas Craston and Cuthbert Studholm, YOur Noise is gone up to London before the sober People: What Imprisoning, what Gagging, what Havock and Spoiling the Goods of People have you made within these few Years, unlike Men; as though you had never read the Scriptures, or had not minded them! Is this the End of Carlisle's Religion? is this the End of your Ministry? and is this the End of your Church, and of your Pro∣fession of Christianity? you have shamed it by your Folly and Mad∣ness, and blind Zeal. Was it not always the Work of the blind Guides, Watchmen, Leaders and false Prophets, to prepare War against them, that would not put into their Mouths? And have not you been the Priests Pack-horses and Executioners? When they spur you up, to bear the Sword against the Just, do not you run on against the Creatures, that cannot hold up such, as the Scriptures did always testify against? Yet will you lift up your unholy Hands, and call up∣on God with your polluted Lips, and pretend a Fast, who are full of Strife and Debate. Did your Hearts never burn within you? Did you never come to question your Conditions? Are you wholly given up to do the Devil's Lusts, to Persecute? Where is your Loving Enemies? Where is your Entertaining Strangers? Where is your Overcoming Evil with Good? Where are your Teachers, that can stop the Mouths of Gain-sayers, and can convince Gain-sayers, and such as oppose themselves? Have you no Ministers of the Spirit, no Soldiers with Spiritual Weapons, displaying Christ's Colours? But all the Dra∣gon's, the Murderer's, the Persecutor's; Arm of Flesh; Cain's Wea∣pons; Chief Priests taking Counsel; Judas and the Multitude with Swords and Staves; Sodom's Company raging about Lot's House; like the Priests and Princes against Jeremiah; like the Dragon, Beast and great Whore, and the false Church, which John saw should cast into Prison, and Kill, and Persecute? Whose Weapons are you bearing? doth not the false Church, the VVhore, make Merchandize of Cattel, Corn, VVine and Oil, even to the very Souls of Men? And hath not all this been, since the true Church went into the Wilderness? Read Re∣velations the 12th, with the 18th: Do you not read and see, what a Spirit you are of, and what a bottomless Pit you are in? And have not you dishonoured the Place of Justice and Authority? What! turned your Sword backward, like Mad-Men, who are a Praise to the Evil-Doer, and would be a Terror to the Good, with all Force and Might to stop the way of Justice! Doth not the Lord, think you, behold your Actions? How many have you wronged? how many have you Imprisoned and Persecuted, and put out of your Synagogues! Are you they, that must fulfil the Prophecy of Christ, Matth 23. John 16. Read the Scriptures, and see, how unlike you are to the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles: and what a Visage you have; like unto them, that persecuted the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles! You are found in their Steps, wrestling with Flesh and Blood; and not with Principalities, and Powers, and Spiritual Wickedness: And your Teachers imprisoning and persecuting for outward things, you being their Executioners; the like whereof
hath not been in all the Nations: The Havock that hath been made, the spoiling of the Goods of People, taking away their Oxen and fatted Beeves, their Sheep, Corn, Wool and Houshold-Goods, and giv∣ing them to the Priests, that have done no Work for them: More like Moss-Troopers, than Ministers of the Gospel, they take them from Friends; suing them in your Courts, and fining them, be∣cause they will not break the Commands of Christ, that is, because they will not Swear. And thus you Act against them, that do not lift up an Hand against you; and as much as you turn against them, you turn against Christ. But he is risen, that will plead their Cause; and you cannot be hid: for your Works are come to Light, and the End of your Ministry is seen, what it is for; for Means. And ye have dishonoured the Truth, the Gospel; and are they, that make it Chargeable: You have lost your Glory; you have dishonoured your selves. Persecution was ever blind and mad: Read the Apostle, what he saith of himself, when he was in your Nature. Exaltation and Pride, and your lifting up your selves, hath brought you to this; not being humble, and not doing Justice, and not loving Mercy. And when such, as have beaten been and bruised by your Rude Company (to whom you are a Praise and Encouragement) have come, and laid things before you, that you might have done Justice, preserved and kept Peace; you (as knowing they could not swear) have put an Oath to them: And this hath been your Trick and Cover, that ye might not do Justice to the Just; but by this means have gone on still fur∣ther to Encourage the Evil-Doer. But the Lord sees your Hearts! If ye were not Men past feeling, ye would fear and tremble before him, the God of the whole Earth; who is risen, and will stain your Glory, and marr your Pride, and deface your Beauty, and lay it in the dust. Though for a Time you may swell in your Pride, and glory in your Shame, and make a mock of God's Messengers, who, for Reproving Sin in the Gate, are become your Prey; you will feel the heavy hand of God, and his Judgments at the last. This is from a Lover of the Truth and of Righteousness, and of your Souls; but a Witness against all such, as make a Trade of the Prophets, Christ's and the Apostles Words, and are found in the Steps of them, that persecuted the Prophets, Christ's and the Apostles Life: who will persecute them, that will not hold you up, and put into your Mouths, and give you Means. Tithes were before the Law, and Tithes were in the Law; but Tithes since the Days of the Apostles have been on∣ly, since the false Church got up. Now Christ, who is come to end the Law, and to end War, Redeems Men out of the Tenths and out of the Nines also. The Redeemed of the Lord shall reign upon the Earth; and know the Election, which was, before the World began. Since the days of the Apostles Tithes have been set up by the Papists, and by them that went forth from the Apostles into the World; so set up by the false Church, that made Merchandize of People, since the true Church went into the Wilderness. But now is the Judgment of the great Whore come, and the Beast and false Prophet (the Old Dragon) shall be taken, and cast into the Fire; and the Lamb and his Saints shall have the Victory. And now is Christ come, who will make War in Righteousness, and destroy with
the Sword of his Mouth all these Inventers and Inventions, that have got up, and been set up since the Days of the Apostles, and since the true Church went into the Wilderness. And the everlasting Gospel, which is the Power of God, shall be preached again to all Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues in this the Lamb's Day; before whom you shall appear to Judgment: and you have no way to Escape For he hath appeared, who is the First and the Last, the Beginning and the Ending, the Alpha and the Omega: He that was Dead, is alive again, and lives for evermore! I mentioned before, That Gervase Benson and Anthony Pearson, (though they had been Justices of the Peace) were not permitted to come to me in the Prison; whereupon they jointly wrote a Letter to the Magistrates, Priests and People at Carlisle concerning my Imprison∣ment. And thus it was: HIM, who is called George Fox, who is persecuted by Rulers and Magistrates, by Justices, by Priests and by People, and who suffers Imprisonment of his Body at this present, as a Blasphemer, and an Heretick, and a Seducer, him do we witness (who in mea∣sure are made Partakers of the same Life, which lives in him) to be a Minister of the Eternal Word of God, by whom the everlasting Gospel is preached; by the powerful Preaching whereof the Eternal Father of the Saints hath opened the Blind Eyes, hath unstopped the deaf Ears, hath let the Oppressed go free, and hath raised up the Dead out of the Graves. Christ is now preached in and among the Saints, the same, that ever he was; and because his heavenly Image is born up in this his faithful Servant, therefore doth fallen Man (Rulers, Priests and People persecute him: because he lives up out of the Fall, and testifies against the Works of the VVorld, that the Deeds thereof are Evil, he suffers by you Magistrates; not as an Evil-Doer. For thus it was ever, where the Seed of God was kept in Prison under the cursed Nature, that Nature sought to imprison them, in whom it was raised. The Lord will make him to you as a burdensom Stone: for the Sword of the Spirit of the Almighty is put into the Hands of the Saints, which shall wound all the Wicked; and shall not be put up, till it hath cut down all corrupt Judges, Justices, Magistrates, Priests and Professors; till he hath brought his wonderful thing to pass in the Earth, which is, to make New Heavens and a New Earth, wherein shall dwell Righteousness; which now he is about to do. Therefore fear the Lord God Almighty, ye Judges, Justices, Commanders, Priests and People: ye that forget God, suddenly will the Lord come, and destroy you with an utter Destruction; and will sweep your Names out of the Earth, and will restore his People Judges, as at the First, and Counsellors, as at the Beginning. And all Persecutors shall partake of the Plagues of the VVhore, who hath made the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men drunk with the VVine of her Fornications; and hath drunk the Blood of the Saints: and therefore shall you be Parta∣kers
of her Plagues. We are not suffered to go see our Friend in Prison, whom we witness to be a Messenger of the Living God. Now all People, mind, Whether this be according to Law, o from the wicked, perverse, envious Will of the envious Rulers and Magistrates, who are of the same Generation, that persecuted Jesus Christ: for, said he, as they have done to me, so will they do to you. And as he took the love, the kindness and service, that was shewed and performed to any of his Afflicted Ones in their Sufferings and Distress, as done unto himself; so the Injuries and Wrongs, that were done by any to any of his Little Ones, he resented, as done unto himself also. Therefore you, who are so far from visiting him your selves in his suffering Servant, that ye will not suffer his Bre∣thren to visit him; ye must depart, ye Workers of Iniquity, into the Lake, that burns with Fire. The Lord is coming to thresh the Mountains, and will beat them to Dust: And all corrupt Rulers, corrupt Officers and corrupt Laws the Lord will take Vengeance on, by which the tender Consciences of his People are oppressed. And he will give his People his Law, and will judge his People himself, not according to the sight of the Eye, and hearing of the Ear; but with Righteousness, and with Equity. Now are your Hearts made manifest, to be full of Envy against the living Truth of God, which is made manifest in his People; who are contemned and de∣spised of the World, and scornfully called Quakers. You are worse than the Heathens, that put Paul in Prison; for none of his Friends or Acquaintance were hindred to come to him by them: therefore they shall be Witnesses against you. Ye are made manifest to the Saints, to be of the same Generation, that put Christ to death, and that put the Apostles in Prison, on the same pretence, as you act under; in calling Truth Error, and the Ministers of God Blasphem∣ers, as they did. But the day is dreadful and terrible, that shall come upon you, ye Evil Magistrates, Priests and People, who pro∣fess the Truth in Words outwardly, and yet persecute the Power of Truth, and them that stand in and for the Truth. While ye have Time, prize it; and remember, what is written Isa. 54.17. George Benson, Anthony Pearson. Not long after this, the Lord's Power came over the Justices, and they were made to set me at Liberty. But sometime before I was set at Liberty, the Governour, and the said Anthony Pearson came down into the Dungeon to see the Place, where I was kept; and un∣derstand, what Ʋsage I had. And when they were come down to me, they found the place so bad, and the savour so ill, that they cried shame of the Magistrates, for suffering the Jailer to do such things: And they called for the Jailers into the Dungeon, and required them to find Sureties for their good Behaviour; and the Ʋn∣der-Jailer, who had been such a Cruel Fellow, they put into the Dun∣geon with me, amongst the Moss-Troopers.
1653. Cumberland At T. B's.Now after I was set at Liberty, I went to Thomas Bewley's, where there came a Baptist-Teacher to Oppose me; and he was Convinced. And Robert Widders being with me, was moved to go to Coldbeck-Steeple-house; and the Baptist-Teacher went along with him the same day. And the People fell upon them, and almost killed Robert Wid∣ders; and took the Baptist's Sword from him, and beat him sorely. This Baptist had the Inheritance of an Impropriation of Tithes; and he went home, and gave it up freely. Robert VVidders was sent to Carlisle-Jail; where having lain a while, he was set at Liberty again. VVilliam Dewsberry also went to another Steeple-house hard by; and the People almost killed him, they beat him so: but the Lord's Power was over all, and healed them again. At that day many Friends went to the Steeple-houses, to declare the Truth to the Priests and People; and great Sufferings they underwent: but the Lord's Power sustained them. Now I went into the Country, and had mighty great Meetings; and the Everlasting Gospel and VVord of Life flourished, and Thou∣sands were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to his Teaching. And several that took Tithes, as Impropriators, denied the receiving of them any longer;Westmor∣land. and delivered them up freely to the Parishioners. Then passing on into VVestmorland, I had many great Meetings: and at Strickland-Head I had a large Meeting,Strickland head. where a Justice of Peace out of Bishoprick, whose Name was Henry Draper, came up; and many Contenders were there. The Priests and Magistrates were in a great Rage against me in Westmorland, and had a VVarrant to ap∣prehend me; which they renewed from time to time, for a long time: Yet the Lord did not suffer them to serve it upon me. So I traveled on amongst Friends, visiting the Meetings, till I came to Swarthmore;Swarth∣more. where I heard, that the Baptists and Professors in Scot∣land had sent to me, to have a Dispute with me. Whereupon I sent them word,Cumberland that I would meet them in Cumberland at Thomas Bewley's House: whither accordingly I went; but none of them came. Some dangers at this time I underwent in my Travels to and fro:Wighton. for at one time, as we were passing from a Meeting, and going through VVighton on a Market-day, the People of the Town had set a Guard with Pitch-forks: and although some of their own Neighbours were with us; they kept us out of the Town, and would not let us pass through the Town, under a pretence of preventing the Sickness: though there was no Occasion for any such thing. However they fell upon us, and had like to have spoiled us and our Horses: But the Lord did restrain them, that they did not much hurt; and we passed away. Another time, as I was passing between two Friend's Houses, some Rude Fellows lay in Wait in a Lane, and exceedingly stoned and abused us; but at last, through the Lord's Assistance, we got through them, and had not much hurt. But this shewed the Fruits of the Priest's Teaching, which shamed their Profession of Christianity. Bishoprick of DurhamNow, after I had visited Friends in that County, I went through the Countries into Bishoprick; having large Meetings by the way: and a very large Meeting I had at Anthony Pearson's, where many were Convinced. From thence I passed through Northumberland to
Darren-Water, where there were great Meetings:1653. Northum∣berland. and the Priests threatned, that they would come; but none came. The everlasting Word of Life was freely preached, and freely received; and many Hundreds were turned to Christ, their Teacher. In Northumberland there came many to dispute;Darren-Water. of whom some pleaded against Perfection: unto whom I declared, That Adam and Eve were perfect, before they fell; and All that God made, was perfect; and that the Imperfection came by the Devil, and the Fall: But Christ, that came to destroy the Devil, said, Be ye perfect. Then one of the Professors said, That Job said, Shall mortal Man be more pure, than his Maker? The Heavens are not clear in his sight. God charged his Angels with Folly. But I shewed him his Mistake, and let him see, That it was not Job, that said so; but one of those, that contended against Job: for Job stood for Perfection, and held his In∣tegrity; and they were called miserable Comforters. Then these Pro∣fessors said, The Outward Body was the Body of Death and Sin. I shewed them their Mistake in that also; shewing them, That Adam and Eve had each of them an Outward Body, before the Body of Death and Sin got into them; and that Man and Woman will have Bodies, when the Body of Sin and Death is put off again; when they are Renewed up into the Image of God again by Christ Jesus, which they were in, before they fell. So they ceased at that time from Opposing further; and glorious Meetings we had in the Lord's Power. Then passed we on to Hexam,Hexam. where we had a great Meeting a Top of an Hill: The Priest threatned, that he would come and Op∣pose us, but he came not; so that all was quiet: And the Ever∣lasting Day, and Renowned Truth of the Everliving God was sounded over those dark Countries, and his Son exalted over all. And it was proclaimed amongst the People, that the Day was now come, wherein all that had made a Profession of the Son of God, might receive him; and that to as many as would receive him, he would give Power to become the Sons of God, as he had done to me. And it was further declared, That he, that had the Son of God, he had Life Eternal: but he that had not the Son of God (though he profest all the Scriptures, from the first of Genesis to the last of the Revelations) he had not Life. So after that all were directed to the Light of Christ, by which they might see him, and receive him, and know, where their true Teacher was, and the Everlasting Truth had been largely declared amongst them; we passed away through Hexam peaceably, and came into Gilsland,Gilsland. a Country noted for Thieving. Here a Friend spying the Priest, went to speak to him: whereupon the Priest came down to our Inn, and the Town's People gathered about us. The Priest said, He would prove us Deceivers out of the Bible; but could find no Scripture for his purpose. Then he went into the Inn; and after a while came out again, and brought some broken Sentences of Scripture, that mention the Doctrines and Com∣mandments of Men, &c. and Touch not, Taste not, &c. for they perish with the using; All which (poor Man) was his own Condition: whereas we were persecuted, because we would not Taste, nor Touch,
nor Handle their Doctrines and Traditions,1653. Gillsland. which we knew, perished with the using. I asked him, What he called the Steeple-house? Oh, said he, the dreadful House of God, the Temple of God. Then I shewed him, and the poor, dark People, That their Bodies should be the Temples of God: and that Christ never commanded these Temples, but ended that Temple at Jerusalem, which God had com∣manded. While I was speaking, the Prist got away: and after∣wards the People made, as if they feared, we would take their Purses, or steal their Horses; judging us like themselves, who are naturally given to Thieving. CumberlandThe next day we came through the Country into Cumberland again, where we had a general Meeting of many Thousands of People a Top of an Hill near Langlands.Lang∣lands. A glorious and heavenly Meeting it was; for the Glory of the Lord did shine over all: and there were as many, as one could well speak over; the Multitude was so great. Their Eyes were fixed on Christ their Teacher; and they came to sit under their own Vine: insomuch that Francis Howgill, coming afterwards to Visit them, found, they had no need of Words; for they were sitting under their Teacher Christ Jesus: In the snse whereof, he sate down amongst them, without speaking any thing. A great Convincement there was in Cumberland, Bishoprick, Northumber∣land, Westmorland, Lancashire and Yorkshire: And the Plants of God grew, and flourished so, the heavenly Rain descending, and God's Glory shining upon them, that many Mouths were opened by the Lord to his Praise; yea, to Babes and Sucklings he ordained Strength. Brigham.After my Release from Carlisle-Prison, I was moved to go to Priest Wilkinson's Steeple-house again: and I being got into the Steeple-house before him, when he came in, I was declaring the Truth to the People, though they were but few; for the most and the best of his Hearers were turned to Christ's free Teaching: and we had a Meeting of Friends hard by, where one Thomas Stubbs was declaring the Word of Life amongst them. As soon as the Priest came in, he Op∣posed me: and there did we stay most part of the Day; for when I began, he Opposed me: so if any Law was broken, he broke it. And when his People would be haling me out, I manifested his Fruits to be such, as Christ spake of, when he said; They shall hale you out of their Synagogues: And then he would be ashamed, and they would let me alone. There did he stand, till it was almost Night, jang∣ling and opposing me; and would not go to his Dinner: for he thought to have wearied me out. But at last, the Lord's Power and Truth came so over him, that he packt away with his People. Then when he was gone, I went to the Meeting of Friends, who were turned to the Lord, and established by his Power upon Christ, the Rock and Foundation of the true Prophets and Apostles, but not of the False. About this time the Priests and Professors fell to prophesying against us afresh. They had said long before, That we should be destroyed within a Month; and after that, they prolonged that time to Half a Year: But that time being long expired, and we mightily increased in number; they now gave forth, That we would eat out one another.
For many times after Meetings, many tender People,1653. NORTH Country. having a great way to go, tarried at Friend's Houses by the way, and sometimes more, than there were Beds to lodge in; so that some have lain on the Hay-mows: Hereupon Cain's Fear possessed the Professors and World's People. For they were afraid, that when we had eaten one another out, we would all come to be maintained by the Parishes, and so we should be Char∣geable to them. But after a while, when they saw, that the Lord blessed and increased Friends, as he did Abraham, both in the Field and in the Basket, at their Goings forth and Comings in, at their Ri∣sings up and Lyings down, and that all things prospered with them; then they saw the falseness of all their Prophecies against us; and that it was In vain to Curse, where God had blessed. At the first Con∣vincement, when Friends could not put off their Hats to People, nor say You to a single Person, but Thou and Thee, nor could not Bow, nor use flattering Words in Salutations, nor go into the Fashions and Customs of the World; many Friends, that were Tradesmen of seve∣ral sorts, lost their Customers at the first: for the People were shy of them, and would not Trade with them; so that for a time some Friends, that were Tradesmen, could hardly get Money enough to buy Bread. But afterwards, when People came to have Experience of Friends Honesty and Faithfulness, and found, that their Yea was Yea, and their Nay was Nay; that they kept to a Word in their Dealings, and that they would not Cozen and Cheat them; but that if they sent any Child to their Shops for any thing, they were as well used, as if they had come themselves: the Lives and Conversations of Friends did preach, and reached to the Witness of God in People. And then things altered so, that all the Inquiry was; Where was a Draper, or Shop-keeper, or Taylor, or Shoomaker, or any other Trades∣man, that was a Quaker? Then that was all the Cry: Insomuch that Friends had more Trade, than many of their Neighbours; and if there was any Trading, they had a great part of it. And then the Envious Professors altered their Note, and began to Cry out; If we let these Quakers alone, they will take the Trade of the Nation out of our Hands. This hath been the Lord's doings to and for his People! which my desire is, that All, who profess his Holy Truth, may be kept truly sensible of; and that all may be preserved in and by his Power and Spirit, faithful to God and Man: First to God, in Obeying him in all things, and then in Doing unto All Men, that which is just and righteous, true and holy, and honest to all Men and Women in all things, that they have to do or deal with them in: that the Lord God may be glorified in their practising Truth, Holiness, Godli∣ness and Righteousness amongst People in all their Lives and Conver∣sations. Now Friends being grown very Numerous in the Northern parts of this Nation, and divers Young-Convinced ones coming daily in among us; I was moved of the Lord to write the following Epistle, and send it forth amongst them, for the stirring up the pure Mind, and raising an Holy Care and Watchfulness in them over themselves, and one ano∣ther, for the honour of Truth.
To you all, Friends every where, scattered abroad. IN the measure of the Life of God wait for Wisdom from God, even from him, from whence it comes. And all ye, who be Babes of God, Wait for the Living Food from the Living God, to be nourished up to Eternal Life, from the one Fountain, from whence Life comes; that orderly and in Order ye may all be guided and walk: Servants in your Places, Young-Men and Young-Women in your Places, and Rulers of Families; that every one, in your re∣spective Places may adorn the Truth, every one in the Measure of it. With it let your Minds be kept up to the Lord Jesus, from whence it doth come; that a sweet Savour ye may be to God, and in Wisdom ye may all be ordered and ruled: that a Crown and a Glory ye may be one to another in the Lord. And that no Strife, nor Bitterness, nor Self-Will may appear amongst you; but with the Light, in which the Ʋnity is, all that may be Condemned. And that every one in particular may see to, and take care of the ordering and ruling of their own Family; that in Righteousness and Wisdom it may be governed, the fear and dread of the Lord in every ones Heart set, that the Secrets of the Lord every one may come to receive, that Stewards of his Grace you may come to be, to dispense it to every one as they have need; and so in savouring and right-discerning you may all be kept: That nothing, that is contrary to the pure Life of God, may be brought forth in you, or among you; but all that is contrary to it, may by it be judged: So that in Light, in Life and Love ye may all live; and all that is con∣trary to the Light, and Life and Love, may be brought to Judg∣ment, and by that Light condemned. And that no fruitless Trees be among you; but all cut down and condemned by the Light, and cast into the Fire: so that every one may bear and bring forth Fruit to God, and grow fruitful in his Knowledge, and in his Wisdom. And so, that none may appear in Words, beyond what they be in the Life, that gave forth the Words: Here none shall be as the un∣timely Figs; and none shall be of those Trees, whose Fruit withers: Such go in Cain's way, from the Light; and by it are condemned. And that none amongst you boast your selves above your Measure; for if you do, out of God's Kingdom you are excluded: for in that boasting part gets up the Pride, and the Strife, which is contrary to the Light; which Light leads to the Kingdom of God, and gives every one of you an Entrance thereinto, and an Understanding, to know the things, that belong to the Kingdom of God. And there the Light and Life of Man every one receives, him who was, before the World was, by whom it was made; who is the Righteousness of God, and his Wisdom: to whom all Glory, Honour, Thanks and Praise belongs, who is God blessed for ever. Let no Image, nor Likeness be made; but in the Light Wait, which will bring Condemnation on that part, that would make the Images: for that prisons the Just. So to the Lust yield not the Eye, nor the Flesh; for the Pride of Life stands in that, which keeps out of the Love
of the Father; and upon which his Judgments and Wrath remains, where the Love of the World is sought after, and a Crown that is mortal: in which Ground the Evil enters, which is cursed; which brings forth Bryars and Thorns, where the Death reigns, and Tri∣bulation and Anguish is upon every Soul, and the Egyptian Tongue is heard: All which is by the Light Condemned. And there the Earth is, which must be removed: by the Light it is seen, and by the Power it is removed, and out of its place it is shaken; to which the Thunders utter their Voices, before the Mysteries of God be opened, and Jesus revealed. Therefore all ye, whose Minds are turned to this Light (which brings Condemnation upon all those things be∣fore-mentioned, that are contrary to the Light) Wait upon the Lord Jesus for the Crown, that is Immortal, and that fadeth not away. G. F. This is to be sent amongst all Friends in the Truth, the Flock of God, to be read at their Meetings in every Place, where they are met together. While yet Friends abode in the Northern Parts, a certain Priest of Rexam in Wales, whose Name was Morgan Floyd, having heard Re∣ports concerning us, sent Two of his Congregation into the North to Inquire concerning us, and to Try us; and bring him an Account con∣cerning us. But when these Triers came down amongst us, the Power of the Lord seized on them, and they were both Convinced of the Truth. So they stayed some Time with us, and then returned back to Wales; where afterwards one of them departed from his Con∣vincement: but the other, whose Name was John-ap-John, abode in the Truth, and received a part of the Ministry, in which he continued faithful. Now were the Priests in a great Rage at New Castle, and at Kendal, and up and down in most of the Northern Counties. And there be∣ing one Gilpin, that had sometimes come amongst us at Kendal, and soon run out from the Truth into vain Imaginations; the Priests made what Evil Ʋse they could of him, against us: but the Lord's Power confounded them all. And the Lord God cut off Two of those perse∣cuting Justices at Carlisle; and the other, after a Time, was turned out of his Place, and went out of the Town. About this Time also the Oath or Engagement to O. Cromwel was tendered to the Souldiers; and many of the Souldiers were disbanded, because in Obedience to Christ they could not swear. As John Stubbs for one, who was Convinced, when I was in Carlisle-Prison, and be∣came a good Soldier in the Lamb's War, and a faithful Minister of Christ Jesus; travelling much in the Service of the Lord in Holland, Ireland, Scotland, Italy, Egypt and America: and the Lord's Power preserved him out of the Hands of the Papists; though many times he was in great Danger of the Inquisition. But some of the Souldiers, who had been Convinced in their Judgments, but had not come into Obedience to the Truth, took O Cromwel's Oath; and going after∣wards into Scotland, and coming before a Garrison there, the Gar∣rison
thinking,1654. NORTH-Country. they had been Enemies, fired at them, and killed divers of them: which was a sad Judgment. Now when the Churches were settled in the North, and Friends were sate down under Christ's Teaching, and the Glory of the Lord shined over them,Swarth∣more. Lancaster. I passed from Swarthmore to Lancaster (about the beginning of the Year 1654) and so through the Countries, visiting Friends, till I came to Synder-hill-green, where there was a Meeting appointed three Weeks before; leaving the North fresh and green, under Christ their Teacher. But before I came to Synder-hill-green, we passed through Hallifax,Hallifax. a rude Town of Professors, and came to one Thomas Taylor's, who had been a Captain; where we met with some Janglers: but the Lord's Power was over all; for I travelled in the Motion of God's Power.Synder-hill-Green. And when I came to Synder-hill-green, there was a mighty Meeting, some Thousands of People, (as it was judged) and many Persons of Note were there, as Captains and other Officers; and there was a general Convincement: for the Lord's Power and Truth was set over all, and there was no Opposition. About this Time did the Lord move upon the Spirits of many, whom he had raised up, and sent forth to Labour in his Vineyard, to travel Southwards, and spread themselves in the Service of the Gospel to the Eastern, Southern and Western parts of the Nation: As Francis Howgill and Edward Burrough to London; John Camm and John Audland to Bristol, through the Countries; Richard Hub∣berthorn and George Whitehead towards Norwich; Thomas Holmes into Wales, and others otherways: for above sixty Ministers had the Lord raised up, and did now send abroad out of the North-Country. And the sense of their Service being very Weighty upon me, I was moved to give forth the following Paper, directed thus: To Friends in the Ministry. ALL Friends every where, Know the Seed of God, which bruiseth the Seed of the Serpent, and is a top of the Seed of the Serpent, which Seed sins not; but bruiseth the Serpent's Head, that doth sin, and tempts to Sin: Which Seed God's Promise and God's Blessing is to; which Seed is One in the Male and in the Fe∣male. Where it is Head, and hath bruised the Head of the other, to the beginning you are come; and the Younger is known, and he that is Ser∣vant to the Younger. And the Promise of God, which is to the Seed, is fulfilled and fulfilling; and the Scriptures come to be opened and owned: And the Flesh of Christ known, who took upon him the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh; the Everlasting Priest∣hood known, the Everlasting Covenant. Christ takes upon him the Seed of Abraham, and is a Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck; him that is without Father, without Mother, without Beginning of Days (mark) or End of Life: This is the Priest, that ever lives; he that is the Covenant of Life, of Light and Peace. And the Everlast∣ing Offering here is known once for all; which Offering overthrows that Nature, which offered: out of which the Priesthood arose, that could not continue by reason of Death. And here is the
other Offering known, the Everlasting Offering; which perfects for ever, them that are sanctified: which Offering blotted out the Hand-writing of Ordinances, triumphs over them, and ascends above all Principalities and Powers. Now, he that hath the Spirit of Jesus, sees this; and here is the Love of God received, that doth not Rejoyce in Iniquity, but leads to Repent of it. So this is the WORD OF THE LORD GOD to you all, Friends every where abroad scattered, Know the Power of God in one ano∣ther, and in that Rejoyce; for then you Rejoyce in the Cross of Christ, who is not of the World: which Cross is the Power of God to all them, that are saved. So you, that know the Power, and feel the Power, you feel the Cross of Christ, you feel the Gospel, which is the Power of God unto Salvation to every one, that believ∣eth. Now, he that believes in the Light, believes in the Ever∣lasting Covenant, in the one Offering, comes to the Life of the Prophets and Moses, comes to see Christ the Hope, the Mystery, which Hope perisheth not; but lets you see the Hope that perisheth, which is not that Mystery: and the Expectation in that perishing Hope fades. And where this never-failing Hope is witnessed, the Lord comes to be sanctified in the Heart, and you come to the Be∣ginning, to Christ the Hope, which perisheth not; but the other Hope, and the other Expectation that perisheth. So all of you know the perishing of the Other, and the failing of the Expectation therein; and know that, which perisheth not: that you may be ready to give a Reason of this Hope with Meekness and Fear, to every Man that asketh you. Christ the Hope, the Mystery, that perisheth not; the End of all perishing things, the End of all changeable things, the End of the decaying Covenant, the End of that which waxeth old and doth decay; the End of the first Cove∣nant, of Moses and of the Prophets; the Righteousness of God, Christ Jesus the Son: his Throne ye will know, Heirs with him ye will be; who makes his Children Kings and Priests to him, and brings them to know his Throne and his Power. There is no Justifi∣cation out of the Light, out of Christ: Justification is in the Light in Christ: Here is the Doer of the Will of God, here's the Entring into the Kingdom. He that believes in the Light, becomes a Child of Light; and here the Wisdom is received, that is justified of her Children. Here believing in the Light, you shall not abide in Darkness; but shall have the Light of Life: and come every one to witness the Light, that shines in your Hearts; which Light will give you the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ. With which Light you will see him reign, who is the Prince of Life and of Peace: which Light turns from him, that is out of the Truth, and abode not in it; where the true Peace is not. Friends, Be not hasty: For he that believes in the Light, makes not Haste. Here the Grace is received, by which you come to be saved; the Election is known, which obtains the Promise: The Will is seen, that wills, the Mind is known that runs, which obtains not; but stops and dulls. Now, that with the Light being seen, and judged, and stopt, the Patience is here known, which obtains the Crown;
and the Immortality is come to Light. So all they now, that act contra∣ry to the Light, and do not believe in it, they do not come to Justifica∣tion. And all Friends, if you go from the Light, from wanting to have the Promise of God fulfilled to the Seed, whereby you may know Christ Reign, you thereby bring on your selves Changable Garments, and come to wear the Changable Garments, and the strange Flesh, which leads to Adultery, which the Law goes upon; which shuts out of the Kingdom: And out of this Will doth proceed the Work or Building, that is for the Fire; whereby you may come to suffer Less. Therefore the Light love, which doth that Condemn; and receive the Power from the Lord, with which you stand over that, and do it Condemn: feeling and seeing that, which gives you the Victory over the World, and to see out of Time, to before Time. And again, Friends, Know Abra∣ham, that must obey the Voice of Sarah, that bears Seed; which casts forth the Bond-woman and her Son: Do not go forth, there will the Wildness lodge. Know that, which bears the Wild Son, and its Mother, who is not Sarah: for the Promise is to the Seed, not of many, but one; which Seed is Christ: And this Seed now you come to witness stand on the Top of all, yea, on the Head of the Ser∣pent. And so all (as I said before) who this come to feel and witness, ceme to the Beginning: and this to all the Seed of God, the Church, that it you all may come to know, where there is no blemish, nor spot, nor Wrinkle, nor any such thing; which is that, which is pur∣chased by the Blood of Jesus, and to the Father presented out of all that does defile: which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth. And none comes to this, but such, who come to the Light, which doth come from Christ, who purchased this Church. They who go from the Light, are shut out and condemned; though they profess all the Scriptures declared forth from it. Therefore walk in the Light, that you may have Fellowship with the Son, and with the Father; and come all to witness his Image, and his Power, and his Law, which is his Light, which hath converted your Souls, and brought them to submit to the higher Power, above that which is out of the Truth: that you may know here the Mercy and Truth, and the Faith that works by Love, which Christ is the Author of; who lighteth every one of you: which Faith gives the Victory. Now that which gives the Victory, is perfect; and that, which the Ministers of God re∣ceived from God, is that which is perfect; and that which they are to Minister, is for the perfecting of the Saints; till they all come in the Unity of the Faith unto a Perfect Man. So this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, every one in the Measure of Life Wait, that with it all your Minds may be guided up to the Father of Life, the Father of Spirits; all to receive Power from him, and Wisdom, that with it you may be ordered to his Glory: to whom be all Glory for ever! All keep in the Light and Life, that judgeth down that which is contrary to the Light and Life. So the Lord God Almigh∣ty be with you all. And keep your Meetings every where, being guided by that of God; by that you may see the Lord God among you, even him, who lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World: by whom the World was made; that Men, that be come into the World, might believe. He that believeth not, the Light condemns
him: He that believeth, cometh out of Condemnation. So this Light, which lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World, which they that hate it, stumble at; this is the Light of Men. All Friends, that speak abroad, see, that it be in the Life of God; for that begets to God: the Fruits of that shall never Wither. And this sows to the Spirit, which is in Prison; and of the Spirit reaps Life (to you this is the VVord of the Lord God) and the other sows to the Flesh, and of the Flesh reaps Corruption. And this you may see all the World over, amongst these Seeds-Men; what may be reaped in the Field, that is, the VVorld. Therefore in the Spirit of the Lord God VVait, which cuts down and casts out all this, the Root and Branches of it. So in that wait to receive Power, and the Lord God Almighty preserve you in it; whereby you may come to feel the Light, that comprehends Time, and the VVorld, and fathoms it: which believed in, gives you the Victory over the VVorld. And here the Power of the Lord is received, which subdues all the con∣trary; and puts off the Garments, that will stain and pollute. With which Light you come to reach the Light in every Man, which Christ enlightens every Man, that cometh into the world, with-all: And here the things of Christ come to be known, and the Voice of Christ heard. Therefore keep in the Light, the Covenant of Peace; and walk in the Covenant of Life. There is that, which maketh Merry over the Witness of God: and there is that, which maketh Merry in the Lord; which rejoyceth over that, which hath made merry over it: of that take notice, you who be in the Light. Such the Lord doth beautify, whose Trust is in his Strength: and the Lord doth see such, and them that be in his Light. But such as be from the Light, whose Eyes be after their Abominations and Idols, their Eyes are to be blinded; and their beautiful Idols, and their Abominations to be destroyed, and by the Light condemned, which they have made from the Life, in their own Strength: which with the Light is seen, and overthrown by the Power of God. If you can change my Covenant, saith the Lord, which keeps the Day in its Sea∣son, and the Night in its Season (mark, my Covenant, the Light) If you can change this; then may you change the Covenant of God with his Seed. So all Friends, that be turned to the Light, which cometh from him, by whom the VVorld was made, who was, before it was made, Christ Jesus, the Saviour of your Souls; abide in the Light, and you will see your Salvation to be VValls and Bulwarks against that, which the Light discovers to be contrary to it. Wait∣ing in the Light, you will receive the Power of God, which is the Gospel of Peace; that you may be shod with it. And know that in one another, which raiseth up the Seed of God, and sets it over the VVorld and the Earth, and Crucifies the Affections and Lusts: and then the Truth comes to reign, which is the Girdle. G. F. About this time Rice Jones of Nottingham (who had been a Baptist, and was turned Ranter; the same, that came to me in Darby-Jail)
he and his Company began to prophesy against me, giving out, That I was then at the highest; and that after that time I should fall down as fast. And he sent a bundle of Railing Papers from Nottingham to Mansfield, Clauson, and the Towns thereabouts, Judging Friends for declaring the Truth in the Markets and in the Steeple-houses; which Papers I Answered. But his and his Company's Prophecies came upon themselves: for soon after they fell to Pieces; and many of his Fol∣lowers came to be Friends, and continued so. And through the Lord's blessed Power, Truth and Friends have increased, and do in∣crease in the increase of God: And I by the same Power have been and am preserved, and kept in the Everlasting Seed, that never fell, nor changes. But Rice Jones took the Oaths, that were put to him; and so disobeyed the Command of Christ. Many such false Prophets have risen up against me, but the Lord hath blasted them; and will blast them all, who rise against the blessed Seed, and me in that. My Confidence is in the Lord: for whosoever did, I saw their End; and how the Lord would Confound them, before the Lord sent me forth. Synder-hill-GreenNow was I at Synder-hill-Green, where I had had a large Meeting in the day-time; and at Night we had a great Meeting again in Tho∣mas Stacy's House: for People came from far, and could not soon depart. The High-Sheriff of the County told Captain Bradford, that he intended to have come up, with half a dozen of his Troopers, to the Meeting; but the Lord prevented him, and stopt him. When I had stayed some Meetings thereabouts,Yorkshire. Holder∣ness. Land'send I traveled up and down in Yorkshire, as far as Holderness, and to the Lands-End that way, visi∣ting Friends and the Churches of Christ; which were finely settled under Christ's Teaching. At length I came to Captain Bradford's house, whither many Ranters came from York to wrangle; but they were confounded, and stopped Thither came she also, who was called the Lady Mountague, who was then Convinced; and lived and died in the Truth. Hallifax.Then I came again to Thomas Taylor's, within three Miles of Hal∣lifax, where there was a large Meeting of about Two hundred People: amongst which were many rude People, and divers Butchers; several of whom had Bound themselves with an Oath, before they came out, that they would kill me (as I was told:) One of those Butchers had been Accused for killing a Man and a Woman. They came in a very rude manner, and made a great Disturbance in the Meeting. The Meeting being in a Close, Thomas Taylor stood up and said unto them; If you will be Civil, you may stay; but if not, I charge you to be gone from off my Ground. But they were the worse; and said, They would make it like a Common: and they yelled, and made such a Noise, as if they had been come to a Bear-baiting. And they thrust Friends up and down; and Friends being peaceable, the Lord's Power came over them. Several times they thrust me off from the place I stood on, by the Crowding of the People together against me: but still I was moved of the Lord to stand up again, as I was thrust down. At last I was moved of the Lord to say unto them, If they would discourse of the things of God, let them come up to me one by one; and if they had any thing to say, or to Object, I would
Answer them all, one after another:1654. Near Hallifax at T. B's. Then they were all silent, and had nothing to say. And then the Lord's Power came so over them all, and Answered the Witness of God in them, that they were bound by the Power of God: and a glorious, powerful Meeting we had, and his Power went over all; and the Minds of People were turned by the Spirit of God in them to God, and to Christ their Teacher. And the powerful Word of Life was largely declared that day; and in the Life and Power of God we brake up our Meeting: and that Rude Company went their way to Hallifax. The People as∣ked them, Why they did not kill me, according to the Oath they had sworn? And they maliciously Answered, That I had so bewitched them, that they could not do it: Thus was the Devil chained at that time. Friends told me, that they used to come at other times, and be very rude and unruly; and sometimes break their Stools and Seats, and make fearful work amongst them: But the Lord's Power had now bound them. Shortly after this, that Butcher, that had been accused of killing a Man and a Woman before, and who was one of them, that had then Bound himself by an Oath to kill me, killed ano∣ther Man; and was thereupon sent to York-Jail.Example. Another of those rude Butchers, who had also sworn to kill me, having accustomed him∣self to Thrust his Tongue out of his Mouth, in derision of Friends, when they passed by him; had his Tongue so swollen out of his Mouth, that he could never draw it in again, but died so. Several strange and sudden Judgments came upon many of these Conspirators against me; which would be too large here to declare. God's Vengeance from Heaven, came upon the Blood-thirsty, who sought after Blood: for all such Spirits I laid before the Lord, and left them to him to deal with them, who is stronger than them all; in whose Power I was preserved, and carried on to do his Work. The Lord hath raised a fine People in those Parts, whom he hath drawn to Christ, and gathered in his Name; who feel Christ amongst them, and sit under his Teaching. After this I passed through the Countries, till I came to Balby;Balby. Lincoln∣shire. from whence several Friends went with me into Lincolnshire, where I had formerly been: of whom some went to the Steeple-houses, and some to private Meetings. There came to the Meeting, where I was, the Sheriff of Lincoln, and several with him; who made a great Con∣tention and Jangling for a time. But at length the Lord's Power struck him, that he was Convinced of the Truth, and received the Word of Life: as did several others also, that did Oppose; and con∣tinued among Friends, till they died. Great Meetings there were, and a large Convincement in those Parts: Many were turned to the Lord Jesus, and came to sit under his Teaching; leaving their Priests, and their superstitious Ways: and the Day of the Lord flourished over all. Amongst them, that came to our Meetings in that Country, there was one called Sir Richard Wrey; and he was Convinced: as was also his Brother, and his Brother's Wife, who abode in the Truth, and died therein; though he afterwards Run out. Having visited those Countries, I came into Darbyshire:Darbyshire. and the Sheriff of Lincoln, who was lately Convinced, came with me.
In one Meeting we had some Opposition;1654. Derbyshire. but the Lord's glorious Power gave dominion over all. At Night there came a Company of Bayliffs and Serving-men, and called me out: so I went out to them, having some Friends with me. When I was come out, they were exceeding Rude and Violent: for they had, it seems, Complotted to∣gether, and intended, To have Carried me away with them in the dark of the Evening by force; and then to have done me a Mischief: But the Lord's Power went over them, and chained them, so that they could not effect their Design; and at last they went away. The next day, Thomas Aldam understanding, that the Serving-men belonged to one called a Knight (who lived not far off) went to his House, and laid before him the bad Carriage of his Servants: And the Knight seemed to Rebuke them; and did not allow of their Evil Carriage to∣wards us. Nottingham-shire. Skegby.After this we came into Nottinghamshire to Skegby, where we had a great Meeting of all sorts of People: and the Lord's Power went over them, and all was quiet; and the People were turned to the Spirit of God, by which many came to receive his Power, and to sit under the Teaching of Christ, their Saviour. A great People the Lord hath that a ways. Kidsley-Park.Then I passed towards Kidsley-park, where there came many Ranters: but the Lord's Power checkt them. From thence I went up into the Peak-Country,Peak-Country. towards Thomas Hammersly's, where there came the Ranters of that Country, and many high Professors. The Ranters opposed me, and fell a Swearing: And when I reproved them for Swearing, they would bring Scripture for it, and said; Abraham, and Jacob, and Joseph swore; and the Priests and Moses, and the Prophets swore, and the Angels swore. Then I told them, I did confess, all these did so, as the Scripture records; but, said I, Christ (who said, Before Abraham was, I am) saith, Swear not at all. And Christ ends the Prophets, and the Old Priesthood, and the Dispensation of Moses, and reigns over the House of Jacob and of Joseph; and he says, Swear not at all. And God, when he bringeth in the First-begotten into the World, saith, Let all the Angels of God worship him, to wit, Christ Jesus, who saith; Swear not at all. And as for the Plea, that Men make for Swearing to end their Strife; Christ, who says, Swear not at all, destroys the Devil and his Works, who is the Author of Strife; for that is one of his Works. And God said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him So the Son is to be heard, who forbids Swearing. And the Apostle James, who did hear the Son of God, and followed him, and preached him, forbids all Oaths, Jam. 5.12. So the Lord's Power went over them, and his Son; and his Doctrine was set over them: and the Word of Life was fully and richly preached, and many were Convinced that day. This Thomas Hammersly being sum∣moned to serve upon a Jury, was admitted to serve without an Oath: and he being Fore-man of the Jury, when he brought in the Verdict, the Judge did declare: That he had been a Judge so many Years; but never heard a more upright Verdict, than that Quaker had then brought in. Much might be written of things of this nature; which time would fail to declare. But the Lord's blessed Power and Truth
was exalted over all; who is worthy of all Praise and Glory for ever! Thus travelling through Darbyshire, I visited Friends,Leicester∣shire. Swaning∣ton. till I came to Swanington in Leicestershire, where there was a General Meeting; to which many Ranters came, and Baptists and other Professors: for great Contests there had been with them, and with the Priests in that Town. To this Meeting several Friends came from several Parts; as John Audland, and Francis Howgil, and Edward Pyot from Bristol, and Edward Burrough from London; and several were Con∣vinced in those Parts. The Ranters, that came to the Meeting, made a disturbance, and were very rude; but at last the Lord's Power came over them, and they were Confounded. The next Day Jacob Bottomley, a great Ranter, came from Leicester; but the Lord's Power stopt him, and came over them all. There came a Priest too; but he also was Confounded by the mighty Power of the Lord: For about this Time the Priests, and the Baptists, and the Ranters, and other Professors were very rude, and stirred up the rude People against us. Now we sent to the Ranters to come forth, and Try their God: and there came abundance of them, who were very rude; and Sung, and whistled, and danced: but the Lord's Power so Confounded them, that many of them came to be Convinced. After this I came to Twy-cross, whither came some Ranters again;Twy-cross and they Sang, and danced before me. But I was moved in the Dread of the Lord to speak to them, and Reprove them; and the Lord's Power came over them, so that some of them were reached, and Convinced; and received the Spirit of God: and are come to be a pretty People, living and walking soberly, in the Truth of Christ. So I went to Anthony Brickley's in Warwickshire,Warwick∣shire. where there was a great Meeting; and several Baptists and other People came, and jangled: but the Lord's Power came over them. Then went I to Drayton in Leicestershire, to visit my Relations:Leicester∣shire. Drayton. and as soon as I was come in, Nathaniel Stephens the Priest, having gotten another Priest, and given notice to the Country, sent down to me, to come up to them: for they could not do any thing, till I came. Now I, having been Three Years away from my Relations, knew no∣thing of their Design and Intentions. But at last I went up into the Steeple-house-yard, where the Two Priests were; and they had gather∣ed abundance of People. When I came there, they would have had me gone into the Steeple-house. I asked them, What I should do there? And they said: Mr. Stephens could not bear the Cold. I told them, He might bear it as well as I. At last we went into a great Hall, and there was Richard Farnsworth with me: And a great Di∣spute we had with these Priests, concerning the Practice of the Priests, how contrary they were to Christ and his Apostles. The Priests would know, Where Tithes were forbidden, or ended? Whereupon I shewed them out of the Seventh Chapter to the Hebrews, That not only Tithes, but the Priesthood, that took Tithes, was ended; and the Law was ended and disannulled, by which the Priesthood was made, and Tithes were commanded to be paid. Then the Priests stirred up the People to some Lightness and Rudeness. Now I had known this Priest Stephens from a Child; therefore I laid open his Condition,
and the manner of his Preaching:1654. Drayton. and how that he, like the rest of the Priests, did apply the Promises to the first Birth, which must die. But I shewed, that the Promises were to the Seed, not to ma∣ny Seeds, but to the One Seed, Christ; who was one in Male and Female: for all were to be born again, before they could enter into the Kingdom of God. Then he said, I must not judge so: but I told him, He that was spiritual, judged all things. Then he con∣fessed. That that was a full Scripture: but Neighbours, said he, This is the Business; George Fox is come to the Light of the Sun, and now he thinks to put out my Star-light. Then I told him, I would not quench the least Measure of God in any; much less put out his Star-light, if it were true Star-light, Light from the Morning-star. But I told him, If he had any thing from Christ or God, he ought to speak it freely, and not take Tithes from the People for Preaching; seeing Christ commanded his Ministers to give freely, as they had received freely. So I charged him to preach no more for Tithes, or any Hire. But he said, He would not yield unto that. Then after a while the People began to be vain and rude; whereupon we broke up: Yet some were made loving to the Truth that Day. Now be∣fore we parted, I told them, That (if the Lord would) I intended to be at the Town that Day Seven-night again; and in the Interim I went into the Country, and had Meetings: and came thither again that Day Seven-night. Against that time this Priest had got Seven Priests to help him: for Priest Stephens had given notice at a Lecture on a Market-day at Adderston, That such a Day there would be a Meeting and a Dispute with me: But I knew nothing of it; but only had said, I should be in Town that day Seven-night again. Now these Eight Priests had gathered several Hundreds of People, even most of the Country thereabouts, and they would have had me into the Steeple-house; but I would not go in, but got on an Hill, and there spoke to them and the People. There was with me Thomas Taylor, who had been a Priest; and James Parnel, and several other Friends. The Priests thought, that Day to have Trampled down Truth; but the Truth came over them. And then they grew Light, and the People Rude; and the Priests would not stand to Trial with me: but would be contend∣ing here and there a little, with one Friend or other. At last one of the Priests brought his Son to dispute with me; but his Mouth was soon stopt: And when he could not tell, how to Answer; he would go ask his Father: And his Father was confounded also, when he came to Answer for his Son. So after they had toiled them∣selves, they went away in a Rage to Priest Stephens his House to drink: And as they went away, I said; I never came in a Place, where so many Priests together would not stand the Trial with me. Where∣upon they and some of their Wives came about me, and laid hold on me, and fawningly said; What might I have been, if it had not been for the Quakers? And then they fell a pushing of Friends to and fro, to thrust them from me, and to pluck me to themselves. After a while several lusty Fellows came, and took me up in their Arms, and carried me into the Steeple-house-porch; intending to have carried me into the Steeple-house by Force: But the Door being locked, they fell down on an Heap, having me under them. As soon as I could
I got up from under them, and got to my Hill again: Then they got me from that Place again, and got me to the Steeple-house-wall, and set me on a Bass, like a Stool: And all the Priests, being come back, stood under with the People. And the Priests cried, Come, to Argument, to Argument: I said, I denied all their Voices, for they were the Voices of the Hirelings and the Strangers. And they cried, Prove it, prove it: Then I directed them to the tenth of John, where they might see, what Christ said of such: for he said, He was the true Shepherd, that laid down his Life for his Sheep, and his Sheep heard his Voice, and followed him: But the Hireling would fly, when the Wolf came, because he was an Hireling. And I offered to prove, that they were such Hirelings. Then the Priests plucked me off from the Bass again; and they themselves got all upon Basses under the Steeple-house-wall. Then I felt the mighty Power of God arise over all (though the People began to be a little rude) and I told them, If they would but give Audience, and hear me qui∣etly, I would shew them by the Scriptures, why I denied those Eight Priests or Teachers, that stood there before me; and all the Hireling-Teachers of the World whatsoever: and I would give them Scriptures, for what I said. Whereupon both Priests and People Consented. Then I shewed them out of the Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Micha, Malachy and other Prophets, that they were in the Steps of such, as God sent his true Prophets to Cry against: For, said I, You are such, as the Prophet Jeremiah cried against, Chap. 5. when he said; The Prophets prophesie falsly, and the Priests bear rule by their means: which he called an horrible, filthy thing. And you are such as they, That used their Tongues and said, Thus saith the Lord, when the Lord never spake to them: And such as followed their own Spirits, and saw nothing; but spake forth a Divination of their own Brain: and by their Lies and their Light∣ness had caused the People to err, Jer. 14. And you are such as They were, that sought for their Gain from their Quarter; that were as greedy, dumb Dogs, that could never have enough, whom the Lord sent his Prophet Isaiah to cry against, Isa. 56. And you are such, as they were, who taught for handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread; who sowed Pillows under Peoples Arm-holes, that they might lie soft in their Sins, Ezek. 13. And you are such as They, that Taught for the Fleece, and the Wool, and made a Prey of the Peo∣ple, Ezek. 34. But the Lord is gathering his Sheep from your Mouths, and from off your barren Mountains; and is bringing them to Christ, the one Shepherd, which he hath set over his Flocks: as by his Prophet Ezekiel he then declared he would do. And you are such as They, that Divined for Money, and preached for Hire; and if a Man did not put into their Mouths, they prepared War against him, as the Prophet Micha complained, Chap. 3. Thus went I on through the Prophets, too largly to be here repeated. Then coming to the New Testament, I shewed from thence, that They were like the Chief Priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees of old, such as Christ cryed Wo against, Matth. 23. And that they were such false Apostles, as the true Apostles Cried against, such as taught for filthy Lucre; and such Antichrists and Deceivers, as they Cried against,
that minded Earthly things, and served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies: for they that served Christ, gave freely and preached freely, as he commanded them. But they that will not preach without Hire, Tithes or outward Means, serve their own Bellies, and not Christ; and through the good words of the Scri∣ptures, and feigned Words of their own, they made Merchandize of the People then, as (said I ye do now. So when I had largely quoted th Scriptures, and shewed them, wherein they were like the Pha∣risees, loving to be called of Men Masters, and to go in Long Robes, and to stand Praying in the Synagogues, and to have the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the like; and when I had thrown them out in the sight of the People amongst the false Prophets, Deceivers, Scribes and Pharisees, and shewed at large, how such as They, were judged and condemned by the true Prophets, by Christ, and by the Apostles, I directed them to the Light of Christ Jesus, who enlightens every Man, that cometh into the World: that by it they might see, whether these things were not true, as had been spoken. Now when I appealed to That of God in their Consciences, the Light of Christ Jesus in them, they could not abide to hear of it; they were all quiet till then: but then a Professor said; George, What! wilt thou never have done? I told him, I should have done shortly. So I went on a little longer, and cleared my self of them in the Lord's Power. When I had done, all the Priests and People stood silent for a time: At last one of the Priests said; They would read the Scriptures, that I had quoted. I told them, With all my Heart. They began to read the 23d of Jeremiah, and there they saw the Marks of the false Pro∣phets, that he cried against. When they had read a Verse or two, I said, Take notice, People: but the Priests said, Hold thy Tongue, George. I bid them, Read the whole Chapter throughout; for it was all against them: Then they stopt, and would read no further; but asked me a Question. I told them, I would Answer their Question, the Matter being first granted, that I had charged them with, viz. That they were false Prophets, false Teachers, Antichrists and De∣ceivers, such as the true Prophets, Christ and the Apostles cried against. A Professor said Nay to that; but I said, Yea: For you leaving the Matter, and going to another thing, seem to consent to the proof of the former Charge. Then I Answered their Question, which was this; Seeing those false Prophets were adulterated, Whether I did judge Priest Stephens to be an Adulterer? To which I Answered, He was adulterated from God in his Practice, like those false Prophets and the Jews. They would not stand to vindicate him, but broke up the Meeting. Then the Priests whispered together; and Priest Stephens came to me, and desired, that my Father and Brother and I might go aside with him, that he might speak to me in private; and the rest of the Priests should keep the People from coming to us. I was very loth to go aside with him: but the People cried, Go George, do Geore, go aside with him: and I was afraid, if I did not go, they would say, I was disobedient to my Parents. So I went; and the rest of the Priests were to keep the People off: but they could not; for the People being willing to hear, drew close to us. I asked the Priest, what he had to say? And he said, If he was out of
the way, I should pray for him; and if I was out of the way, he would pray for me: and he would give me a Form of Words to pray for him by. I replied; It seems, Thou dost not know, whether thou beest in the Right Way, or no; neither dost thou know, whether I am in the Right Way or no: But I know, that I am in the Everlasting Way, Christ Jesus, which thou art out of. And thou would'st give me a Form of Words to pray by, and yet thou deniest the Common-prayer-Book to pray by, as well as I; and I deny thy Form of Words, as well as it. If thou would'st have me pray for thee by a Form of Words, is not this to deny the Apostle's Doctrine and Practice of Praying by the Spirit, as it gave words and utterance? Here the People fell a Laughing: but I was moved to speak more to him. And when I had cleared my self to him and them, we parted; after I had told them, That I should (God willing) be in the Town that day Seven-night again. So the Priests packt away, and many People were Convinced that day: for the Lord's Power came over all. And whereas they thought to have Confounded Truth that day, many were Convinced of it; and many that were Convinced before, were by that day's work Confirmed in the Truth, and abode in it: and a great Shake it gave to the Priests. Yea, my Father, though he was an Hearer and Follower of the Priest, was so well satisfied, that he struck his Cane upon the Ground, and said; Truly I see, he that will but stand to the Truth, it will carry him out. So I passed about in the Country, till that day Seven-night; and then I came again: for we had appointed a Meeting at my Relation's House. Now Priest Stephens having had notice before hand thereof, had got ano∣ther Priest to him: and they had got a Company of Troopers with them; and sent for me to come to them. But I sent them word, Our Meeting was appointed; and they might come to it, if they would. The Priests came not; but the Troopers came, and many rude People Now they had laid their Plot, That the Troopers should take every one's Name, and then command them to go home; and such as would not go, they should take, and carry them away with them. Accord∣ingly they began, and took several Names, charging them to go home; but when they came to take my Name, my Relations told them, I was at home already: So they could not take me away that time. Nevertheless they took my Name: but the Lord's Power was over them, and they went away, both Professors and Troopers, Crost and Vext, because they had not their Ends. But several were Convinced that day, and admired the Love and Power of God. This was that Priest Stephens, that had once said of me; Never such a Plant was bred in England: Yet afterwards he reported, That I was carried up into the Clouds, and found again full of Gold and Silver; and many Lies, and false Reports he raised on me: but the Lord swept them all away. Now the Reason, why I would not go into their Steeple-house was, because I was to bear my Testimony against it, and to bring all off from such Places, to the Spirit of God; that they might know, their Bodies to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost: And to bring them off from all the Hireling-Teachers, to Christ their free Teacher, that had died for them, and purchased them with his Blood.
After this I went into the Country, and had several Meetings, and came to Swannington, where the Souldiers came again; but the Meeting was quiet, and the Lord's Power was over all, and the Souldiers did not meddle. Then I went to Leicester; and from Leicester to Whetston.Leicester. Whetston. But before the Meeting began, there came about Seventeen Troopers of Coll. Hacker's Regiment, with his Mar∣shal; and they took me up before the Meeting; though Friends were beginning to gather together: for there were several Friends come out of several Parts. I told the Marshal, He might let all the Friends go, I would answer for them all: whereupon he took me, and let all the Friends go; only Alexander Parker went along with me. At Night they had me before Coll. Hacker, and his Major, and Captains, a great Company of them; and a great deal of Dis∣course we had about the Priests, and about Meetings (for at this time there was a noise of a Plot against O. Cromwel.) And much Reasoning I had with them about the Light of Christ, which enlight∣neth every Man, that cometh into the World. Coll. Hacker asked, Whether it was not this Light of Christ, that made Judas betray his Master, and after led him to hang himself. I told him, No: That was the Spirit of Darkness, which hated Christ, and his Light. Then Coll. Hacker said, I might go home, and keep at home; and not go abroad to Meetings. I told him; I was an Innocent Man, free from Plots, and denied all such Work. Then his Son Needham said, Father, This Man hath reigned too long; it is time to have him cut off. I asked him, For what? what had I done? or whom had I wrong∣ed from a Child? for I was bred and born in that Country, and who could accuse me of any Evil from a Child? Then Coll. Hacker asked me again; If I would go home, and stay at home? I told him, If I should promise him so, that would manifest, that I was guilty of something to go home, and make my home a Prison: And if I went to Meetings, they would say, I broke their Order. Therefore I told them; I should go to Meetings, as the Lord should order me; and therefore could not submit to their Requirings: but I said, we were a peaceable People. Well then, said Coll. Hacker, I will send you to Morrow Morning by six a Clock to my Lord Protector, by Captain Drury, one of his Life-guard. That Night I was kept a Prisoner at the Marshalsey; and the next Morning by the sixth hour I was ready, and delivered to Captain Drury. I desired, he would let me speak with Coll. Hacker, before I went; and he had me to his Bed-side. Coll. Hacker at me presently again, To go home, and keep no more Meet∣ings. I told him, I could not submit to that; but must have my Liberty to serve God, and to go to Meetings. Then, said he, you must go before the Protector: Whereupon I kneeled on his Bedside, and besought the Lord to forgive him; for he was as Pilate, tho' he would wash his Hands: and when the day of his Misery and Trial should come upon him, I bid him, Then Remember, what I had said to him. But he was stirred up, and set on by Priest Stephens, and the other Priests and Professors, wherein their Envy and Base∣ness was manifest; who, when they could not overcome me by Disputes and Arguments, nor resist the Spirit of the Lord, that was in me, then they got Souldiers to take me up.
Afterwards, when this Coll. Hacker was in Prison in London,1654. Wherston. a day or two before he was Executed, he was put in mind, of what he had done against the Innocent: And he remembred it, and confest to it to Margaret Fell, and said; He knew well, whom she meant; and he had a Trouble upon him for it. So his Son, who told his Father, I had reigned too long, and that it was time to have me cut off, might observe, how his Father was Cut off afterwards, being hanged at Tyburn. Now was I carried up a Prisoner by Captain Drury aforesaid from Leicester; and when we came to Harborough, he asked me,Leicester. Harbo∣rough. North∣ampton. If I would go home, and stay a Fort-night? I should have my Liberty, he said, if I would not go to, nor keep Meetings. I told him, I could not promise any such thing. Several times upon the Road did he ask, and try me after the sme manner; and still I gave him the same Answers. So he brought me to London,London. Charing-Cross. and lodged me at the Mer∣maid over against the Mews at Charing-Cross. And on the way, as we traveled, I was moved of the Lord to Warn People at the Inns and Places, where I came, of the day of the Lord, that was coming upon them. And William Dewsberry and Marmaduke Stor being in Prison at Northampton, he let me go, and visit them. After Captain Drury had lodged me at the Mermaid, he left me there, and went to give the Protector an Account of me. And when he came to me again, he told me, The Protector did require, that I should promise, not to take up a carnal Sword or Weapon against him or the Government, as it then was; and that I should write it, in what words I saw good, and set my Hand to it: I said little in Reply to Captain Drury. But the next Morning I was moved of the Lord to write a Paper To the Protector, by the name of Oliver Cromwel, wherein I did in the presence of the Lord God declare, that I did deny the wearing or drawing of a carnal Sword, or any other outward Weapon against him or any Man. And that I was sent of God to stand a Witness against all Violence, and against the Works of Dark∣ness; and to turn People from the Darkness to the Light, and to bring them from the Occasion of War and Fighting, to the peaceable Gospel; and from being Evil-Doers, which the Magistrates Sword should be a Terror to. When I had written, what the Lord had given me to write, I set my Name to it, and gave it to Captain Drury to give to O. Cromwel; which he did. Then after some time Captain Drury brought me before the Protector himself at Whitehall:White∣hall. It was in a Morning, before he was dressed; and one Harvey, that had come a little among Friends, but was disobedient, waited upon him. When I came in, I was moved to say, Peace be in this House: and I bid him, Keep in the Fear of God, that he might receive Wisdom from him; that by it he might be ordered, and with it might order all things under his Hand to God's Glory. I spake much to him of Truth; and a great deal of Discourse I had with him about Reliion: wherein he carried himself very moderately. But he said, We quarrelled with the Priests, whom he called Ministers: I told him, I did not quarrel with them, but they quarrelled with me and my Friends. But, said I, If we own the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, we cannot hold up such Teachers, Prophets and
Shepherds,1654. White∣hall. as the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles declared against; but we must declare against them by the same Power and Spirit. Then I shewed him, That the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles declared freely, and declared against them, that did not declare freely; such as preached for filthy Lucre, and divined for Money, and preached for Hire, and were covetous and greedy, like the dumb Dogs, that could never have enough: And that they, that have the same Spirit, that Christ and the Prophets and the Apostles had, could not but declare against all such now, as they did then. As I spake, he would several times say, It was very good, and it was Truth. I told him, That all Christendom (so called) had the Scri∣ptures, but they wanted the Power and Spirit, that they had, who gave forth the Scriptures; and that was the reason, they were not in Fellowship with the Son, nor with the Father, nor with the Scri∣ptures, nor one with another. Many more words I had with him; but People coming in, I drew a little back: And as I was turning, he catched me by the Hand, and with Tears in his Eyes, said, Come again to my House; for if thou and I were but an hour of a day together, we should be nearer one to the other: adding, That he wisht me no more Ill, than he did to his own Soul. I told him, If he did, he wronged his own Soul: And I bid him hearken to God's Voice, that he might stand in his Counsel, and obey it; and if he did so, that would keep him from hardness of Heart: but if he did not hear God's Voice, his Heart would be hardened. And he said, It was true. Then went I out:G. F. set at Liberty. And when Capt. Drury came out after me, he told me; His Lord Protector said, I was at Liberty, and might go whither I would. Then I was brought into a great Hall, where the Protector's Gentlemen were to dine; and I asked them, What they did bring me thither for? They said, It was by the Protector's Order, that I might dine with them. I bid them, Let the Protector know, I would not eat a bit of his Bread, nor drink a sup of his Drink. When he heard this, he said; Now I see, there is a People risen and come up, that I cannot win either with Gifts, Honours, Offices or Places; but all other Sects and People I can. But it was told him again, That we had forsook our own; and were not like to look for such things from him. Now I being set at Liberty, went up to the Inn again, where Capt. Drury had at first lodged me. This Capt. Drury, though he sometimes carried fairly, was an Enemy to me, and to Truth, and opposed it: and when Professors came to me (while I was under his Custody) and he was by, he would scoff at Trembling, and call us Quakers; as the In∣dependents and Presbyterians had Nick-named us before. But after∣wards he came on a time to me, and told me, That, as he was lying on his Bed to rest himself in the day-time, a sudden Trembling seized on him, that his Joints knocked together; and his Body shook so, that he could not rise from his Bed: he was so shaken, that he had not strength enough left to rise. But he felt the Power of the Lord was upon him; and he tumbled off his Bed, and cried to the Lord, and said; He would never speak against the Quakers more, such as Trembled at the Word of God.
During the Time, that I was Prisoner at Charing-Cross,1654. Charing-Cross. there came abundace to see me, People almost of all Sorts, Priests, Professors, Officers of the Army, &c. And one Time a Company of Officers being with me, desired me to pray with them: I sate still, with my Mind retired to the Lord. At last I felt the Power and Spirit of God move in me: and the Lord's Power did so shake and shatter them, that they wondred; though they did not live in it. Among those, that came thither to see me, there was one Colonel Packer, with several of his Officers; and while they were with me, came in one Cob, and a great Company of Ranters with him. The Ranters began to call for Drink and Tobacco: but I desired them to forbar it in my Room, telling them, If they had such a Mind to it, they might go into another Room. One of them cried, All is ours: and another of them said; All is well. I replied, How is all well, while thou art so peevish, and envious, and crabbed? for I saw, he was of a peevish Nature: and so I spake to their Condi∣tions; and they were sensible of it, and looked upon one another, wondring. Then Colonel Packer began to talk with a light, chaffy Mind, con∣cerning God, and Christ, and the Scriptures: That was a great Grief to my Soul and Spirit, when I heard him talk so lightly; so that I told him. He was too light to talk of the things of God: for he did not know the solidity of a Man. Thereupon the Officers raged, and said; Would I say so of their Colonel! This Packer was a Bap∣tist, and he and the Ranters bowed and scraped to one another very much: for it was the manner of the Ranters to be exceeding Comple∣mental (as they call it) so that Packer bid them, Give over their Complements: But I told them, They were fit to go together, for they were both of one Spirit. This Colonel Packer lived at Theobald's near Waltham, and was made a Justice of Peace. He set up a great Meeting of the Baptists at Theo∣bald's-Park; for he, and some other Officers had purchased it. They were exceeding High, and railed against Friends and Truth; and threatned to apprehend me with their Warrants, if ever I came there. Yet after I was set at Liberty, I was moved of the Lord God to go down to Theobalds, and appoint a Meeting hard by them;Theo∣balds. to which many of his People came: and divers of his Hearers were Convinced of the Way of Truth, and received Christ, the free Teacher, and came off from him; and that made him Rage the more. But the Lord's Power came over him so, that he had not Power to meddle with me. Then I went to Waltham hard by him,Waltham. and had a Meeting there; but the People were very rude, and gathered about the House, and brake the Windows. Whereupon I went out to them, with the Bible in my Hand, and desired them to come in; and told them, I would shew them Scripture both for our Principles and Practices. And when I had done so, I shewed them also, That their Teachers were in the Steps of such, as the Prophets, and Christ, and the Apo∣stles cryed against. Then I directed them to the Light of Christ, and Spirit of God in their own Hearts, that by it they might come to know their free Teacher, the Lord Jesus Christ. The Meeting be∣ing ended, they went away quieted and satisfied; and a Meeting
hath since been settled in that Town.1654. London. But this was sometime after I was set at Liberty by O. Cromwel. For when I came from White-hall to the Mermaid at Charing-Cross (which had been my Prison) I staid not long there: but went into the City of London, where we had great and powerful Meetings; and so great were the Throngs of People, that I could hardly get to and from the Meetings for the Crouds of People: And the Truth spread exceedingly. Thomas Aldam and Robert Craven (who had been She∣riff of Lincoln) and divers Friends, came up to London after me: but Alexander Parker abode with me. Then after a while I went to White-hall again, and was moved to declare the Day of the Lord amongst them;White-Hall. and that the Lord was come to teach his People himself: So I preached Truth both to the Officers, and to them that were called Oliver's Gentlemen, who were of his Guard. But there was a Priest, that Opposed, while I was de∣claring the Word of the Lord amongst them: For Oliver had several Priests about him, of which this was his News-monger; an envious Priest, and a light, scornful, chaffy man. I bid him Repent; and he put it in his News-book the next Week, That I had been at White-hall, and had bid a Godly Minister there Repent. When I went thither a∣gain, I met with him; and abundance of People gathered about me. Then I manifested the Priest to be a Liar in several things, that he had affirmed; and so he was put to Silence. He put in the News-book, That I wore Silver-Buttons; which was false: for they were but Alchimy. Afterward he put in the News-book, That I hung Ribbands on People's Arms, which made them to follow me: This was another of his Lies; for I never wore, nor used Ribbands in my Life. Three Friends▪ went to examine this Priest, that gave forth this false Intelligence; and to know of him, where he had that Information? He told them, It was a Woman, that told him so; and that if they would come again, he would tell them the Woman's Name. When they came again, he said; It was a Man, but would not tell them his Name then; but if they would come again, he said, he would tell them his Name, and where he lived. They went the Third Time; and then he would not tell, who told him: but offered, If I would give it under my Hand, that there was no such thing, he would put that into the News-book. Thereupon the Friends carried it to him under my Hand; but when they came, he brake his Promise, and would not put it in: but was in a Rage, and threatned them with the Constable. This was the deceitful doing of this Forger of Lies: And these Lies he spread over all the Nation in the News-books, to render Truth Odious, and to put Evil into People's Minds against Friends and Truth; of which a more large Account may be seen in a Book printed soon after this time, for the clearing of Friends and Truth from the Slanders, Lies and false Reports raised and cast upon them. These Priests, the News-Mongers, were of the Independent Sect, like them in Leicester: But the Lord's Power came over all their Lies, and swept them away; and many came to see the Naughtiness of these Priests. The God of Heaven car∣ried me over all in his Power, and his blessed Power went over the Na∣tion: Insomuch, that many Friends about this time were moved to go up and down, to sound forth the Everlasting Gospel, in most parts
of this Nation, and also into Scotland;1654. White-Hall. and the Glory of the Lord was felt over all to his Everlasting Praise. And a great Convincement there was in London, and some in the Protector's House and Family: I went to have seen him again, but could not get to him; the Offi∣cers were grown so Rude. The Presbyterians, Independents and Baptists were in a great Rage: for many of their People came to be turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, and sate down under his Teachings, and received his Power, and felt it in their Hearts; and then they were moved of the Lord to declare a∣gainst the rest of them. I appointed a Meeting in the Fields near Acton, in which the Word of Life, and the Saving Truth was declared freely; and the Lord's Power was eminently manifested, and his blessed Day exalted over all. About this time I was moved to write a Paper, and send it forth among the Professors; a Copy of which here followeth. To all Professors of Christianity. ALL they, that professed Jesus Christ in Words, and yet heard him not, when he was come, they said; he was a Deceiver and a Devil: The Chief Priests were they, that called him so. So the Jews said; He hath a Devil, and is mad; why do ye hear him? But others said; These are not the Words of him, that hath a Devil: Can a Devil open the Eyes of the Blind? The Jews then doubted, whe∣ther he were the Christ, or no; and so all, like the Jews, in the Knowledge, in the Notion, that profess a Christ without only, where Christ is risen within, they do not own him, but do doubt of him; though Christ be the same now and for ever. Jesus Christ said, I and my Father are one; then the Jews took up Stones to stone him: And where Jesus Christ is now spiritually come and made manifest, the Jews, such as are Christians in outward Profession only, have the same hard Hearts inwardly now, as they had then; and do Cast Stones at him, where he is Risen. Jesus said, For which of these good works do ye stone me? The Jews answered, for thy good works we stone thee not; but for Blasphemy, in that thou being a Man, makest thy self God. Jesus answered them; Is it not written in your Law, I said, you are Gods? and the Scripture cannot be broken. Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the World, Thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God? The Jews said to him, say we not well, that thou hast a Devil? Jesus answered, I honour my Father, and ye dishonour me. And they that were in the Synagogue, rose up, and thrust him out of the City; and took him up to the edge of the Hill, whereon their City was built, to cast him down head-long. The Pharisees said of him, He casteth out Devils by the Prince of Devils. Jesus Christ was called a Glutton and a Wine-bib∣ber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners: But Wisdom is justified of her Children. The Officers, when the High-priests and Pharisees asked them, Why have ye not brought him, said; Never Man spake, like this Man. The Pharisees said, Are ye also deceived? Do any
of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believe on him?1654. London. but this People, which know not the Law, are accursed. Nicodemus said unto them (he that came unto Jesus by Night) doth our Law judge any Man, before it hear him? When Stephen confessed Jesus, the Substance of all Fi∣gures and Types, and was brought before the Chief-Priests to his Trial, he told them; The Most-High dwelleth not in Temples made with Hands: and brought the Prophets Words to witnes, and told them; They were stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, and always resisted the Holy Ghost, as their Fathers had done. Stephen was full of the Holy Ghost, and said; he saw Jesus: and they ran upon him, and stoned him to Death, as he was calling upon the Lord. When Paul Confessed Jesus Christ, and his Resurrection, Festus said, he was Mad When Paul preached the Resurrection, some mocked: The Jews perswaded the People, and they stoned him; and drew him out of the City, thinking, he had been dead. The Jews stirred up the Gentiles, to make their Minds Evil-affected towards the Brethren. The Jews stirred up the Devout and Honour∣able Women, and the Chief of the City; and raised up Persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their Coasts: And there was an Assault made both of the Gentiles and of the Jews, with their Rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone them. In like manner all in the nature of those Jews now, whose Religion stands in Notions, do stir up the Rulers, and do stir up the ignorant People, and incense them against Jesus Christ, where he is risen, to stone them all with one Consent, in whom he is risen. This is, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, and the blindness of the Peo∣ple might be discovered. And the same Power now is made mani∣fest, and doth overturn the World, as did overturn the World, to the exalting of the Lord, and to the pulling down of the Kingdom of Satan, and of this World; and setting up his own Kingdom, to his everlasting Praise. The Lord is now exalting Himself, and throwing down Man's self: The Proud one's Head is aloft, fearing he should lose his Pride, and his Crown; the Priests, they incense the ignorant People, for fear their Trade should go down; and the Professors, they shew forth, what is in them, being full of Rage: which shews, that Jesus Christ, the Substance is not there; but a stony Heart, to stone the Precious, where it is risen. The Carnal Mind feeds upon the outward Letter, and Earth feeds upon Earth; and that Vine-yard is not dressed, but is full of Briars, and Nettles: and Ravenous Beasts, Swine and Dogs, Wolves and Lions, and all ve∣nemous Creatures lodge in that Habitation. That House is foul, and is not swept: And these are the Persecutors of the Just, and Enemies of the Truth, and the Enemies of Christ. These are Blas∣phemers of God and his Truth: These are they, that call upon God with their Lips, but their Hearts are far from him. These are they, that feed on Lies, Priests and People: These are they, that Incense all the People, and stir up Envy; for it begets its own, one like it self. These are they, that are the Waves of the Sea, foam∣ing out their own Shame. These are they, that have double Eyes; whose Bodies are full of Darkness. These are they, that paint themselves with the Prophets, with Christ's, and with the Apostles
Words most fair: whited Walls you are; painted Sepulchres you are; Murderers of the Just you are. Your Eyes are double, your Minds are double, your Hearts are double: Ye Flatterers, Repent from your carnal Ends, who are full of Mischief; pretending God and Godliness, taking him for your Cloke: But he will uncover you, and he hath uncovered you to his Children. He will make you bare, and discover your Secrets, and take off your Crown; and take away your Mantle, and your Vail, and strip you of your Cloathing; that your Nakedness may appear, and how you sit deceiving the Nations. Your Abomination, and your Falseness is now made mani∣fest to them, who are of God; who in his Power Triumph over you, Rejoice over you, the Beast, the Dragon, the false Prophet, the Seducer, the Hypocrite; the Mother of all Harlots: now thou must have thy Cup double; Give it to her double. Sing over her, ye Righteous Ones, sing over them all, ye Saints; Triumph in Glo∣ry, Triumph over the Deceit: Sing the Song of the Lamb; Triumph over the World: spread the Truth abroad. Come ye Captive ones out of Prison, and Rejoice with one accord; for the Joyful Days are coming: Let us be glad, and Rejoice for ever! Singleness of Heart is come; Pureness of Heart is come: Joy and Gladness is come. The glorious God is exalting himself: and Truth hath been talked of; but now it is possessed. Christ hath been talked of; but now he is come, and possessed. The Glory hath been talked of; but now it is possessed, and the Glory of Man is defacing. The Son of God hath been talked of; but now he is come, and hath given us an Un∣derstanding. Ʋnity hath been talked of; but now it is come. Vir∣gins have been talkt of; but now they are come with Oil in their Lamps. He will be glorified alone: Where Pride is thrown down, Earth and the fleshly Will is thrown down, and the Pure is raised up; there alone is the Lord Exalted. Let the Heavens Bow down to him, and the Earth Reel to and fro, and Stagger up and down: The Lord is setting up his Throne and his Crown, and throwing down the Crown of Man; and he alone will be glorified: To whom be all Honour and Glory, all Praises and all Thanks. Who gives his Children Wisdom and Strength, Knowledge and Vertue, Power and Riches, Blessings and durable Substance; and an Eye to discern, and an Ear to hear things singly: and brings down the Pride of Man's Heart, and turns the Wicked out of the Kingdom. The Righteous Ones inherit Righteousness; the Pure Ones Pureness, the Holy Ones Holiness: Praises, Praises be to the Lord, whose Glory now shines, whose Day is broken forth; which is hid from the World, hid from all worldly wise Ones, and from all the Prudent of this World: hid from the Fowls of the Air: hid from all Vultures Eyes, and all venemous Beasts; and all Liars, and all Dogs, and all Swine. But to them that fear his Name, the Secrets of the Lord are made mani∣fest, the Treasures of Wisdom are opened, and the Fulness of Know∣ledge: For thou, O Lord! dost make thy self manifest to thy Children. G. F.
My Spirit was greatly burdened to see the Pride, that was got up in the Nation, even amongst the Professors; and in the sense thereof I was moved to give forth the following Paper, di∣rected— To such, as follow the World's Fashions. WHAT a World is this! How doth the Devil garnish him∣self! and how obedient are People to do his Will and Mind, that they are altogether carried away with Fooleries and Vanities, both Men and Women, that they have lost the hidden Man of the Heart, and the meek and quiet Spirit; which with the Lord is of great price. They have lost the Adorning of Sarah; they are putting on Gold and gay Apparel: Women plaiting the Hair, Men and Women powdering it, making their Backs look, like Bags of Meal. They look so strange▪ that they can scarce look at one another; they are so lifted up in Pride. Pride is flown up into their Head, and hath so lifted them up, that they Snuff up, like Wild Asses, and like Ephraim: they seed upon Wind; and are gotten to be like Wild Heifers, who feed upon the Mountains. Pride hath puffed up every one of them: They are out of the Fear of God, Men and Women. Young and Old; one puffs up another. They must be in the Fashion of the World, else they are not in esteem; else they shall not be respected, if they have not Gold or Silver upon their Backs, or if his Hair be not powdered. But if he have store of Ribbands hanging about his Waste, and at his Knees, and in his Hat, of divers Colours, Red or White, or Black or Yel∣low, and his Hair be powdered; then he is a brave Man, then he is accepted, then he is no Quaker, because he hath Ribbands on his Back and Belly and Knees, and his Hair powdered: This is the Array of the World. But is not this from the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, or the Pride of Life? Likewise the Women having their Gold, their Spots on their Faces, Noses, Cheeks, Fore-heads, having their Rings on their Fingers, wearing Gold, having their Cuffs double, under and above, like unto a Butcher with his white Sleeves; having their Ribbands tied about their Hands, and three or four Gold-Laces about their Cloths; This is no Quaker, say they. This is that, that pleaseth the World; this Array, this Attire pleaseth the World: and if they cannot get these things, they are discon∣tented. But this is not the Attire of Sarah, whose Adorning was in the hidden Man of the Heart, of a quiet and meek Spirit: This is the Adorning of the Heathen; not of the Apostle, nor of the Saints, whose Adorning was, not wearing of Gold, nor plaiting of Hair, but a meek and quiet Spirit; which was and is of great price with the Lord. And here was the Sobriety and good Ornament, which was of the Lord accepted. This was Paul's Exhortation and Preaching: But we see, the Talkers of Paul's Words live out of Paul's Command, and out of the Example of Sarah; and are found in the steps of the great Heathen, who comes to examin the Apostles in his gorgeous Apparel. Now, are not all these, that have got their Ribbands
hanging about their Arms, Hands, Back, Waists, Knees, Hats, like unto Fidlers-Boys? Which shews, that you are gotten into the basest and most contemptible Life, who be in the Fashion of the Fidlers-Boys and Stage-Players, quite out of the Paths and Steps of solid Men; and in the very Steps and Paths of the wild Heads, who give themselves up to every Invention and Vanity of the World, that appears; and is inventing, how to get it upon their Backs, Heads, Feet and Legs, and say, If it be out of the Fashion, it is no∣thing worth. Are not these the Spoilers of the Creation, who have the fat and the best of it, and waste and destroy it? Do not these Cumber God's Earth? Let that of God in all Consciences Answer, and who are in the Wisdom, judge. And further: If one get a pair of Britches like a Coat, and hang them about with Points, and up almost to the Middle, a pair of double Cuffs upon his Hands, and a Feather in his Cap, here's a Gentleman; bow before him, put off your Hats, bow, get a Company of Fidlers, a set of Musick, and Women to dance. This is a brave Fellow: up in the Chamber; up in the Chamber without, and up in the Chamber within. Are these your fine Christians? Yea, say they, They are Christians: Yea, but, say the serious People, They are out of Christ's Life, and out of the Apostles Command, and out of the Saints Ornament. And to see such, as are before described, as are in the Fashions of the World before-mentioned, a Company of them playing at Bouls, or at Tables, or at Shovel-Board; or Each taking his Horse, that hath Bunches of Ribbands on his Head, as the Rider hath on his own, (who, perhaps, hath a Ring in his Ear too) and so go to Horse-racing, to spoil the Creatures; Oh, these are Gentlemen in∣deed, these are bred up Gentlemen, these are brave Fellows, and they must take their Recreation; for Pleasures are lawful. And these in their Sports set up their Shouts, like unto the wild Asses; they are like unto the Kine or Beasts, when they are put to Grass, Lowing, when they are full. And here is the Glorying of them be∣fore-mentioned; but it is in the Flesh, not in the Lord: These are bad Christians, and shew, that they are gluttoned with the Creatures, and then the Flesh rejoiceth. And here is bad breeding of Youth and young Women, who are carried away with the Vanities of the Mind in their own Inventions, Pride, Arrogancy, Lust, Gluttony, Ʋn∣cleanness: so Eat and Drink, and rise up to Play. This is the Ge∣neration, which God is not well pleased withall; but their Eyes are full of Adultery, who cannot cease from Evil. These be they, that live in Pleasures upon Earth: These be they, who are dead, while they live; who glory not in the Lord, but in the Flesh. These be they, that be from the Life, that the Scriptures were given forth from; who live in the Fashions and Vanities of the World, out of Truth's Adorning in the Devil's Adorning (who is out of the Truth) and not in the Adorning of the Lord, which is a meek and quiet Spirit, which is with the Lord of great price. But this Orna∣ment and this Adorning is not put on by them, that be adorned, and have the Ornament of him that is out of the Truth; and that is not accepted with the Lord, which is accepted in their Eye. G. F.
Moreover it came upon me about this time from the Lord, to write a short Paper and send forth, as An Exhortation and Warn∣ing to the Pope, and all Kings and Rulers in Europe; a Copy of which here follows: Friends, YE Heads, and Rulers, and Kings, and Nobles of all sorts, Be not bitter, nor hasty in persecuting the Lambs of Christ, nei∣ther turn your selves against the Visitation of God, and his tender Love and Mercies from on high, who sent to visit you; lest the Lord's Hand, Arm and Power take hold swiftly upon you, which is now stretched over the World; that is turned against Kings, and shall turn Wise Men backward, and will bring off their Crowns to the Dust, and lay them low and level with the Earth. God and Christ will be King, who gives Crowns, to whomsoever obey his Will: and this is the Age, wherein the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is staining the Pride of Man, and defacing his Glory. So you, that profess Christ, and do not love your Enemies, but on the contrary, do shut up and Imprison them, who are his Friends; these be Marks, that you be out of his Life, and do not love Christ, who do not the things he commands. The day of the Lord's Wrath is kindling, and his Fire is going forth to burn up the Wick∣ed; which will leave neither Root nor Branch. They that have lost their Habitation with God, be out of the Spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures, and from the Light, that Jesus Christ hath en∣lightned them withall; and so from the true Foundation. There∣fore be swift to hear, and slow to speak, and slower to persecute: For the Lord is bringing his People to himself, from off all the World's Ways, to Christ the Way; and from off all the World's Churches, to the Church which is in God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and from off all the World's Teachers, to teach his People himself by his Spirit; and from off all the World's Images, into the Image of himself; and from their Likenesses, into his own Likeness; and from off all the World's Crosses of Stone or Wood, into his Power, which is the Cross of Christ. For all these Images, and Crosses, and Likenesses are among them, that are Apostatized from the Image of God, the Power of God, which is the Cross of Christ, which now fathoms the World, and is throwing down that, which is contrary to it; which Power of God never changes. Let this go to the Kings of France, and of Spain, and to the Pope, for them to prove all things, and to hold that which is good. And first to prove, that they have not quenched the Spirit: for the mighty Day of the Lord is come, and coming upon all Wickedness, and Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of Men, who will plead with all Flesh by Fire and by Sword. And the Truth, and the Crown of Glory, and the Scepter of Righteousness over all shall be exalted; which shall Answer that of God in every one upon the Earth, tho' they be from it. Christ is come a Light into the World, and doth enlighten every one, that cometh into the World; that all through
him might believe. He that feeleth the Light, that Christ hath enlightened him withal, he feeleth Christ in his Mind, and the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God; and he shall not need to have a Cross of Wood or Stone, to put him in mind of Christ, or of his Cross, which is the Power of God manifest in the inward Parts. G. F. Besides this I was moved to write a Letter to the Protector (so cal∣led) To warn him of the mighty Work, the Lord hath to do in the Nati∣ons, and shaking of them; and to beware of his own Wit, Craft, Subtilty and Policy, or seeking any By-Ends to himself. There was about this time an Order for the Trying of Ministers (so called) and for Approving, or Ejecting them out of their Places or Benefices; whereupon I writ a Paper To the Justices, and other Com∣missioners, who were appointed to that Work. Of which Paper the Copy here follows: Friends, YOU that be Justices, and in Commission to Try Ministers, who have so long been in the Vine-yard of God, now see, whe∣ther they be such, as are mentioned in the Scriptures, whom the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles did Dis-approve of? And if they be such, as they Dis-approved then; see, how ye can stand Approved in the sight of God, to let such go into his Vine-yard, and Approve of them: who will admire your Persons, because of Advantage; and if you do not give them advantage, they will not admire your Persons: Such Jude speaks of. See, if they be not such, as teach for filthy Lucre, for the love of Money, Covetous, such as love them∣selves, who have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power; from such the Apostle bids Turn away. The Apostle said, Their Mouths should be stopped, who served not the Lord Jesus, but their own Bellies; being Evil Beasts, slow Bellies, who mind Earthly Things. Paul gave Timothy an Order to Try Ministers by: He said, They must not be Covetous, nor given to Wine, nor filthy Lucre, nor a Novice; lest being lifted up into Pride, they fall into the Condem∣nation of the Devil: These he was to Try and Prove without Par∣tiality. Now take heed of your Approving such, as he disapproved; for since the Apostles days, such as he disapproved, have had their Liberty: and they have told us, The Tongues were their Original; and that they were Orthodox Men: and that the Steeple-house, with a Cross on the top of it, was the Church (the Papists Mass-house; you may look on the Top of it, and see the Sign.) But the Scriptures tell us; All the Earth was of one Language before the Building of Ba∣bel: And when Pilate crucified Christ, he set the Tongues, Hebrew, Greek and Latin on the top of him. And John tells us, That the Beast had power over the Tongues, Kindreds and Nations; and that the Whore sits upon the Tongues, of whose Cup all Nations have drunk, and the Kings of the Earth have committed Fornication with her: and John said, The Tongues are Waters. Christ gives marks to his Disciples, and to the Multitude, how to Try such as these, that you are to Try. They are called of Men Master; they love
the Chiefest Seat in the Assemblies; they be Sayers, but not Doers: And, said he, They shall put you out of the Synagogues; and seven Woes he denounced against them, and so disapproved them. Christ said, False Prophets should come; and John saw, They were come: for they went forth from them; and since the World hath gone after them. But Babylon must be confounded, the Mother of Har∣lots; and the Devil must be taken, and with him the Beast, and the false Prophet must be cast into the Lake of Fire: for the Lamb and his Saints over all must reign, and have the Victory. The Lord God sent his Prophets of Old, to cry against the Shepherds, that sought for the Fleece, Ezek. 34. and to cry against such Shepherds, as seek for their Gain from their Quarter, and never have enough; Isa. 5.6. and to cry against the Prophets, that prophesied falsely; and the Priests, that bore rule by their Means: which was the filthy and horrible thing, Jer. 5. And if you would forbear to give them Means, you would see, how long they would bear Rule. There was in the Old Time a Store-house for the Fatherless, Strangers and Widows, to come to and be filled; and they did not prosper then, who did not bring their Tithes to the Store-house. But did not Christ put an end to that Priesthood, Tithes, Temple and Priests? And doth not the Apostle say, that the Priesthood is changed, the Law is changed, and the Commandment disannulled? Might not they have pleaded the Law of God, that gave them Tithes? Have ever any of the Priests prospered, that take Tithes since, by the Law of Man? Was not the first Author of them since Christ's time the Pope, or some of his Church? Did the Apostles cast Men into Prison for Tithes, as your Ministers do now? As Instance: Ralph Hol∣lingworth, Priest of Phillingham, for petty Tithes not exceeding six Shillings, hath cast into Lincoln-Prison a poor Thatcher, named Thomas Bromby; where he hath been about Eight and Thirty Weeks, and still remains a Prisoner: And the Priest petitioned the Judge, That the poor Man might not labour in the City, to get a little Money towards his maintenance in Prison. Is this a good Savour amongst you, that are in Commission to chuse Ministers? Is this glad Tidings? to cast in Prison a Man, that is not his Hearer, because he could not put into his Mouth? Can such, as be in the fear of God, and in his Wisdom, own such things? The Ministers of Christ are to plant a Vine-yard, and then Eat of the Fruit; to Plow, Sow and Thresh, and get the Corn; and then let them Reap: but not cast them into Pri∣son, for whom they do no Work. Christ, when he sent forth his Ministers, bid them Give freely, as they had Received freely: and into what City or Town soever they came, Inquire, who were Wor∣thy, and there abide; and what they set before you (said He) that Eat. And when these came back again to Christ, and he asked them, If they wanted any thing, They said, No: They did not go to a Town, and call the People together, to know, How much they might have by the Year? as these that are in the Apostacy do now. The Apostle said, Have I not power to Eat and to Drink? But he did not say, To take Tithes, Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer-Dues, Aug∣mentations and great Sums of Money; But, have I not power to Eat
and to Drink?1655. London. And yet he did not use that Power among the Co∣rinthians. But they that are Apostatized from him, will take Tithes, great Sums of Money, Easter-Reckonings and Midsummer-Dues; and cast them into Prison, that will not give it them, whom they do no work for. The Oxe's Mouth must not be muzz'led, that treads out the Corn; But see, if the Corn be trodden out in you, and the VVheat be in the Garner? This is from a Lover of your Souls, and one that desires your Eternal Good. G. F. Now after I had made some stay in the City of London, and had given forth the several foregoing Papers, and cleared my self, of what Service lay upon me at that time there; I was mov'd of the Lord to go down into Bedford-shire to John Crook's House,Bedford-shire. Luton. where there was a great Meeting, and People generally Convinced of the Lord's Truth. When I was come thither, John Crook told me, that the next day several of those, that were called the Gentlemen of the Country, would come to dine with him, and to discourse with me: They came; and I declared to them God's Eternal Truth. Several Friends went to the Steeple-houses that day. And there was a Meeting in the Country, which Alexander Parker went to: and towards the middle of the day it came upon me, to go to it, though it was several Miles from me. John Crook went with me; and when we came there, there was one — Gritton, that had been a Baptist; but he was gotten higher than they, and called himself a Trier of Spirits. He used to tell People their Fortunes, and pretended to discover to People, when their Goods were stollen, or Houses broken up, who the Persons were, that did it: by which he had gotten into the Affections of many People thereabout. This Man was got into that Meeting, and was speaking, and making an hideous Noise over the Young-convinced Friends, when I came in; and he bid Alexander Parker, give a rea∣son of his Hope. Alex. Parker told him, Christ was his Hope: but because he did not Answer him so soon, as he expected, he boastingly cried; His Mouth is stopt. Then this Gritton directed his Speech to me: for I stood still, and heard him; and he spake many things, which were not agreeable to Scripture. I asked him, Whether he could make those things out by Scripture, which he had spoken? and he said, Yes, yes. Then I bid the People, Take out their Bibles, to search the Places he should quote for proof of his Assertions: But he could not make good by Scripture, that which he had said. So he was shamed, and fled out of the House; and his People were gene∣rally Convinced: for his Spirit was discovered, and he came no more amongst them. And when his People were Convinced, and settled in God's Truth, they gave forth a Book against him; and denied his Spirit, and his false Discoveries. Many were turned to Christ Jesus that day, and came to sit under his Teaching; insomuch that the Judges were in a great Rage, and many of the Magistrates in Bed∣ford-shire: because there were so many turned from the Hireling-Priests to the Lord Jesus Christ's free Teaching. But John Crook
was kept by the Power of the Lord: Yet he was turned out from be∣ing a Justice. After some time I turned up through the Country to London again; where Friends were finely established in the Truth, and great Comings in there were. And about this time several Friends went beyond the Seas, to declare the everlasting Truth of God. Now when I had stay'd a while in the City,Kent. Rochester I went into Kent. And when I came to Rochester, there was a Guard kept to examin Passen∣gers:Cranbrook but we passed by, and were not stopped. So I went to Cran∣brook, where there was a great Meeting, and several Souldiers were at it; and many were turned to the Lord that day. After the Meet∣ing, some of the Souldiers were somewhat Rude; but the Lord's Power came over them. One Thomas Howsigoe, an Independent-Preacher, who lived not far from Cranbrook, was Convinced, and be∣came a faithful Minister for the Lord Jesus. Some Friends had tra∣veled into Kent before, as John Stubbs and William Caton; and the Priests and Professors had stirred up the Magistrates at Maidstone to Whip them, for declaring God's Truth unto them: as may be seen at large in the Journal of William Caton's Life. There was also one Captain Dunk Convinced in Kent,Sussex. Ry. and he went with me to Ry; where we had a Meeting, to which the Mayor and Officers, and seve∣ral Captains came: and they took, what I said, in Writing, which I was well pleased with: All was quiet, and the People affected with the Truth. Rumney.From Ry I went to Rumney, where, the People having had no∣tice of my Coming some time before, there was a very large Meet∣ing. Thither came Samuel Fisher, who was an Eminent Preacher among the Baptists, and had had a Parsonage reputed worth about Two hundred Pounds a Year; which for Conscience-sake he had given up: And there was also the Pastor of the Baptists, and abundance of their People. And the Power of the Lord was so mightily over the Meeting, that many were reached by the Power of God, and one greatly shaken; and the Life sprang up in divers. One of the Pastors of the Baptists, being amazed at the Work of the Lord's Power, bid one of our Friends, that was so wrought upon, Have a good Consci∣ence: Whereupon I was moved of the Lord to bid him, Take heed of Hypocrisy and Deceit: and he was silent. A great Convincement there was that day, and many were turned from the Darkness to the di∣vine Light of Christ, and came to see their Teachers Errors, and to sit under the Lord Jesus Christ's Teaching, and to know him their Way, and the Covenant of Light, which God had given to be their Salvation: And they were brought to the One Baptism, and to the One Baptizer, Christ Jesus. When the Meeting was done, Samuel Fisher's Wife said; Now we may discern this day betwixt Flesh and Spi∣rit, and distinguish Spiritual Teaching from Fleshly. The People were gene∣rally well satisfied, with what had been declared; but the Two Baptist-Teachers, and their Company, when they were gone from the Meet∣ing, fell to Reasoning amongst the People. Samuel Fisher, with di∣vers others, reasoned for the Word of Life, which had been declared that day; and the other Pastor, and his Party, reasoned against it: So it divided them asunder, and cut them in the midst. A Friend
came and told me, that the Baptists were disputing one with another;1655. Rumney. and desired me to go up to them: but I said, Let them alone, the Lord will divide them; and they that Reason for Truth, will be too hard for the other: And so it was. This Samuel Fisher received the Truth in the Love of it, and became a faithful Minister of it; and preached Christ freely, and laboured much in the Work and Service of the Lord; being moved of the Lord to go, and declare the word of Life at Dunkirk, and in Holland, and in divers parts of Italy, as Leghorn, and Rome it self: And yet the Lord preserved him and his Companion John Stubbs, out of their Inquisitions. From Rumney I passed to Dover, and had a Meeting there;Dover. where several were Convinced. And near unto Dover there was a Governour and his Wife Convinced, who had been Baptists; and the Baptists thereabouts were much offended, and grew very envious: but the Lord's Power came over all. Luke Howard of Dover was Convinced sometime before, and became a faithful Minister of Christ. Returning from Dover, I went to Canterbury,Canter∣bury. where there were a few honest-hearted People turned to the Lord; who sate down under Christ's Teaching. Thence I passed to Cranbrook again,Cranbrook where I had a great Meeting: A Friend that was with me, went to the Steeple-house; and was cast into Prison: But the Lord's Power was mani∣fested, and his Truth spread. From thence I passed into Sussex, and lodged near Horsham,Sussex. Horsham. where there was a great Meeting; and many were Convinced. Also at Stenning we had a great Meeting in the Market-House;Stenning. and several were Convinced there, and thereaways; for the Lord's Power was with us. Several Meetings I had thereabouts: and among the rest, there was a Meeting appointed at a Great Man's House; and he and his Son went to fetch several Priests, that had threatned to come and dispute. But when the time came, none of them came; for the Lord's Power was mighty in us. A glorious Meeting we had; and the Man of the House and his Son were vext, because none of the Priests would come. So the Hearts of People were opened by the Spirit of God, and they were turned from the Hirelings to Christ Jesus, their Shepherd, who had purchased them without Money, and would feed them without Money or Price. Many that came, expect∣ing to hear a Dispute, were Convinced that day; amongst which Ni∣cholas Beard was one. Thus the Lord's Power came over all, and his Day many came to see. There were abundance of Ranters in those parts, and Professors, that had been so Loose in their Lives, that they began to be Weary of it; and had thought to have gone into Scotland, to have lived pri∣vately. But the Lord's Net catched them, and their Understandings were opened by his Light, Spirit and Power, through which they came to receive the Truth, and to be settled upon the Lord; and so became very sober Men, and good Friends in the Truth. And great Blessing and Praising the Lord there was amongst them; and great Admiration in the Country. Out of Sussex I traveled through the Country, till I came to Reading;Reading. where I found a few, that were Convinced of the Way of the Lord.
There I stay'd,1655. Reading. till the First-day, and then had a Meeting in George Lamboll's Orchard; and a great part of the Town came to it. A glorious Meeting it was, and a great Convincement there was that day; and the People were mightily satisfied. Thither came Two of Judge Fell's Daughters to me; and George Bishop of Bristol came with his Sword by his side (for he was a Captain.) After the Meeting many Baptists and Ranters came privately, reasoning and discoursing: but the Lord's Power came over them. The Ranters pleaded, That God made the Devil: But I denied it, and told them; I was come into the Power of God, the Seed Christ, which was, before the Devil was, and bruised the Head of him: And he became a Devil by going out of Truth; and so became a Murderer, and a Destroyer. So I shewed them, That God did not make the Devil; for God is a God of Truth, and he made all things good, and blessed them: But God did not bless the Devil. And the Devil is bad, and was a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning; and spoke of himself, and not from God. And so the Truth stopt them, and bound them, and came over all the highest Notions in the Nation, and Confounded them. For by the Power of the Lord God I was manifest, and sought to be made manifest to the Spirit of God in all; that by it, (which they vexed, and quenched, and grieved) they might be turned to God; as many were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, by the Spirit of God, and were come to sit under his Teach∣ing. London.After this Meeting at Reading, I passed up to London; where I stay'd a while, and had large Meetings: and then went into Essex, and came to Cogshall.Essex. Cogshall. And there was a Meeting of about Two Thou∣sand People, as it was judged; which lasted several hours: and a glorious Meeting it was; for the Word of Life was freely declared, and People were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher and their Saviour, the Way, the Truth and the Life. Near Col∣chester.On the sixth day of that Week I had a Meeting near Colchester, to which many Professors, and the Independent-Teachers came. After I had done speaking, and was stept down from the place, on which I stood, One of the Independent-Teachers began to make a Jangling; which Amor Stoddart (who was with me) perceiving, he said to me, Stand up again, George: for I was going away, and did not at the first hear them. But when I heard the Jangling Independent, I stood up again: and after a while the Lord's Power came over him and his Company, and they were confounded; and the Lord's Truth went over all. And a great Flock of Sheep hath the Lord Jesus Christ in that Country, that feed in his Pastures of Life. On the First-day following we had a very large Meeting at another place, not far from Colchester, wherein the Lord's Power was eminently ma∣nifested; and the People were very well satisfied: for they were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ's free Teaching; and they received it gladly. Many of these People had been of the Stock of the Martyrs. As I passed through Colchester, I went to visit James Parnel in Prison; but the Cruel Gaoler would hardly let us come in, or stay with him. Very Cruel they were unto him: The Gaoler's Wife
threatned to have his Blood; and in that Jail they did destroy him:1655. Colchest. as the Reader may see at large in a Book printed soon after his Death, giving an Account of his Life and Death: and also in an Epistle print∣ed with his Collected Books and Writings. From Colchester I went to Ipswich; where we had a little Meeting,Ipswich. and very rude: but the Lord's Power came over them. After the Meeting I said; If any had a desire to hear further, they might come to the Inn: And there came-in a Company of Rude Butchers, that had abused Friends; but the Lord's Power so chained them, that they could not do Mischief. Then I writ a Paper, and gave it forth to the Town, warning them of the Day of the Lord, that they might Repent of the Evils they lived in: and directing them to Christ, their Teacher and Way; exhorting them to forsake their hireling-Teachers. We passed from Ipswich to Mendlesham, where Robert Duncon lived,Suffolk. Mendle∣sham. in Suffolk, where we had a large Meeting, that was quiet: and the Lord's Power was preciously felt amongst us. Then we passed to a Meeting at one Captain Lawrence's in Norfolk; where, it was judged,Norfolk. were above a Thousand People; and all was quiet. Many Persons of Note were there, and a great Convincement there was: for they were turned to Christ, their Way and their Teacher; and many of them received him, and sate down under him, their Vine. Here we parted with Amor Stoddart, and some more Friends; who intended to meet us again in Huntingtonshire. About the Second Hour in the Morning we took Horse for Norwich,Norwich. where Christopher Atkins, that dirty Man, had run out, and brought dishonour upon the blessed Truth and Name of the Lord. But he had been judged and denied by Friends: and afterwards he gave forth a Paper of Condemnation of his Sin and Evil. So we came to Yarmouth,yarmouth and there stayed a while; where there was a Friend, one Thomas Bond in Prison, for the Truth of Christ. There we had some Service for the Lord; and some were turned to the Lord in that Town. From thence we rode to another Town, about Twenty Miles off, where were many tender People; and I was moved of the Lord to speak to the People, as I sate upon my Horse, in several Places as I passed along. We went on to another Town, about Five Miles from thence, and set up our Horses at an Inn; having travelled Five and forty Miles that Day, Richard Hubberthorn and I. There were some friendly People in the Town; and we had a tender, broken Meeting amongst them, in the Lord's Power, to his Praise. We bid the Hostler have our Horses ready by the Third Hour in the Morning; for we intended to ride to Lyn, about three and Thirty Miles, next morning. But when we were in Bed at our Inn, about the Eleventh Hour at Night came the Constable and Officers, with a great Rabble of People into the Inn, and said; They were come with an Hue and Cry from a Justice of Peace (that lived near that Town a∣bout five Miles off, where I had spoken to the People in the Streets, as I rode along) to search for two Horsmen, that rid upon gray Horses, and in gray Cloaths; an House having been broken up upon the Seventh Day before at Night, as they said. We told them, We were ho∣nest and innocent Men, and abhorred such things: Yet they Ap∣prehended
us,1655. Norfolk. and set a Guard with Halberts and Pikes upon us that Night; making some of those Friendly People, with others, to watch us. Next Morning we were up betimes, and the Constable with his Gua arried us before a Justice of Peace about five Miles off; and we took Two or three of the sufficient men of the Town with us, who had been with us at the great Meeting at Captain Lawrence's, and could testify, that we lay both the seventh Day Night, and the first Day Night at Captain Lawrence's; and it was the seventh Day Night, that they said, the House was broken up. Now the Reader is to be Informed, that du∣ring the time, that I was a Prisoner at the Mermaid at Charing-Cross (of which an Account is given before) this Captain Lawrence brought several Independent-Justices to see me there, with whom I had a great deal of Discourse; which they took Offence at. For they pleaded for Imperfection, and to Sin, as long as they lived; but did not like to hear of Christ's Teaching his People himself, and making People as Clear, whilst here upon the Earth, as Adam and Eve were, before they fell. Now these Justices had plotted together this mischief a∣gainst me in the Country, pretending, an House was broken up; that so they might send their Hue and Cry after me: so great was their Malice against the Righteous and the Just. They were vexed al∣so, and troubled, to hear of the great Meeting at John Lawrence's a∣foresaid; for there was a Colonel Convinced there that Day, that lived and died in the Truth. But Providence so ordered it, that the Constable carried us to a Justice about five miles onward in our way towards Lyn, who was not an Independent-Justice, as the rest were. When we were brought before him, he began to be angry, because we did not put off our Hats to him. I told him, I had been before the Protector, and he was not offended at my Hat; and why should he be offended at it, who was but one of his Servants? Then he read the Hue and Cry: And I told him, That that Night, wherein the House was said to be broken up, we were at Captain Lawrence's House; and that we had several Men here present could Testify the Truth thereof. Thereupon the Justice, having Examined us and them, said; He believed, we were not the men, that had broken the House; but he was sorry, he said, that he had no more against us. We told him, He ought not to be sorry for not having Evil against us; but rather to be glad: for to Rejoice, when he got Evil against People, as for house-breaking, or the like, was not a good mind in him. It was a good while yet, before he would Re∣solve, Whether to let us go, or send us to Prison: and the wicked Constable stirred him up against us, telling him, We had good Horses; and that if it pleased him, he would carry us to Norwich-Jail. But we took hold of the Justice's Confession, That he believed, we were not the men, that had broken the House, and after we had admonished him to Fear the Lord in his Day; the Lord's Power came over him, so that he let us go: and so their Snare was broken. A great People were after ward gathered to the Lord in that Town, where I was moved to speak to them in the Street; and from whence the Hue and Cry came. Lyn.Being set at Liberty, we travelled to Lyn; whither we came about the third Hour in the Afternoon. And having set up our Horses, we met with Joseph Fuce, who was an Ensign: and we wisht him to
speak to as many of the People of the Town, as he could,1655. Lyn. that feared God; and to the Captains and Officers to come together: which he did. And we had a very glorious Meeting amongst them, and turn∣ed them to the Spirit of God, by which they might know God and Christ, and understand the Scriptures; and so learn of God and of Christ, as the Prophets and Apostles did. Many were Convinced there that Day: and a fine Meeting there is, of them that are come off from the Hirelings Teaching; and sit under the Teaching of the Lord Jesus Christ. Lyn being then a Garrison, we desired Joseph Fuce to get us the Gate opened by the third hour next Morning (for we had forty Miles to ride next day.) And by that means getting out early, we came next Day by the Eleventh or Twelfth hour to a Town, near the Isle of Ely, called Sutton; where Amor Stoddart,Sutton. and the Friends that were with him, met us again. A multitude of People was gathered thither; and there were no less than four Priests. The Priest of the Town made a great Jangle; but the Lord's Power so confounded him, that he went away: The other three Priests stayed; and one of them was Convinced. One of the other Two, whilst I was speaking, came to lean upon me: but I bid him, Sit down, seeing he was so slothful. A great Convincement there was that Day: and many hundreds were turned from the Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, and from the Spirit of Error to the Spirit of Truth, to be led thereby into all Truth. People came to this Meeting from Hunt∣ington, and beyond; and the Mayor's Wife of Cambridge was there also. A glorious Meeting it was, and many were settled under Christ's Teaching, and knew him, their Shepherd to feed them: for the Word of Life was freely declared, and gladly received by them. The Meet∣ing ended in the Power of the Lord, and in Peace; and after it was done, I walked out, and went into a Garden: where I had not been long, before a Friend came to me, and told me, Several Justices were come to break up the Meeting. But many of the People were gone away; so they missed of their Design: and after they had stayed a while, they went away also, in a Fret. That Evening I passed to Cambridge:Cambridg And when I came into the Town, the Scholars hearing of me, were up, and were exceeding Rude. I kept on my Horse's Back, and rid through them in the Lord's Power: but they Ʋnhorst Amor Stoddart, before he could get to the Inn. When we were in the Inn, they were so rude there in the Courts, and in the Streets, that the Miners, the Colliers and Carters could never be Ruder. The People of the House asked us, What we would have for Supper? as is the usual way of Inn-keepers: Supper! said I, were it not, that the Lord's Power is over them, these Rude Scholars look, as if they would pluck us in pieces, and make a Supper of us. They knew, I was so against their Trade, the Trade of Preach∣ing, which they were there as Apprentices to learn; that they raged as had, as ever Diana's Crafts-men did against Paul. At this Place John Crook met us. When it was within Night, the Mayor of the Town, being friendly, came and fetched me to his House: and as we walked through the Streets, there was a Bustle in the Towm; but they did not know me, it being darkish. But they were in a Rage
not only against me, but against the Mayor also;1655. Cambridg so that he was al∣most afraid to walk the Streets with me, for the Tumult. We sent for the Friendly People, and had a fine Meeting there in the Power of God; and I stay'd there all Night. Next Morning, having ordered our Horses to be ready by the sixth Hour, we passed peaceably out of Town; and the Destroyers were disappointed: for they thought, I would have stay'd longer in the Town, and intended to have done us Mischief; but our passing away early in the Morning, frustrated their Evil-Purposes against us. Bishop-Starford. Hertford.Then rode we through the Countries to Bishop-Starford; where were some Convinced: And so to Hertford, where also there were some Convinced; and where now there is a large Meeting. London.From thence we returned to London, where Friends received us gladly; the Lord's Power having carried us through many Snares and Dangers. And great Service we had for the Lord: for may hundreds were brought to sit under the Teaching of the Lord Jesus Christ, their Saviour, and to praise the Lord through him. James Nailer also was come up to London; and Richard Hubberthorn and I stay'd some∣time in the City, visiting Friends, and Answering Gain-sayers: for we had great Disputes with Professors of all sorts. Many Reproaches they cast upon Truth, and lying, slanderous Books they gave forth a∣gainst us: But we Answered them all, and cleared God's Truth, and set it over them all; and the Lord's Power was over all. Amongst other Services for the Lord, which then lay upon me in the City, I was moved to give forth a Paper to those, That made a scorn at Trembling and Quaking; of which a Copy here fol∣loweth: THE Word of the Lord to all you, that scorn Trembling and Quaking, who scoff at them, and scorn them, and throw Stones at them, and belch forth Oaths against them, who are Tremb∣ling and Quaking, threatning them, and beating them; Strangers ye are to all the Apostles and Prophets, and are in the Generation, that stoned them, and mocked them then in those Ages. Now, ye are the Scoffers which they spake of, that are come in the last times: Be ye Witnesses against your selves. To the Light in all your Con∣sciences I speak, that with it you may see your selves to be from the Life of the holy Men of God. Moses, who was a Judge over all Israel, he trembled, feared and Quaked: when the Lord said unto him, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; then he trembled, and durst not behold. This, which makes to Tremble now, ye Teach∣ers and People scoff at, and scorn them in your Streets, who wit∣ness the Power of the Lord. Moses forsook the Pleasures of the World, which he might have enjoyed for a Season: He might have been called the Son of Pharaoh's-Daughter; he refused it, and for∣sook Pharaoh's House; yet was no Vagabond. And David, a King, he trembled; he was mocked, they made Songs on him, they wag∣ged their Heads at him. Will you profess David's Words, and
Moses his Words, who are in the Generation of your Fathers,1655. London. Mockers, Scoffers, Wonderers and Despisers, which are to perish? O blush, and be ashamed of all your Profession, and be Confounded! Job trembled, his Flesh trembled, and they mocked him: So do you now mock them, in whom the same Power of God is made mani∣fest; and yet you profess Job's Words. O deceitful Hypocrites! will ye not own Scripture? O for shame, never profess Scripture-words, and deny the Power, which, according to the Scripture, makes the Keepers of the House to tremble, and the strong Man to bow himself. These things both Priests, Magistrates and People scoff at; but with the Power ye are judged, and by the Power and Life condemned. The Prophet Jeremiah trembled, he shook, his Bones quaked, he reeled to and fro, like a drunken Man, when he saw the Deceits of the Priests and Prophets, who were turned from the way of God; and they were not ashamed, neither could they blush: Such were gone from the Light; and such were they, that ruled over the People. But he was brought to Cry, O foolish People! that had Eyes, and could not see, that had Ears, and could not hear, that did not fear the Lord, and tremble at his Presence, who placed the Sands for Bounds to the Sea by a perpetual Decree, that the Waves thereof cannot pass! And he said, A horrible thing is committed in the Land; The Prophets prophesy falsly, and the Priests bear rule by their means. Shall not I arise for these things, saith the Lord? Shall not my Soul be avenged upon such a Nation as this? They were such, as did not Tremble at the Word of the Lord; therefore he called them a foolish People. Hear all ye the Word of the Lord, ye foolish People, who scorn Trembling, and Quaking, and Shaking: Give over professing the Prophet Jeremiah's Words, and making a Trade of them; for with his Words you are judged to be among the Scoffers, and Scorn∣ers, and Stockers. For he was stocked by your Generation; and you now stock them, that tremble at the word of the Lord, at the Power of the Mighty God, which raises up the Seed of God, and throws down the Earth, which hath kept it down. So you, that are in the Fall, where Death reigneth, Enemies of the Truth, despising the Power of God, as those of your Generation ever did, Wo and Misery is your Portion, except you speedily Repent. Isaiah said; Hear the Word of the Lord, all ye, that Tremble at his Word: And he said, This was the Man, that God did regard, that was of a broken and contrite Heart, and trembled at his Word. When their Brethren hated them, and persecuted them, saying, Let the Lord be glorified; he shall appear to your Joy, but they shall be ashamed, Isa. 66.5. Now all ye Scoffers and Scorners, that despise Trembling, you re∣gard not the Word of the Lord: They are not regarded by you, that Tremble at the Word; which are regarded by the Lord: there∣fore you are contrary to Isaiah's Words. Therefore profess him and his Words no more for shame, nor make a Trade of his Words. Ye that seek for your Gain from your Quarter, ye greedy, dumb Dogs, that never have enough, ye are they, that despise Trembling; ye are such, as Isaiah cried against, who himself witnessed Trembling. Here therefore be ye Witnesses against your selves, that with the
Light in your Consciences ye may see, ye are out of the Prophet Isaiah's Spirit, and are Haters of them that Tremble, whom the Lord regards; but such you regard not, but hate and persecute, mock and rail against them. But it is manifest, that you walk in the steps of your Fore-fathers, that persecuted the Prophet. Habakuk, the Prophet of the Lord trembled; and Joel, the Prophet of the Lord, said, Blow the Trumpet in Sion, and let all the Inhabitants of the Earth Tremble: The People shall Tremble, and all Faces shall gather Blackness; and the People shall be much pained. And now, this Trembling is witnessed by the Power of the Lord: This Power of the Lord is come; the Trumpet is sounding, the Earth is shak∣ing; the Inhabitants of the Earth are trembling; the Dead is arising; and the Living is praising God: And the World is Raging; and the Scoffers are Scorning; and they that witness Trembling and Quaking wrought in them by the Power of the Lord, can scarce pass up and down the Streets, but with Stones, and Blows, and Fists, and Sticks, or Dogs set at them, or pursued with Mocks and Re∣proaches. Thus you vent forth your Malice against them, that witness the Power of the Lord, as the Prophets did; who are come to the broken Heart and contrite Spirit, and who Tremble at the Word of the Lord, whom the Lord regards: These you stone, these you stock, these you set your Dogs at, these you scoff and scorn, these you revile and reproach: but those Reproaches are our Riches; praised be the Lord, who hath given us power over them. And if you see one, as Habakkuk, whose Lips quivered, whose Belly shock; who said, Rottenness was entred into his Bones, and who trembled in himself; if you see such an one in this Condition now, ye say, He is Bewitched. Here again you shew your selves Strangers to that Power, to that Life, that was in the Prophet: Therefore for shame, never make a Profession of his Words, nor a Trade of his Words; nor of Joel's, who witnessed Trembling, which ye scorn and scoff at. Ye proud Scoffers and Scorners, Misery, Misery is your End, except you speedily Repent. Daniel, a Servant of the most-high God, he Trembled, his Strength and his Breath was gone: He was Prisoned, He was hated, he was persecuted; they laid Baits and Snares for him, in whom the holy Spirit of God was. Now for shame, all you, that make a Profession of Daniel's Words, give over your Profession, Priests and People, who scoff and scorn at Trembling: with the Light you are seen to be out of Daniel's Life, and by the same Power you are judged, at which you scorn and scoff. And so here again be ye Witnesses against your selves, that you are Scorners and Scoffers a∣gainst the Truth: And with the Scripture you are judged to be con∣trary to the Life of the holy Men of God. Paul, a Minister of God, made by the Will of God, a Messenger of the Lord Jesus, a Vessel of the Lords, to carry his Name abroad into several Nations, when the dark, blind World have got some of his Words and Epistles, you filthy Teachers make a Trade of them, and get great Sums of Money for it, and so destroy Souls for dishonest Gain; making a Trade of his Words, and of the rest of the Apostles, and Prophets, and of Christ's Words, but denying the Spirit and Life, that they were guided by, and that Power, which shook the Flesh and the
Earth, which the Apostle witnessed, who said, When he came among the Corinthians, he was then with them in weakness and fear, and in much Trembling, that their Faith might not stand in the Wisdom of Words, but in the Power of God; in that Power, which made him to Tremble. This Power it is, that the World, and all the scoffing Teachers, scoff at and scorn in your Towns, in your Villages, in your Assemblies, in your Ale-houses (for shame lay away all your Profession of the Apostle's Words and Conditions!) And some of them, that scoff at this Power, call it the Power of the Devil; and some perse∣cute them, and Stone and Stock, Imprison and Whip them, in whom that Power is made manifest, and lade them with Reproaches, as not worthy to walk on the Earth; hated and persecuted, as the Off-scouring of all things. Here you may see, you are in the steps of your Fore-Fathers, who persecuted the Apostles, and acted so against them; stocked them, mocked them, prisoned them, stoned them, whipped them, haled them out of the Synagogues, reproached them, and shamefully entreated them. Do not you here fulfil the Scripture, and Christ's saying, who said; If they kill you, they will think, they do God Service? Yet you make a Profession of Christ's Words, of the Prophets and Apostles Words, and call your selves Churches, and Ministers of the Gospel: I charge you in the pre∣sence of the Living God, to be silent, who act such things! And mind the Light in your Consciences (ye Scoffers and Scorners) which Christ hath enlightened you withall; that with it ye may see your selves, what ye Act, and what ye have Acted: for who Act such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; for all such things are by the Light condemned. And who come to witness Trembling and Quaking, the Powers of the Earth to be shaken, the Lustful Nature come to be destroyed, the scorning and scoffing Nature judged by the Light; In it Wait to receive Power from him, who shakes the Earth. That Power we own, and our Faith stands in it, which all the World scoffs at; the Lofty Ones, the Proud Ones, the Presumptuous Ones, which live in Presumption, and yet make a Profession of the Scriptures, as your Fathers, the Pharisees did, who were painted Sepulchres and Serpents; and as the Scribes did, who had the Chiefest Places in the Assemblies, stood praying in the Synagogues, and were called of Men Masters, which Christ cried WO against; who are not come so far as the Trembling of Devils, who believed and trembled: Let that Judge you. The Light and Life of the Scripture is seen and made manifest, and with it all you Scoffers, and all you Scorners, and all you Persecutors and Railers are seen. Take Warning, all ye Powers of the Earth, how ye persecute them, whom the World Nick-name and call Quakers, who dwell in the Eternal Power of God; lest the Hand of the Lord be turned against you, and ye be all Cut off. To you this is the Word of God, Fear and Tremble, and take Warning! For this is the Man, whom the Lord doth regard, who trembles at his Word; which you, who are of the World, scoff and scorn, stock, persecute and imprison. Here ye may see, ye are contrary to God, contrary to the Prophets; and are such as hate, what the Lord regards; which we, whom
the World scorns, and calls Quakers, own. And we exalt that Power, and honour that Power, that makes the Devils tremble, and shakes the Earth, and throws down the Loftiness of Man, and the Haughtiness of Man, and which makes the Beasts of the Field to Tremble, and makes the Earth Reel to and fro, and cleaves the Earth asunder, and over-turneth the World. This Power we own, and honour, and preach up, whom the World scornfully calls Qua∣kers: But all Scoffers and Persecutors, Railers and Scorners, Stockers and Whippers we deny by that Power, which throweth down all that Nature; as seeing, that all, who act such things without Re∣pentance, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, but are for Destru∣ction. So Rejoice, all ye Righteous ones, who are persecuted for Righ∣teousness sake; for great is your Reward in Heaven. Rejoice, ye that suffer for Well-doing; for ye shall not lose your Reward. And wait you in the Light, that you may grow up in the Life, that gave forth the Scriptures; that with it ye may see the Saints Con∣ditions, and with it ye may see all that, which they testified against: and there with it ye will see the state of those, that did reproach and scoff them; and did mock them, and persecute them; and did whip and stock them, and haled them out of the Synagogues before Magistrates. So to you, who are in the same Light and Life, the same things do they now; that they may fill up the measure of their Fathers. With the Light now they are seen, where the Light and Life, and Power of God is made manifest: for as they did unto them, so will they do unto you. Here is our Joy; and the Scripture is fulfilled, and fulfilling: and with the Light, which was before the World was, which is now made manifest in the Children of Light; with it they see the World, and comprehend it, and the Actions of it: for he that loves the World, and turns from the Light, is an Enemy to God; he turneth into VVickedness: for the whole VVorld lieth in VVickedness. He who turns from the Light, turns into the VVorks of Evil, which the Light of Christ testifies against: And by this Light, where it is made manifest, all the VVorks of the VVorld are seen and made manifest. G. F. This is to go abroad among the scattered Ones, and among the World. Great was the Rage and Enmity of the People, Professors as well as Prophane, against the Truth and People of God at this time; and great the Contempt and Disdain they shewed of Friends plainness. Wherefore I was moved to write the following Paper, and send it forth, directed as—An Epistle to gathered Churches into outward Forms, upon the Earth.
ALL ye gathered Churches into outward Forms upon the Earth, the Son of God is come to Reign, and he will tread and tram∣ple, and will shake, and make you Quake and Quiver, you that be found without his Life, out of his Light, and without his Power. His Day hath appeared; Morter and Clay will you be found. Break∣ing and Shaking, and Quaking is coming among you! Your high Building is to be laid desolate; your professed Liberty shall be your Bondage: the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts hath spoken it. Tremble, ye Hypocrites, ye Notionists! The fenced Cities shall be laid desolate, the fruitful Fields shall become a VVilderness; your false Joy shall become your Heaviness: the time of VVeeping and Desolation draw∣eth nigh! Come ye witty Ones, see, how ye can stand before the Almighty, who is now come to plead with you: you'll fall like Leaves, and wither like VVeeds! Come you, that have boasted of my Name (saith the Lord) and have gloried in the Flesh, ye shall fade like a Flower: who have slain my VVitness, yet boast of my VVords, which have been as a Song unto you. Come ye Novelty-Ones, who love Novelties, changeable Suits of Apparel, who be in the Fashions, outward and inward, putting on one thing this day; and another the other day; I'll strip thee, saith the Lord, I'll make thee bare, I'll make thee naked and thou shalt know, that I am the Lord. What! hast thou profest the Prophets words? hast thou profest the Apostles words, and my Son's words? hast thou Covered thy self with their Expressions? thinkest thou not, that I see thee out of my Life? thinkest thou, thou witty One, to hide thy self, where none can see thee? thinkest thou, if thou fliest to the utter∣most parts of the Earth, that I am not there? Is not the Earth mine, and the fulness of it, saith the Lord? Come all ye, that have trusted in your own conceited Notions, and Knowledge, and VVisdom, who were never yet out of the Earth, and the Lusts of it, and never yet got the Load of thick Clay off you, and never were out of the drunken Spirit, whose Imperfection appears, who must be come upon, as a Potter's Vessel, broken Cisterns; and ye that have been made VVise in your own Conceit, and wise in your own Eyes, in which Pride hath lifted you up, and not the Humility; you must be Abased. You have run on with every one after his own Invention, and every Man hath done that thing, that was right in his own Eyes, and that which did please himself: This hath been the Course of People upon Earth. Ye have run on with∣out a King, without Christ, the Light of the World, which hath enlightened every one, that is come into the World: but now is Truth risen, now are your Fruits withering. And you that are fortified, and have fortified your strong Houses, called your Churches, make you your Cords strong, the Lord will break you asunder, ye that are gathering in, and ye that are gathered. For the Lord is risen to scatter you, his Witness is risen in the Hearts of his People, they will not be fed with dead Words, nor with that which dies of it self; nor will they be satisfied with the Husk, which the Swine seeds upon. And all ye Priests in the Nation, and
Teachers, that now stand against the Light, your Envy shews, that ye be in Cain's Way; your Greediness shews, that ye be in Balaam's Way: your standing against the Light, which hath enlightned every man, that cometh into the world, doth manifest, that you are in Core's Way, that spoke the great high Words of Vanity; ye, whose Con∣sciences are seared as with an hot Iron, whose Judgment doth not lin∣ger, whose Damnation doth not slumber, who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but your own Bellies; who are the Evil Beasts spoken of, which have destroyed many Families, taken away their Cattel, their Horses, their Goods, even their Household-Goods; destroyed many poor men, even whole Families, taking their whole Estates from them, whom you do no Work for. O! the grievous Actions, that are seen done by you, the Ministers of Ʋnrighteousness; whose fruits declare to the whole Nation, that you are the Devil's Messengers! your Actions declare it; your taking Tithes, Augmentations, treble Dam∣mages, Midsummer-Dues (as ye call them) of them ye do no Work for, nor Minister to. And all ye Powers of the Earth, beware of holding such up, that be Ʋnrighteous. Let not the Words of the Ʋnrighteous over∣come you, lest the righteous Judge, the righteous God, the Judge of Heaven and Earth upon you take hold; whose Judgment is accord∣ing to that of God in you, which will let you see, when you Trans∣gress. Come you proud and lofty ones, who have not considered the handy-works of the Lord, but have destroyed them; nor have regarded the way of the Lord, but have had plenty of the Creatures, and have therewith fatted up your selves, and forgot the Lord and his way: O let Shame cover your Faces here upon Earth! Come ye, that are given to Pleasures, and spend your Time and Days in Sports, and Idleness and Fulness; your Fruits declare the Sins of Sodom: yet you will make a Talk of my Name, and of my Saints Words. But I behold you afar off, saith the Lord: you are Proud and Lofty; you are bad Patterns, and bad Examples, that be full, and rich, and Idle; who say, Others are Idle, that cannot maintain your Lusts. Oh! the unrighteous Ballances, that are among People! Oh the Ini∣quity in Measuring! Oh the Oppression in Ruling and Governing! Therefore, because of these things my Hand shall come upon you, saith the Lord. For the Oppression is entred into the Ears of the Lord, who gives Rest to the wearied, to the burdened, to the oppressed; who feeds the Hungry, and cloaths the Naked; who brings the Mighty from their Seats, and beats the Lofty to Ground, and makes the Haughty to bend. Come, saith the Lord, ye Mockers and Scorners, and Rebellious ones, light and wild People, vain and heady; you have had your Day of Joy, you have Scoffed, you have Mocked and derided my Messengers and my Ambassadors, who have preached in your Streets, and cried in your Synagogues and Temples; a Day of Trembling and Lamentation shall on you come, when you are not aware. I'le take away your Pride and your Height; I'le shake you as a Leaf, and bring you to be as Men distracted. I'le distract you, and make you, that you shall not trust one another in the Earth; who have joined hand in hand against my Servants in the Truth. I'le smite you with Terrors, and bring Frets and Fears upon you: the
Cup of my Indignation and Fury shall you drink. Where will you appear, when Repentance is hid from your Eyes; when prophane Esau, your Father, it set before you, and Ishmael and Cain, wild and envious, whose Fruits declare the Stock? Come ye proud Priests, who have eaten up the Fat of the Nation, who by Violence have taken other Men's Goods, whose Envy hath slain many, whose Wickedness and Darkness hath abounded, and whose Ʋnrighteousness daily appears: Your Fruits every day declare it, in summoning up by Writs and Subpoena's from most parts of the Nation, for Wages and Tithes, such as you do no work for. Oh the Abominable Ʋn∣righteousness! how is the State of Man lost, that these things they do not take to Heart, to feel them! What havock is made in most parts of the Nation with such! And all ye Priests and Teachers, who are railing and brawling in the Pulpit, setting People at vari∣ance one against another, Haters and Hateful, provoking People to Hate one another; here is the Seed of Enmity seen, which you have sown, and are sowing; whose Seed must be bruised by the Seed of the Woman, which a top of your Heads is set. G. F. This Year came out the Oath of Abjuration, by which many Friends suffered: and several Friends went to speak with the Protector about it; but he began to harden. And Sufferings increasing upon Friends, by reason, that envious Magistrates made use of that Oath as a Snare to catch Friends in, who they knew, could not swear at all; I was moved to write to the Protector about it, and other suffer∣ing Friends, as followeth. THE Magistrate is not to bear the Sword in vain, which ought to be a Terror to the Evil-doers: but the Magistrate, that doth bear the Sword in vain, as he is not a Terror to the Evil-doers, so he is not a Praise to them that do well. Now hath God raised up a People by his Power, whom People, Priests and Magistrates, who are out of the Fear of God, scornfully call Quakers, who do cry against Drunkenness (for Drunkards destroy God's Creatures) and do cry against Oaths (for because of Oaths the Land mourns) and they, Drunkards and Swearers, to whom the Magistrate's Sword should be a Terror, are, we see, at liberty; but for crying against such, ma∣ny are cast into Prison, and for crying against their Pride and Fil∣thiness, their deceitful Merchandize in Markets, their Cozening and their Cheating, their Excess and Naughtiness, their playing at Bouls and Shovel-boards, at Cards and at Dice, and their other vain and wanton Pleasures: for who live in Pleasures, are dead while they live; and who live in Wantonness, kill the Just. This we know by the Spirit of God, which gave forth the Scriptures; which God the Father hath given to us, and hath placed his Righteous Law in our Hearts, which Law is a Terror to Evil-doers, and answers that which is of God in every Man's Conscience. They which act contrary to
the Measure of God's Spirit in every Man's Conscience, cast the Law of God behind their Backs, and walk despitefully against the Spirit of Grace. The Magistrate's Sword, we see, is born in vain, whilst the Evil-doers are at Liberty to do Evil; and they that cry against such, are for so doing punished by the Magistrate, who hath turned his Sword backward against the Lord. And now the Wicked one fenceth himself, and persecutes the Innocent, as Vagabonds and Wanderers, for crying against Sin, and against Ʋnrighteousness and Ʋngodliness openly, in the Markets and in the High-ways; or as Rai∣lers, because they tell them, what Judgment will follow them, that follow such Practices: And here they that depart from Iniquity, are become a Prey; and few lay it to heart. But God will thresh the Mountains, and beat the Hills, and cleave the Rocks, and cast into his Press, which is trodden without the City, and will bathe his Sword in the Blood of the Wicked and Ʋnrighteous. So they, that have drunk the Cup of Abominations, an hard Cup have you to drink, you who are the Enemies of God; and of you he will be avenged, who be his Enemies. Now ye, in whom something of God is remaining, consider; If the Sword was not born in vain, but turned against the Evil-doers, then the Righteous would not suffer, and be cast into Holes, Dungeons, Corners and Prisons, and Houses of Correction, as Peace-Breakers, for crying against Sin openly, as they are commanded of the Lord, and for crying against the Covet∣ousness of the Priests, and their false Worships; who exact Money now of poor People, whom they do no work for. Oh! where will you appear in the Day of the Lord? or how will you stand in the Day of his righteous Judgment? How many Jails and Houses of Correction are now made Places to put the Lambs of Christ in, for following him, and obeying his Commands, which are too many to mention! The Royal Law of Christ, To do, as ye would be done by, is trodden down under foot: So that Men can profess him in Words and Talk; but Crucify him, wheresoever he appears, and cast him into Prison, as the Talkers of him always did in the Gene∣rations and Ages past. And the Labourers, which God (the Master of the Harvest) hath sent into his Vine-yard, do the Chief of the Priests, and the Rulers now take Counsel together against, to cast them into Prison: And here is the Fruits of Priests, and People, and Rulers, without the Fear of God. The Day is come and coming, that every Man's Work doth appear, and shall appear; glory be to the Lord God for ever! So see, and consider the Days you have spent, and the Days you do spend: for this is your Day of Visita∣tion. Many have suffered great Fines of Money, because they could not Swear, but do abide in Christ's Doctrine, who saith, Swear not at all: and by that means are they made a Prey upon, for abiding in the Command of Christ. And now many are cast into Prison, and are made a Prey upon, because they cannot take the Oath of Abjuration, though they denied all, that is contained in it; and by that means ma∣ny of the Messengers and Ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ are cast into Prison, because they will not Swear, nor go out of Christ's Command. Therefore, O Man, Consider; to the Measure of the Life of God in thee I speak. Many also lie in Jails, because they cannot pay the Priests Tithes;
and many have their Goods spoiled and treble Dammages taken of them; and many are whipt and beaten in the Houses of Correction, without Breach of any Law: And these things are done in thy Name, to Protect them in these Actions. If Men fearing God did bear the Sword, and Covetousness were hated, and Men of Courage for God were set up, then they would be a Terror to Evil-doers, and a Praise to them that do well; and not cause them to suffer. Here Equity would be heard in our Land, and Righteousness would stand up and take Place; which giveth not place to the Ʋnrighteous, but judgeth it. To the measure of God's Spirit in thee I speak, that thou may'st consider, and come to Rule for God: That thou may'st answer that which is of God in every Man's Conscience: For that is that, which bringeth to Honour all Men in the Lord. Therefore consider, for whom thou dost Rule, that thou may'st come to re∣ceive Power from God to Rule for him; and all that is contrary to God, may by his Light be Condemned. From a Lover of thy Soul, who desires thy Eternal Good. G. F. But Sufferings, and Imprisonments Continuing and Increasing, and the Protector, (under whose Name they were Inflicted) hardening himself against the Complaints that were made unto him; I was mov∣ed to give forth the following Lines amongst Friends, to bring the Weight of their Sufferings more heavy upon the Heads of the Per∣secutors. WHO is moved by the Power of the Lord to offer himself to the Justice for his Brother or Sister, that lies in Prison; and to go lie in Prison in their stead, that his Brother or Sister may come forth of Prison, and so to lay down his Life for his Brother or Sister? And who lies in Prison for Tithes,, witnessing the Priesthood changed, that took Tithes, and the unchangeable Priesthood come; If any Brother in the Light, who witnesseth a Change of the Old Priesthood, that took Tithes, and a disannulling of the Command∣ment for Tithes, be moved of the Lord to go to the Priest or Impro∣priator, to offer himself to lie in Prison for his Brother, and to lay down his Life, that he may come forth, he may chearfully do it; and heap Coals of Fire upon the Head of the Adversary of God. Like∣wise where any suffer for the Truth, by them who be in the Ʋn∣truth, If any Brother be moved of the Lord to go to the Magistrate, Judge, General or Protector, and offer up themselves to the Prison, to Lay down their Lives for the Brethren, as Christ hath laid down his Life for you, so lay down your Lives one for another; here you may go over the Heads of the Persecutors, and reach the Witness of God in them all. And this shall lie a Judgment upon them all for ever, and be witnessed to by that which is of God in their Consci∣ences. Given forth from the Spirit of the Lord through G. F.
Besides this, I writ also a short Epistle to Friends, as An En∣couragement to them in their several Exercises; which was, as followeth: My dear Friends, IN the Power of the Everlasting God, which comprehends the Power of Darkness, and all the Temptations, and that which comes out of it: In that Power of God dwell, which will bring and keep you to the Word in the Beginning; which will keep you up to the Life, and to feed upon the same, in which you are over the Power of Darkness: in that you will find and feel Dominion and Life. And that will let you see, before the Tempter was, and over him; and in that the Tempter cannot come: for the Power and Truth he is out of. Therefore in that Life dwell, in which you will know Dominion; and let your Faith be in the Power, and over the Weakness and Temptations, and look not at them: but in the Light and Power of God look at the Lord's Strength; which will be made perfect in your Weakest State. So in all Temptations look at the Grace of God, to bring your Salvation, which is your Teacher to teach you: for when you do look or hearken to the Temptations, you do go from your Teacher, the Grace of God; and so are dark∣ened in going from that Teacher, which should bring your Salvation, the Grace of God, which is sufficient in all Temptations, to lead out of them, and to keep over them. G. F. After I had cleared my self of those Services for the Lord, which lay upon me in the City of London, I passed down through the Countries into Bedfordshire,Bedford∣shire. Northam∣pton-shire. Welling∣borough. and Northamptonshire. And at Wel∣lingborough in Northamptonshire I had a great Meeting, in which the Lord's Everlasting Power and Truth was over all; and many in that Country were turned to the Lord. A great Rage was amongst the Professors; for the wicked Priests, Presbyterians and Independents rai∣sed Lies upon us, as That we carried Bottles about with us, which we gave People to drink of, which made them to follow us: But the Power and Spirit, and Truth of God kept Friends over the Rage of the People. Great Spoiling also there was of Friends Goods for Tithes, by the Independent and Presbyterian Priests, and some Baptist-Priests, that had gotten into the Steeple-houses; as Books of Friend's Sufferings do at large declare. Leicester∣shire.From Wellingborrough I went into Leicestershire, where Coll. Hacker had threatned, That if I came there, he would Imprison me again, al∣though the Protector had set me at liberty: But when I was come to Whetston (the Meeting,Whetston. from which he took me before) all was quiet there. And thither came Coll. Hacker's Wife, and his Marshal to the Meeting, and were Convinced: for the glorious, powerful Day of the Lord was exalted over all, and many were Convinced that
day at that Meeting. There were at that Meeting Two,1655. Whetston. that came out of Wales, who were Justices of Peace, their Names were Peter Price, and Walter Jenkin; who came both to be Ministers of Christ. I went from thence to Sileby, to William Smith's,Sileby. where was a great Meeting, to which several Baptists came; and one of them, a Baptist-Teacher, was Convinced, and came to sit under the Lord's Teaching by his Spirit and Power. This Baptist said, he had Baptized Thirty in a day. From thence I went to Drayton, my Native Town,Drayton. where so many Priests and Professors had formerly gathered together against me; but now never a Priest nor Professor did appear. I asked some of my Relations, Where were all the Priests and Professors now? They said, The Priest of Non-Eaton was dead; and there were Eight or Nine of them seeking to get into his Benefice. They will let you alone now (said they:) for they are like a Company of Crows, when a rot∣ten Sheep is dead, they all gather together to pull out the Puddings; and so do the Priests for a fallen Benefice. These were some of their own Hearers, that said so of them: But they had spent their Venom against me; and the Lord delivered me by his Power out of their Snares. Then I went to Badgley,Badgley. where there was a great Meeting from many parts; many came far to it, and many were Convinced, and turned to the Lord: And they that were Convinced, came under Christ's Teaching, and were settled upon him their Foundation, and their Rock. From thence I passed into Nottinghamshire,Notting∣ham-shire. Darbyshire. and had large Meetings there: and so into Darbyshire, where the Lord's Power came over all; and many were turned from the Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, and came to receive the Holy Ghost. And great Miracles were wrought in many Places, by the Power of the Lord through several. In Darbyshire James Nailer met me, and told me, Seven or Eight Priests had challenged him to a Dispute. I had a Travel in my Spirit for him, and the Lord answered me; and I was moved to bid him Go on, and God Almighty would be with him, and give him the Victory in his Power. And the Lord did so; insomuch that the People saw, the Priests were foiled; and they cried, A Nailer, a Nailer hath con∣futed them all. After the Dispute was over, he came to me again, praising the Lord. Thus was the Lord's Day proclaimed, and set over all their Heads; and People began to see the Apostacy and Slavery, they had been under to their Hireling-Teachers for Means: and they came to know their Teacher, the Lord Jesus, who had bought them, and purchased them, and made their Peace be∣twixt God and them. While we were here, Friends came out of Yorkshire to see us, and were glad of the Prosperity of Truth. After this I passed into Warwickshire, through Friends,Warwick∣shire. Worcester∣shire. Birmin∣gham. visiting their Meetings; and so into Worcester∣shire, and had a Meeting at Brummingham, as I went, where several were Convinced, and turned to the Lord. At length I came to one Cole's House in Worcester∣shire,
near Chattan.1655. Near Chattan. This Cole had given an Independent-Preacher a Meeting-place, and the Independent came to be Convinced; and after he was Convinced he laid aside his Preaching: Whereupon the Old Man — Cole gave him an hundred Pounds a Year. I had a Meeting at that Meeting-place, and a very great Meeting it was, insomuch that the Meeting-place would not hold the People; and many were turned to the Lord that day. Afterwards, when the time of Trials came, this Independent did not stand to that, which had Convinced him; but turned back: Whereupon the Old Man took away his 100 l. a Year from him again. But this Old Man Cole himself died in God's Truth. Now I heard, that at Evesholme the Magistrates had cast several Friends into Prison, in several Prisons; and that, hearing of my coming, they made a pair of high Stocks. So I sent for Edward Pit∣taway, a Friend, that lived near Evesholme, and asked him the Truth of the thing; and he said, It was so. Then I went that Night with him to Evesholme;Evesholme and in the Evening we had a large, precious Meeting, wherein Friends and People were refreshed with the Word of Life, and with the Power of the Lord. Next Morning I got up, and rid to one of the Prisons, and visited Friends there; and en∣couraged them. Then I rid to the other Prison, where there were several Prisoners, and amongst them one Friend, that had been a Priest, but was now become a free Minister of Christ; his Name was Humphrey Smith. So when I had visited the Friends at both Prisons, and was turned away from the Prison, to go out of Town, I espied the Magistrates coming up the Town, to have seized me in Prison. But the Lord frustrated their Intents, that the Innocent escaped their Snare; and the Lord God's blessed Power came over them all. But exceeding Rude and Envious were the Priests and Professors about this time in those Parts. WorcesterI went from Evesholme to Worcester, and had a precious Meeting there, and quiet. But after the Meeting, as we came down the Street towards our Inn, some of the Professors fell to discourse with Friends, and were like to have made a Tumult in the City; and as we went into the Inn, they all cluttered into the Yard: but I went among them, and got them quieted. The next day I walked forth into the Town, and had a great deal of Discourse with some of the Professors, concerning Christ and the way of Truth. One of them denied, That Christ was of Abraham, according to the Flesh; and that he was de∣clared to be the Son of God, according to the Spirit: But I proved from Rom. 1. that he was of the Seed of Abraham, being made of the Seed of David, according to the Flesh; and that according to the Spirit, he was declared to be the Son of God. Afterwards I writ a Paper concerning it. Tewks∣bury.From Worcester we went to Tewksbury, where in the Evening we had a great Meeting. And there came in the Priest of the Town, with a great Rabble of rude People; and the Priest boasted, That he would see, whether he or I should have the Victory. I turned the Peo∣ple to the Divine Light, which Christ, the heavenly and spiritual Man, had enlightned them withal; that with that Light they might see their Sins, and that they were in Death and Darkness, and
without God in the World:1655. Tewks∣bury. And with the same Light they might see Christ, from whom it came, their Saviour and Redeemer, who had shed his Blood for them, and died for them; and who was the Way to God, the Truth, and the Life. Here the Priest began to Rage against the Light, and denied it; for neither Priest, nor Pro∣fessor could endure to hear the Light spoken of. So the Priest, having railed at the Light, went away, and left his rude Company amongst us: but the Lord's Power came over them; though Mischief was in their Hearts. Leaving Tewksbury, we passed back through the Country, and came to Warwick,Warwick. where in the Evening we had a Meeting at a Widow-woman's House, whither many sober People came together: and a precious Meeting we had in the Lord's Power, and several were Convinced, and turned to the Lord. After the Meeting was done, and I was walking out, a Baptist in the Company began to Jangle; and the Bayliff of the Town, with his Officers came in, and said, What do these People here at this time of the Night? So he secured John Crook and Amor Stoddart, and Gerrard Roberts and me; but we had leave to go to our Inn (all that were Strangers) and to be forth-coming in the Morning The next Morning there came many rude People into the Inn, and into our Chambers, desperate Fellows: but the Lord's Power gave us Dominion over them. Gerrard Roberts and John Crook went up to the Bailiff to speak with him, and to know, What he had to say to us? He said, We might go our ways; for he had little to say to us Then, as we rid out of Town, it lay upon me to ride to his Hse, to speak to him, and to let him know; That the Protector, having given forth an Instrument of Govern∣ment, in which Liberty of Conscience was granted; it was very much, that contrary to that Instrument of Government, he would trouble peaceable People, that feared God. The Friends went with me; but the rude People gathered about us with Stones: And one of them took hold of my Horse's Bridle, and brake it; but the Horse drawing back, threw him under him. Though the Bayliff saw this, yet did he not stop, nor so much as Rebuke the Rude Multitude; so that it was much, we had not been slain, or hurt in the Streets amongst them: for the People threw Stones, and struck at us, as we Rode along the Town. When we were come quite out of the Town, I told Friends, It was upon me from the Lord, that I must go back into the Town again: and if any one of them felt any thing upon him from the Lord, he might follow me; and the rest that did not, might go on to Dun-Cow. So I passed up through the Market in the dreadful Power of God, declaring the Word of Life to them; and John Crook followed me. Some struck at me; but the Lord's Power was over them, and gave me Dominion over all: And I shewed them their Ʋnworthiness of the Name of Christians, and the Ʋnworthiness of their Teachers, that had not brought them into more Sobriety; and what a shame they were to Christianity! Having cleared my self, I turned back out of the Town again, and passed to Coventry: but when we came thither,Coventry. we found the People closed up with Darknss. I went to a Profssor's House, that
I had formerly been at;1655. Coventry. and he was drunk: which grieved my Soul so, that I did not go into any House in the Town; but rode into some of the Streets of the Town, and into the Market-place; and I felt, the Power of the Lord God was over the Town. Duncow.Then I went on to Duncow, and had a Meeting there in the Even∣ing, and some were turned to the Lord by his Spirit, as some also were at Warwick and Tewksbury before-mentioned. We lay at the Duncow that Night; and there we met with John Cham, a faithful Minister of the Everlasting Gospel. In the Morning there was ga∣thered together a Rude Campany of Priests and People, who behaved themselves more like Beasts, than Men; for some of them came Ri∣ding on Horseback into the Room, where we were: But the Lord gave us Dominion over them. Leicester∣shire. Warwick∣shire. Badgley.From thence we passed into Leicester-shire, where we had a great Meeting again, at the place, where I had been taken formerly: And after that, we came back into Warwickshire to Badgley. Here Wil∣liam Edmundson, a Friend that lived in Ireland, having some draw∣ings upon his Spirit to come over into England to see me, met with me; and by him I writ a few Lines to those few Friends, that were then Convinced in the North of Ireland, as followeth: Friends, IN that which Convinced you, Wait; that you may have that removed, you are Convinced of. And all my Dear Friends, dwell in the Life and Love, and Power and Wisdom of God, in Ʋnity one with another, and with God: and the Peace and Wisdom of God fill all your Hearts, that nothing may rule in you, but the Life, which stands in the Lord God. G. F When these few Lines were read amongst the Friends in Ireland, at their Meeting, the Power of the Lord seized upon them all, that were in the Room. Swan∣nington. Higham. Northam∣ptonshire. Bedford∣shire. Hertford∣shire. Baldock.From Badgley we passed to Swannington and Higham, and so through the Countries into Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire, having great Meetings; and many were turned to the Lord by his Power and Spirit. When we came to Baldock in Hertfordshire, I asked, If there was nothing in that Town, no Profession? and it was An∣swered me, There were some Baptists and a Baptist-woman sick John Rush of Bedfordshire went along with me to visit her; and when we came in, there were many People in the House, that were Tender about her: And they told me, She was not a Woman for this World; but if I had any thing to comfort her concerning the World to come, I might speak to her. So I was moved of the Lord God to speak to her;☞ and the Lord raised her up again, to the astonishment of the Town and Country: Her Husband's Name was Baldock. This Baptist-woman and her Husband came to be Convinced; and many hundreds of People have been at Meetings at their House since. Great Meet∣ings
and Convincements there were up and down in those Parts after∣wards, and many People received the Word of Life,1655. Baldock. and sate down under the Teaching of Christ, their Saviour. When we had visited this sick Woman, we went back to our Inn; and there were Two desperate Fellows fighting, so furiously, that none durst come nigh them to part them. But I was moved in the Lord's Power to go to them: and when I had loosed their Hands, I held one of them by one Hand, and the other by the other Hand; and I shew∣ed them the Evil of their doings, and reconciled them one to the other, that they were loving, and very thankful to me: so that People ad∣mired at it. From thence I passed through the Country to Market-street,Market-street. Albans. London. where God had a People; and so through Albans to London, where Friends were glad of the Prosperity of Truth, and the manifestation of the Lord's glorious Power, that had delivered us, and carried us through many dangers and difficulties: and I was glad, to find Truth prosper in the City, and all things well amongst Friends there. Only there was one man, whose Name was John Toldervey, that had been Convinced of Truth, and run out from it; and the envious Priests took occasion from thence to write a wicked Book against Friends, which they stuffed with many Lies, to render Truth and Friends odious in People's Eyes and Minds: and they Intituled their Book, The Foot out of the Snare. But this poor man came to see his Folly, and returned, and Condemned his Back-sliding; and answered the Priests Book, and mani∣fested all their Lies and Wickedness. Thus the Lord's Power came over them, and his Everlasting Seed reigned, and reigns to this Day. Now after I had tarried some time in London, and had visited Friends in their Meetings there, I went out of Town again; leaving James Nayler in the City. And as I passed from him, I cast my Eyes upon him, and a Fear struck into me concerning him: But I went away, and rode down to Rygate in Surrey,Surrey. Rygate. where I had a little Meet∣ing. There the Friends told me of one Thomas Moore, a Justice of Peace, that lived not far from Rygate, and was a friendly, moderate man: whereupon I went to visit him at his House, and he came to be a serviceable man in Truth. We passed on to one Thomas Pachin's, where we had a Meeting, unto which several Friends came from London; and John Bolton and his Wife came thither on foot in frost and snow. After we had parted with Friends there, we went towards Horsham-park;Horsham-park. Arundel. Chicester. and hav∣ing visited Friends there, we passed on to Arundel and Cchester, where we had Meetings. At Chichester many Professors came in, and some jangling they made; but the Lord's Power was over them. The Woman of the House, where the Meeting was, though she was Convincd of Truth, yet not keeping her Mind close to that which Convinced her; she fell in love with a man of the World, that was there that time. When I knew it, I took her aside, and was moved to speak to her, and to pray for her: But a light thing got up in her Mind, and she slighted it. Afterwards she Married that man; and soon after went distracted: for the Man was greatly in Debt, and she greatly disappointed. Then was I sent for to her; and the Lord was intreated, and Raised her up again, and settled her Mind by his Power.
And afterwards her Husband died; and she acknowledged, the just Judgments of God were come upon her, for slighting the Exhortation and Counsel I had given her. After we left Chichester, we travelled on through the Countries, till we came to Portsmouth.Ports∣mouth. There the Souldiers had us to the Gover∣nour's House; and after some Examination, the Lord's Power came over them, and we were set at Liberty, and had a Meeting in the Town.Ringwood After which we passed away, and came to Ringwood, where in the Evening we had a Meeting; at which several were Convinced, and turned to the Spirit of the Lord, and to the Teaching of Christ Jesus, their Saviour. Pool.From Ringwood we came to Pool: and having set up our Horses at an Inn, we sent into the Town to inquire for such, as feared the Lord, and such who were worthy; and we had a Meeting there with several sober People: And William Baily, a Baptist-Teacher, was con∣vinced there at that time. The People received the Truth in the inward Parts, and were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Rock and Foundation, their Teacher and Saviour: And there is become a great Gathering in the Name of Jesus of a very tender People, who continue under Christ's Teaching. South∣ampton.We went also to Southampton, and had a Meeting there; and se∣veral were Convinced there also. Edward Pyot of Bristol travelled with me all this Western Journey. Dorche∣ster.From thence we went to Dorchester, and alighted at an Inn, that was a Baptist's house: And we sent into the Town to the Baptists, to let us have their Meeting-house to meet in, and to invite the sober People to the Meeting; but they denied it us. And we sent to them again to know, Why they would deny us their Synagogue? so the thing was noised in the Town. Then we sent them Word, If they would not let us come to their house, They, or any People that feared God, might come to our Inn, if they pleased: But they were in a great Rage, and their Teacher, and many of them came up; and they flapped their Bibles on the Table. I asked them, Why they were so Angry? were they Angry with the Bible? But they fell into a Discourse about their Water-Baptism. I asked them, Whether they could say, they were sent of God to baptize People, as John was? And whether they had the same Spirit and Power, that the Apostles had? And they said, They had not. Then I asked them, How many Powers there are? Whether there are any more, than the Power of God, and the Power of the Devil? And they said, There was not any other Power, than those Two. Then said I, If you have not the Power of God, that the Apostles had, then you act by the Power of the Devil. There were many sober People present, who said; They have thrown them∣selves on their Backs. Many substantial People were Convinced that Night; and a precious Service we had there for the Lord, and his Power came over all. Next Morning, as we were passing away, the Bap∣tists being in a Rage, began to shake the Dust from off their Feet after us. 'What, said I, in the Power of Darkness! We, who are in the Power of God, shake off the Dust of our feet against you.
Thus leaving Dorchester, we came to Weymouth;1655. Wey∣mouth. where also we inquired after the sober People: and about four score of them gather∣ed together at a Priest's House, all very sober People; and most of them received the Word of Life, and were turned to their Teacher, Christ Jesus, who had enlightned them with his Divine Light, by which they might see their Sins, and him, who saved them from their Sins. A blessed Meeting we had with them, and they received the Truth in the Love of it, with gladness of Heart. The Meeting held for several Hours; and the state of their Teachers, and the Apostacy was opened to them; and the state of the Apostles, and of the Church in their Days; and the state of the Law and of the Pro∣phets before Christ, and how Christ came to fulfil them, and how he was their Teacher in the Apostles Days: and how he was come now to teach his People again himself by his Power and Spirit. All was quiet, and the Meeting brake up peaceably; and the People were very loving: and a Meeting is continued in that Town to this Day, and many are added to them; and some that had been Ranters, came to own the Truth, and to live very soberly. There was at that Time a Captain of Horse in the Town, and he sent to me, and would fain have had me to have stay'd longer in the Town: But I was not to stay. So he and his Man rode out of Town with me about seven Miles; Edward Pyot also being with me. This Captain was the fattest, merriest, cheerfullest Man, and the most given to Laughter, that ever I met with; insomuch, that I was se∣veral Times moved of the Lord, to speak in the dreadful Power of the Lord to him: and yet it was become so customary to him, he would presently laugh at any thing, that he saw. But I still admonished him to come to Sobriety, and the fear of the Lord, and Sincerity. We lay at an Inn that Night; and the next Morning I was moved to speak to him again, when he parted from us. Next time I saw him, he told me, that when I spake to him at parting, the Power of the Lord so struck him, that before he got home, he was serious enough, and had left his laughing. He afterwards was Convinced, and became a seri∣ous and good Man; and died in the Truth. Parting from him, we went to Honitone;Honitone. and at our Inn inqui∣red, What People there were in the Town, that feared God; and sent for them. There came to us some of the Particular Baptists, with whom we had a great deal of Reasoning. I told them, They held their Doctrine of Particular Election in Esau's, Cain's and Ishmael's nature, and not in Jacob, the second Birth: But they must be born again, before they enter the Kingdom of God. And that as the Promise of God was to the Seed, not as many, but as one, which was Christ; so the Election and Choice stands in Christ: and they must be such, as walk in his Light, Grace, Spirit and Truth. And many more Words we had with them. From thence we passed to Topsham,Topsham. and stay'd there on the First Day; but the Inn-keeper and his People were rude. The next Morn∣ing we gave forth some Queries to the Priests and Professors: where∣upon some Rude Professors came into our Inn; and had we not gone, when we did, they had stopped us. I wore a Girdle, which through forgetfulness I left behind me at the Inn, and afterwards sent to
the Inn-keeper for;1655. Topsham. but he would not let me have it again. Afterwards, when he was Tormented in his Mind about it, he took it and burnt it; lest he should be bewitched by it, as he said: Yet when he had burnt it, he was more tormented, than before. Some, notwithstanding the Rudeness of the Place, were Convinced there; and a Meeting was afterward settled in that Town, which hath continued ever since. After this we passed to Totnes, which was a dark Town: We lodged there one Night at an Inn,Totnes. and that Night Edward Pyot was Sick; but the Lord's Power healed him,King's Bridge. so that the next Day we got to King's-bridge, and at our Inn inquired for the sober People of the Town. They di∣rected us to one Nicholas Tripe and his Wife; and we went down to their house. When we were come there, they sent for the Priest, with whom we had some Discourse; but he being Confounded, quickly left us. But Nicholas Tripe and his Wife were Convinced; and since there is a good Meeting of Friends in that Country. In the Evening we returned to our Inn: and there being many People drink∣ing in the House, I was moved of the Lord to go amongst them, and to direct them to the Light, which Christ, the heavenly Man, had enlightened them withal; by which Light they might see all their Evil Ways, Words and Deeds, and by the same Light they might also see Christ Jesus, their Saviour. The Inn-keeper stood uneasie, seeing, it hindred his Guests from drinking; and as soon as the last Words were out of my Mouth, he snatcht up the Candle, and said, Come, here is a Light for you to go into your Chamber. Next Morn∣ing, when he was Cool, I spake to im of it, and told him, What an Ʋncivil Thing it was for him so to do: Then Warning him of the Day of the Lord, we got ready, and passed away. Plimouth.We came next Day to Plymouth: and after we had refreshed our selves at our Inn, we went to Robert Cary's House, where we had a very precious Meeting. There was at this Meeting one Elizabeth Trelawny, daughter to one that was called a Baronet: She being somewhat thick of hearing, came close up to me, and clapt her Ear very nigh me, while I spake; and she was Convinced. After the Meeting was ended, there came in some Jangling Baptists; but the Lord's Power came over them, and this Elizabeth Trelawny gave Testi∣mony thereto. A fine Meeting was settled there in the Lord's Power, which hath continued ever since; and many faithful Friends have been Convinced there. Cornwal. Menhen∣niot.From thence we passed into Cornwal, and came to an Inn in the parish of Menhenniot. At Night we had a Meeting at Edward Han∣cock's House; to which came one Thomas Mounce, and a Priest, and a great deal of People. We made the Priest confess, That he was a Minister made by the States, and maintained by the States; and he was Confounded, and went his way: but many of the People stayed. I directed them to the Light of Christ, by which they might see their Sins, and see their Saviour Christ Jesus, who was the way to God, and their Mediator to make Peace betwixt God and them; and was their Shepherd to feed them, and their Prophet to teach them. And I directed them to the Spirit of God in themselves, by which they might know the Scriptures, and be led into all Truth; and by the Spirit might know God, and in it have unity one with another.
Many were Convinced at that Time, and came under Christ's Teach∣ing; and there are fine Gatherings in the Name of Jesus, in those Parts at this Day. We travelled from thence through the Country,Penryn. Helston. and through Pen∣ryn, and came to Helston; but could not get to the knoweldge of any sober People, through the Badness of the Inn-keepers. At length we came to a Village, where some Baptists and sober People lived, with whom we had some Discourse; and some of them were brought to confess, That they stumbled at the Light of Christ. They would have had us to have stay'd with them;Market-Jew. but we passed thence to Mar∣ket-Jew: and having taken up our Lodging at an Inn there, we sent out over night to inquire for any People, that feared the Lord. Next Morning the Mayor and Aldermen gathered together, with the High-Sheriff of the County; and they sent first the Constables to us, to bid us come before them. We asked them for their Warrant: and they saying, they had none; we told them, we should not go along with them without a Warrant. Upon the Return of the Constables with∣out us, they sent their Serjeants, and we asked them for their War∣rant, and they said, they had none; but they told us, the Mayor and Aldermen stay'd for us. We told them, the Mayor and his Com∣pany did not well to trouble us in our Inn; and we should not go with them without a Warrant. So they went away, and came again; and when we asked them for their Warrant, one of them pluckt his Mace from under his Cloak: We asked them, Whether this was their Custom, to molest and trouble Strangers in their Inns and Lodg∣ings? After some time Edward Pyot went to the Mayor and Alder∣men, and a great deal of Discourse he had with them; but the Lord's Power gave him Dominion over them all. When he came back, there came several of the Officers to us: and we laid before them the Incivility and Ʋnworthiness of their Carriage towards us, who were the Servants of the Lord God, thus to stop and trouble us in our Inns and Lodgings; and what an Ʋnchristian Act it was. Before we left the Town, I writ a little Paper, to be sent to the seven Parishes at the Land's End, to declare, 'That the Lord was come to teach his People himself by his Son Christ Jesus. A Copy of which Paper here followeth: THE mighty Day of the Lord is come, and coming, wherein all Hearts shall be made manifest, and the Secrets of every one's Heart shall be revealed by the Light of Jesus, which cometh from Jesus Christ, who Lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World, that all Men through him might believe, and that the World might have Life, through him, who saith, Learn of me; and of whom God saith, This is my beloved Son, hear ye him. And Christ is come to teach his People himself; and every one, that will not hear this Prophet, which God hath raised up, and which Moses spake of, when he said, Like unto me will God raise you up a Pro∣phet, him shall you hear: Every one (I say) that will not hear this Prophet, is to be Cut off. They that despised Moses's Law, died under the Hand of two or three Witnesses; but how much greater
Punishment will come upon them,1655. Market-Jew. that neglect this great Salva∣tion, Christ Jesus, who saith, Learn of me, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; who lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World: which Light lets him see his evil Ways, and his evil Deeds that he hath done. But if you hate that Light, and go on in Evil, this Light will be your Condemnation, saith Christ. Therefore, now ye have Time, prize it: for this is the Day of your Visitation, and Salvation profer'd to you. Every one of you hath a Light from Christ; which lets you see, you should not lie, nor do wrong to any, nor Swear, nor Curse. nor take God's Name in vain, nor Steal. It is the Light, that shews you these evil Deeds: which if you love, and come unto it, and follow it, it will lead you to Christ, who is the way to the Father, from whence it comes; where no Ʋn∣righteousness enters, nor Ʋngodliness. But if you do this Light hate, this Light will be your Condemnation; but if you do it love, and come to it, you will come to Christ; and it will bring you off from all the World's Teachers and VVays, to learn of Christ, and will preserve you from the Evils of the VVorld, and all the Deceivers in it. G. F. This Paper a Friend, who was then with me, had; and when we were gone some three or four Miles from Market-Jew towards the VVest, he meeting with a Man upon the Road, gave him a Copy of the Paper. That Man proved to be a Servant to one, Peter Ceely, who was Major in the Army, and a Justice of Peace in that County; and he riding before us to a Place called St. Ives, shewed the Paper to his Master Major Ceely.Ives. When we came to Ives, Edward Pyot's Horse having cast a Shoe, we staid there to have a Shoe set; and while he was getting his Horse shod, I walked down to the Sea-side. When I came back, I found the Town in an Ʋproar; and they were haling Edward Pyot and the other Friend before Major Ceely. I followed them into the Justice's House, though they did not lay Hnds upon me. When we came in, the House was full of Rude People: Whereupon I asked, Whether there were not an Officer a∣mong them, to keep the People Civil? Major Ceely said, he was a Magistrate. I told him, He should shew forth Gravity and Sobri∣ety then, and use his Authority to keep the People Civil: for I never saw any People ruder: The Indians were more like Christians, than they. After a while they brought forth the Paper aforesaid, and asked, Whether I would own it? I said, Yes. Then he tendered the Oath of Abjuration to us: Whereupon I put my Hand in my Pocket, and drew forth the Answer to it, which had been given to the Pro∣tector. After I had given him that, he Examined us severally, one by one. He had with him a silly, young Priest, who asked us many frivolous Questions: and amongst the rest he asked To cut my Hair, which then was pretty long; and I was not to Cut it, though many times many were Angry at it. I told them, I had no Pride in it; and it was not of my own putting on. At length the Justice put us
under a Guard of Souldiers, who were hard and wild,1655. Ives. like the Justice himself: Nevertheless we Warned the People of the day of the Lord, and declared the Truth to them. On the next day he sent us guarded with a Party of Horse, with Swords and Pistols, and they carried us to Redruth.Redruth. On the First-day the Soldiers would have car∣ried us away; but we told them, It was their Sabbath, and it was not usual to Travel on that day. Several of the Town's People gather∣ed about us; and whilst I held the Souldiers in Discourse, Edward Pyot spake to the People; and afterwards Edward Pyot held the Soul∣diers in Discourse, whilst I spake to the People: And in the mean time the other Friend got out into the Backside, and went to the Steeple∣house, to speak to the Priest and People there; and the People were ex∣ceeding desperate, in a mighty Rage against him, and Abused him. The Souldiers also missing him, were in a great Rage, ready to kill us: But I declared the Day of the Lord, and the Word of Eternal Life to the People, that gathered about us. In the Afternoon the Souldi∣ers were Resolved, and would have us away from thence; so we took Horse: And when we were rid to the Towns-end, I was moved of the Lord God to go back again, to speak to the Old Man of the House. The Souldiers drew out their Pistols, and swore, that I should not go back: I heeded them not, but Rid back; and they Rid after me. So I cleared my self to the Old Man and the People; and then returned back again with them, and Reproved them for being so Rude and Violent. At Night we were brought to a Town called Smethick then,(Smithick) Falmouth. but since Falmouth; and it being the Evening of the First-day, there came in to our Inn the Chief-Constable of the Place, and many sober People; and some of them began to inquire concerning us. We told them, We were Prisoners for Truth's sake: and a great deal of Dis∣course we had with them concerning the Things of God. They were very sober, and very loving to us; and some of them were Convinced, and stood faithful ever after. After the Constable and People aforesaid were gone, other People came in; who also were very Civil, and went away very loving. When all were gone, we went to our Chamber to go to Bed: and about the Eleventh Hour Edward Pyot said; I will shut the Door, it may be some may come to do us a Mischief. Afterwards we understood that Capt. Keat, who commanded the Party, had a purpose to have done us some Mischief that Night: but the Door being bolted, they missed their Design at that time. Next Morning Capt. Keat brings in a Brother or Kinsman of his, a rude, wicked Man, and put him into the Room; he himself standing without. This evil-minded Man walking huffing up and down the Room, I bid him Fear the Lord. Whereupon he ran upon me, and struck me with both his Hands; and clapping his Leg behind me, would fain have thrown me down, if he could; but he could not: for I stood stiff and still, and let him strike. And as I looked towards the Door, I saw Capt. Keat look on, and see his Brother or Kinsman thus bet and abuse me. Where∣upon I said to him, Keat, Dost thou allow this? and he said, He did. Is this Manly or Civil, said I, to have us under a Guard, and put a Man to abuse and beat us? Is this manly, civil or Christian?
So I desired one of our Friends to send for the Constables;1655. Falmouth. and they came. Then I desired the Captain to let the Constables see his War∣rant or Order, by which he was to carry us; which he did: and his Warrant was To conduct us safe to Captain Fox, Governour of Pen∣dennis-Castle, and if the Governour should not be at home, then he was to Convey us to Lanceston-Gaol. I told him, He had broken his Order concerning us: for we, who were his Prisoners, were to be safely Conducted; but he had brought a Man to beat and abuse us: so he having broken his Order, I wisht the Constable to keep the Warrant. Accordingly he did, and told the Souldiers, They might go their ways, for he would take charge of the Prisoners; and if it cost twenty Shil∣lings in Charges to Carry us up, they should not have the Warrant again. I shewed the Souldiers the baseness of their Carriage towards us; and they walkt up and down the House in their Dumps, being pitifully blankt, and down. The Constables went to the Castle, and told the Officers, what they had done. The Officers shewed great dislike of Captain Keat's base Carriage towards us; and told the Con∣stables, that Major General Desborow was coming to Bodmin, and that we should meet him; and that it was likely, he would free us. Mean while our old Guard of Soldiers came by way of Intreaty to us, and promised, That they would be Civil to us, if we would go with them. Thus the Morning spent, till it was about the Eleventh Hour: and then, upon the Souldiers Intreaty, and Promise to be more Civil, the Constables gave them the Order again; and we went with them. Great was the Civility and Curtesy of the Constables, and People of that Town towards us, who did kindly entertain us; and the Lord did reward them with his Truth, that many of them have since been Convinced thereof, and are gathered into the Name of Jesus, and sit under Christ, their Teacher and Savi∣our. Captain Keat, who commanded our Guard, understanding, that Captain Fox, who was the Governour of Pendennis-Castle, was not at home, but was gone to meet Major General Desborow, did not have us thither; but went with us directly to Bodmin, a Town in the way to Lanceston. And as we went, we met Major General Desborow on the way: The Captain of his Troop, that rode before him, knew me, and said, Oh Mr. Fox, what do you here? I repli∣ed, 'I am a Prisoner. Alack, said he, for what? I told him, 'I was taken up, as I was traveling. Then, said he, I will speak to my Lord, and he will set you at Liberty. So he came from the Head of his Troop, and rode up to the Coach, and spake to the Major General: We also gave him an Account, how we were taken. He began to speak against the Light of Christ; for which I Reproved him: Then he told the Souldiers, They might carry us to Lanceston; for he could not stay to talk with us, lst his Horses should take Cold. Bodmin.So to Bodmin we were had that Night: And when we were come to our Inn, Captain Keat, who was gone in thither before us, put me into a Room, and went his way. When I was come in, there stood a Man with a naked Rapier in his Hand. Whereupon I turned out again, and called for Captain Keat, and said unto him; What now, Keat, what Trick hast thou played now, to put me into a
Room, where there is a Man with his naked Rapier?1655. Bodmin. What is thy End in this? Oh, said he, pray hold your Tongue; for if you speak to this Man, we cannot all rule him, he is so devilish. Then said I, Dost thou put me into a Room, where there is such a Man with a naked Rapier, that thou say'st, You cannot all rule him? What an unworthy, bad Trick is this? and to put me single into this Room from the rest of my Friends, that were Fellow-Prisoners with me? Thus his Plot was discovered, and the Mischief they intended, was prevented. And afterward we got another Room, where we were together all Night: And in the Evening we declared the Truth to the People; but they were an hardened, dark People. And the Souldiers, notwithstanding their fair Promises, were very rude and wicked to us again, and sate up drinking and roaring all Night. Next day we were brought to Lanceston;Lanceston Prison. and there Captain Keat delivered us to the Gaoler. Now was thee no Friend, nor friendly People near us; and the People of the Town was a dark, hardened People. The Gaoler required us to pay seven Shillings a Week for ou Horse-meat, and seven Shillings a Week for our Diet a piece: But after some time several sober People came to see us, and some of the Town came to be Convinced; and many friendly People out of several parts of the Country came to visit us, and were Convinced. Then got up a great Rage among the Professors and Priests against us; and they said, This People Thou and Thee all Men without Respect, and they will not dff their Hats, nor bow the Knee to any Man: This made them fret. But, said they, we shall see, when the Assize comes, whether they will dare to Thou and Thee the Judge, and keep on their Hats before him: And they expected, we should all be hanged at the Assize. But all this was little to us; for we saw, how God would stain the World's Honour and Glory: And we were commanded not to seek that Honour, nor give it; but knew the Honour, that came from God only, and sought that. It was Nine Weeks from the time of our Commitment to the Assizes:1556. Lanceston Assizes. And when the Assize came, abundance of People came from far and near, to hear the Trial of the Quakers. There was one Captain Bradden, that lay with his Troop of Horse there at that time whose Souldiers, and the Sheriff's men guarded us up to the Court through the Multitude of People, that filled the Streets; and much ado they had to get us through them: besides the Doors and Windows were filled with People looking out upon us. When we were brought into the Court, we stood a pretty while with our Hats on, and all was quiet; and I was moved to say, Peace be amongst you! After that, Judge Glyn, a Welch-man, who was then Chief Justice of England, said to the Gaoler, What be these you have brought here into the Court? Prisoners, my Lord, said he. Why do not you put off your Hats, said the Judge to us? We said nothing. Put off your Hats, said the Judge again: still we said nothing. Then said the Judge, The Court commands you to put off your Hats. Then I spake, and said, Where did ever any Magistrate, King or Judge, from Moses to Daniel, command any to put off their Hats, when they came before them in their Courts, either amongst the Jews (the People of God) or amongst the Heathens? And if the Law of England doth com∣mand
any such thing, shew me that Law either Written or Printed. Then the Judge grew very Angry, and said; I do not carry my Law-books on my Back. But, said I, tell me, where it is printed in any Statute-book, that I may read it. Then said the Judge, Take him away, Praevaricator! I'le ferk him. So they tock us away, and put us among the Thieves. Presntly after he calls to the Gaoler; Bring them up again. Come, said he, where had they Hats from Moses to Daniel? Come Answer me; I have you fast now, said he. I replied, Thou may'st read in the Third of Daniel, that the Three Children were cast into the fiery Furnace by Nebuchadnezzar's Command, with their Coats, their Hose, and their Hats on. This plain Instance stopt him: so that not having any thing else to say, He cried again, Take them away, Gaoler. Accordingly we were taken away, and thrust in among the Thieves; where we were kept a great while: and then, without being called again, the Sheriff's men and the Troopers made way for us (but we were almost spent) to get through the Crowd of People;Lanceston Prison. and so guarded us to the Prison again, a Mul∣titude of People following us, with whom we had much Discourse and Reasoning at the Gaol. We had got some very good Books, to set forth our Principles, and to Inform People of the Truth; which the Judge and Justices hearing of, they sent Captain Bradden for them; who came into the Gaol to us, and violently took our Books from us, some out of Edward Pyot's Hands, and carried them away: so that we never got them again. In the Afternoon we were had up again into the Court by the Gaoler and Sheriff's men, and Troopers; who had a mighty Toil to get us through the Crowd of People. When we were in the Court, waiting to be called, I seeing both the Jury-men, and such a Multi∣tude of others Swearing, it grieved my Life to see, that such, as pro∣fest Christianity, should so openly disobey, and break the Command of Christ, and the Apostle. And I was moved of the Lord God to give forth a Paper against Swearing, which I had about me, to the Grand and Petty Juries, which was, as followeth: Concerning SWEARING. TAKE heed of giving People Oaths to swear: for Christ our Lord and Master saith, Swear not at all; but let your Communi∣cations be Yea Yea, and Nay Nay: for whatsoever is more than these, cometh of Evil. And if any Man was to suffer Death, it must be by the Hand of two or three Witnesses; and the Hands of the Wit∣nesses were to be put first upon him to put him to Death. And the Apo∣stle James saith, My Brethren, above all things swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath, least ye fall into Con∣demnation. Now you may see, those that Swear, fall into Condem∣nation, and are out of Christ's and the Apostle's Doctrine. There∣fore every one of you having a Light from Christ, who saith, I am the Light of the World, and doth enlighten every Man, that cometh into the World; who saith, Learn of me, whose Doctrine is not to Swear; and the Apostle's Doctrine is not to Swear; but Let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be Nay in all your Communications; for whatsoever is
more, cometh of Evil: So then, they that go into more than Yea and Nay, go into the Evil, and are out of the Doctrine of Christ. Now if you say, That the Oath was the End of Controversie and Strife: they who be in Strife, are out of Christ's Doctrine; for he is the Covenant of Peace: and who be in it, are in the Covenant of Peace. And the Apostle brings that but as an Example: As, Men swearing by the greater; and, The Oath was the end of Controversie and Strife among Men; and said, Verily, Men swear by the greater: but God could not find a greater; but swears by himself, concerning Christ; which when he was come, taught not to swear at all: So such as be in him, and follow him, cannot but abide in his Doctrine. Now, if you say, They swore under the Law, and under the Prophets: Christ is the End of the Law, and of the Prophets to every one, that doth believe, for Righteousness sake. Now mark; If you believe, I am the Light of the World, which doth enlighten every Man, that cometh into the World, saith Christ, by whom it was made; now every Man of you, that is come into the World, being enlightned with a Light, that comes from Christ, by whom the World was made, that all of you through him might believe, That is the End, for which he doth enlighten you. Now if you do believe in the Light, as Christ Commands, and saith, Believe in the Light, that you may be Child∣ren of Light; you believe in Christ, and come to learn of him, who is the Way to the Father. And this is the Light, which shews the Evil Actions you have all acted, the ungodly Deeds you have un∣godly Committed, and all the ungodly Speeches you have spoken, and all your Oaths and cursed Speaking, and ungodly Actions. Now if you hearken to this Light, it will let you see all the Actions, that you have done contrary to it; and loving it, it will turn you from your evil Deeds, evil Actions, evil Ways, evil Words to Christ, who is not of the World; who is the Light, which lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World: who testifies against the World, that the Deeds thereof are evil. And so doth the Light in every Man, that he hath received from him, testifie against his Works and Deeds, that be Evil, that they be contrary to the Light; which he shall give an Account of at the day of Judgment for every idle Word, that is spoken. Which Light shall bring every Tongue to Confess, yea, and every Knee to bow at the Name of Jesus Which Light, if you believe in, you shall not come into Condemnation; but come to Christ, who is not of the World; to him, by whom it was made: but if you believe not in the Light, this is your Condem∣nation, the Light, saith Christ. G. F. This Paper passing among them from the Jury to the Justices, they presented it to the Judge; so that when we were called before the Judge, he bid the Clerk give me that Paper; and then asked me, Whether that Seditious Paper was mine? I told him, If they would read it up in open Court, that I might hear it, if it was mine, I would own it, and stand by it. He would have had me to have taken it, and looked upon it in my own Hand: But I again desired, That it
might be read, that all the Country might hear it, and Judge, whe∣ther there was any Sedition in it, or no: for if there were, I was willing to suffer for it. At last, the Clerk of the Assize read it with an Audible Voice, that all the People might hear it: and when he had done, I told them, It was my Paper, and I would own it; and so might they too, except they would deny the Scripture: for was not this Scripture-Language, and the Words and Commands of Christ and the Apostle, which all true Christians ought to obey? Then they let fall that Subject: and the Judge fell upon us about our Hats again, bidding the Gaoler, Take them off; which he did, and gave them un∣to us: and we put them on again. Then we asked the Judge and the Justices, What we had lain in Prison for these nine Weeks, see∣ing, they now Objcted nothing to us, but about our Hats? And as for putting off our Hats, I told them, That was the Honour, which God would lay in the Dust, though they made so much ado about it; the Honour, which is of Men, and which Men seek one of ano∣ther, and is the mark of Ʋnbelievers. For How can ye believe, saith Christ, who receive Honour one of another, and seek not the Honour, that cometh from God only? And Christ saith, I receive not Honour from Men: and all true Christians should be of his Mind. Then the Judge began to make a great Speech, how he Represented the Lord Protector's Person; and he had made him Lord Chief Justice of Eng∣land, and sent him to come that Circuit, &c. We desired him then, that he would do us Justice for our false Imprisonment, which we had suffered Nine Weeks wrongfully. But instead of that, they brought in an Indictment, that they had framed against us, such a strange thing, and so full of Lies, that I thought, it had been against some of the Thieves: How That we came by Force and Arms, and in an hostile manner into the Court; who were brought, as aforesaid. I told them, It was all false: and still we cried for Justice for our false Imprisonment; being taken up in our Journy without Cause, by Major Ceely. Then this Peter Ceely spake to the Judge, and said; May it please you, My Lord, This Man (pointing to me) went aside with me and told me, how serviceable I might be for his Design; that he could raise Forty Thousand Men at an Hours warning, and involve the Nation into Blood, and so bring in King Charles: and I would have aided him out of the Country, but he would not go. And, if it please you, My Lord, I have a Witness to swear it: and so he called upon his Witness. But the Judge not being forward to Examine the Wit∣ness, I spake to the Judge, and desired, That he would be pleased to let my Mittimus be read in the face of the Court and Country, in which my Crime was signified, for which I was sent to Prison. The Judge said, It should not be Read: I said, It ought to be, seeing, it concerned my Liberty and my Life. The Judge said again, It shall not be read; but I said, It ought to be read: for if I have done any thing worthy of Death, or of Bonds, let all the Country know it. Then seeing, they would not read it, I spake to one of my Fellow-Prisoners, 'Thou hast a Copy of it, Read it up, said I. It shall not be read, said the Judge; Gaoler, said he, Take him away: I'le see, whether He or I shall be Master. So I was taken away; and a while after called for again: And I still cried, to have my Mittimus read
up; for that signified the Cause of my Commitment. Wherefore I again spake to the Friend, that was my Fellow-Prisoner, and bid him, Read it up; and he did Read it up, and the Judge, Justices and whole Court were silent: for the People were eager to hear it. Which is as followeth: Peter Ceely,Cornwall ss. one of the Justices of the Peace of this County, To the Keeper of His Highness's Gaol at Lanceston, or his Lawful Deputy in that behalf, Greeting. I Send you here-withal by the Bearers hereof, the Bodies of Edward Pyot of Bristol, and George Fox of Drayton and Clea in Lei∣cestershire, and William Salt of London, which they pretend to be the Places of their Habitations, who go under the Notion of Quakers, and acknowledge themselves to be such; who have spread several Papers, tending to the disturbance of the Publick Peace, and cannot render any Lawful Cause of coming into these Parts, being Persons altogether un∣known, and having no Pass for their Travelling up and down the Country, and refusing to give Sureties of their good Behaviour, according to the Law in that behalf provided, and refuse to take the Oath of Abjura∣tion, &c. These are therefore, in the Name of His Highness the Lord Protector, to Will and Command you, that when the Bodies of the said Edward Pyot, George Fox and William Salt, shall be unto you brought, you them receive, and in His Highness's Prison aforesaid you safely keep them, until by due Course of Law they shall be delivered. Hereof fail you not, as you will Answer the contrary at your Perils. Given under my Hand and Seal, at St. Ives the Eighteenth day of January, 1655. P. Ceely. When it was read, I spake thus to the Judge and Justices, Thou that say'st, thou art Chief-Justice of England, and you, that be Justices, ye know, that if I had put in Sureties, I might have gone, whether I pleased; and have carried on the Design (if I had had one) which Major Ceely hath charged me with: And if I had spoken those Words to him, which he hath here declared, then judge ye, whether Bail or Mainprize could have been taken in that Case. Then turning my Speech to Major Ceely, I said, When or where did I take thee aside? Was not thy House full of rude People, and thou as Rude, as any of them at our Examination, so that I asked for a Constable or some other Officer, to keep the People civil? But if thou art my Accuser, why sittest thou on the Bench? That is not a place for thee to sit in; for Accusers do not use to sit with the Judges: Thou oughtest to come down, and stand by me, and look me in the Face. Besides, I would ask the Judge and Justices this Question;
Whether or no Major Ceely is not guilty of this Treason, which he charges against me, in Concealing it so long, as he hath done? Dos he understand his place, either as a Souldier, or a Justice of the Peace? For he tells you here, That I went aside with him, and told him, what a Design I had in hand, and how serviceable he might be for my Design: That I could raise Forty Thousand Men in an Hour's time, and bring in King Charles, and involve the Nation in Blood. He saith moreover, He would have aided me out of the Country, but I would not go; and therefore he committed me to Prison for want of Sureties for the good Behaviour, as the Mittimus declares. Now do not you see plainly, that Major Ceely is guilty of this Plot and Treason, that he talks of, and hath made himself a Party to it, by desiring me to go out of the Country, and demanding Bail of me; and not charging me with this pretended Treason, till now, nor discovering it? But I deny and abhor his Words, and am Innocent of his Devilish Design. So, that Business was let fall: for the Judge saw clear enough, that instead of Ensnaring me, he hath Ensnared himself. Then this Major Ceely got up again, and said; If it please you, my Lord, to hear me: This Man struck me, and gave me such a Blow, as I never had in my Life. At this I smiled in my Heart, and said; Major Ceely, art thou a Justice of Peace, and a Major of a Troop of Horse, and tells the Judge here in the Face of the Court and Country, That I (who am a Prisoner) struck thee, and gave thee such a Blow, as thou never had'st the like in thy Life? What! Art thou not asham∣ed? Prithee, Major Ceely, said I, where did I strike thee? and who is thy Witness for that? who was by? He said; It was in the Castle-green, and that Captain Bradden was standing by, when I 'struck him. I desired the Judge to let him produce his Witness for that: And I called again upon Major Ceely to come down from off the Bench, telling him; It was not fit, that the Accuser should sit as Judge over the Accused. Now when I called again for his Wit∣ness, he said; Captain Bradden was his Witness. Then I said, speak Captain Bradden, Did'st thou see me give him such a Blow, and strike him, as he saith? Captain Bradden made no answer; but bowed his Head towards me. I desired him to speak up, if he knew any such thing: but he only bowed his Head again. 'Nay, said I, speak up, and let the Court and Country hear, and let not bowing of the Head serve the Turn. If I have done so, let the Law be Inflicted on me; I fear not Sufferings, nor Death it self, for I am an Innocent Man concerning all his Charge. But Captain Bradden never Testified to it: And the Judge finding, those Snares would not hold, cried, Take him away, Gaoler: and then, when we were taken away, he fined us Twenty Marks a piece for not putting off our Hats; and to be kept in Prison, till we paid it: and so sent us back to the Gaol again. At Night Captain Bradden came to see us, and Seven or Eight Ju∣stices with him, who were very Civil to us, and told us; They did believe, neithr the Judge, nor any in the Court did believe those Charges, which Major Ceely had charged upon me in the Face of the Country And Capt. Bradden said, Major Ceely had an Intent to have taken away my Life, if he could have got another Witness.
But, said I, Captain Bradden, why did'st not thou witness for me,1656. Lanceston Prison. or against me, seeing Major Ceely produced thee for a Witness, that thou sawest me strike him? And when I desired thee to speak either for me, or against me, according to what thou sawest or knewest, thou wouldst not speak Why, said he, when Major Ceely and I came by you, as you were walking in the Castle-green, he put off his Hat to you, and said, How do you Mr. Fox? your Servant Sir. Then you said to him, Major Ceely, take heed of Hypocrisy, and of a rotten Heart: for when came I to be thy Master, and thou my Servant? Do Servants use to cast their Masters into Prison? This was the great Blow he meant, that you gave him. Then I called to mind, that they walked by us, and that he spake to me as aforesaid; and I spake those Words to him before-mentioned: which Hypocrisy and Rotten-heartedness he manifested openly, when he complained or this to the Judge in open Court, and in the Face of the Country; and would have made them all believe, that I struck him outwardly with my Hand. Now were we kept in Prison, and divers People came, from far and nigh, to see us; of whom some were People of Account in the World: for the Report of our Trial was spread abroad, and our Boldness and Innocency in our Answers to the Judge and Court was talked of in Town and Country. Among others, that came to visit us, there was one Humphry, Lower, a grave, sober, ancient Man, who had been a Justice of Peace formerly: and he was very sorry, we should lie in Prison; telling us, how serviceable we might be, if we were out of Prison. But we reasoned with him concerning Swearing: and having acquainted him, how they tendered the Oath of Abjuration to us, as a Snare, because they knew, we could not swear; we shew'd him, That No People could be serviceable to God, if they disobeyed the Command of Christ: and that they, that Imprisoned us for the Hat-Honour, which was of Men, and which Men sought for, they prisoned the Good, and vexed and grieved the Spirit of God in themselves, which should have turned their Minds to God. So we turned him to the Spirit of God in his Heart, and to the Light of Christ Jesus; and he was throughly Convinced, and continued so to his Death, and was very serviceable to us. There came also to see us one Colonel Rouse, a Justice of Peace, with a great Company with him; and he was as full or Words and Talk, as ever I heard any Man in my Life, so that there was no speak∣ing to him. At length I asked him, 'Whether he had ever been at School, and knew, what belonged to Questions and Answers? (this I said, to stop him) At School! said he, yes. At School! said the Souldiers; Doth he say so to our Colonel, that is a Scholar? Then said I, If he be so, let him be still, and receive Answers, to what he hath said. Then I was moved of the Lord so speak the Word of Life to him in God's dreadful Power; which came so over him, that he could not open his Mouth: his Face swelled, and was red like a Turkey; and his Lips moved, and he mumbled something: but the People thought, he would have fallen down. I stept to him; and he said, He was never so in his Life before: For the Lord's Power stopt the Evil Power and Air in him; so that he was almost choked. The Man was ever after very Loving to Friends, and not so full of Airy
Words to us; though he was a Man full of Pride: but the Lord's Power came over him, and the rest that were with him. Another time there came another Officer of the Army, a very ma∣licious, bitter Professor, whom I had known in London: And he was full of his airy Talk also, and spake slightly of the Light of Christ, and against the Truth, as Colonel Rouse had done, and against the Spirit of God being in Men, as it was in the Apostles Days; till the Power of God, that bound the Evil in him, had almost Choked him also, as it did Colonel Rouse: for he was so full of Evil Air, that he could not speak; but blubbered and stuttered. But from that time, that the Lord's Power struck him, and came over him, he was ever after more Loving to us. Now the Assize being over, and we settled in Prison upon such a Commitment, as we were not likely to be soon Released, we broke off from giving the Gaoler Seven Shillings a Week a piece for our Horses, and Seven Shillings a Week for our selves; and sent our Horses out into the Country. Upon which the Gaoler grew very Wicked and Devilish,Dooms-Dale. and put us down into Dooms-dale; a nasty, stinking Place, where they used to put Witches and Murderers, after they were Condemned to Die. The Place was so Noisom, that it was observed, few that went in, did ever come out again in Health: for there was no House of Office in it; and the Excrements of the Prisoners, that from time to time had been put there, had not been carried out (as we were told) for many Years. So that it was all like Mire, and in some Places to the Top of the Shoes in Water and Piss; and he would not let us Cleanse it, neither would he let us have Beds, or Straw to lie on. At Night some friendly People of the Town brought us a Candle, and a little Straw; and we went to burn a little of our Straw to take away the Stink. The Thieves lay over our Heads, and the Head-Gaoler lay in a Room by them over our Heads also. Now it seems, the Smoke went up into the Room, where the Gaoler lay: which put him into such a Rage, that he took the Pots of Excrements of the Thieves, and poured them down through a Hole upon our Heads in Dooms-dale; so that we were so bespattered with the Excrements, that we could not touch our selves, nor one another. And the Stink Increased upon us; so that what with Stink, and what with Smoke, we had like to have been choked and smothered in Dooms-dale: For we had the Stink under our Feet before; but now we had it on our Heads and Backs also: And he having quenched our Straw with the Filth he poured down, had made a great Smother in the Place. More∣over he railed on us most hideously, calling us Hatchet-faced Dogs, and such strange Names, as we had never heard of. In this manner were we fain to stand all Night, for we could not sit down; the Place was so full of filthy Excrements: And a great while he kept us after this manner, before he would let us cleanse it, or suffer us to have any Victuals brought in, but what we got through the Grate. One time a Lass brought us a little Meat; and he Arrested her for breaking his House, and sued her in the Town-Court for breaking the Prison: and a great deal of Trouble he put the Young-woman to; whereby others were so discouraged, that we had much a do to get Water, or Drink or Victuals. Near this Time we sent for a Young-woman, one
Ann Downer from London, (that could write,1656. Lanceston Doomsdale and take things well in Short-hand,) to buy and dress our Meat for us; which she was very willing to, it being also upon her Spirit to come to us in the Love of God: and she was very serviceable to us. This Head-Gaoler, we were Informed, had been a Thief, and was burnt both in the Hand, and in the Shoulder: His Wife too had been burnt in the Hand. The Ʋnder-Gaoler had been burnt both in the Hand, and in the Shoulder; and his Wife had been burnt in the Hand also: And Colonel Bennet, who was a Baptist-Teacher, having pur∣chased the Gaol and Lands belonging to the Castle, had placed this Head-Gaoler therein. The Prisoners, and some wild People would be talking of Spirits, that haunted Doomsdale, and walked there, and how many had died in it; thinking perhaps, to terrify us there∣with. But I told them and Friends, That if all the Spirits and De∣vils in Hell were there, I was over them in the Power of God, and feared no such thing: for Christ our Priest, would sanctify the Walls and the House to us, he who bruised the Head of the Devil. The Priest was to cleanse the Plague out of the Walls of the House under the Law, which Christ, our Priest, ended; who sanctifies both inwardly and outwardly the Walls of the House, and the Walls of the Heart, and all things to his People. By this time the General Quarter-Sessions drew nigh; and the Gaoler still carrying himself basely and wickedly towards us, we drew up our Sufferings, and sent it to the Sessions at Bodmin: upon the read∣ing of which, the Justices gave Order; That Doomsdale-Door should be opened, and that we should have liberty to Cleanse it, and to buy our Meat in the Town. We sent up a Copy also of our Sufferings to the Protector, setting forth, how we were taken and Committed by Ma∣jor Ceely; and how we were abused by Capt. Keat as aforesaid, and the rest in Order: Whereupon the Protector sent down an Order to Capt. Fox, Governour of Pendennis-Castle, to Examin the Matter about the Souldiers abusing us, and striking me. There were at that time many of the Gentry of the Country at the Castle: and Capt. Keat's Kinsman, that struck me, was sent for up before them, and much Threatned. They told him, That if I should change my Principle, I might take the Extremity of the Law against him, and might recover sound Damages of him. Capt. Keat also was checkt, for suffering the Prisoners under his Charge to be abused. This was of great Service in the Country: for afterwards Friends might have spoken in any Market or Steeple-house thereabouts, and none would meddle with them. I understood, that Hugh Peters, who was one of the Pro∣tector's Chaplains, told him; They could not do George Fox a greater Service for the spreading of his Principles in Cornwall, than to Im∣prison him there. And indeed, my Imprisonment there was of the Lord, and for his Service in those parts: For after the Assizes were over, and it was known, we were likely to continue Prisoners; se∣veral Friends from most parts of the Nation, came into the Country to visit us. And those parts of the West were very dark Countries at that time: But the Lord's Light and Truth brake forth, and shined over all; and many were turned from Darkness to the Light, and from Satan's Power unto God. And many were moved to go to the
Steeple-houses; and several were sent to Prison to us: and a great Convincement there began to be in the Country. For now we had Liberty to come out, and to walk in the Castle-Green; and divers People came to us on the First-days, to whom we declared the Word of Life: and great Service we had among them, and many were turned to God, here and there, up and down the Country; but a great Rage got up in the Priests and Professors against the Truth and us. One of the envious Professors had gathered together many Scripture-Sentences, to prove, That we ought to put off our Hats to the People; and he invited the Town of Lanceston to come into the Castle-Yard to hear him read them: Amongst other Instances, that he there brought, one was; That Saul bowed to the Witch of Endor. When he had done, we got a little Liberty (whether the Gaoler would or no) to speak; and we shewed both him and the People, That Saul was gone from God, and had disobeyed God, like them, when he went to the Witch of Endor: That neither the Prophets, nor Christ, nor the Apostles ever taught People to bow to a Witch. The Man went away with his rude People; but some of the People staid with us: and we shewed them; That this was not Gospel-Instructions, to teach People to bow to a Witch. For now People began to be af∣fected with the Truth, and now the Devil's Rage increased; so that we were in great dangers many times. One time there came a Souldier to us; and one of our Friends was admonishing of him, and exhorting him to Sobriety, &c. and I saw him begin to draw his Sword at him. Whereupon I stept to him, and told him, What a shame it was to offer to draw his Sword upon a naked Man, and a Prisoner; and how unfit and unworthy he was to carry such a Weapon: and that, if he should have offered such a thing to some Men, they would have taken his Sword from him, and have broken it to pieces. So he was ashamed, and went his way; and the Lord's Power preserved us. Another time, about the Eleventh Hour at Night, the Gaoler being half-drunk, came and told me, That he had gotten a Man now to dispute with me (this was, when we had leave to go a little into the Town:) As soon as he spake those Words, I felt, there was Mischief intended to my Body. All that Night, and the next day I lay down on a Grass-plat to slumber, and I felt something still about my Body; and I started up, and struck at it in the Power of the Lord, and yet still it was about my Body. Then I arose, and walked into the Castle-green; and the Ʋnder-Keeper came to me, and told me, There was a Maid would speak with me in the Prison. I felt a Snare in his Words too, therefore I went not into the Prison; but went to the Grate, and looked in: and there I saw a Man, that was lately brought to Prison for be∣ing a Conjurer; and he had a naked Knife in his Hand. So I spake to him, and he threatned to cut my Chaps (as his Expression was;) but he being within the Gaol, could not come at me: This was the Gaoler's great Disputant. I went soon after into the Gaoler's House, and found him at Breakfast; and he had then gotten his Conjurer out with him: So I told the Gaoler, his Plot was discovered. Then he got up from the Table, and cast his Napkin away in a Rage; and I left them, and went away to my Chamber: for at this time we were
out of Doomsdale. At the time the Gaoler had said,1656. Lanceston Gaol. the Dispute should be, I went down and walked in the Court (the place ap∣pointed) till about the Eleventh Hour; but no Body came: then I went up to my Chamber again; and after a while I heard one call for me. I stept to the Stairs-head; and there I saw the Gaoler's Wife upon the Stairs, and the Conjurer at the bottom of the Stairs, holding his Hand behind his Back, and in a great Rage. I asked him; Man, what hast thou in thy Hand behind thy Back? Pluck thy Hand before thee, said I; Let's see thy Hand, and what thou hast in it? Then in a Rage he pluckt forth his Hand with a naked Knife in it. Then I shewed the Gaoler's Wife the wicked Design of her Husband and her against me: for this was the Man they had brought to dispute of the things of God. But the Lord discovered their Plot, and prevented their Evil Design; and they both raged, and the Con∣jurer threatned. Then I was moved of the Lord to speak sharply to him in the dreadful Power of the Lord: and the Lord's Power came over him, and bound him down; so that he never after durst appear before me, to speak unto me. I saw, it was the Lord alone, that did preserve me out of their bloody Hands: for the Devil had a great Enmity to me, and stirred up his Instruments to seek my hurt. But the Lord prevented them; and my Heart was filled with Thanksgivings and Praises unto him. Now while I was exercised with People of divers sorts, that came some out of good will to visit us, some out of an envious, carping Mind to wrangle and dispute with us, and some out of Curiosity to see us; Edward Pyot, who before his Convincement had been a Captain in the Army, and had a good Understanding in the Laws and Rights of the People, being sensible of the Injustice and Envy of Judge Glyn to us at our Trial, and willing to lay the VVeight thereof upon him, and make him sensible thereof also, writ an Epistle to him, on behalf of us all, which was thus; and thus directed: To John Glyn, Chief Justice of England. Friend, WE are Free-men of England, Free-born; our Rights and Liberties are according to Law, and ought to be defended by it: And therefore with thee, by whose Hand we have so long and yet do suffr, let us a little plainly reason concerning thy Pro∣ceedinos against us, whether they have been according to Law, and agreeable to thy Duty and Office, as Chief Minister of the Law, or Justice of England? And in Meekness and Lowliness abide; that the Witness of God in thy Conscience may be heard to speak and judge in this Matter: For Thou and We must all appear before the Judgment-Seat of Christ, that every one may receive, according to what he hath done, whether it be good or bad. Therefore, Friend, in Moderation and Soberness Weigh, what is herein laid before thee.
In the Afternoon, before we were brought before thee at the Assize at Lanceston, thou didst cause divers Scores of our Books to be vi∣olently taken from us by Armed Men, without due Process of Law; which Books being perused (to see, if any thing in them could have been found to have laid to our Charge, who were Innocent Men: and them upon our Legal Issue) thou hast detained from us to this very day. Now, our Books are our Goods, and our Goods are our Property; and our Liberty it is to have and enjoy our Property: and of our Liberty and Property the Law is the defence; which saith, No Free-man shall be disseized of his Free-hold, Liberties or free Customs, &c. nor any way otherwise destroyed: Nor we shall not pass upon him, but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; Magna Charta, cap. 29. Now Friend, Consider, Is not the taking away of a Man's Goods violently, by force of Arms, as aforesaid, contrary to the Law of the Land? Is not the Keping of them so taken away, a disseizing him of his Property, and a de∣stroying of it and his Liberty, yea, his very Being, so far as the Invading of the Guard the Law sets about him, is in order thereunto? Calls not the Law this, a Destroying of a Man? Is there any more than one common Guard or Defence to Property, Liber∣ty and Life, viz. the Law? And can this Guard be broken on the former, (viz. Property and Liberty;) and the Latter (viz. Life) be sure? Doth not he, that makes an Invasion upon a Man's Property and Liberty (which he doth, who contrary to Law, which is the Guard, acts against either) make an Invasion upon a Man's Life; since that which is the Ground of the One, is also of the Other? If a Penny, or Penny's-worth be taken from a Man contrary to Law, may not by the same Rule all a Man hath, be taken away? If the Bond of the Law be broken upon a Man's Property, may it not on the same ground be broken upon his Person? And by the same Reason, as it is broken on One Man, may it not be broken upon all, since the Liberty and Property, and Beings of all Men under a Government are Relative, a Communion of Wealth, as the Members in the Body, but one Guard and Defence to all, the Law? One Man cannot be injured therein, but it redounds to all. Are not such things in or∣der to the Subversion and Dissolution of Government? Where there is no Law, what is become of Government? And of what value is the Law made, when the Ministers thereof break it at pleasure up∣on Mens Properties, Liberties and Persons? Canst thou Clear thy self of these things, as to us? To that of God in thy Conscience, which is Just, do I speak: Hast thou acted, like a Ministr, the Chief Minister of the Law, who hast taken our Goods, and yet de∣tainest them, without so much as going by lawful Warrant, ground∣ed upon due Information, which in this our Case thou could'st not have; for none had perused them, whereby to give thee Infor∣mation? Shoul'st thou exercise Violence and Force of Arms on Pri∣soners Goods, in their Prison-Chamber, instead of proceeding Orderly and Legally, which thy Place calls upon thee above any Man, to tender, defend and maintain against the other, and to preserve entire the Guard of every Man's Being, Liberty, Life and Livelyhood? Should'st thou, whore Duty it is to punish the Wrong-doer, do wrong
thy self? Who ought'st to see the Law be kept and observed, break the Law, and turn aside the due Administration thereof? Surely, from Thee, considering Thou art Chief Justice of England, other things were expected both by Ʋs, and by the People of this Nation. And Friend, when we were brought before thee, and stood upon our Legal Issue, and no Accuser, or Accusation came in against us; as to what we had been wrongfully Imprisoned, and in Prison detained for the Space of Nine Weeks, shouldest not thou have caused us to have been Acquitted by Proclamation? Saith not the Law so? Ought'st thou not to have Examined the Cause of our Commitment? And there not appearing a lawful Cause, ought'st thou not to have dis∣charged us? Is it not the Substance of thy Office and Duty, To do Justice according so the Law and Custom of England? Is not this the End of the Administration of the Law? of the General Assizes? of the Gaol-Deliveries? of the Judges going the Circuits? Hst not thou, by doing otherwise, acted Contrary to all these, and to Magna Charta? which, Cap. 29 saith, "We shall sell to no Man, we shall Deny, or Defer to no Man either Justice or Right: Hast thou not both Deferred and Denied to us, who had been so long oppressed, this Justice and Right? And when of thee Justice we demanded, sayd'st thou not, "If we would be uncovered, thou would'st hear us, and do us Justice? — We shall sell to no Man, we shall deny or defer to no Man either Justice or Right, saith Magn. Chart. as afore∣said: Again; "We have commanded all our Justices, that they shall from henceforth do even Law, and Execution of Right to all our Sub∣jects, Rich and Poor, without having Regard to any Man's Person; and without letting to do Right for any Letters or Commandments, which may come to them from Ʋs, or from any other, or by any other Cause, &c upon Pain to be at our Will, Body, Lands and Goods, to do therewith, as shall please us, in case they do contrary, saith Stat. 20. Edw. 3. cap. 1. Again, "Ye shall swear, that ye shall do even Law and Execution of Right to all, Rich and Poor, without having regard to any Person; and that ye deny to no Man Common Right by the King's Letters, nor none other Man's, nor for none other Cause. And in Case any Letter come to you contrary to the Law, that ye do no∣thing by such Letter; but Certify the King thereof, and go forth to do the Law notwithstanding those Letters. And in case ye be from hence∣forth found in default in any of the Points aforesaid, ye shall be at the King's Will of Body, Lands and Goods, thereof to be done, as shall please him: Saith the Oath, appointed by the Statute to be taken by all the Judges, Stat. 18. Edw. 3. But none of these, nor none other Law hath such an Expression, or Condition in it, as this, viz. Provided, he will put off his Hat to you, or be Ʋncovered: Nor doth the Law of God so say, or that your Persons be respected; but the contrary. From whence then comes this New Law, If ye will be uncovered, I will hear you, and do you Justice? This hearing Com∣plaint of Wrong, this doing of Justice, Ʋpon Condition; wherein lies the Equity and the Reasonableness of that? When were these Funda∣mental Laws Repealed, which were the Issue of much Blood and War; which to uphold, cost the Miseries and Blood of the late
Wars, that we shall now be heard, as to Right, and have Justice done us but upon Condition, and that too such a Trifling one, as the Putting off the Hat? Doth thy saying so, who art Commanded, as aforesaid, Repeal them, and make them of none Effect, and all the Miseries undergone, and the Blood shed for them of old, and of late Years? Whether it be so or no indeed, and to the Nation, thou hast made it so to Ʋs; to whom thou hast denied the Justice of our Li∣berty (when we were before thee, and no Accuser, nor Accusation came in against us) and the Hearing of the Wrong done to us, who are Innocent; and the Doing us Right. And Bonds hast thou cast, and continued upon us until this Day, under an Ʋnreasonable and Cruel Gaoler, for not performing That thy Condition, for Conscience sake. But thinkest thou, that this thine own Conditional Justice maketh void the Law? or can it do so? or absolve thee before God or Man? or acquit the Penalty mentioned in the Laws aforesaid? un∣to which, hast thou not Consented and Sworn? viz. And in case ye be from henceforth found in Default, in any of the points aforesaid, ye shall be at the King's Will, of Body, Lands and Goods, thereof to be done, as shall please him. And is not Thy Saying, If ye will be uncovered (or put off your Hats) I will hear you, and do you Justice; and (because we could not put them off for Conscience-sake) Thy denying us Justice, and refusing to hear us, as to Wrong (who had so unjustly suffered) a Default in thee against the very Essence of those Laws, yea, an Overthrow thereof, for which things sake (being of the highest Importance to the well-being of Men) so just, so equal, so necessary, those Laws were made, and all the Provisions therein? To make a Default in any one Point of which Provisions, exposeth to the said Penalty. Dost not thou by this time see, where thou art? Art thou sure, thou shalt never be made to understand and feel the Justice thereof? Is thy Seat so high, and thy Fence so great, and art thou so certain of thy Time and Station, above all that have gone before thee, whom Justice hath Cut down, and given them their due, that thou shalt never be called to an Account, nor with its long and sure stroke be reached? Deceive not thy self, God is come nearer to Judgment, than the Workers of Iniquity in this Age Imagin; who persecute and evil-intreat those, that witness the Just and Holy One, for their Witnessing of him, who is come to Reign for ever and ever. Saith he not, he will be a swift Witness against the false Swearers? God is not mocked. Surely, Friend, that must needs be a very great Offence, which deprives a Man of Justice, of being heard as to Wrong, of the Be∣nefit of the Law, and of those Laws afore-rehearsed; to defend the Justice and Equity of which, a Man hath adventured his Blood, and all that is Dear to him. But to stand Covered (or with the Hat on) in Conscience to the Command of the Lord, is made by thee such an Offence (which is none in Law) and rendered upon us (who are Innocent, serving the Living God) effectual to deny us Justice; though the Laws of God, and of Man, and the Oath, and Equity, and Reason saith the Contrary, and on it pronounceth such a Penalty. If ye will be Ʋncovered (Ʋncovered, said'st thou) I will hear you, and do you Justice: But Justice we had not, nor were we heard,
because Jesus Christ, who is the Higher Power, the Law-giver of his People, in our Consciences Commanded us not to Respect Per∣sons; whom to Obey we chuse rather than Man. And for our Obe∣dience unto him hast thou cast us into Prison, and continuest us there, till this very Day; having shewed us neither Law for it, nor Scripture, nor Instances of either, nor Example of Heathens or others. Friend, Come down to that of God, that is Just in thee, and Con∣sider, was ever such a thing, as this, heard of in this Nation? What's become of Seriousness, of true Judgment, and of Righteous∣ness! An unrighteous Man, standing before thee with his Hat off, shall be heard; but an Innocent Man, appearing with his Hat on in Conscience to the Lord, shall neither be heard, nor have Justice. Is not this regarding of Persons contrary to the Laws aforesaid, and the Oath, and the Law of God? Understand, and Judge: Did we not own Authority and Government oftentimes before the Court? Didst not Thou say in the Court, Thou wast glad to hear so much from us of our owning Magistracy? Pleaded we not to the Indictment, though it was such a new-found One, as England never heard of before? Came we not, when thou sentest for us? Went we not, when thou bid'st us go? And are we not still Prisoners at thy Command, and at thy Will? If the Hat had been such an Offence to thee, Could'st not thou have caused it to have been taken off, when thou heard'st us so often declare, we could not do it in Conscience to the Commands of the Lord; and that for that Cause we forbore it, not in Contempt of thee, or of Authority, nor in Disrespect to thine, or any Man's Person: (For we said, We honoured all Men in the Lord, and owned Authority, which was a Terror to Evil-Doers, and a Praise to them that do well; And our Souls were subject to the Higher Powers for Conscience-sake) as thou caused'st them to be taken off, and to be kept so, when thou called'st the Jury to find us Transgressors without a Law? What ado hast thou made to take away the Righteousnes of the Righteous from him, and to cause us to suffer further, whom thou knewest, to have been so long wrongfully in Prison contrary to Law? Is not Liberty of Conscience a Natural Right? Had there been a Law in this Case, and we bound up in our Consciences, that we could not have obeyed it, was not Liberty of Conscience there to take place? For where the Law saith not against, there needs no Plea of Liberty of Conscience: But the Law have we not offended; yet in thy Will hast thou caused, and dost thou yet cause us to suffer for our Consciences, where the Law requires no such thing: and yet for Liberty of Conscience hath all the Blood been spilt, and the Miseries of the late Wars undergone, and (as the Protector saith) this Govern∣ment undertaken, to preserve it; and a Natural Right, he saith, it is; and he that would have it, he saith, ought to give it. And if it be a natural Right, as is undeniable; then to attempt to force it, or to punish a Man for not doing contrary to it, is to act against Nature: which as it is unreasonable, so it is the same, as to offer Violence to a Man's Life. And what an Offence that is in the Law, thou knowest; and how, by the Common Law of England, all Acts, Agreements and Laws, that are against Nature, are meer Nullities: and all the Judges cannot make one Case to be Law, that is against Nature. But
put the Case, our standing with our Hats on, had been an Offence in Law, and we wilfully, and in Contempt, and not out of Conscience had stood so (which we deny, as aforesaid) yet that is not a ground, wherefore we should be denied Justice, or to be heard, as to the Wrong done to us. If ye will not Offend in one Case, I will do you Justice in another: This is not the Language of the Law, or of Ju∣stice, which distributes to every one their Right; Justice, to whom Justice is due; Punishment, to whom Punishment is due. A Man who doth Wrong, may also have Wrong done to him; shall he not have Right, wherein he is wronged unless he Right him, whom he hath wronged? The Law saith not so: but the Wrong-doer is to suffer, and the Sufferer of Wrong to be righted. Is not otherwise to do, a Denying, a Letting, or Stopping of Even Law, and Exe∣cution of Justice, and a bringing under the Penalties aforesaid? Mind and Consider. And should'st Thou have Accused, when no Witness appeared against us, as in the particulars of striking Peter Ceely, and Dispersing Books (as thou said'st) against Magistracy and Ministry, with which thou didst falsly Accuse one of u? saith not the Law, The Judge ought not to be the Accuser? much less a false Accuser. And wast not thou such an one, in Affirming, That he dispersed Books against Magistracy and Ministry, when as the Books were Violently taken out of our Chamber, (as hath been said) undispersed by him, or any of us? Nor did'st thou make it appear in one particular, wherein those Books, thou so Violently didst cause to be taken away, were against Magistracy or Ministry? or gavest one Instance, or Reply, when he denied, what thou charged'st therein; and spake to thee to bring forth those Books, and make thy Charge appear. Is not the Sword of the Magistrate of God to pass upon such Evil-Doing? And ac∣cording to the Administration of the Law, ought not Accusations to be by way of Indictment, wherein the Offence is to be charged, and the Law expressed, against which it is? Can there be an Issue without an Indictment? Or can an Indictment be found, before Proof be made of the Offence charged therein? And hast not thou herein gone contrary to the Law, and the Administration thereof, and thy Duty, as a Judge? What just cause of Offence gave George Fox to thee, when, upon thy producing a Paper concerning Swearing, sent by him (as thou said'st) to the Grand Jury, and requiring him to say, Whether it was his Hand-writing? he answered, Read it up before the Country; and when he heard it read, if it were his, he would own it? Is it not equal, and according to Law, that what a Man is charged with before the Country, should be read in the hearing of him and of the Country? When a Paper is delivered out of a Man's Hand, Alterations may be made in it to his Prejudice, which, on a suddain looking over it, may not presently be discerned; but by hearing it read up, may be better understood, whether any such Alterations have been made therein? Could'st thou in Justice have expected, or required him otherwise to do? Considering also, that he was not unsensible, how much he had suffered already, being Inno∣cent; and what Endeavours there were used, to cause him further to suffer? Was not, what he said, as aforesaid, a plain and single
Answer, and sufficient in the Law? Though (as hath been demon∣strated) contrary to Law thou didst act, and to thy Office, in being his Accuser therein, and producing the Paper against him. And in his Liberty it was, whether he would have made thee any Answer at all, to what thou did'st exhibit, or demand out of the due Course of Law: for to the Law Answer is to be made; not to thy Will. Wherefore then wast thou so filled with Rage and Fury upon that his Reply? Calmly, and in the Fear of the Lord consider: Where∣fore did'st thou Revile him, particularly with the reproachful Names of Juggler, and Prevaricator? Wherein did he juggle? wherein did he prevaricate? Wherefore did'st thou use such Threatning Lan∣guage, and such Menacings to him and us, saying, Thou would'st Ferk us, with such like? Doth not the Law forbid Reviling, and Rage, and Fury, and Threatning and Menacing of Prisoners? So∣berly mind; Is this to act like a Judge, or a Man? Is not this Transgression? Is not the Sword of the Magistrate of God to pass on this as Evil-doing, which the righteous Law condemns, and the Higher Power is against, which judgeth for God? Take heed, what ye do; for ye judge not for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment. Wherefore now, let the Fear of the Lord be upon you; take heed, and do it: For there is no Iniquity with the Lord our God, nor Respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts, said Jeho∣shaphat to the Judges of Judah. Pride, and Fury, and Passion, and Rage, and Reviling, and Threatning is not the Lord's: It, and the Principle, out of which it springs, is for Judgment, and must come under the Sword of the Magistrate of God; and it is of an ill Savour, especially such an Expression, as to threaten to Ferk us. Is not such a Saying more becoming a Pedant, or Schoolmaster with his Rod or Ferula in his Hand, than Thee, who art the Chief Justice of the Nation, who sittest in the highest Seat of Judgment; who oughtest to give a good Example, and so to Judge, that others may hear and fear? Weigh it soberly, and Consider, Doth not threatning Lan∣guage demonstrate an Inequality, and Partiality in him, who sits as Judge? Is it not a Deterring of a Prisoner from standing to, and pleading the Innocency of his Cause? Provides not the Law against it? Saith it not, That Irons, and all other Bonds shall be taken from the Prisoner, that he may plead without Amazement, and with such freedom of Spirit, as if he were not a Prisoner? But when he, who is to judge according to the Law, shall before-hand threaten, and Menace the Prisoner contrary to the Law, how can the Mind of the Prisoner be free, to plead his Innocency before him? or expect Equal Judgment from him, who, before he hears him, threatens, what he will do unto him? Is not this the Case between Thee and Ʋs? Is not this the Measure we have received at thy Hands? Hast thou herein dealt according to Law? or to thy Duty? Or as thou wouldest be done unto? Let that of God in thy Conscience Judge. And did'st not thou say, There was a Law for putting off the Hat; and that thou would'st shew a Law? and did'st not thou often so ex∣press thy self? But didst thou produce any Law? or shew, where that Law might be found? or any Judicial President, or in what
King's Reign, when we so often desired it of thee; having never heard of, or known any such Law, by which thou didst Judge us? Was not, what we demanded of thee, reasonable and just? Was that a Savoury Answer, and according to Law, which thou gavest us, viz. I am not to carry the Law-books at my Back, up and down the Country; I am not to Instruct you? Was ever such an Expression heard be∣fore these days, to come out of a Judge's Mouth? Is he not to be of Counsel in the Law for the Prisoner, and to Instruct him therein? Is it not for this cause, that the Prisoner, in many Cases, is not al∣lowed Counsel by the Law? In all Courts of Justice in this Nation, hath it not been known so to have been? And to the Prisoner hath not this been often declared, when he hath demanded Counsel, alledg∣ing his Ignorance in the Law, by reason of which his Cause might miscarry, though it were righteous, viz. The Court is of Counsel for you? Ought not he, that judgeth in the Law, to be Expert in the Law? Could'st thou not tell, by what Act of Parliament it was made, or by what Judicial President, or in what King's Reign, or when it was adjudged so by the Common Law (which are all the Grounds, the Law of England hath) had there been such a Law; though the words of the Law thou could'st not remember? Surely, To Inform the Prisoner, when he desired it, especially as to a Law, which was never heard of, by which he proceeds to Judge him, that he may know, what Law it is, by which he is to be Judged, becomes him who Judgeth for God: for so the Law was read to the Jews, by which they were to be Judged, yea, every Sabbath-day; this was the Commandment of the Lord. But instead thereof to say, I am not to carry the Law-books at my Back up and down the Country; I am not to Instruct you: To say, There is a Law, and to say, Thou wilt shew it; and yet not to shew it, nor to tell, where it is to be found; Consider, whether it be Consistent with Savouriness, or with Truth, or Justice? Have not thy whole Proceedings against us made it evidently to appear, that thy desire was to Cause us to suffer, not to deliver us, who, being Innocent, suffered; to have us aspersed and reproached before the Country, not to have our Innocency cleared and vindi∣cated? Doth not thy taking away our Books, as aforesaid, and the perusing of them in such haste before our Trial, and thy Accusing us with something, which thou said'st was contained in them, make it to appear, that Matter was sought out of them, where-withal to Charge us, when the Et Caetera-Warrant would not stand in Law, by which we stood Committed, and were then upon our Delivery, according to due Course of Law? Doth it not further appear, by thy refusing to take from our Hands a Copy of the strange Et Caetera-Warrant, by which we were Committed, and of the Paper, for which we were Apprehended, to read it, or cause it to be read; that so our long Sufferings by reason of both, might be lookt into, and weighed in the Law, whether Just or Righteous, and the Coun∣try might as well see our Innocency, and Sufferings without a Cause, and the manner of Dealing with us, as to hear such Reports, as went of us, as great Offenders, when we called upon thee often so to do, and which thou oughtest to have done, and said'st, Thou
would'st do, but did it not; nor so much as took notice before the Country, that we had been falsely Imprisoned, and had wrongfully suffered? But what might Asperse and Charge us, thou brought'st in thy self, contrary to Law, and did'st call to have us charged there∣with. Is not this further manifest, in that thou did'st cause us on a sudden to be with-drawn, and the Petty-Jury to be called in with their Verdict; whereupon Peter Ceely's falsly accusing George Fox, with telling him privately of a Design, and persuading him to join therein, It was by G. Fox made so Clear to be a manifest Fals∣hood, and so plainly to be perceived, that the Cause of our Suffer∣ings was not any Evil we had done, or Law that we had transgres∣sed, but Malice and Wickedness? And is it not abundantly clear from thy not permitting us to Answer, and clear our selves of the many foul Slanders charged upon us in the New-found-Indictment, of which no Proof was made? but when we were Answering there∣unto, and Clearing our selves thereof, thou did'st stop us, saying; Thou mindest not those things, but only the putting off the Hat: when as, before the Country, the New-found Indictment charged us with those things, and the Petty-Jury brought in their Verdict, Guilty of the Trespasses and Contempts mentioned therein; of which (except as to the Hat) not one Witness or Evidence was produced; and as to the Hat, not any Law, or judicial President, upon the Transgres∣sion of which all legal Indictments are only to be grounded? Now the Law seeks not for Causes, whereby to make the Innocent to suf∣fer; but helpeth him to Right, who suffers Wrong, and relieveth the Oppressed, and searcheth out the Matter, Whether that, of which a Man stands Accused, be so or no; seeking Judgment, and haste∣ning Righteousness: and it saith, The Innocent and the Righteous slay thou not. But whether thou hast done so to us, or the contrary, let the Witness of God in thee search and judge; as these thy Fruits do also make manifest. And Friend, Consider, how abominably wicked, and how high∣ly to be abhorred, denied and witnessed against, and how Contrary to the Laws such a Proceeding is, as to Charge a Man with many Offences in an Indictment, which they, who draw the Indictment, they who Prosecute, and they who find the Bill, know to be false, and to be set in purposely to Reproach, and Wound his good Name; whom with some small Matter, which they can prove, they Charge and Indict; as is the Common Practice at this day. Prove but one particular Charge in the Indictment, and it must stand (say they) for a True Bill; though there be never so many Falshoods and Lies therein, on set purpose to wrong him, who is maliciously prosecuted: This is known to the Judges; and almost to every Man, who hath to do with, and attends their Courts. How contrary is this to the End and Righteousness of the Law, which Clears the Innocent, and Condemns the Guilty, and condemneth not the Righteous with the Wicked! Much it is Cried out of; but what Reformation is there thereof? How else shall Clerks of Assize, and other Clerks of Courts fill up their Bags (out of which perhaps their Master must have a secret Consideration) and be heightned in Pride and Impudence; that even in open Court they take upon them to Check and Revile
Men without Reproof, when a few Lines might serve instead of an hundred? How else shall the Spirit, that is in Men, that lusteth un∣to Envy, Malice, Strife and Contention, be cherished and nourished to feed the Lawyers and Dependents on Courts, with the Bread of Mens Children, and the Ruin of their Families, to maintain their long Suits and malicious Contentions! For a Judge to say, I mind not these things; I'le not hear you clear your selves, of what you are falsely accused of: One thing I mind in your Charge, the rest are but Matter of Form, set there to render you such wicked Men before the Country, as the thing, that is to be proved against you, is not suffi∣cient to make out. Oh, abominable Wickedness, and perverting of the Righteous End of the Law, which is so careful and tender of every Man's Peace and Innocency! How is the Law in the Admini∣stration thereof adulterated by the Lawyers, as the Scriptures are mangled by the Priests! And that which was made to preserve the Righteous, and to punish the Wicked, perverted to the Punishing of the Righteous, and the Preserving of the Wicked! An Eye for an Eye; a Tooth for a Tooth; Life for Life; Burning for Burning; Wound for Wound; a Stripe for a Stripe; he that Accuseth a Man falsely, to suffer the same, as he should have suffered, who was falsely Accused, if he had been guilty; This saith the righteous Law of God: which is agreeable to that of God in every Man's Consci∣ence. Are not such Forms of Iniquity to be denied, which are so contrary to the Law of God and Man? Which serve for the gender∣ing of Strife, and the kindling of Contention? And of this Nature was not that, with which thou did'st cause us to be Indicted? And this Form did'st not thou uphold, in not permitting us to Answer to the many foul Slanders therein; saying, Those things thou mindest not? Will not the Wrath of God be revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness; who are so far from the Power of Godli∣ness, that they have not the Form, but the Form of Iniquity, which is set up and held up instead of, and as a Law, to overthrow and destroy the Righteousness of the Righteous, and so to shut him up, as by the Law he can never get out? Is not the Cry, thinkest thou, gone up? It is time for thee, to set to thine Hand, O Lord, for thine Enemies have made void thy Law! Draws not the hour nigh? Fills not up the Measure of Iniquity apace? Surely the day is coming, and hastneth. Warned ye have been from the presence, and by the Mouth of the Lord; and clear will he be, when he cometh to Judgment, and upright, when he giveth Sentence. That of God in every one of your Consciences shall so to him bear witness and con∣fess, and your Mouths shall be stopped, and before your Judge shall ye be silent, when he shall divide you your Portion, and render unto you according to your Deeds. Therefore, whilst Thou hast Time, prize it, and Repent: for verily, Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence; a Fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very Tempestuous round about him. He shall call to the Heavens from above, and to the Earth, that he may judge his People; and the Hea∣vens shall declare his Righteousness: for God is Judge himself. Consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.
And Friend, should'st thou have given Judgment against us, (wherein thou didst fine us Twenty Marks a piece, and Imprisonment till Payment) without causing us, being Prisoners, to be brought before thee, to hear the Judgment, and to Move, what we had to say in Arrest of Judgment? Is not this contrary to the Law, as is manifest to those, who understand the Proceedings thereof? Is not the Prisoner to be called, before Judgment be given? And is not the Indictment to be read? and the Verdict thereupon? And is not Liberty to be given him to move in Arrest of Judgment? And if it be a Just Exception in the Law, ought not there to be an Arrest of Judgment? For the Indictment may not be drawn up according to Law, and may be wrong placed, and the Offence charged therein may not be a Crime in Law; or the Jury may have been corrupted, or menaced, or set on by some of the Justices; with other Particu∣lars, which are known to be legal and just Exceptions. And the Judgment ought to be in the Prisoner's hearing, not behind his Back; as if the Judge were so Conscious of the Error thereof, that he dares not give it to the Face of the Prisoner. But these Priviledges of the Law, this Justice, we (who had so long, and so greatly suf∣fered contrary to Law) received not, nor could have at thy Hands; no, not so much as a Copy or Sight of that long and New-found In∣dictment (which in England was never heard of before, nor that the Matter contained therein was an Offence in Law, nor ever was there any Law, or judicial President, that made it so;) though Two Friends of ours in our Names and Behalfs that Night, and the next day, and the day following often desired it of the Clerk of the Assize, and his Assistant and Servants: but it they could not have, nor so much liberty, as to see it. And 'tis like, it was not unknown, or unperceived by thee, that, had we been Called, as we ought to have been, or had known, when it was to be given, Three or Four Words might have made a sufficient, legal Arrest of the Judgment given on that New-found Indictment, and the Verdict thereupon. Therefore, as our Liberties, who are Innocent, have not (in thy Accompt) been worth the minding, and esteemed fit for nothing, but to be trampled under foot, and destroyed; so, if we find fault, with what thou hast done, thou hast taken care, that no Door be left open to us in the Law, but a Writ of Error: The Consideration whereof, and the Judgment to be given thereon, is to be had only, where thy self is Chief; of whom such Complaint is to be made, and the Error Assigned for the Reverse of thy Judgment. And what the Fruit of that may be well expected to be, by what we have already mentioned, as having received at thy Hands, thou hast given us to understand. And here thou may'st think, thou hast made thy self secure, and sufficiently barr'd up our Way of Relief, against whom (tho' thou knew'st, we had done nothing contrary to the Law, or worthy of Bonds; much less of the Bonds and Suf∣ferings, we had sustained:) thou hast proceeded, as hath been re∣hearsed; notwithstanding that thou art (as are all the Judges of the Nation) Intrusted not with a Legislative Power, but to Admini∣ster Justice, and to do Even Law, and Execution of Right to all, High and Low, Rich and Poor, without having regard to any Man's
Person; and art sworn so to do, as hath been said: And wherein thou dost Contrary, art lible to Punishment, as ceasing from being a Judge, and becoming a Wrong-doer, and an Oppressor; which what it is to be, many of thy Predecssors have understood, some by Death, others by Fine and Imprisonment. And of this thou may'st not be Ignorant, that to deny a Prisoner any of the Priviledges the Law allows him, is to deny him Justice; to Try him in an Arbitrary Way; to rob him of that Liberty, which the Law gives him, which is his Inheritance, as a Freeman: And which to do, is in ef∣fect To subvert the Fundamental Laws and Government of England, and to Introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law; which is Treason by the Common Law: and Treasons by the Common Law are not taken away by the Statutes of 25 Edw. III. 1 H. IV. 1, 2. m. See O. St. Johns, now Chief Justice of the Com∣mon Pleas, his Argument against Strafford, fol. 65. &c. in the Case. These things, Friend, We have laid before thee in all plainness; to the End, that (with the Light of Jesus Christ, who lighteth every one, that cometh into the World, a Measure of which thou hast, which sheweth thee Evil, and reproveth thee for Sin, for which thou must be accountable) thou being still and cool, may'st consider and see, what thou hast done against the Innocent; and shame may overtake thee, and thou may'st Turn unto the Lord, who now calleth thee to Repent∣ance by his Servants, whom, for witnessing his living Truth in them, thou hast Cast into, and yet continuest under Cruel Bonds and Sufferings. From the Gaol in Lanceston, the 14th day of the 5th Month, 1656. Edw. Pyot. By the foregoing Letter the Reader may Observe, how contrary to Law we were made to suffer: But the Lord, who saw the Integrity of our Hearts to him, and knew the Innocency of our Cause, was with us in our Sufferings, and bore up our Spirits through, and made them Easie to us; and gave us Opportunities of publishing his Name and Truth amongst the People: so that several of the Town came to be Convinced, and many were made Loving to us; and Friends from many Parts came to visit us. There came Two out of Wales, who had been Justices of the Peace there: —Also Judge Hagget's Wife of Bristol came to visit us; and she was Convinced, and several of her Children: and her Husband was very kind and serviceable to Friends, and had a great Love to God's People, which he retained to his Death. Now in Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorsetshire and Somersetshire Truth began mightily to spread; and many were turned to Christ Jesus, and his free Teaching: for many Friends, that came to Visit us, were drawn forth to declare the Truth in those Countries; which made the Priests and Professors rage, and they stirred up the Magi∣strates to ensnare Friends. Then they set up Watches in the Streets, and in the High-ways, on pretence of taking up all suspicious Persons;
under which Colour they stopt, and took up those Friends, that tra∣velled in and through those Countries, coming to visit us in Prison: which they did, that the Friends might not pass up and down in the Lord's Service. But that, which they thought to have stopt the Truth by, was the Means of spreading it so much the more: for then Friends were frequently moved to speak to one Constable, and t'other Officer, and to the Justices they were brought before; and this caused the Truth to spread the more amongst them in all their Parishes. And when Friends were got among the Watches, it would be a Fortnight or three Weeks, before they could get out of them again: for no sooner had one Constable taken them, and carried them before the Justices, and they had discharged them; but another would take them up, and carry them before other Justices: Which put the Country to a great deal of needless Trouble and Charges. As Thomas Rawlinson was coming up out of the North, to visit us, a Constable o Devonshire took him up; and at Night took Twenty Shillings out of his Pocket: And after they had thus robbed him, he was cast into Exeter-Gaol. They cast Henry Pollexfen also into Pri∣son in Devonshire, for being a Jesuit; who had been a Justice of Peace for the most part of Forty Years before. Many Friends were cruelly beaten many times by them: Nay, some Clothiers, that were but going to Mill with their Cloth, and other Men about their outward Occasions, they took up and Whipt; though Men of about Eighty or an hundred Pounds by the Year, and not above four or five Miles from their Families. The Mayor of Lanceston too was a very Wicked Man; for he would take up all he could get, and cast them into Prison: And he would search substantial, grave Women, their Petticoats and their Head∣cloaths. There came a Friend, a Young-Man, to ee us, who came not through the Town: So I drew up all the Gross, Inhuman and Ʋnchristian Actions of the Mayor (for his Carriage was more like an Heathen, than a Christian) and I gave it the Young Man, and bid him, Seal it up, and go out again the back-way; and then come into the Town through the Gates. He did so: and the Watch took him up, and carried him before the Mayor; who presently searched his Pockets, and found the Letter, wherein he saw all his Actions Chara∣cterized: Which shamed him so, that from that time forward he meddled little with the Servants of the Lord. Now, from the sense I had of the Snare, that was laid, and Mischief intended against the Servants of the Lord, in setting up those Watches at that time, to stop and take up Friends; it came upon me to give forth the following Lines, as— An Exhortation and Warning to the Magistrates. ALL ye Powers of the Earth, Christ is come to Reign, and is among you, and ye know him not; who doth Enlighten every one of you, that are come into the World, that ye all through him might believe: who is the Light, who treads the Wine-press
alone, without the City; whose Feet are upon it. Therefore see all, and examin with the Light, what ye are Ripe for; for the Press is ready for you. Before Honour is Humility: And all you, that would have Ho∣nour, before ye have Humility (mark, before ye have Humility) are ye not as the Heathen are? Ye would have Honour, before ye have Humility; Did not all the Persecutors, that ever were upon the Earth, want this Humility? And so they wanted the Honour; and yet would have the Honour, before they had the Humility, and had learned that. And so ye, that be out of the Humility, be out of the Honour; and ye are not to have the Honour, who have not the Humility: for before Honour is Humility, mark, before it. Now, ye pretend Liberty of Conscience, yet shall not one carry a Letter to a Friend; nor Men visit their Friends; nor visit Prisoners; nor carry a Book about them, either for their own Use, or for their Friends: and yet ye pretend Liberty of Conscience. Men shall not see their Friends; but Watches are set up against them, to catch and stop them: and these must be Well-armed Men too, against an Inno∣cent People, that have not so much as a Stick in their Hnds, who are in scorn called Quakers. And yet mng such, as set up these Watches, is pretended Liberty of Conscience; who take up them, whose Consciences are exercised towards God and Men, who worship God in their Way, which is the Truth, which they, that be out of the Light, call Heresy. Now these, who set up the Watches against them, whom they in scorn call Quakers, it is. Because they confess and witness the true Light, that lighteth every one, that cometh into the World, amongst People, as they pass through the Country, or among their Friends. This is the dangerous Doctrine, which the Watchmen are set up against, to subdue Error, as they call it; which is the Light, that doth enlighten every Man, that cometh into the World, Hm, by whom the World was made: who was glori∣fied with the Father, before the VVorld began. For them, whom they in scorn call Quakers, have they set up their VVatches, Able Men, well-Armed, to take up these, that bear this Testimony either in VVords, Books or Letters. So that is the Light you hate, that doth Enlighten every man, that cometh into the VVorld; and these that wit∣ness to this Light, are they that you put in Prison: And after you have Imprisoned them, you set up your VVatches, to take up all, that go to Visit them; and to Imprison them also: So that by setting up your VVatches, ye would stop all Relief from coming to Priso∣ners. Therefore this is the VVord of the Lord God to you, and a Charge to you all, in the presence of the living Go of Heaven and Earth: Every Man of you being enlightned with a Light, that com∣eth from Christ, the Saviour of People's Souls, from whom the Light cometh, that enlightens you, To the Light all take heed; that with it you may all see Christ, from whom the Light cometh, you may all see him to be your Saviour, by whom the VVorld was made, who saith; Learn of me. But if ye hate this Light, which Christ hath enlightned you withal, ye hate Christ; who doth Enlighten you all, that you all through him (who is the Light) might believe. But not believing in the Light, nor bringing your Deeds to the Light,
which will make them manifest, and reprove them; this is your Con∣demnation, even the Light. Remember, you are warned in your Life-time; for this is your VVay to Salvation, the Light, if you walk in it: And this is your Condemnation, the Light, if you re∣ject and hate it. And you can never come to Christ, the Second Priest, unless you come to the Light, which the Second Priest hath enlightned you withal. So ye, that come not to the Light, ye go to the Priests, that take Tithes, as did the First Priesthood; and so hale out of your Synagogues and Temples (as some call them) as that Priesthood did, that took Tithes: which they, that were of the Second Priesthood, did not. Was there ever such a Generation! Or ever did such a Generation of Men appear, as doth now in this Age, who are so full of Madness, Envy and Persecution, that they stand up in VVatches with Bills and VVeapons against the Truth, to perse∣cute it; as the Towns and Countries do declare: which Rings as Sodom, and like Gomorrah! And this hath its Liberty, and Truth is stood against: And to Reprove Sin, is accounted a Breach of the Peace, as they say; who be out of the Truth, and set up their VVatches against it. G. F. Besides this General VVarning, there coming to my Hand a Copy of a VVarrant Issued out from the Sessions of Exon, in express Terms, For the apprehending of all Quakers; wherein Truth and Friends were reproached and vilified, I was moved to write an Answer thereunto, and send it abroad, for the Clearing of Truth and Friends from the Slanders therein cast upon them: and to manifest the wickedness of that persecuting Spirit, from whence it proceeded. And that which I writ, was after this manner: WHereas there was a VVarrant granted forth the last Sessions holden at Exon, on the Eighteenth Day of the Fifth Month, 1656. which VVarrant is For the Apprehending and taking up all such, as are Quakers, or call themselves Quakers, or go under the Notion of Quakers; And is directed to the Chief-Constables, to be sent by them to the Petty-Constables, requiring them to set VVatches, able Men with Bills, to take up all such Quakers, as aforesaid. And whereas in your said VVarrant you speak of the Quakers spreading Seditious Books and Papers; I Answer: They, whom ye in scorn call Qua∣kers, have no Seditious Books or Papers; but their Books are against Sedition, and Seditious Men, and Seditious Books, and Sediti∣ous Teachers, and Seditious VVays. And so, ye have numbred them, who are honest Men, Godly Men, holy Men, Men that fear God, among Beggars, Rogues and Vagabonds: Thus putting no Difference between the Precious and the Vile, you are not fit to judge; who have set up your Bills, and armed your Men to stand up together in Battel against the Innocent People, the Lambs of Christ, which have not lifted up an Hand against you. But if ye were sensible of the State of your own Country, your Cities, your Towns, your Villages,
how the Cry of them is like Gomorrah, and the Ring, like Sodom, and the Sound, like the Old World, where all Flesh had Corrupted its way, which God overthrew with the Flood! If you did this con∣sider with your selves, you would find something to turn the Sword against, and not against the Lambs of Christ, and not make a Mock upon the Innocent, that stand a Witness against all Sin and Ʋnrighte∣ousness in your Towns and Steeple-houses. Noah, the Eighth Person, a Preacher of Righteousness, was grieved with the filthy Conver∣sation of the Wicked: So are we now. So likewise Just Lot was grieved with their unmerciful Deeds, and the filthy Conversation of Sodom. And were not these hated of the World, and of them that lived in Filthiness? And whereas you speak of those, whom you in scorn call Quakers, that they are a Grief to those, whom you call Pious and Religious People, and their Religion. Such as be in the Religion that is Vain, whose Tongues are not bridled, I believe, the Quakers are a Grief to; but are not a Grief to such, as be in the pure Religion, which keepeth unspotted of the World: which sets not up Bills, nor Watches, to maintain it by the World; for they are not of the World, which be in the pure Religion, which keeps them unspotted of the World: Mark, the pure Religion, which keeps un∣spotted of the World. But such as be in the Religion, that is not pure, which have a Form of Godliness, and not the Power, such as you call Pious, the Truth it self to such was always a Grief; and so it is in this Age. And now, your Fruits do appear, the End of your Religion and Profession, and what you do possess: But you are in the Error, and have been but in the Profession, out of the Pos∣session of the Spirit, who are not in the Spirit of Truth. For where did ever it set Stints, and Bounds, and number the Just and Innocent with the Wicked? But the Wicked set Stints, and Bounds, and Li∣mits to the Just, and number them among the Wicked; yea, speak all manner of Evil they did of them, as ye are doing now of us: they did so, who did profess that, which ye do profess in Words. Nay, according as it was foretold in the Scripture, such as tremble at the Word of God, you cast out and hate, you that have your Tem∣ple-worship; and you say, The Quakers come to disturb you in your Churches (as you call them:) Was it not the Practice of the Apo∣stles, to go into the Synagogues and Temples, to witness against the Priesthood, that took Tithes? And was it not the Practice of the Jews to hale them out, and persecute them, and stone them, that wit∣nessed Christ the Second Priest, and went to bring People off from the First Priesthood? Was it not the practice of the Prophets, to go and cry against the High Places? And was it not the Practice of the Jews, when they were back-slidden, and of the Heathen, to Imprison, and Persecute the Prophets, and send after them into other Countries? And is not this the Practice of you now, who are holding up your High-Places, which the Papists set up, which ye now call your Churches; where ye beat and persecute? What Reli∣gious People are you, that are filled with so much Madness? Did not Paul Confess, he was Mad, while he was in your Practice, haling, beating, prisoning, putting out of the Synagogues, having his Autho∣rity from the Chief Priests? And are not the Chief Priests the cause
of this? Was there ever such a Cry made in any Age past, as there is now in the Pulpits, Railing against an Innocent People, whom ye in scorn call Quakers, who lift not up an Hand against you; and who are indeed the Pious, that are of the pure Religion, who fear God, and worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth, but can∣not Join with you in your Religion? And do not the Ministers of God say, That the Scriptures are a Declaration, which you call the Word? Do not you rob Christ of his Title, and of his Honour, and give it to the Letter, and shew your selves out of the Doctrine of the Ministers of God, who called the Scriptures by the name of Wri∣tings and Treatises, and Declarations, and said; Christ's Name is cal∣led the Word of God? Are not you here in the Error you speak of, which is your Common Talk among you? There was talk among some of you of your Gospel-shining: Doth your Gospel, which you profess, perse∣cute? Did ever any of them, that did possess it, cast into Prison, and not suffer others to go to Visit them? Are you like Christians in this, or like Heathen, who set Bounds and Watches over the Land, that they should not pass to Visit them, that be in Prison? Was ever the like heard in any Age? Search and see, if you have not out∣stript them all in your Watches, if not in your manner of Persecu∣tion, and in your Imprisonments: And oh! never talk, that we are a Grief to them, that are in the pure Religion. And whereas in your Warrant we are represented, as Dis-affected to Government; I say, the Law, that is a Terror to the Evil-Doer, we own; the Higher Power, to which the Soul must be subject: But we deny the Evil-Doer, the malicious Man reigning, and the Envious Man seeking for his Prey, whose Envy is against the Innocent; who rai∣seth up the Country against honest Men, and so becomes a Trouble to the Country, in raising them up to take the Innocent: but that we leave to the Lord to Judge. Your false Accusations of Heresy and Blasphemy we do deny: you should have laid them down in Par∣ticulars, what they had been, that People might have seen them; and not have slandered behind our Backs: The Law saith, The Crime should be mentioned in the Warrant. Then for your saying, We deny the godly Ministers to be a true Ministry of Christ; that is false: for we say, that the Godly Ministers are the Ministers of Christ. But which of your Ministers dare say, that they are truly Godly? And for your charging us with seducing many weak People, that is false also; for we seduce none: But you, that deny the Light, which lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World, are seduced from the Anointing, which should Teach you: and if ye would be Taught by it, ye would not need, that any Man should Teach you. But such, as are taught by the Anointing, which abideth in them, and deny Man's Teaching, these ye call Seducers, quite contrary to John's Doctrine, 1 Joh. 2. You speak quite contrary to him: that which is Truth, ye call Seducing; and that which he calls Seducing, you call Truth: Read the latter part of the Chapter. And beware, I warn you all from the Lord God of Glory, set not any Bound a∣gainst him; Stint him not, Limit not the Holy one of Israel: for the Lord is rising in Power and great Glory, who will rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron, which to him are but as the drop of a Bucket;
he that measures the Waters in the Hollow of his Hand, will dash Nations together, as a Potter's Vessel. And know, you that are found in this his day blaspheming his Work, that God hath brought forth, calling it Blasphemy, fighting against it, setting up your Car∣nal Weapons, making your Bonds strong; God will break asunder, that which your Carnal Policy hath invented, and which by your Carnal Weapons ye would uphold: and make you to know, there is a God in Heaven, who carries his Lambs in his Arms, which are come among Wolves, and are ready to be torn in pieces in every place, yea, in your Steeple-houses; where are People without Rea∣son, and that have not natural Affection. Therefore all ye Petty-Constables, Sheriffs and Justices, take Warning; and take heed, what ye do against the Lambs of Christ: for Christ is come, and coming, who will give to every one of you a Reward according to your Works, you which have the Letter, which speaks of Christ; but now ye are persecuting that, which the Scripture speaks of: so your Fruits make you manifest. Therefore every one, Sheriff, Justices, Constables, &c. see, what ye do possess; Consider, what ye do possess, and what a Profession ye are now in, that all these Car∣nal Weapons are now set up against the Innocent, yea, against the Truth. Which shews, that ye have not the Spiritual Weapons; that they are not among you: and that ye want the Counsel of Gamaliel, yea, ye want the Counsel of such a Man among you, who said; Let the Apostles alone: If it be of God, it will stand; if it be not, it will come to nought. But ye may see your selves on the Contrary, in the Spirit of them that came with Judas, with Swords and Staves from the Chief-Priests against Christ: still it is against Christ, where he is made manifest. Paul (while Saul) went against him, though he professed a Christ, that was to come; and the Jews professed a Christ, that was to come: Yet Paul persecuted him, where he was manifested in his Saints. So ye profess a Christ, that is come, but persecute him, where he is manifest. You that have the Letter, the High-Places, the Synagogues, you persecute him, where he is made manifest in his Saints, as the Jews did. They who were in the Letter, out of the Life, persecuted them, that were in the Life of that, which they profess in the Letter: So now do you persecute them, that are in the Life, and are your selves Stran∣gers to it; as your Fruits make appear. You have numbred the People of God amongst Transgressors; but have you prisoned any of the Rogues and Transgressors you speak of? you have prisoned the Innocent, and let the others go free. G. F. When I had sent abroad the fore-going Papers concerning the Watches, that were then set up to Intercept and Stop Friends in their Travels in the Work of tho Lord; so great a sense came upon me of the Darkness and Vail, that was over the Priests and Professors of Christianity, that I was moved to give forth the following Paper, as An Awakening Warning to them.
BLindness hath happened to the professed Christians of the Letter now a days, as Blindness happened to the Jews; who profes∣sed the Letter, but owned not the Life, which the Letter speaks of: As the Christians now, to whom this Blindness hath hap'ned, who profess the Scripture, but own not the Life, which the Scri∣pture speaks of. For against the Life the Jews stood, who profest the Letter of the Scripture; but they were Blind, they gathered Counsel against the Life: they were in an Ʋproar, when the Babe was born in Bethlehem, Herod and all the Chief Priests. And Herod sought to destroy all the young Children in Bethlehem, yet missed the Babe; Herod, that Fox, though he slew John, and put him to death. And you may here see, how the Literal Professors did stand up, not for the Truth, but quite against it: Furthermore, the Chief-Priests consulted together, how they might take Jesus by Subtilty, and put him to death; mark, by their Subtilty. The Pro∣fessors of a Christ that was to come, they preached of a Messias, of a Christ, of a Saviour; but denied the Life, when he was made manifest. The Chief-Priests and the Council gathered together, they profest his words; and the Chief-Priests, who were gathered together with the Council, said: That his Disciples had stolen him away by Night; and gave large Monies to the Souldiers to declare this. Likewise in the day, when the Children of Israel were in Egypt, and they with their Children began to spread and multiply; Come, said the Egyptians, Let us deal wisely with them to Afflict them, and tax them: Which held, until the Lord overthrew their Oppressors, and brought out his Seed by his mighty Power from under the Oppressor, and exalted his Son above all; though the Heathen raged, and the People imagined vain things: and he made his Power known, that all might see, that there was no God upon the Earth, but himself. This Power now hath brought forth the Work of the Lord! Many, who be turned to the Light, Christ, have received the Power of God, and are thereby become the Sons of God. Now this Birth, that is born of God, are all the Powers of the World joined together to Crucify, to put to Death those Jews in the Spirit, as they did put Christ to Death in the Flesh formerly. This is the Birth, that all the Wicked World is enraged against, and mad at: Against this they set their Watches, this Birth, brought forth by the Mighty God of Jacob, who rides upon the High-places of the Earth: This is the Birth, that the profest Christians without the Life in our Days and Age rage against, and lay out all their Wisdom about. Are not the Chief-Priests and Wise Men of the Earth consulting together, how they might destroy this Birth? Is not this the Birth, that is banished out of your Hearts, you that profess the Scripture, and are Talkers of it, but do not own the Light and Life, which the Scripture speaks of, as the Jews would not; and so will not have Christ to Reign over you, as they would not? Do you not hale out of your Syna∣gogues, and before Magistrates? Do you not herein fulfil Christ's Words, who said to his Disciples; They should be haled out of the Syna∣gogues, and before Rulers? Do you not Persecute them from City
to City? Do you not almost fill your Prisons with them? And now set your Watches, that none should go to Visit them, whom ye have put into Prison? Is not this an Ʋnchristian Spirit? How can you for shame say, You are Ʋpholders of Truth? Or how can you for shame say, that Truth hath been profest among you? Yet we say, We Grant, that you have talked of it. And how can you for shame say, The Gospel shines among you, when you will not own it, the Life of it, when you call it Error, and the evil Seed? Yea, the very Truth, yea, the very Life of Truth ye have blasphemed against now, as the Jews did against Christ, calling him a Devil; you now call it Error, and the Evil Seed, and stand up against it, and turn the Sword against it. As it was in the days of the Jews, who turn∣ed the Sword against Christ; so it is in these days of the Professed Christians of the Scripture, but out of the Life, that gave it forth; as it was with the Jews outward in the Flesh, who were not the Jews in the Spirit. And is it not a shame to all the Ministers of the Gospel, (as they are called) that they can find no better Way to maintain that, which they call the Truth, and their Gospel, than by Carnal Weapons, Stocks and Prisons, and Whips, Watches and Wards, and Powers of the Earth? Were these the Apostles Weapons? Carnal Watches and Wards, Stocks and Prisons, and haling out of the Syna∣gogues, when they came to speak? Judge your selves, what an Anti∣christian Spirit you have. Never talk of defending Truth, with that which is against Truth. For are you not setting up the Rabble of the World against it? Do they not Join with you, with Swords and Staves against it? And is this the Life of Christians? Is not this the Life of Error, and of the Evil Seeds-man? Surely, ye would find Work enough, if ye were in the Fear of the Lord, to turn your Swords against the Prophaneness, the Oaths and Wickedness, that is in your Streets and High-ways: How do they ring like Sodom, and give a sound like Gomorrah! But they are become a Prey in this your Age, that Reprove in your Gate Sin, Wickedness and Prophane∣ness: They are become your By-word. Against them your Coun∣cils are gathered, and them you cast into Prison, and hale them out of your Synagogues: and cast them likewise into Prison, that write against it, and speak against it; and set your Guards to stop and hinder any from Visiting them, whom you cast into Prison, and give them the Names of Vagabonds and Wanderers. Was ever the like heard in the days of the Heathen against the Apostles, who witnessed the Gospel? Did they set Guards and Watches in every Town, in every City, to take the Disciples, the Brethren, the Be∣lievers, that heard, that the Apostles were cast into Prison, and came to see, what they wanted? Shew ye not as much Rage and Fury now in your Age, as was in those, that were in that Age? And how can you talk of the Gospel, and of defending the Gospel, when you are setting Guards and Watches against it, and are defending that, which stands against it; and the Lambs of Christ are almost torn to pieces amongst you, who are like Wolves? for the Lord hath now sent his Lambs amongst Wolves. And have not you profest the words of Christ, and of the Prophets and Apostles, as the Jews had long profest the Scriptures, the words of Moses, and of the Prophets, that
prophesied of Christ, that was to come; and stood against him, when he was come? as you do in this Day of his Reign, and in this Day of his glorious Gospel, who are persecuting the Messengers of it, imprisoning them, persecuting them in your Streets and High-ways, and now setting up your VVatches against them, who bring you the glad Tidings of Peace to your Souls; whose Feet are beautiful a Top of the Mountains; Mark, a Top of the Mountains, that, against which the Mountains rage and swell: but God will make them to melt; the Sun is risen, which will make them to melt. And God will cleave the Rocks and Mountains asunder, and make the Hills to bow perpetually: for his Son he will exalt, and his Glory he will give to him, and not to ano∣ther. Therefore be awakened, ye Rulers of the Earth, and take Counsel of the Lord, and take not Counsel together against him. Make not your Bonds strong; and set not your selves in Battel against him: for ye will be found but as Briers and Thorns before him, which the Fire shall consume. Therefore be awakened, all ye that be Talkers of the Scripture, and that gather your selves together by your Multitudes and Meetings, and have had your Teachers; but not having the Spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures, the Lord God of Glory, the Father of Spirits will scatter you: all your Bonds will not hold you together, who are out of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace. The Threshing Instrument is gone forth, which will beat the Hills to pieces: Sion is risen to Thresh; out of the holy Mountain is the Trumpet sounded. Stand not up against the Lord: for all Nations are with the Lord as the Drop of a Bucket. He that measures the VVaters in the hollow of his Hand, and weighs the Earth in Scales, the Lord of Hosts is his Name; who is now risen and rising, to plead the Cause of the Innocent: who is exalting his Son, and bringing his Sheep to him. Now are they seen and known, that feed upon wind, that are lifted up, given up to believe Lies; who report, and say, Report, and we will report it. Now are they seen, who have a Form of Godliness, but the Power is denied by them; so Christ is denied, the Power it self is denied: for Christ is the Power of God. And the Power being denied by you, that have a Form of Godliness, that have the words of the Scriptures, the Gospel is denied: for the Gospel is the Power of God. And thus it is among you, that have the Knowledge and VVisdom that is sensual, earthly and devilish: Doth it not appear so? Let your Gaols and VVatches witness your Fruits in every Town. Your VVisdom is earthly, sensual and Devillish: so you have a Knowledge and VVisdom, but not that which is from above; for that is pure and gentle, and so is not your knowledge: But to know Christ, is Life Eternal. Now your Fruits have manifested, that you are not of this; and so out of the Power of God, which is the Cross of Christ: For you are found in the VVorld, out of the Power of God, out of the Cross of Christ, persecuting. So that which doth persecute, and send forth VVritings and Decrees to stop all, and take up all, and set VVatches, and prepare Bonds to stint the Lord, to Im∣prison and persecute, and suffer none to go to visit them; This shews, you are not Christians, but stand against a Christian's Life, which is to love your Enemies. Where is your Heaping up Coles of Fire? your Love to your Enemies, who are thus persecuting your Friends? He
came to his own, and his own received him not: Here is a turning the Sword against the Just. Do you shew here a Christian's Life, or your selves Christians, who are filling your Gaols with the Christians in the Spirit, you that be in the Letter (in Shadows) as the Jews in the Letter did put the Jews in the Spirit into Prison? Is not this the Fruit in our Days of the Christians in the Letter, to put the Christi∣ans in the Spirit into Prison? And doth not this shew, that your Decrees, which you have sent forth, proceed from Death, who thus Act against the Life, and them that be in it; which the Scriptures were given forth from? Is it not here, as it was with Saul, when he went to persecute, to hale to Prison, and bind all, that he could find, calling upon that Name, who were Christians in the Life, the Spirit, such as now you are persecuting, because they are in the Life, though you profess their Words? Are not your Decrees gone forth from the same Spirit of Envy, against the same Spirit of Christ they were in? Is it not manifest to all, that fear God, and to the sober-minded and honest-hearted People, that see your Practices, your Decrees, your Letters to stop, to molest, to hinder, to Imprison them that are moved of the Lord to do his Will, or to go to Visit Prisoners, whom you have Imprisoned? Doth this shew you to have a Spirit like Paul, yea, or nay? or are you not quite contrary, like to them, that persecuted Paul? The Day hath declared it. To that of God in you all I speak, which shall witness it at the Last Day, in the Day of Judgment. Persecution was blind in all Ages; and Mad∣ness and Folly led it: Yet Persecution got always a Form or Presence of Godliness, or to talk of Religion, as in the Days of Moses, in the Days of Jeremy, in the Days of Christ, and of the Apostles. Come, saith the Council, Let us crush them, while they are Young; they have almost over-spread the Nation in every Corner. This is as much as to say; Let us put this Birth to Death, as Pharaoh and Herod did the Children: But the Lord caused his Truth the more to spread. For you may read, what Numbers came out of Egypt! and what Multi∣tudes followed Christ! Therefore, with Consideration read these Lines, and not with Fury; and let not Foolishness appear: But consider in Humility your Ways you act in, and your Paths you go in; and what Spirit you are of, and what the End of your Conver∣sation is, now see: For in Love to your Souls I write, that in the Day of your Visitation you may consider it. From him who loveth Righteousness, and the establishing of it, and Truth, and Peace, and Faith, which is by Christ Jesus (Mercy and Peace be multiplied among such!) But a Witness against all Hypocrites, and all who have a Profession, but live out of the Possession; who are in an Hypocritical Religion, in the Lusts and Fashions of the World, having a Form of Godliness, but standing against the Power with might and main, Sword and Staff. Which things declare your Conversation and Practices to be out of Christ's Life, against the Gospel-practice, and contrary to the Manner and Order of the Saints. G. F
We were continued in Prison, till the next Assize:1656. Lanceston Assize. before which time divers Friends, both Men and Women, were sent to Prison, that had been taken up by the Watches. When the Assize was come, several of these were called before the Judge, and Indicted: and tho' the Jailer brought them into Court, yet they Indicted them, that they came in by Force of Arms, and in an hostile manner: And the Judge fined them, because they would not put off their Hats. But we were not called before the Judges any more; but they let us alone. Great Work we had, and Service for the Lord, both between the Assizes, and after, amongst the Professors and People of all sorts: for many came to see us, and to reason with us. And Elizabeth Tre∣lawny of Plimouth (who was the Daughter of one called a Baronet) being Convinced, (as was formerly mentioned) the Priests and Pro∣fessors, and some great Persons of her Kindred were in a great Rage concerning her; and writ Letters to her. And she being a Wise and Tender Woman, and fearing to give them any Advantage, sent their Letters to me; and I answered them, and returned them to her again, for her to send the Answers to them. Which she did: till growing in the Power and Spirit, and Wisdom of God, she came her self to be able to Answer the wisest Priest and Professor of them all; and had a Dominion over them all in the Truth, through the Power of the Lord, by which she was kept faithful to her Death. Now, while I was in Prison here,Lanceston Gaol. the Baptists and Fifth-Monarchy-Men prophesied, That this Year Christ should come, and Reign upon Earth a Thousand Years. And they looked upon this Reign to be Out∣ward: When as he was come inwardly in the Hearts of his People, to Reign and Rule there; and these Professors would not Receive him there: So they failed in their Prophecy and Expectation, and had not the Possession of him. But Christ is come, and doth dwell in the Hearts of his People; and Reigns there: And Thousands, at the Door of whose Hearts he hath been knocking, have opened to him; and he is come in, and doth Sup with them, and they with him, the heavenly Supper with the heavenly and spiritual Man. So many of these Baptists and Monarchy-People turned the greatest Enemies to the Possessors of Christ: But he Reigns in the Hearts of his Saints over all their Envy. At the Assize divers Justices came to us, and were pretty Civil, and Reasoned of the things of God pretty soberly; expressing a Pity to us. There came also Capt. Fox, who was Governour of Pendennis-Castle, and lookt me in the Face, and said never a word; but went his ways to his Company: and told them; He never saw a simpler Man in his Life. I called after him, and said; Stay Man, we will see, who is the simpler Man. But he went his way: A light, Chaffy Man. There came also at the Assize, one Thomas Lower to Visit us: and he offered to give us Money, which we refused; accepting neverthe∣less of his Love. He asked us many Questions concerning our denying the Scriptures to be the Word of God? and concerning the Sacraments, and such like: To all which he received Satisfaction. And I spake
unto him; and he afterwards said:1656. Lanceston Gaol. My Words were as a flash of Light∣ning, they ran so through him. And he said, He never met with such wise Men in his Life, for they knew the Thoughts of his Heart; and were, as the wise Master-Builders of the Assemblies, that fastned their Words, like Nails. He came to be Convinced of the Truth, and re∣mains a Friend to this Day. When he came home to his Aunt Ham∣bley's (where he then lived) and made Report to her concerning us; She, with her Sister Grace Billing, hearing the sound of Truth, came afterwards to Visit us in Prison, and was Convinced also. And great Sufferings and Spoilings of Goods both he and his Aunt have undergone for the Truth's sake. About this time I was moved to give forth the following Paper to Friends in the Ministry. Friends, IN the Power of life and wisdom, and dread of the Lord God of life, and Heaven and Earth dwell; that in the wisdom of God over all ye may be preserved, and be a Terror to all the Adversaries of God, and a Dread, answering that of God in them all, spreading the Truth abroad, awakening the VVitness, confounding the Deceit, gathering up out of Transgression into the Life, the Covenant of Light and Peace with God. Let all Nations hear the sound by Word or Writing: Spare no Place, spare no Tongue, nor Pen; but be obedient to the Lord God: go through the VVork, and be valiant for the Truth upon Earth; tread and trample all that is Contrary, under. Ye have the Power, do not Abuse it; and Strength and Presence of the Lord, eye it, and the VVisdom: that with it you may all be ordered to the Glory of the Lord God. Keep in the Dominion, keep in the Power over all Deceit; tread over them in that, which lets you see to the VVorlds End, and the utmost Parts of the Earth. Reign and Rule with Christ, whose Scepter and Throne is now set up, whose Do∣minion is over all to the Ends of the Earth; whose Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, Throne an everlasting Throne, Kingdom an everlasting Kingdom, Power above all Powers. Therefore this is the Word of the Lord God to you all: Keep in the wisdom of God, that spreads over all the Earth; the wisdom of the Creation, that is Pure from Above, not destructive. For now shall Salvation go out of Zion, to Judge the Mount of Esau: and now shall the Law go forth from Jerusalem, to Answer the Principle of God in all; to hew down all Inventors and Inventions. For all the Princes of the Earth is but as Air to the Power of the Lord God, which you are in, and have tasted of: Therefore Live in it, that is the Word of the Lord God to you all; and do not Abuse it: And keep down and Low; and take heed of false Joys, that will Change. Bring all into the Worship of God: Plow up the fallow Ground, thresh and get out the Corn; that the Seed, the Wheat, may be ga∣thered into the Barn: that to the Beginning all People may come, to Christ, that was, before the VVorld was made. For the Chaff is come upon the VVheat by Transgression: he that treadeth it out, is out of Transgression, and fathoms Transgression; and puts a diffe∣rence
between the precious and the vile; and can pick out the Wheat from the Tares, and gather into the Garner: so brings to the lively Hope the Immortal Soul into God, out of which it came. And none worships God, but who comes to the Principle of God, which they have transgressed; and none are plowed up, but who comes to the Principle of God in him, that he hath transgressed: then he doth service to God, then is the planting and the watering; and the Increase from God cometh. So the Ministers of the Spirit must minister to the Spirit, that is in Prison, which hath been in Captivity in every one; that with the Spirit of Christ People may be led out of Captivity up to God, the Father of Spirits, and do ser∣vice to him, and to have Ʋnity with him, with the Scriptures, and one with another. And this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, and a Charge to you all in the presence of the living God, Be Patterns, be Examples in all Countries, Places, Islands, Nations, where-ever you come; that your Carriage and Life may preach among all sorts of People, and to them: then you will come to walk Chearfully over the World, Answering that of God in every one, whereby in them ye may be a Blessing, and make the Witness of God in them to bless you: Then to the Lord God you will be a sweet Savour, and a Blessing. Spare no Deceit, lay the Sword upon it; go over it: Keep your selves clear of the Bloods of all Men, either by Word, or Writing, or Speaking; and keep your selves clean, that you may stand in your Throne, and every one have his Lot, and stand in the Lot in the Ancient of Days. And so the Blessing of the Lord be with you, and keep you over all the Idolatrous Worships and Worshippers: let them know the Living God; for Teachings, Churches, Worships must be thrown down with the power of the Lord God, set up by Man's earthy Ʋnderstanding, Knowledge and Wills. For this all must be thrown down with that, which gave forth Scripture; and who be in that, Reigns over it all: That is the Word of the Lord God to you all. In that is God Worshipped, that brings to declare his Will; and brings to the Church in God, the Ground and Pillar of Truth: for now is the mighty Day of the Lord appeared, and the Arrows of the Almighty gone forth; which shall stick in the Hearts of the Wicked. Now will I Arise, saith the Lord God Almighty, to trample and Thunder down Deceit, which hath long reigned, and stained the Earth: Now will I have my Glory out of every one. The Lord God Almighty over all in his Strength and Power you keep, to his Glo∣ry, that you may come to Answer that of God in every one in the World. Proclaim the mighty Day of the Lord of Fire and Sword, who will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; and keep in the Life and Power of the Lord God, that the Inhabitants of the Earth may tremble before you: That the Lord God's Power and Majesty may be Admired among the Hypocrites and Heathens, and ye in the Wisdom, Dread, Life, Terror and Dominion Preserved to his Glory: that nothing may Rule or Reign, but Power and Life it self; and in the Wisdom of God ye may be preserved in it. And this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, and the Call is now Out of Transgression; the Spirit bids, Come: and the Call is now from all false Worships
and Gods, and from all Inventions and dead Works to serve the living God; and the Call to Repentance, to the Amendment of Life, where∣by Righteousness may be brought forth; which shall go through∣out the Earth. Therefore ye, that be Chosen and Faithful, which are with the Lamb, go through your Work faithfully, and in the Strength and Power of the Lord: and be obedient to the Power; for that will save you out of the Hands of unreasonable Men, and pre∣serve you over the World to himself: hereby you may live in the Kingdom, that stands in Power, which hath no end; where glory and life is. For Tho. Mounts. G. F. After the Assize, the Sheriff, with some Souldiers came to guard a Woman to Execution, that was sentenced to die; and we had a great deal of Discourse with them. One of them wickedly said, That Christ was as passionate a Man, as any that lived upon the Earth: for which wicked Saying we rebuked him. Another time we asked the Jailer, what Doings there were at the Sessions? and he said, Small Matters; only about Thirty for Bastardy. We thought it very strange, that they, who professed themselves Christians, should make small Matters of such things: But this Jailer was very bad himself, and I often admonished him to Sobriety; but he would Abuse People, that came to Visit us. Edward Pyot had a Cheese sent him from Bristol from his Wife; and the Jailer took the Cheese from him, and carried it to the Mayor, to search it for Treasonable Letters, as he said: And though they found no Treason in the Cheese, they kept it from us. This Gaoler might have been made Rich, if he had carried himself Civilly; but he sought his own Ruin. Which soon after came upon him: For the next Year he was turned out of his Place, and for some wickedness was cast into the Jail himself; and there begged of our Friends. And for some Ʋnruliness in his Carriage, he was by the succeeding Jailer put into Doomsdale, and lockt in Irons, and beaten; and bid to Remember, how he had abused those good Men, whom he had wickedly, without any Cause, cast into that nasty Dungeon: and told, That now he deservedly should suffer for his wickedness; and the same Measure he had meted to others, he should have meted out to himself. He grew to be very poor, and died in Prison; and his Wife and Family came to Misery. While I was in Prison in Lanceston, there was a Friend went to Oliver Cromwel, and offered himself Body for Body, to lie in Dooms∣dale-Prison for me, or in my stead; if he would take him, and let me go at Liberty. Which thing so struck him, that he said to his great Men and Council; VVhich of you would do so much for me, if I were in the same Condition? And though he did not accept of the Friend's Proffer, but said, He could not do it, for that it was contrary to Law; yet however, the Truth thereby came mightily over him. A good while after this he sent down Major General Desborow, pretending to set us at Liberty: And when he came, he proffered us, If we would say, VVe would go home, and preach no more, we should have our
Liberty; but we could not promise him so. Then he urged, that we should promise to go home, if the Lord permit: Whereupon Edward Pyot writ him this following Letter. To Major General Desborow. Friend, THough much might be said, as to the Liberty of English-men, to Travel in any part of the Nation of England, it being as the English-man's House by the Law, and he to be protected in any part of it; and if he transgress the Law, the penalty upon the Trans∣gressor is to be inflicted. And as to Liberty of Conscience, which is a natural Right, and a Fundamental; and the Exercise of it, by those who profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, is to be protected: as by the Instru∣ment of Government appears; though they differ in Doctrine, Wor∣ship and Discipline: provided, the Liberty extend not to Popery, or Prelacy, nor to Licentiousness. Where these Rights are denied is, our Liberties are infringed; which are the Price of much Blood and Treasure in the late Wars. Yet in the Power of God over all, by which all are to be ruled, are we, and in it dwell, and by it alone are guided to do the Will of God; whose Will is free: and we, in the freedom of his Will walk by the Power, either as it Commands or Permits, without any Condition or Enforcement thereunto by Men; but as the Power moves either by Command, or Permission. And although we cannot Covenant or Condition to go forth of these Parts, or to do this or that thing, if the Lord permit (for that were to do the will of Man by God's Permission) yet 'tis like, we may pass forth of these Parts in the liberty of the will of God, as we may he se∣verally moved, and guided by the pure Power, and not of Neces∣sity. We, who were first Committed, were passing homewards, when we were apprehended; and, as far as I know, we might pass, if the Prison-Doors were Commanded to be Opened, and we freed of our Bonds. Should we stay, if the Lord commands us to go; or should we go, if the Lord command us to stay; Or having no Command to stay, but being permitted to pass from hence, the pure Power moving thereto, and we yet stay; or go, when as efore commanded to stay; we should then be Wanderers indeed: for such are Wanderers, who wander out from the Will and Power of God, abroad, at large, in their own Wills and earthly Minds. And so, in the fear of the Lord God well weigh and consider, with the just Weight and just Ballance, that Justice thou may'st do to the Just and Innocent in Prison. Edward Pyot. Some time having passed, after the fore-going was delivered him, and he not giving any Order for our Discharge, I also writ unto him, as followeth:
To Major General Desborow. Friend, WE, who be in the Power of God, the Ruler of all, the Ʋp∣holder of all things, and know and dwell in his Power, o it we must be Obedient; which brings us to stand out of all Men's Wills, not limited. To say, We will, if the Lord permit, in a Case of Buying and Selling to get gain, if the Intent be so to do, may be done: but we standing in the Power of God to do his VVill, and to stand out of Man's will, If Man propound, VVe shall have our Liberty, if we will say, we will go to our outward Being, if the Lord permit, if it be the VVill of God.; and because we cannot say these Words in this case, shall not have our Liberty; when we know, that the will of God is, we shall go to speak at some other Place: here we cannot say these Words truly. For to say, We will go to our out∣ward Habitation, if it be according to the will of God, when we know, the will of God is otherwise; we cannot speak so truly and clearly. Neither can any Man say so to him, that requires it of him; who stands in the Power, and knows the Power of God to lead him, accord∣ing to God's will, and it leads him to another place, than that which is called the outward Home. But the Son of God, who came to do, and did the will of God, had no place, whereon to lay his Head: And the Apostles, and many of the Followers of Christ, had no cer∣tain dwelling-place. Now, if these should have been restrained, be∣cause they could not say, they would go to that which the world calls their outward Homes, if it were the will of God; when they knew, it was the will of God, they should not; and they could not do the will of God in doing so: and therefore could not speak those words, to satisfy man's mind and will; would not that have been Evil? Abraham could not do the will of God, but in going from his Native Country: And who are of Faith, are of Abraham, of whom Christ came according to the Flesh. Now, if thou alledge and say, This is to let all loose, and at Liberty to Idleness; I say, No: such as be in the Power of God, who do the will of God, come to receive his wis∣dom, by which all his Creatures were created; by which to use them to his Glory. So this I shall say: who are moved by the Lord God of Glory and Power, to go to their outward Beings or Habitations, such of us may go to our outward Beings or Homes; and there be diligent in serving the Lord God, that they may be a Blessing from the Lord God in their Generation; diligently serving him in Life and Doctrine, in Manners, in Conversation, in all things. And who are moved of the Lord to go to any other Place; we standing in his will, and being moved by his Power, which comprehends all things, and is not to be limited; we shall do his will, which we are com∣manded to do. So the Lord God open your Understandings, that you may see this great Power of the Lord, which he is now manifest∣ing among his Children in this his Day; that ye may not withstand it in our Friends, that are come into the Power of God, and to God, and know him, by whom the world was made: by whom all things
were Created, that were created; and there was not any thing made, of all that was made, but what was made for him, and to him, and by him: who is the Power of God, who doth Enlighten every Man, that cometh into the world. Now, our Friends being come to this Light, which cometh from Christ, and having received Power from him, by whom all things were Created, who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, who is the wisdom of God; we have received wisdom and power from him: by which the Lord doth give us to know, how to use and order the Creatures to the glory of him, who is the Creator of all things. So, our Friends here are taught of the Lord to be diligent, serving him; and who come into the Life, the Scriptures were given forth from, are given up to serve the Lord: And of this I have in all your Consciences a Witness. So, if thou open the Prison-Door, we shall not stay there. If thou send a Liberate, and set us free, we shall not stay in Prison: for Israel is to go out free, whose freedom is purchased by the Power of God, and the Blood of Jesus. But who goeth out of the Power of God, loseth his Freedom. The 13th of the 6th Month. 1656. George Fox, and the rest who are Sufferers for the Truth in Lanceston-Gaol. After this Major Desborow came to the Castle-green, and there plaid at Bowles with the Justices and others. And several Friends were moved to go to him, and admonish him and them of their spending their Time so vainly; bidding them Consider, That though they pro∣fessed themselves to be Christians, yet they gave themselves up to their Pleasures, and kept the Servants of God mean while in Prison: and told them; The Lord would plead with them, and visit them for such things. But notwithstanding what was writ or said unto him, he went away, and left us in prison: Yet we understood afterwards, that he left the Business to Colonel Bennet; who had the Command of the Gaol. For sometime after Bennet would have set us at Liberty, if we would have paid his Gaoler's Fees: But we told him, We could give the Gaoler no Fees; for we were innocent Sufferers: and how could they expect Fees of us, who had suffered so long wrongfully? After a while this Colonel Bennet coming to Town, sent for us to an Inn, and insisted again upon Fees; which we refused: And at last the Power of the Lord came so over him, that he freely set us at Liberty. It was on the Thirteenth Day of the Seventh Month, 1656. that we were set at Liberty: and we had been Prisoners Nine Weeks at the first Assize, called the Lent-Assize, which was in the Spring of the Year. Observing, while I was here a Prisoner, how much the People (they especially, who were called the Gentry) were addicted and given to Pleasures, and vain Recreations; I was moved, before I left the Place, to give forth several Papers, as a Warning unto them, and unto all, that so Mispend their Time. One of which was thus di∣rected:
This to go abroad among them, who are given to Pleasures and Wantonness. SOdom and Gomorrah their Sins were Pride, Fulness of Bread and abundance of Idleness; whose filthy Conversation vexed the righteous Soul of the Just Lot Day by Day, and would not take Warning: on whom God sent Fire, and turned them into Ashes. And in Spiritual Sodom and Egypt was our Lord Jesus Christ crucified; And it is written, The People sate down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play: with whom God was not well-pleased; and there fell three and twenty thousand in one Day: These the Apostle com∣manded the Saints, that they should not follow; for these things happened to them for Examples, and are written for our Admonition. And God spared not the Old World; but reserving Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, brought the Flood upon the World of the Ungodly, making them an Example to all, that after should live Ʋngodly. Mark, ye Ʋngodly ones, who are as natural brute Beasts, who speak great swelling Words of Vanity, alluring through the Lusts of the Flesh, through much Wantonness, as they that count it Pleasure to Riot in the Day-time, sporting your selves with your own deceiv∣ings; ye shall receive the Reward of Ʋnrighteousness. Ye are as Dogs and Swine turned to the Vomit, and wallowing in the Mire, speaking evil of things that ye know not; and unless ye Repent, ye shall utterly perish in your own Corruptions. Ye have lived in Pleasure on the Earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your Hearts, as in a Day of Slaughter: ye have condemned and killed the Just, and he doth not resist you. Go to, Weep and Houl for the Misery, that is coming upon you; and she that liveth in Pleasures, is dead, while she liveth. God condemned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, making them an Example to all those, that after should live Ʋngodly, in the wicked, filthy Conversation: Mark, here is your Example. Hear this, ye that are given to Pleasures, and read your Examples. G. F. Another Paper, upon my taking Notice of the Bowlers, that came to sport themselves in the Castle-green, was as followeth: THE VVord of the Lord to all you vain and idle-minded People, who are Lovers of Sports, Pleasures, and foolish Exercises, and Recreations, as you call them; Consider of your Ways, what it is you are doing. Was this the End of your Creation? Did God make all things for you, and you to serve your Lusts and Pleasures? Did not the Lord make all things for you, and you for himself, to fear and worship him in Spirit and in Truth, in Righteousness and true Ho∣liness? But where is your Service of God, so long as your Hearts
run after Lusts and Pleasures? ye cannot serve God, and the foolish Pleasures of the World, as Bowling, Drinking, Hunting, Hawking, and the like: If these have your Hearts, God will not have your Lips: Consider, for 'tis true. Therefore from the Lord must you all witness VVo and Misery, Tribulation and VVrath, who conti∣nue in the Love and Practice of your vain Sports, Lusts and Plea∣sures. Now is the Day, when all every-where are exhorted to Repentance: O foolish People, wicked and slow of Heart to believe the Threatnings of the Great Jehovah against the wicked! What will you do in the Day of the Lord's fierce wrath, that makes haste to Come upon the world of ungodly Men! And what good have your foolish Sports and Delights done you, now they are past? Or what good will they do you, when the Lord calls for your Souls? Therefore all now Awake from Sleep, and see where you are: And let the Light of Jesus Christ, that shines in every one of your Con∣sciences, search you throughly; and it will let you clearly see, for all your Profession of God, Christ and the Scriptures, you are Ignorant of them, and Enemies to them all, and your own Souls also: And being found living in Pleasures, you are dead, while you live. And therefore doth the Lord by many Messengers forwarn you, and calls you to Repentance and deep Humiliation; that you may forsake the Evil of your Doings, and so own this Day of your Visitation, and while you have Time, to prise it: lest the things, which belong to your Peace, be hid from your Eyes, for your Disobedience and Re∣bellion against the Holy One. And then had it been good, that you never had been born: Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; again I say, Repent! To the Bowlers in the Green. Given forth in Lanceston-Gaol in Cornwall. Being Released, we got Horses,Cornwall. and rid up into the Country towards Humphry Lower's; and met him upon the Road coming towards us. He told us, He was much troubled in his Mind concerning us, and could not rest at home; but was going to Colonel Bennet to seek our Liberty. But when we told him, VVe were set at liberty, and were going to his House; he was exceeding glad. So to his House we went: and there we had a fine, precious Meeting; and many were Convinced, and turned by the Spirit of the Lord, to the Lord Jesus Christ's Teaching. From his House we went to Loveday Hambleys, where also we had a fine large Meeting: and the Lord's Power was over all, and many were Convinced there also; and turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher. After we had tarried there Two or Three Days, we came to Thomas Mounce's, where we had a general Meeting for the whole County; which, being very large, was held in his Orchard. Friends from Pli∣mouth were there, and from many Places; and the Lord's Power was over all: and a great Convincement there was in many Places of the County. And all their Watches were down in all those Countries;
and all was plain and open:1656. Cornwall. for the Lord had let me see, before I was set at Liberty, that he would make all the Country plain before us. Now Thomas and Ann Curtis, with another, an Alderman of Reading, who was Convinced, had come to Lanceston to see us, while I was a Prisoner: And when Ann, and the other man returned, Thomas Cur∣tis staid behind in Cornwall, and did good Service for the Lord there at that Time. LancestonFrom Thomas Mounce's we passed to Lanceston again, and visited that little Remnant of Friends, that had been raised up there, while we were there in Prison; and the Lord's Plants grew finely, and were established on Christ, their Rock and Foundation. As we were going out of Town again, the Constable of Lanceston came running to us with the Cheese, that had been taken from Edward Pyot; which they had kept from us all this while, and were tormented with it. But we, being now set at Liberty, would not receive it. Okington.From Lanceston we came to Okington; and lay at an Inn, which the Mayor of the Town kept. He had stopt and taken up seve∣ral Friends, but was very Civil to us; and was Convinced in his Judgment. Exeter.From thence we came through the Countries to Exeter, where many Friends were in Prison; and amongst the rest James Nayler. For a little before the Time, that we were set at Liberty, James run out into Imaginations, and a Company with him; and they raised up a great Darkness in the Nation. And he came to Bristol, and made a Disturbance there: And from thence he was coming to Lanceston, to see me; but was stopt by the Way, and Imprisoned at Exeter: As were also several others, that were coming to see me; one of whom, an honest, tender Man, died in Prison there: whose Blood lieth on the Heads of his Persecutors. That Night, that we came to Exeter, I spake with James Nayler: for I saw, he was out, and wrong; and so was his Company. The next day, being the First-day of the week, we went to the Prison, to visit the Prisoners; and had a Meeting with them in the Prison: but James Nayler, and some of them could not stay the Meeting. There came a Corporal of Horse into the Meeting, and was Convinced; and remained a very good Friend. The next day I spake to James Nayler again; and he slighted, what I said, and was dark, and much out: yet he would have come, and kissed me. But I said, Since he had turned against the Power of God, I could not receive his shew of Kindness: So the Lord God moved me to slight him, and to set the Power of God over him. So after I had been warring with the World, there was now a wicked Spirit risen up amongst Friends to war against: and I admonished him and his Company. And when he was come to London, his Resisting the Power of God in me, and the Truth that was declared to him by me, became one of his greatest Burdens, but he came to see his Out-going, and to Condemn it; and after some Time he returned to Truth again: as in the printed Relation of his Repentance, Condemnation and Recovery may be more fully seen.
We passed from Exeter through Collumpton and Taunton,1656. Collump∣ton. Taunton. Puddi∣moor. visiting Friends; and had Meetings amongst them, and declared the Word of Life unto them. And from thence we came to Puddimoor, to William Beaton's; and on the First-day we had a very large Meet∣ing there. For a great Convincement there was all up and down that Country, and many Meetings we had, and the Lord's Power was over all; and many were turned, by the Power and Spirit of God, to the Lord Jesus Christ, who died for them, and they came to sit under his free Teaching. From thence we went to John Dandy's, where we had another precious Meeting; and the Lord's Power was over all, and many were Convinced of God's Eternal Truth. Some Contention was raised by Professors and Baptists, in some Places; but the Lord's Power came over them.— near Bristol. From thence we came to Edward Pyot's house near Bristol. It was the Seventh-day at Night, that we came thither: And it was quickly noised over the Town, that I was come. Now I had never been there before. On the First-day Morning I went to the Meeting in Broadmead at Bri∣stol; and a great Meeting there was, and quiet.Bristol-Meeting. Notice was given of a Meeting to be in the Afternoon in the Orchard. There was at Bristol a rude Baptist, named Paul Gwin, who had used before to make great disturbance in our Meetings; being encouraged and set on by the Mayor, who, as it was reported, would sometimes give him his Dinner to Incourage him. And such multitudes of rude People would he gather after him, that it was thought, there had been sometimes Ten thousand people at our Meeting in the Orchard. As I was going along into the Orchard, the People told me, That Paul Gwin, the rude, jangling Baptist, was going to the Meeting: But I bid them, Never heed; It was nothing to me, who went to it. When I was come into the Orchard, I stood upon the Stone, that Friends used to stand on, when they spake: and I was moved of the Lord, to put off my Hat, and to stand a pretty while; and let the People look at me: for some Thousands of People were there. While I thus stood silent, this Rude Baptist began to find Fault with my Hair; but I said nothing to him. Then he run on into Words; and at last, Ye wise men of of Bristol, said he, I strange at you, that you will stand here, and hear a Man speak and affirm that, which he cannot make good. Then the Lord opened my Mouth (for as yet I had not spoken a Word) And I asked the People, Whether they ever heard me speak before: or ever saw me before? And I bid them, 'Take notice, what kind of Man this was amongst them, that should so Impudently say, That I spake and Affirmed, that which I could not make good; and yet neither he, nor they ever heard me, or saw me before. Therefore that was a lying, envious, malicious Spirit, that spake in him; and it was of the Devil, and not of God. Therefore I charged him in the Dread and Power of the Lord, to be silent: And the Mighty Power of God came over him, and all his Company. And then a glorious, peaceable Meeting we had, and the Word of Life was divided amongst them; and they were turned from the Dark∣ness to the Light, and to Jesus their Saviour. And the Scriptures were largely opened to them; and the Traditions, and Rudiments,
and ways,1656. Bristol. and Doctrines of Men were laid open before the People, which they had been in; and they were turned to the Light of Christ, that with it they might see them, and see him to lead them out of them. I opened also to them the Types, and Figures, and Shadows of Christ in the time of the Law; and shewed them, That Christ was come, and had ended the Types, and Shadows, and Tithes, and Oaths, and put down Swearing; and had set up Yea and Nay instead of it, and a free Ministry: for he was now come to Teach People himself, and his heavenly Day was springing from on high. So for many hours did I declare the Word of Life amongst them in the Eternal Power of God; that by him they might come up into the Beginning, and be Reconciled to him. And having turned them to the Spirit of God in themselves, that would lead into all Truth, I was moved to pray in the mighty Power of God; and the Lord's Power came over all. But when I had done, this Fellow began to babble again; and John Audland was moved to bid him Repent, and fear God. So his own People and Followers being ashamed of him, he passed away, and never came again to disturb the Meeting. And the Meeting brake up quietly, and the Lord's Power and Glory shined over all: a blessed Day it was, and the Lord had the Praise. After a while this Paul Gwin went beyond the Seas; and many Years after, I met with him again at Barbado's: of which in its Place. From Bristol we returned to Edward Pyot's, where we had a great Meeting; and the Lord's Power was over all, and Truth was decla∣red and spread abroad, and many were turned to Christ Jesus, their Life, their Prophet to teach them, their Shepherd to feed them, and their Bishop to oversee them. After the Meeting was done, I had some Reasoning with some Professors; and the Lord's Truth and Pow∣er came over them. Slatten∣ford.From Edward Pyot's we passed to Slattenford, where we had a very large Meeting (Edward Pyot and another Friend being still with me;) and a great turning of People there was to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher: and People were glad, that they were brought to know their Way, and their free Teacher, and their Saviour Christ Jesus. Wiltshire.On the First-day following we went to Nathaniel Crips his House, who had been a Justice of Peace in Wiltshire; where it was supposed, there were between Two and Three Thousand People at a Meeting, and all was quiet: And the mighty Power of God was manifest, and People were turned to the Grace and Truth in their Hearts, that came by Jesus Christ, which would Teach them to deny all Ʋngodli∣ness and wordly Lusts, and to live soberly and godly in this present world. So that every Man and Woman might know the Grace of God, which had appeared to all Men, and which was saving, and suffi∣cient to bring their Salvation. This was to be their Teacher, the Grace of God, which would teach them how to live, what to do, and what to deny: and would season their Words, and establish their Hearts. And this was a free Teacher to every one of them: so that they might come to be Heirs of this Grace, and of Christ, by whom it came; who hath ended the Prophets, and the Priests that took Tithes, and the Jewish Temple. And as for these Hireling-Priests
that take Tithes now,1656. Wiltshire. and their Temples (which Priests were made a Schools and Colledges of Man's setting up, and not by Christ) they, with all their Inventions were to be denied. For the Apostles denied the true Priesthood and Temple, which God had com∣manded, after Christ had put an End thereto. So the Scriptures, and the Truths therein contained were largely opened, and the Peo∣ple turned to the Spirit of God in their Hearts; that by it they might be led into all Truth, and understand the Scriptures, and know God and Christ, and come to have Unity with them, and one with another in the same Spirit. And the People went away gene∣rally satisfied, and were glad, that they were turned to Christ Jesus, their Teacher and Saviour. The next day we went from thence to Marlborough,Marlebo∣rough. where we had a little Meeting. And the Sessions being in that Town that day, they were granting forth a Warrant to send for me: But one Justice Stooks being at the Sessions, stopt them; telling them, There was a Meeting at his House yesterday, at which were several Thousands. So the Warrant was stopt, and our Meeting was quiet; and several received Christ Jesus their Teacher, and came into the New Covenant, and abode in it. From hence we went to Newberry, where we had a large,Newberry blessed Meeting; and several were Convinced there. Thence we passed on to Reading, where we had a large,Reading. precious Meeting in the Lord's Power amongst the Plants of God; and many of the World came in, and were reached, and added to the Meeting: and all was quiet, and the Lord's Power was over all.Kingston upon Thames. We went from Reading to Kingston upon Thames, where a few came in to us, that were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ: but since, it is become a Larger Meeting. Leaving Kingston, we rode to London.Hide-park And when we came near Hide-Park, we saw a great Concourse of People: and looking to∣wards them, we espied the Protector coming in his Coach. Where∣upon I rode up to his Coach-side: and some of his Life-Guard would have put me away; but he forbad them. So I rode down by his Coach-side with him, declaring, what the Lord gave me to say unto him, of his Condition, and of the Sufferings of Friends in the Nati∣on; shewing him, 'how contrary this Persecution was to Christ and his Apostles, and to Christianity.London. When we were come to James's Park-gate, I left him; and at parting he desired me to come to his House. The next Day, one of his Wife's Maids, whose Name was Mary Sanders, came up to me at my Lodging, and said; Her Ma∣ster came to her, and told her, he would tell her some good News: And when she asked him, What it was? He told her, George Fox was come to Town. She replied, That was good News indeed (for she was one, that had received Truth) but she said, She could hardly believe him; till he told her, how I met him, and rode from Hide-Park down to James's Park with him. After a little time Edward Pyot and I went to Whitehall:Whitehal. And when we came before him, there was one called Dr. Owen, Vice∣chancellor of Oxford, with him. We were moved to speak to Oliver Cromwel concerning the Sufferings of Friends, and laid them before him; and directed him to the Light of Christ, who had enlight∣ned
appeared to all Men.1656. London. Jude saith; Behold, the Lord cometh with Ten Thousands of his Saints, to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are Ʋngodly among them, of all their ungodly Deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard Speeches, which un∣godly Sinners have spoken against him, (ver. 15.) Here mark again; Him that cometh with ten Thousands of his Saints, to Convince all of their ungodly Deeds, and hard Speeches: Here it is, All of their ungodly Deeds; and All of their hard Speeches: none left out, but All to be Convinced and Judged, the World Reproved, by him who comes with ten Thousands of his Saints, and will Reign, and be King and Judge. And have not ye all something in you, that doth Reprove you for your hard Speeches, and your ungodly Deeds, the Ungodliest of you all, who live in your hard Speeches against him, and against his Light and spiritual Appearance in his People? Again, the Apostle writing to the Gentiles, saith, But unto every one of us is given Grace, according to the Measure of the gift of Christ, (Ephes. 4.7) Now mark, Here is the Measure of the Gift of Christ, who lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World, (Joh. 1.9.) that all Men through him might believe. He that be∣lieveth on him, is not condemned: but he that believeth not, is con∣demned, &c. And this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, &c. (Joh. 3.18.19.) Now every Man, that cometh nto the World, being enlightned, One, he loveth it, and brings his Deeds to the Light, that with the Light he may see, whether they be wrought in God: The Other, he hates the Light, because his Deeds are Evil; and he will not bring his Deeds to the Light, because he knows, the Light will reprove him. So he that hates the Light, wherewith Christ hath enlightned him, knows, the Light will reprove him for his evil Deeds; and therefore he will not come to the Light. Again, the Lord by his Prophet saith concerning Christ; I will give him for a Light to the Gentiles, that he may be my Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, (Isa. 49.6.) And what is that, which the Children, that walk according to the Course of this World, accord∣ing to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit, that now worketh in the Children of Disobedience, (Ephes. 2.2.) are diso∣bedient to? Mark, and read your selves, who being disobedient, walk according to the Course of the World, according to the Power of the Prince of the Air; Mark, I say, what it is, that all such are disobedient to? He that hath an Ear, let him hear. The Apostle saith to the Colossians, The wrath of God cometh upon the Children of Disobedience, (Col. 3.6.) Come ye Professors, let us see, Is not this something of God, that is disobey'd? Is it not that which is of God manifest in them, which God hath shewed them, which lets them see, God's Judgments are upon such, when they act unrighte∣ously? Is not this the Measure of God, (Mark) and the Spirit that is in Prison? and the Spirit of God, that is grieved? And ye Professors, come, let us read the Parable of the Talents, and reckon with you, and see, who it is, that hath hid the Lord's Money in the Earth? Come ye, that have gained, enter ye
into your Master's Joy: Go thou, that hast hid the Lord's Money in the Earth, into utter Darkness; Take it from him, and give it to him that hath: and every Man shall have his Reward. For the Lord hath given to every Man, according to is several Ability (Mat. 25.15.) Mark that, To every Man according to his several Ability: Read this, if you can: And now is the Lord coming to call every Man severally to Accompt, to whom he hath given severally, accord∣ing to their Ability. And now the wicked and slothful Servant, who hid the Lord's Money in the Earth, will be found out; and the Lord's Money will be taken from him, although he hath hidden it: To him the Lord's Commands have been grievous; but to us they are not, who love God and keep his Commandments. And, saith the Apostle to the Romans, I say, through the Grace given unto me to every Man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly, than he ought to think; but to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every Man the measure of Faith, (Rom. 12.3.) Read and mark, here is a Measure of Faith. And, saith another Apostle, As every one hath received the Gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the mani∣fold grace of God, (1 Pet. 4.10.) For the grace of God hath appear∣ed to all Men. Now, the good Stewards can give their Accompt with Joy: But ye bad Stewards, that turn the grace of God into La∣sciviousness, now ye will be reckoned withal; now ye shall have your Reward. But, say the World, Must every one minister, as he hath received the Gift? Yea, say I, but let him speak, as the Oracles of God; and let him do it, as of the Ability, which God giveth, (ver. 11.) John in the Revelation saith, They were judged every Man according to their works, (Rev. 20.13.) Christ saith; Every idle Word, that Men shall speak, they shall give Account thereof in the day of Judgment, (Mat 12.36.) So ye, that name the Name of Christ, depart from Iniquity, (2 Tim. 2.19.) The Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels; and then he shall re∣ward every Man according to his Works, (Mat 16.27.) He who is gone into a far Country, and hath given the Talents to every one of you, according to your several Ability, will render to every Man according to his Deeds, (Rom. 2.6.) And further I say unto you, If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And if Christ be in you, the Body is dead because of Sin; but the Spirit is Life, because of Righteousness, (Rom 8.9, 10.) So let the Light, which cometh from Christ, Examin: for the Lord is appearing. Ye that have received according to your Ability, smite not your Fellow-ser∣vant; and think not, that the Lord delayeth the Time of his Coming: Be not, as they that said, Let us Eat and Drink, for to Morrow we shall die. The Apostle tells the Ephesians, that unto him this grace was given—to make all Men see, what is the Fellowship of the Mystery, which from the beginning of the World hath been hid in God, who cre∣ated all things by Jesus Christ, (Eph. 3.9.) Read and understand every one with the Light, which comes from Christ, the Mystery; which will be your Condemnation, if ye believe not in it. This is to all, who stumble at the work of the Spirit of God, the manifestation of it, which is given to every Man, to profit withal. Come, ye Pro∣fessors, who stumble at it; Let us read the Parables. A Sower went forth to sow; and some Seed fell on the High-way-ground,
and some on stony ground, and some on thorny ground: The Seed is the word, the Son of Man is the Seeds-man. He that hath an Ear, let him hear, (Mat. 13.) Now look, all ye Professors, which Ground ye are? And what ye have brought forth? And whether the wicked Seeds-man hath not got his Seed into your Ground? He that hath an Ear, let him hear it. And come, read another Parable, of the Housholder, hiring Labourers to go into the Vineyard, and agreeing with every Man for a Penny, (Mat. 20.) Every Man is to have his Penny; the Last that went in, as well as the First: and the Last shall be First, and the First shall be Last; for many are called, but few are chosen. He that hath an Ear, let him hear. There is a Promise spoken to Cain, that if he did well, he should be accepted, (Gen. 4.7.) And Esau had a Birth-right, but despised it. Yet is it not of him that willeth, (Rom. 9.16.) but by grace ye are saved, (Ephes. 2.8.) And stand still, and see your Salvation, (Exod. 14.13.) And ye that be Children of Light, put on the Armour of Light, that ye may come into the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God; unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fulness of Christ: that henceforth ye be no more Children tossed to and fro, (Eph. 4.13.) And the Lord said, he would make a new Covenant, by writing his Law in People's Hearts, and putting his Spirit in their inward parts; whereby they should all come to know the Lord, him by whom the World was made. Now every one of you mind the Law written in your Hearts, and this Spirit put in your inward parts; that it need not be said to you, Know the Lord: but that ye may witness the Promise of God fulfilled in you. But, say the World and Professors, If every one must come to witness the Law of God written in their Hearts, and the Spirit put in the inward parts; what must we do with all our Teachers? As we come to wit∣ness that, we need not any Man to Teach us to know the Lord, having his Law written in our Hearts, and his Spirit put in our inward parts. This is the Covenant of Life, the everlasting Covenant, which decays not, not changes not: and here is the way to the Fa∣ther, without which no Man cometh unto the Father. And here is the Everlasting Priesthood, the End of the Old Priesthood, whose Lips were to preserve Knowledge: but now saith Christ, Learn of me; who is the High-Priest of the New Priesthood. And, saith the Apostle,—That ye may grow up in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, in whom are hid the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. So we are brought off from the Old Priesthood, that did change, to Christ, to the New Priesthood, that doth not change; and off from the first Covenant, that doth decay, to the Everlasting Covenant, that doth not decay, Christ Jesus, the Covenant of Light, from whom every one of you have a Light, that ye might believe in the Covenant of Light. If ye do not believe, ye are condemned: for Light is come into the World; and Men love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are evil. I am come a Light into the World, saith Christ, that whosoever believeth in me, should not abide in Darkness, but have the Light of Life, (Joh. 12.46.) And, Believe in the Light, that ye may be Children of the Light. But ye, who do not believe in the Light, but hate it, because it manifests your Deeds to be evil; ye are they, that are condemned by the Light. Therefore while ye have Time, prize it: Seek the Lord, while he may be found, and call upon him, while he is nigh; lest ye say, Time is past: for the Rich Glutton's Time was past. Therefore
while Time is not quite past, consider and search your selves, and see, if ye be not they, that hate the Light; and so are Builders, that stumble at the Corner-stone: for they that hated the Light, and did not believe in the Light, did so in Ages past. I am the Light of the World, saith Christ, and who doth enlighten every Man, that cometh into the World: and he also saith, Learn of me; and of him God saith, This is my beloved Son, hear ye him: Here is your Teacher. But ye that hate the Light, do not learn of Christ, and will not have him to be your King, to reign over you; him, to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is given, who bears his Government upon his Shoulders, who is now come to reign: who lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World; and who will give to every Man a Reward, according to his Works, whether they be good or evil. So every Man, with the Light that comes from Christ, will see his Deeds, both he that hates it, and he that loves it. And he that will not bring his Deeds to the Light, because the Light will reprove him, that is his Condemnation; and he shall have a Reward according to his Deeds. For the Lord is come to reckon with you, and he looks for Fruits; and now the Ax is laid to your Root, and every Tree of you, that bears not good Fruit, must be hewen down, and cast into the Fire. G. F. Having staid sometime in London, and visited the Meetings of Friends in and about the City, and cleared my self, of what Services the Lord had at that time laid upon me there, I left the Town; and travelled into Kent, Sussex and Surrey,Kent. Sussex. Survey. visiting Friends in those Coun∣ties: amongst whom I had great Meetings; and many times met with Opposition from Baptists, and other jangling Professors: but the Lord's Power went over them. We lay one Night at Farnham, where we had a little Meeting;Farnham. and the People were exceeding Rude: But at last the Lord's Power came over them. After Meeting we went to our Inn, and gave no∣tice, That any, that feared God, might come to our Inn to us: And there came abundance of rude People, and the Magistrates of the Town also; and some Professors. I declared the Truth unto them; and those of the People, that behaved themselves rudely, the Ma∣gistrates put out of the Room. When they were gone, there came up another Rude Company of Professors, and some of the Chief of the Town: and they called for Faggots and Drink, though we forbad them; and were as Rude a carriaged People, as ever I met withal. The Lord's Power chained them, that they had not power to do us any Mischief: but when they went away, they left all their Fag∣gots and Beer, which they had called for into the Room, for us to pay for in the Morning. We shewed the Inn-keeper, what an Ʋnworthy thing it was; but he told us, we must pay it: and pay it we did. And before we left the Town, I writ a Paper to the Magistrates and Heads of the Town, and to the Priest, shewing them and him, how he had
taught his People;1656. Basing∣stoke. and laying before them their rude and uncivil Car∣riage to Strangers, that sought their good. Then leaving that Place, we came to Basingstoke, a very Rude Town; where they had formerly very much abused Friends. There I had a Meeting in the Evening, which was quiet; for the Lord's Pow∣er chained the Ʋnruly. At the Close of the Meeting I was moved to put off my Hat, and to pray to the Lord to open their Ʋnderstandings: upon which they raised a Report, That I put off my Hat to them, and bid them Good Night; which was never in my Heart. After the Meeting, when we came to our Inn, I sent for the Inn-keeper (as I used to do;) and he came into the Room to us, and shewed himself a very Rude Man. I admonished him to be sober, and fear the Lord: but he called for Faggots, and a pint of Wine, and drank it off him∣self; and then called for another: and called up half a dozen men into our Chamber. Thereupon I bid him go out of the Chamber, and told him, he should not drink there; for we sent for him up to speak to him concerning his Eternal good: And he was exceeding mad, rude and drunk. When he continued his Rudeness, and would not be gone, I told him, The Chamber was mine, for the Time I lodged in it; and I called for the Key: and then he went away in a great Rage. In the Morning he would not be seen: but I told his Wife of his Ʋnchri∣stian and Rude Carriage towards us. Bridport.After this we passed through the Country, till we came to Bridport; having Meetings in the way. We went to an Inn there, and sent into the Town for such as feared God, to come to us: and there came a Shop-keeper, a Professor, and put off his Hat to us: and seeing, we did not the like to him again, but said Thou and Thee to him, he told us; He was not of our Religion: and after some discourse with him, he went away; his Wife (who came with him) being somewhat loving. Then went he, and stirred up the Priest and Magistrates against us: and after a while sent to the Inn to us, to desire us to come to his House; for there were some would speak with us, he said. Thomas Curtis was then with me, and he went down to the Man's House: where when he came, the Man had laid a snare for him; for he had gotten the Priest and Magistrates thither: and they boasted much, that they had catched George Fox, taking him for me. When they perceived their Mistake, they were in a great Rage: yet the Lord's Power came over them, so that they let him go again. Mean while I had an Opportunity of speaking to some sober People, that came to the Inn. And when Thomas was come back, and we were passing out of the Town, some of them came to us, and said; The Offi∣cers were coming to fetch me: But the Lord's Power came over them all, so that they had not power to touch me. There were some Convinced in the Town that time, who were turned to the Lord; and have stood faithful in their Testimony to the Truth ever since, and a fine Meeting there is there. 1657. Portsm. Pool. Ringwood Weym. Dorche∣ster.Passing from hence we visited Portsmouth and Pool, where we had glorious Meetings; and many were turned to the Lord. And at Ringwood we had a large general Meeting, where the Lord's Power was over all. And at Weymouth we had a Meeting: and from thence came to Dorchester, and so to Lime, where the Inn we went
to, was taken up with Mountebanks;1657. Lime. so that there was hardly any room for us, or our horses. In the Evening we drew up some Que∣ries concerning the ground of all Diseases, and the Natures and Ver∣tues of Medicinable Creatures, and sent them to the Mountebanks; let∣ting them know, If they would not answer them, we would stick them on the Cross next Day: This brought them down, and made them Cool; for they could not answer them: But in the Morning they rea∣soned a little with us: And we left the Queries with some friend∣ly People, that were Convinced in the Town, to stick upon the Market-Cross. And the Lord's Power reached some of the sober People in that place, who were turned by the Light and Spirit of Christ to his free Teaching. Then traveled we on through the Country, till we came to Exeter:Exeter. and there, at the Sign of the Seven Stars, an Inn at the Bridge-foot, we had a general Meeting of Friends out of Cornwal and Devonshire; to which came Humphry Lower, and Thomas Lower, and John Ellis from the Land's End, and Henry Pollexfen, and Friends from Pli∣mouth, Elizabeth Trelawny, and divers other Friends. A blessed, heavenly Meeting we had, and the Lord's everlasting Power came over all; in which I saw, and said, That the Lord's power had surrounded this Nation round about, as with a Wall and Bulwark; and his Seed reached from Sea to Sea: And Friends were established in the ever∣lasting Seed of Life, Christ Jesus, their Life, Rock, Teacher and Shepherd. The next Morning after the Meeting, Major Blackmore sent Souldiers to apprehend me; but I was gone, before they came: and as I was riding up the Street, I saw the Officers going down. So the Wolf missed the Lamb; and the Lord crossed them in their Design: and Friends passed away peaceably and quietly. The Souldiers examined some Friends, after I was gone, What they did there? but when they told them, They were in their Inn, and had occasions and business in the City; they passed away without meddling any further with them. From Exeter I travelled through the Countries, taking Meetings as I went, till I came to Bristol; and was at the Meeting there.Bristol. After the Meeting was done, I did not stay in the Town; but passed up into Wales, and had a Meeting at the Slone:WALES, Slone. Cardiff. and so passed through the Country to Cardiff; where a Justice of Peace sent to me, desiring, I would come up, with half a dozen of my Friends to his House. So I took a Friend or two, and went up to him; and he and his Wife received us very civilly. The next Day we had a Meeting in Cardiff in the Town-Hall; and that Justice sent about seventeen of his Family to the Meeting. There came some disturbers; but the Lord's Power was over them: and many were turned to the Lord there. There were some, that had run out with James Naylor, that did not come to Meetings; to whom I sent Word, That the Day of their Visitation was over: and they never prospered after. We travelled from Cardiff through the Country, to Swanzey,Swanzey. where we had a blessed Meeting: and a Meeting was settled there in the Name of Jesus. In our way thither we passed over in a Passage-boat with the high-Sheriff of the County: and the next
Day I went to have spoken with him;  but he would not be spoken withal. From thence we went to another Meeting in the Country; where the Lord's Presence was much with us. And from thence we went to a Great Man's House, who received us very lovingly; but the next Morning he would not be seen: One, that in the mean time came to him, had so estranged him, that we could not get to him to speak with him again, he was so Changed; and yet over-night was exceed∣ing Loving. We passed still on through the Countries, having Meetings, and gathering People in the Name of Christ, to him their heavenly Teach∣er;Brecknock. till we came to Brecknock: where we set up our Horses at an Inn. There went with me Thomas Holmes, and John ap John; who was moved of the Lord to speak in the Streets. I walked out but a little into the Fields: and when I came in again, the Town was up in an Ʋproar. When I came into the Chamber in the Inn, it was full of People; and they were speaking in Welch: I desired them to speak in English; and they did: and much discourse we had. After a while they went away. But towards Night the Magistrates gather∣ed together in the Streets, with a multitude of People; and they bid them shout: and gathered up the Town: So that for about Two Hours together, there was such a Noise, as the like we had not heard; and the Magistrates set them on to shout again, when they had given over. We thought, it looked like the Ʋproar, which we read was amongst Diana's Handicrafts-Men: This Tumult continued, till it was within Night; and if the Lord's Power had not limited, them, they seemed likely to have pulled down the House, and us to pieces. After it was Night, the Woman of the House would have had us go to Supper in another Room: but we discerning her Plot, refused. Then she would have had half a dozen Men come into the Room to us, under pretence of discoursing with us: but we told her; That no Persons should come into our Room that Night, neither would we go to them. Then she told us, we should sup in another Room: but we told her, we would have no Supper, if we had it not in our own Room. At length when she saw, she could not get us out; she brought up our Supper in a great Rage. So She and They were crossed in their Design: for they had an Intent to have done us Mischief; but the Lord God prevented them. Next Morning I writ a Paper to the Town concerning their Ʋnchristian Carriages; shewing the Fruits of their Priests and Magistrates: and as I passed out of the Town, I spake to the People, and told them; They were a shame to Christianity, and Religion. From this Place we went to a great Meeting in a Steeple-house-yard; where was a Priest, and Walter Jenkin, who had been a Justice, and another Justice: and a blessed, glorious Meeting we had. And there being many Professors, I was moved of the Lord to open the Scri∣ptures to them, and to Answer the Objections, which they stuck at in their Profession (for I knew them very well;) and to turn them to Christ, who had enlightned them: with which Light they might see their Sins and Trespasses they had been dead in, and their Saviour,
him that came to Redeem them out of them,1657. Brechnock. who was to be their Way to God, the Truth and the Life to them, and their Priest made higher than the Heavens, so that they might come to sit under his Teaching. A peaceable Meeting we had; and many were Con∣vinced, and settled in the Truth that day. After the Meeting was over, I went with Walter Jenkin to the other Justice's House; and he said unto me, You have this day given great satisfaction to the Peo∣ple, and answered all the Objections, that were in their Minds. For the People had the Scriptures, but they were not turned to the Spirit, which should let them see that, which gave them forth, the Spirit of God; which is the Key to open them. From hence we passed to Pontamile, to Richard Hamborow's,Pontamile where was a great Meeting; to which there came another Justice of Peace, and several Great People: whose Understandings were opened by the Lord's Spirit and Power, and the Light of Jesus Christ; and they came to be turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, from whence it came. A great Convincement there was; and a large Meeting is gathered in those parts, and settled in the Name of Jesus. After this we returned back to England, and came to Shrewsbury,England. Shrews∣bury. where we had a great Meeting: and visited Friends all up and down the Countries in their Meetings, till we came to William Gandy's in Cheshire;Cheshire. where we had a Meeting of between two and three thousand People (as it was thought:) and the everlasting Word of Life was held forth, and received that day. A blessed Meeting it was; for Friends were settled by the Power of God upon Christ Jesus, the Rock and Foundation. At this time there was a great Drought: And after this general Meeting was ended, there fell so great a Rain, that Friends said; they thought we could not Travel, the Brooks and Waters would be so risen. But I believed, the Rain had gone so far, as they had come that day to the Meeting. And the next day in the Afternoon, when we turned back into some parts of Wales again, the ways were dusty; and no Rain had fallen thereabouts. And when Oliver Cromwel set forth a Proclamation for a Fast throughout the Nation, for Rain, when there was a very great Drought, it was observed, that as far as Truth had spread in the North, there were pleasant Showers and Rain enough; when in the South, in many places, they were almost spoiled for want of Rain. At that time I was moved to write an Answer to the Protector's Pro∣clamation; wherein I told him: If he had come to own God's Truth, he should have had Rain: And that Drought was a Sign unto them of their Barrenness, and Want of the Water of Life. And about the same time was writ the following Paper to Distinguish be∣twixt the true and false Fasts.
1656. London.Concerning the True Fast and the False. TO all you, that be keeping Fasts, who smite with the fist of wickedness, and fst for Strife and Debate; against you hath the Voice cried aloud, like a Trumpet, that you may come to know the true fast, which is accepted; and the fast, which is in the Strife and the Debate, and smiting with the fists of wickedness: Which fast is not required of the Lord. Behold, in the day of your fast you find Pleasure, and exact all your Labour: Behold (mark, take notice) ye fast for Strife and Debate, and to smite with the fist of wick∣edness: Ye shall not fast, as ye do this day, to make your Voice known on High Is it such a fast, that I have chosen, saith the Lord, a day for a Man to afflict his Soul? Is it to bow down his Head, like a Bul∣rush, and to spread Sack-cloth under him? Wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? Consider all you, that do fast, see, if it be not hanging down the Head for a day, like a Bulrush; and are in Strife and Debate, and to smite with the fists of wickedness, to make your Voice to be known on high? But this fast is not with the Lord accepted: but that, which leads you from Strife, from Debate, from Wickedness; which is not the bowing down of the Head, as a Bulrush for a day, and yet live in Exacting and Pleasure; this is not accepted with the Lord: but that which separates from all these before-mentioned. Which separates from Wickedness, Debate, Strife, Pleasures, smiting with the fist of wickedness, that which separates from that, brings to know the true fast, which breaks the bonds of Iniquity, and deals the bread to the hungry; brings the poor, that are cast out, to his own House; and when he sees any Naked, he covers them, and hides not himself from his own Flesh. Here is the true fast, which separates from them, where the bonds of Iniquity are standing, and the heavy bur∣thens of the Oppressed remaining, and the Yoke not broken; who deals not the Bread to the Hungry, and brings not the Poor to their own House; and sees the Naked, but lets him go uncloathed, and hides himself from his own Flesh. Yet such will make their Voice to be heard on high, as Christ speaks of the Pharisees, which sounded a Trumpet before them, and disfigured their Faces, to appear to Men to fast; but the bonds of Iniquity were standing, Strife and Debate was standing, striking with the fists of wickedness standing; that made their Voice heard on high, who had their Reward. But that which brings to the true fast, which appears not to Men to fast, but unto the Father, which sees in secret; and the Father, that seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly. This fast separates from the Pharisees-fast, and them that bow the Head for a day, like a Bulrush: And this is it, which brings to deal the Bread to the hungry, and cloath thine own flesh, when thou seest them naked; and bring the Poor to thine House, and to loose the bonds of Wickedness, mark, this is the fast; and to undo every heavy burthen (mark again) and to let the oppressed go free; this is the fast: and to break every Yoke.
And thou, that observest this fast, Then shall thy light break forth,1657. London. as the Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth speedily, and thy Righteousness shall go before thee: the glory of the Lord shall be thy Re-reward. Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, here I am: If thou take away from the midst of thee the Yoke, the putting forth of the Finger, and speaking Vanity: and if thou draw out thy Soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted Soul; then shall thy light arise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the Noon-day. The Light brings to know this fast; and walking in it, this fast is kept: and he that believeth in the Light, in darkness abides not. And again; The Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in drought, and make fat thy Bones; and thou shalt be like a watered Garden, and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters fail not, Isa. 58.11. These are them, that are guided with the Light, which comes from Christ, where the Springs are. And again: They that shall be of thee, (that keeps this fast) shall build the old waste Places, and thou shalt raise up the foundations of many Generations; and thou shalt be called the Repairer of the breach, the Restorer of paths to dwell in, Isa. 58.12. Now that, which gives to see the foundation of many Generations, is the Light, which separates from all, which is out of the Light: and they that go out of the Light, though they may pretend a fast, and bowing down the Head for a time; yet they are far from this fast, that doth raise up the Foundation of many Generations; and is the Repairer of the breach, and Restorer of the paths to dwell in. That which doth give to see this foundation of many Generations, and these Breaches, that are to be repaired and restored, and Paths to dwell in, is the Light, which brings to know the true fast: and where this fast is known, which is from Wickedness, from Debate, from Strife, from Pleasures, from Exacting, from the Voice that is heard on high, from the speaking of Vanity, from the bonds of Iniquity, which breaks every Yoke, and lets the Oppressed go free; here the Health grows. Where the Morning is known, Righteousness goes forth; the Glory of the Lord is the Re-reward, and the Light riseth, and the Soul is drawn out to the Hungry, and satisfies the afflicted Soul; and the Springs of living Water are known and felt. The Waters fail not here; the Lord guides continually, and the Foundation of many Generations comes to be seen and raised up: And the Repairer of Breaches is here witnes∣sed, and the Restorer of Paths to dwell in. But all such, as be from the Light, which the Prophets were in, with which they saw Christ, and such to be in Fasts, where was Strife, where was Wickedness, where was Debate, where was bow∣ing down the Head like a Bulrush for a day, lifting their Voice on high, and the bonds of wickedness yet standing, and the Burthens unloosed, and the Oppressed not let go free, and the Yoke not broken, the Na∣kedness not cloathed, the Bread not dealt to the Hungry, and this foundation of many Generations, not raised up; until these things before-mentioned be broken down, on such the Light breaks not forth, as the Morning, and the Lord hears them not. And such have their Reward, and their Iniquities have separated them from their God, and their Sins have hid his Face from them, that he will
not hear: and such their Hands are defiled with Blood, and their Fingers with Iniquity; whose Lips have spoken Lies, and Tongues have muttered Perversness. None calleth for Justice, nor any Plead for Truth; they trust in Vanity, and speak Lies, they conceive Mis∣chief, and bring forth Iniquity. They hatch Cockatrice-Eggs, and weave the Spiders-Web: he that eateth of their Eggs, dies; and that which is crushed, breaks out into a Viper: their Webbs shall not become Garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their Works. Mark and take notice; Their works are works of Iniquity, and the Act of Violence is in their Hands: Their Feet run to do evil, and they make haste to shed innocent Blood. Their Thoughts are Thoughts of Iniqui∣ty, Wasting and Destruction are in their Paths; the way of Peace they know not, and there is no Judgment in their Doings. They have made them a crooked Path; whosoever goes therein, shall not know Peace: Mark: Such go from the Light, therefore is Judgment far; neither doth Justice overtake. And here is Obscurity, and here is the walk∣ing in Darkness; and here is the groping, like blind Men, as though they had no Eyes, and their stumbling at Noon-day in the desolate Places, like blind Men. And here is the roaring like Bears, and mourning sorely like Doves; and here Judgment is looked for, but there is none, and Salvation is put far off: For the Light is denied, which gives to see it. But here the multiplying of Transgression, and their Sins testifying against them, and the Transgression that was within them, and their Iniquities, which they knew in transgressing and lying against the Lord, speaking the things they should not; when that they knew with that of God in them, they should not speak it. So departing from the way of God, speaking Oppression, revolt∣ing, conceiving and uttering forth from the Heart words of Fal∣shood; here is Judgment turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off: Truth is fallen in the Streets, and Equity cannot enter. Yea, Truth faileth; and he that departeth from Evil, makes himself a Prey: Yea, the Lord saw it, and it displeased him. These are such, that are in the Fast, which God doth not accept; and are not in the true fast, whose Light breaks forth as the Morning: but these are such, that be in the false fast, who grope, like blind Men. And that which gives to know the true fast, and the false fast, is the Light, which is the Eye, that gives to see each fast; where the true Judgment is, and the Iniquity standeth not, nor the Trans∣gressor, nor the Speaker of Lies: but that is judged and condemned with the Light, which makes it manifest. And who be in this fast, when they call upon the Lord, the Lord will answer them, here am I: and here Truth is pleaded for, and Falshood flies away. But who be out of this fast in the Perverseness, Tongues uttering perverse things; are stumbling and groping like blind Men, which be from the Light in the Iniquity, which separates from God, who hides his Face from them, that he will not hear: going from the Light, goes from the Lord, and his Face. So this is it, which must be fasted from; for this is it, which separates from God: and here comes the Reward openly, which condemns all that before-mentioned, which is contrary to the Light; Injustice, Iniquity, Transgression,
Vanity, and that which brings forth Mischief; which hatcheth the Cockatrice-Eggs and weaves the Spiders Web: he that eateth of these Eggs, dies. Mark, That which is crushed, breaks out into a Vi∣per: mark again, Their Web shall not become Garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their Works of Vanity: Acts of Vio∣lence are in their Hands: This is all from the Light in the wickedness. Their Feet run to do evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood; their thoughts are thoughts of Vanity, wasting and destruction is in their Path: This is all from the Light. Again: The way of Peace they know not, there is no Judgment in their Goings: they have made them crooked Paths, whosoever goes therein, shall not know Peace. Mark; who goes in their way, that know not the way of Peace, shall they know Peace? Whose Path is crooked, where there is no Judgment in their Goings; Take notice, No Judgment in their Goings: And this is all from the Light, which manifesteth that, which is to be judged; where the Covenant of Peace is known, where all that, which is contrary to it before-mentioned, is kept out. Which all, who live in those things before-mentioned contrary to the Light, in the false fast, they may mark their Path, and behold their Reward; who be out of the Light, stumbling and groping like blind Men. Which they that be in the true fast, are from all them separated; their words, their actions and fruits, and their fast: whose fast breaks the bonds of Iniquity, and whom the Lord hears, and to whom Righte∣ousness springs forth, and goes before them, the Glory of the Lord is the Re-reward. G. F. We passed up into Wales through Montgomeryshire,Montgome∣ryshire. Radnor∣shire. and so into Radnorshire, where there was a Meeting like a Leaguer, for Multitudes. I walked a little aside, whilst the People were gathering: and there came to me John ap John, a Welch-man, whom I spake to, to go up to the People; and if he had any thing upon him from the Lord to speak to them, he might speak to them in Welch, and thereby gather them more together. Then came Morgan Watkins to me, who was then become loving to Friends; And, said he, the People lie like a Leaguer, and the Gentry of the Country is come in. I bad him go up also, and leave me: for I had a great Travel upon me for the Salva∣tion of the People. When they were well gathered together, I passed up into the Meeting, and stood upon a Chair about three Hours. And I stood a pretty while, before I began to speak: After some time I felt the Power of the Lord went over the whole Assembly; and the Lord's Everlasting Life and Truth shined over all: and the Scri∣ptures were opened to them, and the Objections they had in their Minds, were Answered. And they were every one directed to the Light of Christ, the heavenly Man; that by it they might all see their Sins, and Christ Jesus to be their Saviour, their Redeemer, their Mediator, and come to feed upon him, the Bread of Life from Heaven. Many were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to his free Teaching that Day; and all were bowed down under the Power of
God:1657. Radnorshire so that, though the Multitude was so great, that many sate on Horse-back to hear; there was no Opposition made by any. And a Priest sate with his Wife on horse-back, and heard Attentively; and made no Objection: but the People parted peaceably and quietly, with great Satisfaction; many of them saying, They never heard such a Sermon before, and the Scriptures so opened. For the New Covenant was opened, and the Old, and the Nature and Terms of each; and the Parables were explained: and the State of the Church in the Apostles Days was set forth, and the Apostacy since laid open; and the free Teaching of Christ and the Apostles was set a top of all the hireling-Teachers: and the Lord had the Praise of all, for many were turned to him that Day. Lemster.I went back from thence to Lemster, where there was a great Meeting in a Close; many hundreds of People being gathered together. There were a Matter of six Congregational Preachers and Priests amongst the People; and Thomas Taylor, who had been a Priest, but was now become a Minister of Christ Jesus, was with me. I stood up, and declared about three Hours; and none of the Priests were able to open their Mouths in Opposition: the Lord's Power and Truth so reached them, and bound them down. At length one Priest went off about a Bow-shot from me; and drew several of the People after him, and there set a preaching to them: So I kept our Meeting, and he kept his. But after a while Thomas Taylor was moved to go to him, and spake to him; and he gave over: and then he, and the People he had drawn off, came up to us again; and the Lord's Power went over them all. At last a Baptist, that was Convinced, said; Where's Priest Tombs? how chance, he doth not come out? This Tombs was Priest of Lemster. Hereupon some went, and told the Priest; and up comes he with the Bailiffs and other Officers of the Town: And when he was come, they set him upon a Stool over against me. Now I was speaking of the heavenly, divine Light of Christ, which he Enlightens every one, that cometh into the World withal; and turning them to it, to give them the Knowledge of the glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus, their Saviour. When Priest Tombs heard this, he cried out; That is a Natural Light, and a made Light. Then I de∣sired the People to take out their Bibles: and I asked the Priest, Whether he did Affirm, that that was a Created, natural, made Light, which John, a Man that was sent from God, did bear witness to, and did speak of, when he said; In him (to wit, in the Word) was life, and that life was the Light of Men, Joh. 1.4. Dost thou affirm and mean, said I, that this Light here spoken of, was a Cre∣ated, Natural, Made Light? And he said, Yes. Then said I, Be∣fore I have done with thee, I will make thee bend to the Scriptures. Then I shewed by the Scriptures, that the Natural, created, made Light is the outward Light in the outward Firmament, proceeding from the Sun, Moon and Stars: And dost thou Affirm (said I) that God sent John to bear witness to the Light of the Sun, Moon and Stars? Then said he, Did I say so? I replied, 'Didst thou not not say, it was a Natural, Created, Made Light, that John bore witness unto? If thou dost not like thy Words, take them again and mend them. Then he said, That Light, which I spake of, was a
natural, created Light. I told him,1657. Lemster. He had not at all mended his Cause: for that Light, which I spake of, was the very same, that John was sent of God to bear witness to; which was the Life in the Word, by which all the natural Lights, as Sun, Moon and Stars were made. In him (to wit, the Word) was Life, and that Life was the Light of Men. So I directed the People to turn to the Place in their Bibles, and I recited to them the Words of John, how that In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God: All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that was made. (So all natural, created Lights were made by Christ the Word.) In him was life, and the life was the light of Men: And that was the true light, which lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World. And Christ saith of himself (John 8.12.) I am the light of the World: And bids them, Believe in the light (John 12.36.) And God said of him by the Prophet Isaiah (ch. 49.6.) I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my Salvation to the Ends of the Earth: So Christ in his Light is saving. And the Apostle said, The light, which shined in their Hearts, was to give them the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: And that was their Treasure in their earthen Vessels. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. When I had thus opened the matter to the People, the Priest cried to the Magistrates; Take this man away, or else I shall not speak any more. But, said I, 'Priest Tombs, deceive not thy self, thou art not in thy Pulpit now, nor in thy Old Mass-house; but we are in the Fields. So he was shuffling to be gone: and Thomas Taylor stood up, and undertook to make out our Principle by Christ's Parable concerning the Sower, Matth. 13. Then said the Priest, Let that Man speak, and not the other. So he got up into a little Jangling for a while; till the Lord's Power catched him again, and stopt and confounded him. Afterwards a Friend stood up and told him, How he had sued him for Tithe-Eggs, and other Friends for other Tithes: for he was an Anabaptist Preacher, and yet had a Parsonage at Lemster; and had several Journey-men under him. And he said; He had a Wife, and he had a Concubine; and his Wife was the Baptized People, and his Con∣cubine was the World. But the Lord's Power came over him and them all, and the everlasting Truth was declared that Day; and many were turned by it to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher and Way to God: And of great Service that Meeting was in those Parts. The next day Thomas Taylor went to this Priest, and reasoned with him; and came over him by the Power of the Word. From this place I travelled on in Wales,Tenby. having several Meetings as I went, till I came to Tenby: where, as I rode up the Street, a Justice of Peace came out of his House, and desired me to alight, and stay at his House: and I did so. On the First-day the Mayor and his Wife, and several others of the Chief of the Town came in about the tenth Hour, and stay'd all the Time of the Meeting: and a glorious Meeting it was. John ap John being then with me, left the Meeting, and went to the Steeple-house; and the Governour cast him into Prison. On the Second-day Morning the Governour sent one of his Officers to the Justice's House to fetch me: which grieved the Mayor and the Justice;
for they were both with me in the Justice's House,1657. Tenby. when the Officer came. So the Mayor and the Justice went up to the Governour before me; and a while after I went up with the Officer. When I came in, I said; Peace be unto this House: And before the Governour could Examin me, I asked him, Why he did cast my Friend into Prison? He said; For standing with his Hat on in the Church. I said, Had not the Priest two Caps on his Head, a black one, and a white one? and cut of the brims of the Hat, and then my Friend would have but one; and the brims of the Hat were but to defend him from Weather. These are frivolous things, said the Governour: 'Why then, said I, dost thou cast my Friend into Prison for such frivolous things? Then he asked me, Whether I owned Election and Reproba∣tion? Yes, said I, and thou art in the Reprobation. At that he was in a Rage, and said; He would send me to Prison, till I proved it: But I told him, I would prove that quickly, if he would confess Truth. Then I asked him, Whether Wrath, Fury and Rage, and Persecution were not Marks of Reprobation? for he that was born of the Flesh, persecuted him that was born of the Spirit; but Christ and his Disciples never persecuted, nor imprisoned any. Then he fairly Confest, That he had too much Wrath, Haste and Passion in him: And I told him, Esau was up in him, the first-Birth; not Jacob, the second-Birth. The Lord's Power so reached the Man, and came over him, that he confess'd to Truth; and the other Ju∣stice came, and shook me kindly by the Hand. As I was passing away, I was moved to speak to the Governour again; and he Invited me to Dinner with him; and set my Friend at Liberty. I went back to the other Justice's House: And after some time the Mayor and his Wife, and the Justice and his Wife, and di∣vers other Friends of the Town went about half a Mile out of Town with us, to the Water-side, when we went away; and there, when we parted from them, I was moved of the Lord to kneel down with them, and pray to the Lord to preserve them. So after I had recom∣mended them to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Saviour and free Teacher, we passed away in the Lord's Power; and the Lord had the Glory: And there is a Meeting continues in that Town to this Day. Pembrock∣shire. Pembrock Haverford west.So we travelled through the Country to Pembrockshire; and in Pembrock Town we had some Service for the Lord. From thence we passed to Haverford-west, where we had a great Meeting, and all was quiet; and the Lord's Power came over all, and many were settled in the New Covenant, Christ Jesus, and built upon him, their Rock and Foundation: and they stand a precious Meeting to this Day. The next day, being their Fair-day, we passed through their Fair, and sounded the Day of the Lord, and his Everlasting Truth amongst them. After this we came into another County: and at Noon came into a great Market-Town; and went into several Inns, before we could get any Meat for our Horses. At last we came to an Inn, where we did get some Meat for our Horses: and then John ap John being with me, went, and spake through the Town, declaring the Truth to the People; and when he came to me again, he said he thought, All the Town was as people asleep. After a while he was moved to go and declare Truth
in the Streets again; and then the Town was all in an Ʋproar,1657. WALES. and cast him into Prison. Presently after, several of the Chief of the Town came down, with others, to the Inn where I was, and said; They have cast your Man into Prison. For what? said I; He preached in our Streets, said they. Then I asked them, What did he say? Had he reproved some of the Drunkards and Swearers, and warned them to Repent, and leave off their evil Doings, and turn to the Lord? I asked them, Who cast him into Prison? And they said, The High-Sheriff, and the Justices, and the Mayor. I asked the Names of them, and whether they did understand themselves? And whether that was their Carriage to Travellers, that passed through their Town; and to Strangers, that did admonish them, and exhort them to fear the Lord, and reproved Sin in their Gates? So these went back, and told the Officers, what I said: And after a while they brought down John ap John guarded with Halberts, to the Inn-door, in order to put him out of the Town. I being at the Inn∣door, bid the Officers, take their Hands off of him: They said; The Mayor and Justices had commanded them to put him out of Town. I told them, I would talk with their Mayor and Justices anon, concerning their uncivil and unchristian Carriage towards him. So I spake to John to go look after the Horses, and get them ready; and charged the Officers not to touch him. And after I had declared the Truth to them, and shewed them the Fruits of their Priests, and their Inci∣vility and unchristian-like Carriage, they went away and left us. They were a kind of Independents; but a very wicked Town, and false. We bid the Inn-keeper give our Horses a Peck of Oats; and no sooner had we turned our Backs, but the Oats were stolen from our Horses. After we had refresht our selves a little, and were ready; we took Horse, and rode up to the Inn, where the Mayor, and Sheriff and Justices were: And I called to speak with them, and asked them the Reason, Wherefore they had Imprisoned John ap John, and kept him in Prison two or three hours? But they would not answer me a Word; only looked out at the Windows upon me. So I shewed them, how unchristian their Carriage was to Strangers and Travellers, and manifested the Fruits of their Teachers; and I declared the Truth un∣to them, and warned them of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon all the Evil-Doers: and the Lord's Power came over them, that they looked ashamed; but not a Word could I get from them in An∣swer. So when I had warned them to Repent, and Turn to the Lord, we passed away: And at Night came to a little Inn, very poor, but very cheap; for our own Provision, and our two Horses cost but Eight Pence: But the Horses would not eat their Oats. We declared the Truth to the People of the Place, and sounded the Day of the Lord through the Countries. Travelling from thence, we came to a great Town, and went to an Inn. And Edward Edwards went into the Market, and declared the Truth amongst the People; and the People followed him down to the Inn, and filled the Inn-yard, and were exceeding rude: Yet a good Service he and we had for the Lord amongst them. For the Life of Christianity, and the Power of it tormented their chaffy Spirits, and came over them, so that some were reached and Convinced; and the
Lord's Power came over all: and the Magistrates were bound, they had no Power to meddle with us. After this we passed away, and came to another great Town on a Market day; and John ap John declared the Everlasting Truth through the Streets, and proclaimed the Day of the Lord amongst them. In the Evening many People gathered about the Inn; and some of them being drunk, they would fain have had us forth into the Street again: but we seeing their Design, I told them; If there were any, that feared God, and desired to hear Truth, they might come into our Inn: or else we might have a Meeting with them next Morning. So some Service for the Lord we had amongst them, both over Night and in the Morning: And though the People was hard to receive the Truth, yet the Seed was sown; and thereabouts the Lord hath a People gathered to himself. In that Inn also I turn∣ed but my Back to the Man, that was giving Oats to my Horse; and I looked back again, and he was filling his Pockets with the Provender, that was given to my Horse. A wicked, theevish People, to rob the poor, dumb Creature of his Food! I had rather they had robbed me. Leaving this Town, and travelling on, there was a Great Man over∣took us on the Way; and he purposed (as he told us afterward) to have taken us up at the next Town for High-way-men. But before we came to the Town, I was moved of the Lord to speak to him: And what I spake, reached to the Witness of God in the Man; and he was so affected therewith, that he had us to his House, and enter∣tained us very civilly. And he and his Wife desired us to give them some Scriptures, both for proof of our Principles, and against the Priests. We were glad of the Service, and furnished him with Scri∣ptures enough: And he writ them down, and was Convinced of the Truth, both by the Spirit of God in his own Heart, and by the Scri∣ptures, which were a Confirmation to him. Afterwards he set us on in our Journey: And as we travelled, we came to an Hill, which the People of the Country say, is two or three Miles high; from the Side of this Hill I could see a great Way. And I was moved to set my Face several ways, and to sound the Day of the Lord there: And I told John ap John (a faithful Welch Minister) in what Places God would raise up a People to himself, to sit under his own Teaching. Those Places he took notice of; and since there hath a great People arisen in those Places. The like I have been moved to do in many other Places and Countries, which have been rude Places; and yet I have been moved to declare, the Lord had a Seed in those Places: and afterwards there hath been a brave People raised up in the Cove∣nant of God, and gathered in the Name of Jesus; where they have Salvation and free Teaching. DalgelthlyFrom this Hill we came down to a Place called Dalgelthly: and we went to an Inn; and John ap John declared through the Streets: and the Town's People rose, and gathered about him. And there be∣ing two Independent-Priests in the Town, they both came out, and dis∣coursed with him both together. I went up to them: and finding them speaking in Welch, I asked them, What was the Subject they spake upon, and why they were not more moderate, and spake one
by one? For the things of God, I told them, were weighty, and they should speak of them with Fear and Reverence. Then I desired them to speak in English, that I might discourse with them: and they did so. Now they affirmed, That the Light, which John came to bear witness of, was a created, natural, made Light. But I took the Bible, and shewed them (as I had done to others before) That the Natural Lights, which were made and created, were the Sun, Moon and Stars: but this Light, which John bare witness to, and which he called the True Light, that lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World, is the Life in Christ the Word, by which all things were made and created. The same, that is called the Life in Christ, is called the Light in Man: and this is an heavenly, divine Light, which lets Men see their evil Words and Deeds, and shews them all their Sins; and (if they would attend unto it) would bring them to Christ (from whom it comes,) that they might know him to save them from their Sin, and to blot it out. This Light, I told them, shined in the Darkness in their Hearts, and the Darkness in them could not comprehend it: but in those Hearts, where God had com∣manded it to shine out of Darkness, it gave unto such the Knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Christ Jesus, their Saviour. Then I opened the Scriptures largely to them, and turned them to the Spi∣rit of God in their Hearts; which would reveal the Mysteries in the Scriptures to them, and would lead them into all the Truth thereof, as they became subject thereunto. I directed them to that, which would give every one of them the Knowledge of Christ, who died for them; that he might be their Way to God, and might make Peace betwixt God and them. The People were attentive, and I spake to John ap John to stand up, and speak it in Welch to them; which he did: and they generally received it, and with Hands lifted up, blessed and praised God. The Priest's Mouths were stopt, so that they were quiet all the while: for I had brought them to be sober at the first, by telling them, That when they speak of the things of God and of Christ, they should speak with Fear and Reverence. Thus the Meeting brake up in peace in the Street: and many of the People accompanied us to our Inn, and rejoiced in the Truth, that had been declared unto them; that they were turned to the Light and Spirit in themselves, by which they might see their Sin, and know Salvation from it. And when we went out of the Town, the People were so affected, that they lifted up their Hands, and blest the Lord for our Coming. A pretious Seed the Lord hath there-aways; and a great People in those Parts is since gathered to the Lord Jesus Christ, to sit down under his free Teaching; and have suffered much for him. From this place we passed to a City, like a Castle: Where when we had set up our Horses at an Inn, and refreshed our selves, John ap John went forth, and spake through the Streets; which were so strait and short, that one might stand in the Midst of the Town, and see both the Gates. I followed John ap John, and a multitude of People were soon gathered about him; amongst whom a very dark Priest began to babble: but his Mouth was soon stopped. So when John had cleared himself, I declared the word of Life amongst the
People; directing them to the Light of Christ in their Hearts, that by it they might see all their own Ways, Religions and Teachers, and might come off from them all, to Christ, the true and living Way, and the Free Teacher. Some of the People were rude, but the greater part were civil; and told us, They had heard, how we had been persecuted, and abused in many places, but they would not do so to us there. I commended their Moderation and Sobriety, and warned them of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon all Sin and Wickedness; testifying unto them, that Christ was now come to Teach his People himself, by his Spirit and by his Power. Beaumor∣ris.From hence we went to Beaumorris; a Town, wherein John ap John had formerly been Preacher to a Congregation. After we had put up our Horses at an Inn, John went forth, and spake through the Street: and there being a Garrison in the Town, they took him, and put him into Prison. The Inn-keeper's Wife came, and told me, That the Governour and Magistrates were sending for me, to send me to Prison also: I told her, They had done more, than they could answer already; and had acted contrary to Christianity in Imprison∣ing him for Reproving Sin in their Streets and Gates, and for declaring the Truth. Soon after came other friendly People, and told me; If I went out into the Street, they would Imprison me also: and therefore they desired me to keep within the Inn. Upon this I was moved to go, and walk up and down in the Streets; and told the People, What an uncivil and un-Christian thing they had done, in casting my Friend into Prison. And, they being high Professors, I asked them, If this was the Entertainment they had for Strangers? And if they would willingly be so served themselves? And whether they, who looked upon the Scriptures to be their Rule, had any Example in the Scri∣ptures from Christ or his Apostles, for what they had done? So after a while they set John ap John at Liberty again. Next Day, being Market-day, we were to cross over a great Wa∣ter: and not far from the place, where we were to take Boat, many of the Market-People drew to us; amongst whom we had good Ser∣vice for the Lord, declaring the word of Life and Everlasting Truth unto them, and proclaiming the Day of the Lord amongst them, which was coming upon all wickedness: and directing them to the Light of Christ, which he, the heavenly Man, had enlightned them withal; by which they might see all their sins, and all their false Ways, Religions, Worships and Teachers: and by the same Light might see Christ Jesus, who was come to save them, and lead them to God So after the Lord's Truth had been declared to them in the Power of God, and Christ the free Teacher set over all the Hireling-Teachers; I bid John ap John get his Horse into the Boat, which was then ready. But there being a Company of wild Gentlemen (as they called them) got into it (whom we found very rude, and far from gentleness; they, with others, kept his Horse out of the Boat. So I rode to the Boat's-side, and spake to them, shewing them, What an unmanly and unchristian Carriage it was; and told them, they shew∣ed an unworthy Spirit, below Christianity or Humanity. As I spake unto them, I leapt my Horse into the Boat amongst them; thinking, John's Horse would have followed, when he had seen mine go in be∣fore
him: but the Water being pretty deep, John could not get his Horse into the Boat. Wherefore I leapt out again on Horseback into the Water, and staid with John on that side, till the Boat returned. There we tarried from the Eleventh Hour of the Fore-noon, to the Second in the Afternoon, before the Boat came to fetch us; and then had we forty and two Miles to ride that Evening: and by that time we had paid for our Passage, we had but one groat left between us both, in Money. We rode about sixteen Miles, and then got a little Hay for our Horses: and setting forward again, we came in the Night to a little Ale-house, where we thought to have staid and baited. But finding, we could have neither Oats nor Hay there, we travelled on all Night: And about the fifth Hour in the Morning got to a place within six Miles of Rexam;Near Rexam. where that Day we met with many Friends, and had a glorious Meeting, and the Lord's Everlast∣ing Power and Truth was over all: and a Meeting is continued there to this day. Very weary we were with travelling so hard up and down in Wales; and in many places we found it difficult to get meat either for our Horses or Our selves. The next Day we passed from thence into Flintshire,Flintshire. Rexam. sounding the Day of the Lord through the Towns: and came into Rexam at Night. Here many of Floyd's People came to us; but very rude, wild and airy they were, and little Sense of Truth they had: Yet some were Con∣vinced in that Town. Next Morning one, called a Lady, sent for me, who kept a Preacher in her House. I went to her House, but found both her and her Preacher very light and airy; too light to receive the weighty Things of God. In her Lightness she came, and asked me, If she should cut my Hair? But I was moved to reprove her, and bid her Cut down the Corruptions in her self with the Sword of the Spirit of God. So after I had admonished her to be more grave and sober, we passed away: and afterwards in her frothy mind she made her Boast, That she came behind me, and cut off the Curl of my Hair; but she spake falsly. From Rexam we came through the Country to West-chester;West-Chester. and it being the Fair-time, we stay'd there a while, and visited Friends. For I had travelled through every County in Wales, preaching the Everlasting Gospel of Christ; and a brave People there is now, which hath received it, and sitteth under Christ's Teaching. But before I left Wales, I writ a Paper to the Magistrates of Beaumorris concern∣ing their Imprisoning of John ap John; letting them see their Condi∣tions, and the Fruits of their Christianity, and of their Teachers: And afterwards I met with some of them near London; but oh! how ashamed they were of their Action! From West-chester we came through the Country to Leverpool,Liverpool where was at that time a Fair also. And as I rode through the Fair, there stood a Friend upon the Cross, declaring the Truth to the Peo∣ple: Who seeing me ride by, and knowing, I had appointed a Meet∣ing to be the next Day upon an Hill not far off, gave Notice to the People, That George Fox, the Servant of the Lord, would have a Meet∣ing next day upon such an Hill; and if any feared the Lord, they might come there, and hear him declare the Word of Life to them. We went that Night to Richard Cubban's, who himself was Convinced,
but not his Wife;1657. Liverpool. but at that time his Wife was Convinced also. Next Day we went to the Meeting on the Top of the Hill, which was very large: and some Rude People with a Priest's Wife came, and made a Noise for a while; but the Lord's Power came over them, and the Meeting became quiet, and the Truth of God was de∣clared amongst them: And many were that Day settled upon the Rock and Foundation Christ Jesus, and under his Teaching; who made Peace betwixt God and them. Malpoth.We had a small Meeting, with a few Friends and People, at Mal∣poth. And from thence we came to another place, where we had another Meeting; and there came a Bailiff with a Sword, and was rude: but the Lord's Power came over him; and Friends were esta∣blished in the Truth. Man∣chester.From thence we came to Manchester: and the Sessions being there that Day, many rude People were come to the Town out of the Country. In the Meeting they threw at me Coals, and Clods, and Stones, and Water: Yet the Lord's Power bore me up over them, that they could not strike me down. At last, when they saw, they could not prevail by throwing Water, Stones and Dirt at me, they went and Informed the Justices in the Sessions; who thereupon sent Officers to fetch me before them. The Officers came in, while I was declaring the Word of Life to the People; and they plucked me down, and haled me up into their Court. When I came there, all the Court was in a Disor∣der and a Noise: Wherefore I asked; Where were the Magistrates, that they did not keep the People civil? Some of the Justices said, They were Magistrates. I asked them, Why then they did not ap∣pease the People, and keep them sober? For one cried I'le swear, and another cried, I'le swear. So I declared to the Justices, How we were abused in our Meeting by the rude People, who threw Stones, and Clods, and Dirt, and Water: and how I was haled out of the Meeting, and brought thither, contrary to the Instrument of Government, which said; None should be molested in their Meet∣ings, that professed God, and owned the Lord Jesus Christ: which I did. So the Truth came over them, that when one of the rude Fel∣lows cried, He would swear; one of the Justices checked him, saying, What will you swear? hold your Tongue. At last they bid the Con∣stable, Have me to my Lodging; and there I should be secured, till to morrow Morning, that they sent for me again. So the Constable had me to my Lodging: And as we went, the People were exceeding rude; but I let them see the Fruits of their Teachers, and how they sha∣med Christianity, and dishonoured the Name of Jesus, which they professed. At Night we went to a Justice's House in the Town, who was pretty moderate; and I had a great deal of Discourse with him. Next Morning we sent to the Constable to know, If he had any thing more to say to us? And he sent us Word, He had nothing to say to us, but that we might go, whither we would. The Lord hath since raised up a People to stand for his Name and Truth in that Town, over those chaffy Professors.
We passed from? Manchester through the Country,1657. Preston. having many pre∣cious Meetings in several Places, till we came to Preston; between which and Lancaster I had a general Meeting: From which I went to Lancaster. There at our Inn I met with Colonel West,Lancaster who was very glad to see me: and he meeting with Judge Fell, told him, That I was mightily grown in the Truth; when as indeed he was come nearer to the Truth, and so could better discern it. We came from Lancaster to Robert Widders: and on the First-Day after I had a general Meeting near the Sands-side,Sands-side. of Friends of West∣morland and Lancashire, where the Lord's Everlasting Power was over all; in which the Word of Eternal Life was declared, and Friends were settled upon the Foundation, Christ Jesus, under his free Teach∣ing: And many were Convinced, and turned to the Lord. Next day I came over the Sands to Swarthmore,Swarth∣more. where Friends were glad to see me: and I stay'd there two first Days, visiting Friends in their Meetings there-aways; who rejoiced with me in the Goodness of the Lord, who by his Eternal Power had carried me through, and over many Difficulties and Dangers in his Service: to him be the Praise for ever! Having gotten a little Respit from Travel, I was moved to write an Epistle to Friends, as followeth: ALL Friends of the Lord every where, whose Minds are turn∣ed in towards the Lord, take heed and hearken to the Light within you, which is the Light of Christ; which, as ye love it, will call your Minds inward, that are abroad in the Creatures: so your Minds may be renewed by it, and turned to God in this which is pure, to worship the living God, the Lord of Hosts over all the Creatures. That which calls your Minds out of the Lusts of the World, it will call them out of the Affections and Desires, and turn you to set your Affections above. The same that calls the mind out of the World, will give judgment upon the World's Affections and Lusts, that which calls out your Minds from the World's Teachers, and the Creatures; and so to have your minds renewed. There is your Obedience known and found, and there the Image of God is renewed in you; and ye come to grow up in it. That which calls your minds out of the Earth, turns them towards God, where the pure Babe is born of the Virgin; and the Babe's food is known, the Children's Bread, which comes from the living God, and nourishes up to Eternal Life: Which Babes and Children receive their Wisdom from above, from the pure, living God, and not from the Earthly Ones; for that is trodden under Foot with such. And all who hate this Light, whose minds are abroad in the Creatures, in the Earth, and in the Image of the Devil, get the Words of the Saints (that recei∣ved their Wisdom from above) into the old Nature, and their cor∣rupted minds: Such are they, that are Murderers of the just, Ene∣mies to the Cross of Christ, in whom the Prince of the Air lodgeth; Sons of perdition, Betrayers of the just. Therefore take heed to that Light, which is opprest with that Nature; which Light, as it arises, shall condemn all that cursed Nature, and shall turn it out, and shut
it out of the House:1657. Swarth∣more. And so ye will come to see the Candle lighted, and the House sweeping and swept. Then afterward the pure Pearl ariseth; and then the Eternal God is exalted. The same Light, that calls in your minds out of the World (that are abroad) the same turns them to God, the Father of Lights. Here in the pure mind is the pure God waited upon for Wisdom from above; and the pure God is seen Night and Day, and the Eternal Peace, of which there is no end, enjoied. People may have Openings, and yet their minds go into the Lusts of the Flesh; but there the Affections are not mortified. Therefore hearken to that, and take heed to that, which calls your minds out of the Affections and Lusts of the World, to have them renewed: The same will turn your minds to God; the same Light will set your Affections above, and bring you to wait for the pure Wisdom of God from on high, that it may be justified in you. VVait all in that, which calls in your minds, and turns them to God; Here is the true Cross: that mind shall feed upon nothing, that is earthly; but be kept in the pure Light of God up to God, to feed upon the living Food, which comes from the living God. So the Lord God Almighty be with you all, Dear Babes, and keep you all in his Strength and Power to his Glory, over all the world, ye whose minds are called out of it, and turned to God, to worship the Crea∣tor, and serve him, and not the Creature. And the Light of God, which calls the mind out of the Creatures, and turns it to God; brings into a Being of Endless Joy and Peace: And here is alway a Seeing God present, which is not known to the world, whose minds are in the Creatures, whose Knowledge is in the Flesh, whose minds are not renewed. Therefore all Friends, the Seed of God mind and dwell in, to reign over the Ʋnjust: and the Power of the Lord dwell in, to keep you clear in your Understandings, that the Seed of God may reign in you all; the Seed of God, which is but one in all, which is Christ in the male and in the female, which the Promise is to. VVait upon the Lord for the Just to reign over the Ʋnjust, and for the Seed of God to reign over the Seed of the Serpent, and be the Head; and all that is mortal, may die: for out of that will rise Presumption. So Fare ye well, and God Almighty bless, and guide, and keep you in his VVisdom. G. F. About this time Friends, that were moved of the Lord to go to the Steeple-houses and Markets, to reprove Sin, and warn People of the Day of the Lord, suffered much hardship from the rude People, and also from the Magistrates; being commonly pulled down, buffeted and bea∣ten, and many Times sent to Prison. Wherefore I was moved to give forth the following Paper, to be spread abroad amongst People, to shew them, How contrary they acted therein to the Apostles Do∣ctrine and Practice; and to bring them to more moderation. Thus it was:
IS it not better for you, that have cast into Prison the Servants and Children of the Lord God, for speaking, as they are moved, in Steeple-houses or Markets, Is it not better, I say, for you to Try all things, and hold fast that which is good? Is it not of more Honour and Credit, to prove all things, and try all things, than to pluck down in the Steeple-houses, and pull off the Hair of their Heads, and cast them into Prison? Is this an Honour to your Truth and Gospel you pro∣fess? Doth it not shew, that ye be out of Truth, and are not they, that are ready to Instruct the Gainsayers? Hath not the Lord said, He will pour out of his Spirit upon all Flesh, and his Sons and his Daughters shall prophesy, and old Men shall dream Dreams, and young Men see Visions, and on his Hand-maids he will pour forth of his Spirit? Was not this Prophecy in Ages past stood against by the Wise, learn∣ed Men in their own Wisdom, and by the Synagogue-Teachers? And were not such haled out of the Synagogues and Temple, who witnessed the Spirit poured forth upon them? Doth not this shew, that ye have not received the pourings forth of this Spirit upon you, who fill the Gaols with so many Sons and Daughters, and hold up such Teachers, as are bred up in Learning at Oxford and Cambridge, and are made by the Will of Man? Doth not this shew, that ye, that are bred up there, and are made Teachers by the Will of Man, and do persecute for Prophesying, are Strangers to the Spirit, that is poured forth upon Sons and Daughters, by which Spirit they come to mi∣nister to the Spirits, that are in Prison? The Lord hath a Controver∣sy with you, who are found prisonings and persecuting such, as the Lord hath poured forth of his Spirit upon. Do not all your Fruits shew, in all the Nation, where ye come, in Towns, Cities, Villa∣ges and Countries, that ye are the Seeds-men made by the Will of Man, who to the Flesh do sow, of which nothing but Corruption is reaped in Nations, Countries, Cities and Villages? Ye are looked upon, and your Fruits; and that which may be gathered, is seen by all that be in the Light, as they pass through your Countries, Towns, Cities and Villages, that ye are all the Seeds-men, that have sown to the Flesh. Mark, and of this take ye Notice, who are of that Birth, that is born of the Flesh; and so ye sow to your own, persecuting him, that is born of the Spirit, who sows to the Spirit, and of the Spirit reaps Life Eternal: Such ye, who sow to the Flesh, cast into Prison. Do ye not hale out of the Synagogues? and perse∣cute and beat in the Synagogues, and knock down? Are not these the Works of the Flesh? Have not many been almost murdered and smothered in your Synagogues? And have not some been haled out of your Synagogues, for but looking at the Priest, and after cast into Prison? Doth not all this make manifest, what Spirit ye are of, and your Fruits to be of the Flesh? What Pleasures and Sports in every Town are to be seen among your Flocks, that sow to the flesh, and are born of it! Whereas the Ministers of the Spirit cried against such, as sported in the day-time; and such, as ate and drank, and rose up to play; and such, as lived wantonly upon Earth in Pleasures; and such, as lived in fulness of Bread and Idleness; such as defile
the Flesh:  such did God overthrow and destroy, and set them forth as Examples to all them, that after should live Ʋngodly. But are not the Fruits of this reaped in every Town? Cannot we from hence see, that here is sowing to the flesh? Again, what Scorning, Scoffing, Mocking, Derision and Strife! What Oaths, Drunkenness, Ʋncleanness and cursed Speaking! What Lust and Pride is seen in the Streets! These fruits, we see, are reaped of the flesh. So here we see the Seeds-man, him that sows to this flesh, of which nothing but Corruption is reaped; as the Countries, Towns, Cities and Villages make manifest. But the Ministers of the Spirit, who sow to the Spirit, come to reap Life Eternal: These discern the other Seeds-man, who sows to the flesh, and of the flesh reaps Corruption. For the Day hath manifested each Seeds-man, and what is reaped from each, is seen; Glory be to the Lord God for ever! The Ministers of the Spirit, which be born of the Spirit, Sons and Daughters, which have the Spirit poured forth upon them, and witness the promise of God fulfilled in them; by the Spirit of God preach and minister to the Spirit in Prison in every one, in the sight of God, the Father of Spi∣rits. God's Hand is turned against you all, that have destroyed God's Creatures upon your Lust: And God's Hand is turned against you, that have wronged by unjust Dealing, and defrauded, and have oppressed the Poor, and have respected the Persons of the Proud, (such as be in gay Apparel;) and lend not your Ear to the Cry of the Poor. The Lord's Hand and Arm against you all is turned, and his righteous Judgment and Justice upon you all will be accomplish∣ed and repayed; who shall have a Reward every one, according to your Works. Oh the Abomination and hypocritical Profession, that is upon the Earth, where God and Christ, Faith, Hope, the holy Spirit and Truth is professed; but the fear of God, and the Faith, that pu∣rifies and gives Victory over the World, not lived in! Doth it not appear, that the Wisdom, that rules in all those, whom the Seeds-man, that sows to the flesh, sows for, and who are born of the Flesh, is from below, earthly, sensual and devillish, and their Under∣standing brutish, and their knowledge natural as the brute Beasts? For Men and Women in that state have not patience, to speak one to the other of the Scriptures, without much Corruption and Flesh appearing, yet they have a feigned Humility, a Will-worship, and Righteousness of Self; but they own not the Light, which lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World, Christ Jesus, the Righteous∣ness of God: Which Light being owned, Self, and the Righteous∣ness of Self comes to be denied. Here is the Humility, that is con∣trary to the Light, and that is below and feigned: Here is the Wis∣dom, that is from below, earthly, sensual and devillish: for People can scarce speak one to another, without destroying one another, prisoning and persecuting one another, when they speak of the Scri∣ptures. Now, this is the Devillish Wisdom, murdering and destroy∣ing: This is not the Wisdom that is from above, which is pure and peaceable, gentle and easie to be intreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits. Here all may read each Seeds-man, which hath each Wis∣dom: He that sows to the Flesh, and is born of that, hath the wis∣dom that is earthly, sensual and devillish; He that sows to the Spirit;
a Minister of the Spirit, hath the Wisdom from above, which is pure,  which is peaceable, which is gentle, which is easie to be intreated; the Wisdom, by which all things were made and created. Now is each Wisdom discovered, and each Seeds-man: the Day, which is the Light, hath discovered them. G. F. As the fore-going Paper was sent forth amongst the World's People, to let them see, from whence their Imprisoning and Persecuting, Cru∣elty and violent Dealing sprang; so I was also moved to give forth the following Epistle to Friends, to stir them up to be bold and valiant for the Truth, and to encourage them in their Sufferings for it. ALL Friends and Brethren every where, Now is the Day of your Trial, and now is the Time for you to be Valiant; and to , that the Testimony of the Lord doth not fall: For now is the Day of Exercise of your Gifts, of your Patience, and of your Faith. Now is the Time to be armed with Patience, with the Light and with Righteousness, and with the Helmet of Salvation: And now is the Trial of the Slothful Servant, who hides his Talent, and will judge Christ hard. Now, happy are they that can say, The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fulness thereof, and he gives the Increase: And therefore, who takes it from you? Is it not the Lord still, that suffers it? For the Lord can trie you, as he did Job, whom he made Rich, whom he made Poor; and whom he made Rich again: who still kept his Integrity in all Conditions. So learn Paul's Lesson, In all State to be content: And have his Faith, That nothing is able to separate us from the Love of God, which we have in Christ Jesus. Therefore be Rich in Life, and in Grace, which will endure, ye who are Heirs of Life, and born of the Womb of Eternity, that Noble Birth, that cannot stoop to that, that is born in Sin, and conceived in Iniquity; who are better bred and born: whose Religion is from God, above all the Religions, that are from below; and who walk by Faith, by that which God hath given you, and not by that which Men make, who walk by Sight, from the Mass-book to the Directory: Such are subject to stumble and fall, who walk by Sight, and not by Faith. Therefore mind him, that destroys the Original of Sin, the Devil and his Works, and cuts off the Entail of Satan, viz. Sin; who would have by Entail an Inheritance of Sin in Men and Women from Generation to Generation, and pleads for it by all his Lawyers and Counsellors. For though the Law did not cut it off, which made nothing perfect; yet Christ being come, destroys the Devil and his Works, and cuts off the Entail of Sin: This angers all the Devil's Lawers and Counsellors, that Satan shall not hold Sin by Entail in thy Garden, in thy Field, in thy Temple, thy Taber∣nacle. So keep your Tabernacles, that there ye may see the Glory of the Lord appear at the Doors thereof. And be faithful: for ye see, what the Worthies and Valiants of the Lord did attain unto by
Faith. Enoch by Faith was translated: Noah by Faith was pre∣served over the Waters in his Ark: Abraham by Faith forsook his Father's House and Religion, and all the Religions of the World: Isaac and Jacob by Faith followed his Steps. And see, how Samuel, and other of the Lord's Prophets, with David, by Faith were pre∣served to God, over God's Enemies! And Daniel, and the Three Children by Faith escaped the Lions and the Fire, and preserved their Worship clean, and by it were kept over the Worships of the World. And the Apostles by Faith travelled up and down the World, and were preserved from all the Religions of the World, and hld forth the pure Religion to the dark World, which they had received from above, from God (for the Way they walked in, and the Wor∣ship they performed and taught, was received from above, from God and from Christ Jesus) and likewise their Fellowship was received from above, which is in the Gospel, that is Everlasting. And in this neither Powers, Principalities, nor Thrones, Dominions nor Angels, nor things present, nor things to come, nor Heights, nor Depths, nor Death, Mockings, nor spoiling of Goods, nor Prisons, nor Fetters, were able to separate them from the Love of God, which they had in Christ Jesus. And Friends, Quench not the Spirit, nor despise Prophesying, where it moves; neither hinder the Babes and Suck∣lings from crying Hosannah: for out of their Mouths will God ordain Strength. There were some in Christ's Day, that were against such; whom he reproved: And there were some in Moses his Day, who would have stopt the Prophets in the Camp; whom Moses re∣proved, and said in Way of Incouragement to them, Would God, that all the Lord's People were Prophets! So I say now to you. Therefore ye, that stop it in your selves, do not quench it in others, neither in Babe nor Suckling; for the Lord hears the Cries of the Nee∣dy, and the Sighs and Groans of the Poor. Judge not that, nor the Sighs and Groans of the Spirit, which cannot be uttered; lest ye judge Prayer: for Prayer as well lies in Sighs and Groans to the Lord, as otherwise. So let not the Sons and Daughters, nor the Hand-maidens be stopt in their Prophesyings, nor the Young-men in their Visions, nor the Old-men in their Dreams: but let the Lord be glorified in and through all, who is over all, God blessed for ever! So that every one may improve their Talents, and every one exer∣cise their Gifts; and every one speak, as the Spirit gives them Ʋt∣terance. Thus every one may minister, as he hath received the Grace, as a good Steward to him, that hath given it him; so that all Plants may bud, and bring forth Fruit to the glory of God: for the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to profit withal. So see, that every one hath profited in heavenly things: Male and Female, look into your own Vineyards, and see, what Fruit ye bear to God; look into your own Houses, see how they are decked and trimmed, and see, what Odors, Mirrh and Frankincense ye have there∣in, and what a Smell and Savour ye have to ascend to God, that he may be glorified. So bring your Deeds all to the Light, which ye are taught to believe in by Christ, your Head, the heavenly Man; and see, how they are wrought in God. And every Male and Female, let Christ dwell in your Hearts by Faith (Christ in the
Male and in the Female;) and let your Mouths be opened to the Glory of God the Father, that he may rule and reign in you. We must not have Christ Jesus, the Lord of Life, put any more in a Stable, amongst the Horses and Asses: but he must now have the best Chamber, the Heart; and the rude, debauched Spirit must be turned out. Therefore let him reign, whose Right it is, who was con∣ceived by the Holy Ghost; by which Holy Ghost ye call him Lord, in which Holy Ghost ye pray, and by which Holy Ghost ye have Comfort, and Fellowship with the Son and with the Father. There∣fore know the Triumph in it, and in God and his Power (which the Devil is out of) and in the Seed, which is first and last, the begin∣ning and ending, the Top-and Corner-stone: in which is my Love to you, and in which I rest— Your Friend, G. F. POSTSCRIPT. And Friends, be careful, how ye set your feet among the tender Plants, that are springing up out of God's Earth; lest ye do tread upon them, and hurt them, and bruise them, or crush them in God's Vineyard. Now after I had tarried two first-Days at Swarthmore, and had visited Friends in their Meetings thereabouts, I passed from thence into Westmorland, visiting Friends Meetings there;Westmor∣land. till I came to John Audland's, where there was a general Meeting. The Night before I had a vision of a desperate Creature, that was coming to destroy me; but I got Victory over it. And the next Day in the Meeting-time there came one Otway, with some rude fellows with him; and he rode round about the Meeting with his Sword or Rapier, and would fain have got∣ten in, through the Friends to me: but the Meeting being great, the Friends stood thick; so that he could not easily come at me. Then when he had rid about several Times raging, and found, he could not get in, being limited by the Lord's Power; he at length went away. It was a glorious Meeting, and ended peaceable; and the Lord's ever∣lasting Power came over all. But this wild Man went home, and be∣came distracted; and not long after died. I sent a Paper to John Blaykling to read to him, while he lay ill, shewing him his wickedness; and he did acknowledge something of it. Going from hence, I went through Kendal,Kendal. where a Warrant had long lain to apprehend me: and the Constables seeing me, ran to fetch their Warrant, as I was riding through the Town: but be∣fore they could come with it, I was gone past the Town; and so escaped their Hands. I travelled on Northwards, visiting Friends Meetings, as I went; till I came to Strickland-head, where I had a great Meeting.Strickland head. And most of the Gentry of that Country being gathered to an Horse-Race, not far off from the Meeting, I was moved to go, and declare the
Truth unto them;1657. Strickland head. and a Chief-Constable, that was there, did also ad∣monish them. Our Meeting was quiet, and the Lord was with us; and by his Word and Power Friends were settled in the Eternal Truth. Cumber∣land.From hence we passed into Cumberland, where we had many pre∣cious, living Meetings. And after we had travelled through to Gils∣land,Gilsland. Carlisle. and had a Meeting there; we came to Carlisle, where they had used to put Friends out of the Town: but there came a great Flood, while we were there, that they could not put us out of the Town; so we had a Meeting there on the first-Day. After which we passed through the Country to Abby-holm,Abbey-holm. and had a little Meeting there. This is a Place, where I told Friends long before, there would a great People come forth to the Lord; which hath since come to pass, and a large Meeting there is gathered to the Lord in those Parts. Lang∣lands.I passed from hence to a general Meeting at Langlands in Cumberland, which was very large: for most of the People had so forsaken the Priests, that the Steeple-houses in some places stood empty. And John Wilkinson, a Preacher, that I have often named before, who had three Steeple-houses, had so few Hearers lest, that giving over preaching in the Steeple-houses, he first set up a Meeting in his House, and preach∣ed there to them that were left. Afterwards he set up a silent Meet∣ing (like Friends,) to which came a few: for most of his Hearers were come off to Friends. Thus he held on, till he had not past half a Dozen left; the rest still forsaking him, and coming away to Friends. At last, when he had so very few left, he would come to Pardsey-Crag (where Friends had a Meeting of several hundreds of People, who were all come to sit under the Lord Jesus Christ's Teaching) and he would walk about the Meeting on the first-Days, like a man that went about the Commons to look for Sheep. Now during this time, I came to this Pardsey-Crag-meeting, and he with three or four of his follow∣ers, that were yet left to him, came to the Meeting that Day; and they were all throughly Convinced. After the Meeting was done, Priest Wilkinson asked me two or three Questions, which I answered him to his Satisfaction: and from that time he came amongst Friends to their Meetings, and became an Able Minister; and preached the Gospel freely, and turned many to Christ's free Teaching. And after he had conti∣nued many Years in the free Ministry of Christ Jesus, he died in the Truth. SCOT∣LAND.I had for some time felt Drawings on my Spirit to go into Scotland; and had sent to one Colonel William Osborn of Scotland, desiring him to come and meet me: and he, with some others with him, were come out of Scotland to this Meeting. So after the Meeting was over (which, he said, was the most-glorious Meeting, that ever he saw in his life) I passed with him, and those others that were with him, into Scotland; having Robert Widders with me, who was a Thundring man against Hypocrisy and Deceit, and the Rottenness of the Priests. The first Night we came into Scotland. we lodged at an Inn; and the Inn-keeper told us: There was an Earl lived about a Quarter of a Mile off, who had a desire to see me; and had left word at his House, that if ever I came into Scotland, he should send him word. He told us, there were three Draw-bridges to his House; and that it would be Nine
a Clock, before the third Bridge was drawn. So finding,1657. Scotland. we had time in the Evening, we walked down to his House. He received us very lovingly; and said, He would have gone with us on our Journey, but that he was before engaged to go to a Funeral. After we had spent some time with him, we parted very friendly; and returned to our Inn. Next Morning we travelled on, and passing through Dumfreeze,Dumfreez Douglass. we came to Douglas; where we met with some Friends: and from thence we passed to the Heads,Heads. where we had a blessed Meeting in the Name of Jesus, and felt him in the midst. Leaving Heads, we went to Badcow, and had a Meeting there;Badcow. to which abundance of People came, and many were Convinced: a∣mongst whom there was one, that was called a Lady, Convinced.Highlands From thence we passed towards the High-lands to William Osburn's House; where we gathered up the Sufferings of Friends, and the Principles of the Scotch Priests, which may be seen in a Book called, The Scotch-Priests Principles. Afterwards we came back again to Heads and Badcow,Heads. Badcow. Garshore. and Gar∣shore, where the said Lady Margaret Hambleton was Convinced; who afterwards went to warn O. Cromwel and Charles Fleetwood of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon them. On the First-day we had a great Meeting, and several Professors came to it. Now, the Priests had frighted the People with the Do∣ctrine of Election and Reprobation; telling them: That God had or∣dained the greatest part of Men and Women for Hell; and that, let them Pray, or Preach, or Sing, and do what they could, it was all to no purpose, if they were ordained for Hell. And that God had a certain Number, which were Elected for Heaven; and let them do what they would, as David an Adulterer, and Paul a Persecutor, yet elected Ves∣sels for Heaven. So the fault was not at all in the Creature, less or more; but God had ordained it so. Now I was lead to open to the People the falseness and folly of their Priests Doctrines, and shewed them; How the Priests had abused those Scriptures, which they had brought and quoted to them, as in Jude, and other Places. For whereas they said, There was no fault at all in the Creature; I shewed them, that they, who Jude speaks of, to wit Cain, Core and Balaam, who, he says, were ordained of old to Condemnation, the fault was in them. For did not God warn Cain and Balaam, and gave a Promise to Cain, If he did well, he should be accepted? And did not the Lord bring Core out of Egypt, and his Company? And yet did not he gainsay both God and his Law, and his Prophet Moses? So here People might see, that there was a fault in Cain, Corah and Balaam; and so there is in all them, that go in their ways. For if they, who are called Christians, resist the Gospel, as Core did the Law, and err from the Spirit of God, as Balaam did; and if they do Evil, as Cain did, is not here a fault? Which fault is in themselves, and is the Cause of their Reprobation, and not God. Doth not Christ say, Go, preach the Gospel to all Nations? Which is the Gospel of Salvation. He would not have sent them out into all Nations, to preach the Doctrine of Salvation, if the greatest part of Men had been ordained for Hell. Was not Christ a Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, for those that become Reprobates, as well as for the Saints?
He died for all Men, the Ʋngodly as well as the Godly, as the Apo∣stle bears witness, (2 Cor. 5.15. Rom. 5.6.) And he enlightens every Man, that cometh into the World, that through him they might all believe. And Christ bids them believe in the Light: But all they, that hate the Light, which Christ bids all believe in; they are Reprobated. Again, The Manifestation of the Spirit of God is given to every Man to profit withal: But they that vex, quench and grieve it, are in the Reprobation; and the fault is in them, as it is also in them that hate his Light. The Apostle saith, The grace of God, which brings Salvation, hath appeared unto all Men, teaching us, (saith he) that denying Ʋngodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, (Tit. 2.11.12.) Now all those Men and Women, that live Ʋngodly, and in the Lusts of the World, that turn this grace of God into Wantonness, and walk despitefully against it, and so deny God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that bought them; the fault is in all such, that turn the grace into Wantonness, and walk despitefully against that, which would bring their Salvation, and save them out of the Reprobation. But the Priests, it seems, can see no fault in such as deny God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that hath bought them, such as deny his Light, which they should believe in, and his grace, which should teach them to live godly, and which should bring them their Salvation. Now all that believe in the Light of Christ, as he commands, are in the Election; and sit under the Teaching of the grace of God, which brings their Salvation. But such, as turn this grace into Wantonness, are in the Reprobation: and such as hate the Light, are in the Con∣demnation. Therefore I exhorted all the People to believe in the Light, as Christ commands, and own the grace of God their free Teacher; and it would assuredly bring them their salvation: for it is sufficient. Many other Scriptures were opened concerning Re∣probation, and the People were opened to see; and a spring of Life rose up among them. These things soon came to the Priests Ears: for the People, that sate under their dark Teachings, began to see Light, and to come into the Covenant of Light. So the Noise was spread over Scotland, a∣mongst the Priests, That I was come thither; and a great Cry was among them, that all would be spoiled: for they said, I had spoiled all the honest Men and Women in England already (so, upon their own account, the worst were left to them.) Upon this they gathered great Assemblies of Priests together, and drew up a Company Articles of Curses to be read in their several Steeple-houses; and that all the People should say, Amen to them. Some few of these I will here set down; the rest may be read in the Book before-mentioned of The Scotch Priests Principles. The first was; Cursed is he, that saith, Every Man hath a Light within him sufficient to lead him to Salvation: And let all the People say, Amen. The second; Cursed is he that saith, Faith is without Sin: And let all the People say, Amen. The third; Cursed is he, that denieth the Sabbath-day: And let all the People say, Amen.
In this last they make the People Curse themselves: for on the Sab∣bath-day (which is the Seventh-day of the Week, which the Jews kept by the Command of God to them) they kept Markets and Fairs; and so brought the Curse of God upon their own Heads. And as to the first, concerning the Light, Christ saith; Believe in the Light, that ye may become Children of the Light: and he that be∣lieveth, shall be saved; he that believeth, shall have everlasting Life: He that believeth, passes from Death to Life, and is grafted into Christ. And ye do well, said the Apostle, that ye take heed unto the Light, that shines in the dark place, until the day dawn, and the Day-star arise in your Hearts. So the Light is sufficient to lead unto the Day-star. And as concerning Faith, it is the gift of God; and every gift of God is pure. The faith, which Christ is the Author of, is precious, divine and without Sin: And this is the faith, which gives Victory over Sin, and Access to God; in which faith they please God. But they are Reprobates themselves concerning this faith, and are in their dead faith, who Charge sin upon this faith under pain of a Curse: which faith gives victory over their Curse, and returns it into their own Bowels. There were a Company of Scots near Badcow,Badcow. who challenged a Dispute with some of our Scotch Friends (for with me they would not dispute:) so some of the Scotch Friends met them at the Market-Place. The Dispute was to be concerning the Sabbath-day, and some other of their Principles before-mentioned: And I having gotten their Principles and Assertions, shewed the Friends, where they might easily be overthrown; and a Scotch Friend, a Smith, overthrew them clearly. There were two Independent Churches in Scotland, of which many were Convinced: But the Pastor of the other was in a great Rage against Truth and Friends. They had their Elders, who sometimes would exercise their Gifts amongst the Church-members, and would sometimes be pretty tender: but their Pastor speaking so much against the Light, and us, who are the Friends of Christ, he darkned his Hearers; so that they grew dark, and blind, and dry, and lost their Tenderness. And he continued preaching against Friends, and against the Light of Christ Jesus, calling it natural: At last one Day in his Preaching he Cursed the Light; and fell down dead in his Pulpit. The People carried him out, and laid him upon a Grave-stone, and poured Strong-Waters into him; which fetched him to Life again: and they carried him home, but he was Mopish. After a while he stripped off his Cloths, and put on a Scotch Plod; and went into the Country a∣mongst the Dairy-women: and when he had staid there about two Weeks, he came home, and went into the Pulpit again. Whereupon the People expected some great Manifestation or Revelation from him: but instead thereof he began to tell them, what Entertainment he had met with; how One Woman gave him Skim'd Milk, Another gave him Butter-milk, and Another gave him good Milk: So the People were fain to take him out of the Pulpit again, and carry him home. He that gave me this Account, was one Andrew Robinson, who was one of his Chief Hearers; and came afterwards to be Convinced, and
received the Truth: And he said, He never heard, that he recovered his Senses again. By this People may see the Vengeance of God, which came upon him, that cursed the Light; which Light was the Life in Christ, the Word: And it may be a Warning to all others, that speak Evil against the Light of Christ. Now were the Priests in such a Rage, that they posted up to Eden∣borough, to O. Cromwel's Council there, with Petitions against me. And the Noise was, That all was gone: for several Friends were come out of England, and spread over Scotland, Sounding the Day of the Lord, and preaching the everlasting Gospel of Salvation, and turning People to Christ Jesus, who died for them, that they might receive his free Teach∣ing. After I had gathered up the Principles of the Scotch Priests, and the Sufferings of Friends, and had seen the Friends in that part of Scotland settled, by the Lord's Power, upon Christ their Foundation; I went up to Edenborough;Lithgow. and in the way came to Lithgow: Where lodging at an Inn, the Inkeeper's Wife, who was blind, received the Word of Life, and came under the Teaching of Christ Jesus, her Savi∣our. At Night there came in abundance of Souldiers, and some Offi∣cers, with whom we had much Discourse; and some were rude: One of the Officers said, He would obey the Turk's or Pilate's Command, if they should command him to guard Christ to crucify him. So far he was from all Tenderness, or Sense of the Spirit of Christ, that he would rather crucify the Just, than suffer for or with the Just; whereas many Officers and Magistrates have lost their Places, before they would turn against the Lord and his Just one. Edenburg Leith.When I was come to Edenborough, and had stayed there a while, I went from thence to Leith, where many Officers of the Army came in with their Wives; and many were convinced. Among those that came, Edward Billing's Wife was one: She brought a great Deal of Coral in her Hand, and threw it on the Table before me, to see, whether I would speak against it, or no? I took no notice of it, but declared the Truth to her; and she was reached. There came in many Baptists also, who were very rude; but the Lord's Power came over them, so that they went away confounded. Then there came in another sort; and one of them said, He would dispute with me: and for Argument's sake, would deny, There was a God. I told him, He was one of those fools, that said in his Heart, There is no God: but he should know him in the Day of his Judgment. So he went his way: and a fine precious time we had afterward with several People of Account; and the Lord's Power came over all. William Osburn was with me: And Colonel Lidcot's Wife and William Welch's Wife, and several of the Officers themselves also, that were there, were con∣vinced at that Time. Now Edward Billing and his Wife were at that time separated, and lived apart; and she being reached by Truth, and become loving to Friends, we sent for her Husband, and he came: and the Lord's Power reached unto them both, and they joined together in it, and agreed to live together in Love and Unity, as Man and Wife. After this we went back to Edenborough again, where many Thou∣sands of People were gathered together, with abundance of Priests among them, about burning of a Witch; and I was moved to declare
the Day of the Lord amongst them. Which when I had done, I went from thence to our Meeting, whither many rude People and Baptists came. The Baptists began to vaunt with their Logick and Syllogisms: but I was moved, in the Lord's Power, to thresh their chaffy,Eden∣borough. light minds; and shewed the People, That, after that fallacious way of discoursing, they might make White seem Black, and Black seem White: as, That because a Cock had two Legs; And each of them had two Legs; therefore they were all Cocks. Thus they might turn any thing into Lightness and Vanity: but it was not the Way of Christ, or his Apostles, to Teach, Speak or Reason after that manner. Here∣upon those Baptists went their way; and after they were gone, we had a blessed Meeting in the Lord's Power, which was over all. I mentioned before, that many of the Scotch Priests, being great∣ly disturbed at the Spreading of Truth, and Loss of their Hearers thereby; were gone up to Edenborough, to Petition the Council against me. Now, when I came back from the Meeting to the Inn, where I lodged, an Officer belonging to the Council, came to me, and brought me the following Order: Thursday, the 8th of October, 1657. at his Highness's Council in Scotland. Ordered, THat George Fox do appear before the Council on Tuesday, the 13th of October next, in the Fore-noon. E. Downing, Clerk of the Council. When he had delivered me the Order, he asked me, Whether I would Appear or no? I did not tell him, whether I would or no; but asked him, If he had not forged the Order? He said, No; it was a real Order from the Council, and he was sent as their Messenger with it. When the Time came, I Appeared, and was had up into a great Room; where many great Persons came, and looked at me. After a while the Door-keeper came, and had me into the Council-Chamber:Eden∣borough-Council. and as I was going in, he took off my Hat. I asked him, Why he did so? and who was there, that I might not go in with my Hat on? for I told him, I had been before the Protector with my Hat on: But he hung up my Hat, and had me in before them. When I was come in, and had stood a while, and they said nothing to me; I was moved of the Lord to say, Peace be amongst you, and Wait in the Fear of God, that ye may receive his Wisdom from above, by which all things were made and created; that by it ye may all be Ordered, and may Order all things under your Hands to God's Glory. After I had done speaking, they asked me; What was the Occasion of my coming into that Nation? I told them, I came to visit the Seed of God, which had long lain in Bondage under Corruption: and the Intent of my Coming was, that all in the Nation, that did pro∣fess the Scriptures, the Words of Christ, and of the Prophets and
Apostles,1657. Scotland. Eden∣borough-Council. might come to the Light, Spirit and Power, which they were in, who gave them forth; that so in and by the Spirit they might understand the Scriptures, and know Christ and God aright, and have fellowship with them, and one with another. They asked me, Whether I had any outward Business there? I said, Nay. Then they asked me, How long I intended to stay in the Country? I told them, I should say little to that: My Time was not to be long; yet in my freedom in the Lord I stood, in the Will of him, that sent me. Then they bid me withdraw; and the Door-keeper took me by the Hand, and led me forth. In a little time they sent for me in again, and told me; I must depart the Nation of Scotland by that day Seven-night. I asked them, Why? What had I done? What was my Transgression, that they passed such a Sentence upon me to depart out of the Nation? They told me, They would not dispute with me. Then I desired them to hear, what I had to say to them: but they said; They would not hear me. I told them, Pharaoh heard Moses and Aaron, and yet he was an Heathen, and no Christian; and Herod heard John Baptist: and they should not be worse, than these. But they cried, Withdraw, withdraw: Whereupon the Door-keeper took me again by the Hand, and led me out. Then I returned to my Inn, and continued still in Edenborough; visiting Friends there and there∣abouts, and strengthning them in the Lord. And after a little time I writ a Letter to the Council, to lay before them their Ʋnchristian Dealing, in banishing me, an innocent Man, that sought their Salva∣tion and Eternal Good; A Copy of which Letter here followeth, directed— To the Council of Edenborough. YE that sit in Council, and bring before your Judgment-seat the Innocent, the Just, without shewing the least Cause, what Evil I have done, or convicting me of any Breach of any Law; and afterward ye banish me out of your Nation and Country, without telling me, for what, or what Evil I had done: though I told you, when ye asked me, How long I would stay in the Nation? That my Time was not long (I spake it innocently;) and yet ye banish me. Will not all, think ye, that fear God, judge this to be wickedness? Consider, did not they sit in Council about Stephen, when they stoned him to Death? Did not they sit in Council about Peter and John, when they haled them out of the Temple, and put them out of their Council for a little Season, and took Counsel together; and then brought them in again, and threatned them, and charged them To speak no more in that Name? Was not this to stop the Truth from spreading in that Time? And had not the Priests an hand in these things, with the Magistrates? and in examining Stephen, when he was stoned to Death? Was not the Council gathered together against Jesus Christ, to put him to Death? and had not the Chief Priests an hand in it? When they go to persecute the Just, and crucify the Just, do they not then neglect Judgment, and Mercy, and Justice, and the weighty Matters of the Law, which is just? Was not the Apostle Paul tossed up and down by the Priests and the
Rulers, and Prisoned? And was not John Baptist cast into Prison?1657. Scotland. Eden∣borough. Are not ye doing the same Work, shewing, what Spirit ye are of? Now, do not ye shew the End of your Profession, the End of your Prayers, the End of your Religion, and the End of your Teaching, who are now come to banish the Truth, and him that is come to declare it unto you? Doth not this shew, that ye be but in the Words, out of the Life of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles? for they did not use such Practice, as to banish any. How do ye re∣ceive Strangers, which is a Command of God among the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles? some by that means have entertained An∣gels at unawares; but ye banish one, that comes to Visit the Seed of God, and is not chargeable to any of you. Will not all, that fear God, look upon this to be Spight, and Wickedness against the Truth? How are ye like to love Eemies, that banish your Friend? How are ye like to do Good to them that hate you, when ye do Evil to them that love you? How are ye like to heap Coals of Fire on their Heads that hate you, and to Overcome Evil with Good, when ye banish thus? Do ye not manifest to all, that are in the Truth, that ye have not the Christian Spirit? How did ye do Justice to me, when ye could not convict me of any Evil, yet banish me? This shews, that Truth is banished out of your Hearts, and ye have taken part against the Truth with Evil-doers, and the wicked, envi∣ous Priests, and Stoners, Strikers and Mockers in the Streets; with these, ye that banish, have taken part: whereas ye should have been a Terror to these, and a Praise to them that do well, and Suc∣courers of them that be in the Truth; then might ye have been a Blessing to the Nation, and not have banished him, that was moved of the Lord to visit the Seed of God, and thereby have brought your Names upon Record, and made them to stink in Ages to come, among them that fear God. Were not the Magistrates stirred up in former Ages to persecute or banish, by the corrupt Priests? and did not the corrupt Priests stir up the rude Multitude against the Just in other Ages? Therefore are your Streets like Sodom and Gomorrha. Did not the Jews and the Priests make the Gentiles Minds envious against the Apostles? And who were they, that would not have the Prophet Amos to prophesie at the King's Chappel; but bad him, fly his way? And when Jeremiah was put in the Prison, in the Dungeon, and in the Stocks, had not the Priests an Hand with the Princes in doing it? Now see all, that were in this Work of banishing, prisoning, persecuting, Whether they were not all out of the Life of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles? To the Witness of God in you all I speak: Consider, Whether or no they were not always the blind Magistrates, which turned their Sword always backward, that knew not their Friends from their Foes, and so hit their Friends? Such Magistrates were deceived by Flattery. G. F. When this was delivered, and read amongst them, some of them, as I heard, were troubled, at what they had done; being made sen∣sible, that they would not be so served themselves. But it was not
long,1657. Scotland. Eden∣borough-Council. before they that banished me, were banished themselves, or glad to get away; who would not do good in the Day when they had Pow∣er, nor suffer others, that would. After I had spent some time among Friends at Edenborough, and thereabouts,Heads. I passed from thence to Heads again, where Friends had been in great Sufferings: for the Presbyterian Priests had Excommuni∣cated them, and given Charge, That none should Buy or Sell with them, nor Eat nor Drink with them. So they could neither Sell their Com∣modities, nor Buy what they wanted; which made it go very hard with some of them: for if they had bought Bread or other Victuals of any of their Neighbours, the Priests threatned them so with Curses, that they would run, and fetch it from them again. But Colonel Ash∣field, being a Justice of Peace in that Country, put a stop to the Priests Proceedings. This Colonel Ashfield was afterwards convinced himself, and had a Meeting settled at his House; and declared the Truth, and lived and died in it. After I had visited Friends at Heads and there-aways, and had en∣couraged them in the Lord,Glascow. I went to Glascow, where a Meeting was appointed; but not One of the Town came to it. As I went into the City, the Guard at the Gates had me up before the Governour, who was a moderate Man; and a gread deal of Discourse I had with him: but he was too light to receive the Truth; yet he set me at Liberty, and so I passed to the Meeting. But seeing, none of the Town's People came to the Meeting, we declared Truth through the Town, and so passed away; and visited Friends in their Meetings there∣abouts:Badcow. and then returned towards Badcow. Several Friends went, and declared Truth in their Steeple-houses; and the Lod's Power was with them. And one time, as I was going with William Osburn to his House, there lay a Company of rude Fellows by the Way-side, who had hid themselves under the Hedges and in Bushes; and I spying them, asked him, What they were? Oh, said he, they are Thieves. Now Robert Widders being moved to go to speak to a Priest, was left be∣hind, intending to come after. So I said to William Osburn, I will stay here in this Valley; and do thou go look after Robert Widders: But he was unwilling to go, being afraid to leave me there alone, because of those Fellows; till I told him, 'I feared them not. Then I called to them, asking them, What they lay lurking there for? and I bid them, Come up to me: but they were loth to come up. I charged them to come up to me, or else it might be worse with them: Then they came trembling to me; for the Dread of the Lord had struck them. I admonished them to be honest; and directed them to the Light of Christ in their Hearts, that by it they might see, what an Evil it was to follow after Theft and Robbery: and the Power of the Lord came over them. So I stayed there, till William Osburn and Robert Widders came up; and then we passed on toge∣ther. But it is likely, that if we two had gone away before, they would have robbed Robert Widders, when he had come after alone; there being three or four of them. We went to William Osburn's House, where we had a good Op∣portunity to declare the Truth to several People, that came in there. And then we went among the Highlanders;Highlands who were so Devillish,
they had like to have spoiled us and our Horses: for they run at us with Pitch-forks; but through the Lord's Goodness we escaped them, being preserved by his Power. From thence we passed to Starling, where the Soldiers took us up,Starling and had us to the Main-guard; and after a few Words with their Officers, the Lord's Power coming over them, we were set at Liberty: But no Meeting could we get amongst them in the Town, they were so closed up in Darkness. Next Morning there came a Man with an Horse, that was to run a Race; and most of the Town's People, and the Officers went to see it. As they came back from the Race, I had a brave Opportunity, to declare the Day of the Lord, and his Word of Life amongst them: Some Confessed to it, and some Opposed: but the Lord's Truth and Power came over them all. Leaving Starling, we travelled through the Country, till we came to Burnt-Island,Burnt-Island. where I had two Meetings at one Captain Pool's House; one in the Morning, and the other in the Afternoon. Whilst they went to Dinner, I walked to the Sea-side, not having freedom to eat with them. Both he and his Wife were Convinced, and be∣came good Friends afterward; and several Officers of the Army came in, and received the Truth. We passed from thence through several other Places in the Country, till we came to Johnston's; where were several Baptists,Johnstons that were very bitter, and came in a Rage to dispute with us: Vain Janglers and Disputers indeed they were. And when they could not prevail by disputing, they went, and informed the Governour against us; and next Morning they raised a whole Company of foot, and banished me, and Alexander Parker, and James Lancaster and Robert Widders out of the Town. As they guarded us through the Town, James Lan∣caster was moved to Sing with a Melodious Sound in the Power of God; and I was moved to proclaim the Day of the Lord, and preach the Everlasting Gospel to the People. For the People generally came forth, so that the Streets were filled with them: and the Souldiers were so ashamed, that they said, They had rather have gone to Jamaica, than have guarded us so. But we were put into a Boat, with our Horses; and carried over the Water, and there left. And the Baptists, who were the Cause of our being thus put out of this Town, were them∣selves, not long after, turned out of the Army; and he that was then Governour, was turned out also, when the King came in. Being thus thrust out of Johnstons, we went to another Market-Town, where Edward Billing and many Souldiers quartered. We went to an Inn, and desired to have a Meeting in the Town, that we might preach the Everlasting Gospel amongst them. The Officers and Souldiers said, We should have it in the Town-hall; but the Scotch Magistrates in spight appointed a Meeting there that Day, for the Business of the Town. Which when the Officers of the Souldiery un∣derstood, and perceived, that it was done in Malice, they would have had us to have gone into the Town-hall nevertheless. But we told them, No, by no means; for then the Magistrates might inform the Governour against them, and say, They took the Town-hall from them by force, when they were to do their Town-business therein. But we told them, 'We would go to the Market-place: They said, It
was Market-day; We replied, 'It was so much the better: for we would have all People to hear the Truth, and know our Principles. So Alexander Parker went up, and stood upon the Market-cross, with a Bible in his Hand, and declared the Truth amongst the Souldiers and Market-people; but the Scots, being a dark, carnal People, gave little heed, nor hardly took notice, what was said. After a while I was moved of the Lord God to stand up at the Cross, and to declare with a loud Voice the Everlasting Truth, and the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon all Sin and Wickedness. Whereupon the People came running out of the Town-hall; and they gathered so together, that at last we had a large Meeting: for they sate in the Court but only for a Colour, to hinder us from having the Hall to Meet in. When the People were come away, the Magistrates followed them; and some walked by, but some staid and heard: and the Lord's Power came over all, and kept all quiet. And the People were Turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, who died for them, and had enlightned them; that with his Light they might all see their evil Deeds, and be saved from their Sins by him, and might come to know him to be their Teacher. But if they would not receive Christ, and own him, it was told them, that this Light, which came from him, would be their Condemnation. Several of them were made loving to us, especially of the English People, and some came afterwards to be Convinced. But there was a Souldier, that was very envious against us, and hated both us and the Truth, and spake Evil of the Truth, and very despitefully against the Light of Christ Jesus, which we bore Testimony to; and mighty Zealous he was for the Priests, and their Hearers. As this Man was hearing the Priest, holding his Hat before his Face, while the Priest prayed;☞ one of the Priest's Hearers stabbed him to Death: So he, who had rejected the Teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ, and cried down the Servants of the Lord, was murdered amongst them, whom he had so cried up, and by one of them. Leith.We travelled from this Town through the Country to Leith, warn∣ing and exhorting People, as we went, to turn to the Lord. At Leith the Inn-keeper told me, that the Council had granted forth War∣rants to apprehend me, because I was not gone out of the Nation, after the seven Days were expired, that they had ordered me to depart the Nation in; several friendly People also came, and told me the same. To whom I said: What do ye tell me of their Warrants against me? if there were a Cartload of them, I do not heed them; for the Lord's Power is over them all. Eden∣borough.So I went from Leith up to Edenborough again, where they said, the Warrants from the Council were out against me; and I went to the Inn, where I had lodged before: and no Man offered to meddle with me. After I had visited the Friends in the City, I desired those Friends, that travelled with me, to get ready their Horses in the Morning; and we rode out of Town together. There were with me at that time Thomas Rawlinson, Alexander Parker and Robert Wid∣ders. When we were come out of Town, they asked me, Whether I would go? I told them, It was upon me from the Lord, to go back again to Johnston (the Town,Johnstons out of which we had been lately
thrust) and to set the Power of God and his Truth over them also. Alexander Parker said, he would go along with me: and I wisht the other Two to stay at a Town, about three Miles from Edenborough, till we returned. Then Alexander Parker and I got over the Water,Johnstons. which was about three Miles over; and rid on through the Country: but in the Afternoon, his Horse being weak, and not able to hold up with mine, I put on, and got into Johnston's, just as they were draw∣ing up the Bridges; the Officers and Souldiers never questioning me. So I rid up the Street to Capt. Davenport's House, from which House we had been banished before. There were many Officers with him: and when I came amongst them, they lifted up their Hands, admiring, that I should come again; but I told them, The Lord God had sent me amongst them again. So they went their Way: And the Baptists sent me a Letter, by way of Challenge, That they would discourse with me the next day: I sent them Word, I would Meet them at such an House, about half a Mile out of the Town, at such an Hour. For I considered, if I should stay in Town to discourse with them they might, under pretence of discoursing with me, have raised Men, to put me out of the Town again, as they had done before. At the Time appointed I went to the Place appointed, Capt. Davenport and his Son accompanying me; and there I stay'd some Hours, but never a one of them came. But while I stay'd there waiting for them, I spied Alexander Parker coming; who not being able to reach the Town, had lain out the Night before: and when I saw him, I was ex∣ceeding glad, that we were met again. This Captain Davenport was then loving to Friends; but after∣wards coming more into the Obedience to Truth, he was turned out of his Place, for not putting off his Hat, and for saying Thou and Thee to them. Now when we had waited, beyond reasonable Ground to expect any of their Coming, we departed: And Alexander Parker being moved to go again to the Town, where we had the Meeting at the Market-Cross; I passed alone through the Country to Lieutenant Foster's Quarters, where there were several Officers, that were Con∣vinced. From thence I went up to the Town, where I had left the other two Friends; and they and I went back to Edenborough toge∣ther. When we were come to the City, I bid Robert Widders follow me; and in the Dread and Power of the Lord we came up to the two first Sentries: and the Lord's Power came so over them, that we passed by them without any Examination. Then we rode up the Street to the Market-place, and by the Main-guard out at the Gate by the third Sentry: and so clear out at the Suburbs, and there came to an Inn, and set up our Horses; it being the seventh Day of the Week. Now I saw and felt, that we had rid, as it were, against the Canon's Mouth, or the Sword's Point; but the Lord's Power and immediate Hand carried us over the Heads of them all. Next day I went up to the Meeting in the City, Friends having notice, that I would be at it: There came many Officers and Souldiers to it, and a glorious Meeting it was; and the Everlasting Power of God was set over the Nation, and his Son reigned in his glorious Power: and all was quiet, and no
Man offered to meddle with me.1657. Eden∣borough. When the Meeting was ended, and I had visited Friends, I came out of the City to my Inn again; and the next day, being the second day of the Week, we set forward, through the Country, towards the Borders of England. As we travelled along the Country, I spied a Steeple-house; and it struck at my Life. I asked, what Steeple-house it was? and was An∣swered,Dunbar. that it was Dunbar. When I came thither, and had set up at an Inn, I walked up to the Steeple-house, having a Friend or two with me. When we came into the Steeple-house-yard, one of the chief Men of the Town was walking there: So I spake to one of the Friends, that was with me, To go to him, and tell him, that about the Ninth Hour next Morning there would be a Meeting there of the People of God called Quakers; of which we desired, he would give notice to the People of the Town. He sent me Word, That they were to have a Lecture there by the Ninth Hour; but that we might have our Meeting there by the Eighth Hour, if we would. We con∣cluded so; and desired him to give Notice of it. Accordingly in the Morning both Poor and Rich came: And there being a Captain of Horse quartered in the Town, He and his Troopers came also; so that we had a large Meeting: And a glorious Meeting it was, the Lord's Power being set over all. After some time the Priest came, and went into the Steeple-house: but we being in the Steeple-house-yard, most of the People staid with us. And Friends were so full, and their Voices so high in the Power of God, that the Priest could do little in the Steeple-house; but came quickly out again, and stood a while, and then went his Way. For after I had opened to the People, Where they might find Christ Jesus, having turned them to the Light, which he had enlightned them withal, that in the Light they might see Christ, that died for them, and turn to him, and know him to be their Saviour and free Teacher; and had let them see, that all the Teachers they had hitherto followed, were Hirelings, who made the Gospel chargeable; and had shewed them the wrong Ways they had walked in, in the Night of Apostacy, and had directed them to Christ, the new and living Way to God; and had manifested unto them, how they had lost the Religion and Worship, which Christ set up in Spirit and Truth, and had hitherto been in the Religions and Worships of Mens making and setting up; and after I had turned the People to the Spirit of God, which led the holy Men of God to give forth the Scriptures; and shewed them, that they must also come to receive and be led by the same Spirit in themselves (a Measure of which was given unto every one of them) if ever they came to know God and Christ, and the Scriptures aright: perceiving, the other Friends, that were with me, to be full of the Power and Word of the Lord, I stepped down; giving way for them to declare, what they had from the Lord to say unto the People. Towards the latter End of the Meet∣ing some Professors began to jangle: Whereupon I stood up again, and answered their Questions, so that they seemed to be satisfied; and our Meeting ended in the Lord's Power, quiet and peaceable. This was the last Meeting I had in Scotland: And the Truth and the Power of God was set over that Nation; and many, by the Power and Spirit of God were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Saviour and Teacher,
whose Blood was shed for them: And since there is a great Increase;1657. Scotland. Dunbar. and great there will be in Scotland. For when first I set my Horses Feet upon the Scottish Ground, I felt the Seed of God to sparkle about me like in∣numerable Sparks of Fire. Not but that there is Abundance of thick, Cloddy Earth of Hypocrisy and Falseness, that is a top, and a briary, bram∣bly Nature, which is to be burnt up with God's Word, and plowed up with his Spiritual Plow, before God's Seed brings forth heavenly and spi∣ritual Fruit to his glory. But the Husbandman is to wait in Pati∣ence. From Dunbar we came to Berwick,Northum∣berland. Berwick. where we were questioned a little by the Officers; but the Governour was loving towards us: and in the Evening we had a little Meeting, in which the Power of the Lord was manifested over all. Leaving Berwick, we came to Morpeth; and so through the Country,Morpeth. Newcastle visiting Friends, to New-castle, where I had been once before: For the Newcastle-Priests had written many Books against us; and one Ledger, an Alderman of the Town, was very envious against Truth and Friends. He and the Priests had said; The Quakers would not come into any great Towns, but lived in the Fells, like Butterflies. So I took Anthony Pearson with me, and went to this Ledger, and several others of the Aldermen; de∣siring, to have a Meeting amongst them, seeing they had written so many Books against us: for we were now come, I told them, into their great Town. But they would not yield we should have a Meeting, nei∣ther would they be spoken withal, save only this Ledger, and one other. I told them; Had they not called Friends Butterflies, and said, We would not come into any great Towns? And now we were come into their Town, they would not come at us, though they had printed Books against us. Who are the Butterflies now, said I? Then Ledger began to plead for the Sabbath-day: but I told him They kept Markets and Fairs on that which was the Sabbath-day, for that was the seventh day of the Week; whereas that Day, which the professed Christians now Meet on, and call their Sabbath, is the First day of the Week. So when we could not have a publick Meeting among them, we got a little Meeting among Friends and friendly People, at the Gate-side; where a Meeting is continued to this day, in the Name of Jesus. As I was passing away by the Market-place, the Power of the Lord rose in me, To warn them of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon them. And not long after, all those Priests of Newcastle, and their Profession, were turned out, when the King came in. From New-Castle we travelled through the Countries,Northum∣berland. Bishoprick. having Meet∣ings, and visiting Friends as we went, in Northumberland and Bishoprick; and a very good Meeting we had at Lieutenant Dove's, where many were turned to the Lord and his Teaching. After the Meeting I went to visit a Justice of Peace, a very sober, loving Man; and he confessed to the Truth. From thence we came to Durham,Durham. where was a Man come down from London, to set up a Colledge there, to make Ministers of Christ, as they said: I went, with some others, to reason with the Man, and to let him see, That to teach Men Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and the Seven Arts, which was all but the Teachings of the Natural Man, was not the Way to make them Ministers of Christ. For the Languages began at
Babel:1657. Durham. and to the Greeks, that spake Greek, as their Mother-Tongue, the Preaching of the Cross of Christ was foolishness; and to the Jews, that spake Hebrew, as their Mother-Tongue, Christ was a Stumbling-block. And as for the Romans, who had the Latin and Italian, they persecuted the Christians; and Pilat, one of the Roman Governours, set Hebrew, Greek and Latin a top of Christ, when he Crucified him. So he might see, the many Languages began at Babel, and they set them a top of Christ, the Word, when they Crucified him. And John the Divine, who preached the Word, that was in the beginning, said, That the Beast, and the Whore have Power over Tongues and Languages, and they are as Waters. Thus, I told him, he might see, the Whore and Beast have Power over the Tongues and the many Languages, which are in Mystery Babylon: for they began at Babel; and the Persecutors of Christ Jesus set them over him, when he was Crucified by them: but he is Risen over them all, who was before them all. Now (said I to this Man) Dost thou think to make Ministers of Christ by these natural, confused Languages, which sprang from Babel, are admired in Babylon, and set a top of Christ, the Life, by a Persecutor? Oh no! So the Man confest to many of these things. Then we shewed him fur∣ther, That Christ made his Ministers himself, and gave Gifts unto them; and bid them Pray to the Lord of the Harvest, to send forth La∣bourers. And Peter and John, though unlearned and ignorant (as to School-learning) preached Christ Jesus the Word, which was in the be∣ginning, before Babel was. Paul also was made an Apostle not of Man, nor by Man, neither received he the Gospel from Man, but from Jesus Christ; who is the same now, and so is his Gospel, as it was at that Day. When we had thus Discoursed with the Man, he became very loving and tender: and after he had considered further of it, he never set up his Colledge. Cleveland Yorkshire. Holder∣ness. Hull. PomfretFrom Durham we went to Anthony Pearson's, and from thence into Cleaveland; and so passed through Yorkshire to the further End of Hol∣derness, and had mighty Meetings, the Lord's Power accompanying us. After we parted from Anthony Pearson's: we went by Hull and Pom∣fret through the Countries to George Watkinson's House, and visited most of the Meetings all up and down in these Parts,Scalehouse Swarth∣more. till we came to Scale-house, and so on to Swarthmore; the everlasting Power and Arm of God carrying us through, and preserving us. After I had visited Friends up and down there-aways,Yorkshire. Cheshire. Derbishire. Nottin∣ghamshire. Nottin∣gham. I passed through the Countries into York∣shire again, and into Cheshire; and so through other Counties into Der∣byshire and Nottinghamshire: and glorious Meetings we had, the Lord's Presence being with us. At Nottingham I sent to Rice Jones, desiring him To make his Peo∣ple acquainted, that I had something to say to them from the Lord. He came and told me, Many of them lived in the Country, and he could not tell, how to send to them. I told him, He might acquaint them about the Town of it, and send to as many in the Country, as he could. So the next Day we Met at the Castle, there being about fourscore Peo∣ple; to whom I declared the Truth for about the space of two Hours: And the Lord's Power was over them all, so that they had not Power to open their Mouths in Opposition. When I had done, one of them asked me a Question, which I was loth to have answered; for I saw, it might
lead into Jangling, and I was unwilling to go into Jangling,1657. Nottin∣gham. for some of the People were tender: yet I could not tell, how well to escape it. Wherefore I answered the Question: and was moved forthwith to speak to Rice Jones, and lay before him, How that he had been the Man, that had scattered such, as had been Tender, and some that had been Convinced, and had been led out of many Vanities of the World, which he had formerly judged; but now he judged the Power of God in them, and they, being simple, turned to him: and so he and they were turned to be vainer than the World: for many of his Followers were turned to be the greatest Foot-ball-players and Wrestlers in the Country. So I told him, it was the Serpent in him, that had scat∣tered, and done hurt to such as were Tender towards the Lord. Ne∣vertheless, if he did wait in the Fear of God, for the Seed of the Woman, Christ Jesus, to bruise the Serpent's Head in him, that had scattered, and done the hurt; by the Seed Christ Jesus, (he coming into him) he might come to gather them again by this heavenly Seed: though it would be an hard work for him, to gather them again out of those Vanities, he had led them into. At this Rice Jones said, Thou liest, it is not the Seed of the Woman, that bruises the Serpent's Head. No! said I, What is it then? I say, it is the Law, said he. But, said I, the Scripture speaking of the Seed of the VVoman, saith, It shall bruise thy Head, and thou shalt bruise his Heel: Now, hath the Law an Heel; said I, to be bruised? Then Rice Jones and all his Company were at a stand: and I was moved in the Power of the Lord to speak to him, and say; This Seed, Christ Jesus, the Seed of the VVoman, which should bruise the Serpent's Head, shall bruise thy Head, and break you all to pieces. Thus I did leave on the Heads of them the Seed, Christ: and not long after he and his Company scattered to pieces; and several of them came to be Friends, and stand to this Day. For many of them had been Convinced about eight Years before, but had been led aside by this Rice Jones: For they denied the Inward Cross, the Power of God, and so went into Vanity. And it was about eight Years, since I had been for∣merly amongst them; in which time I was to pass over them and by them, seeing they had slighted the Lord's Truth and Power, and the Visitation of his Love unto them. But now was the time, that I was moved to go to them again, and it was of great Service; for many of them were brought to the Lord Jesus Christ, and were settled upon him, sitting down under his Teaching and Feeding, where they were kept fresh and green: and the others, that would not be gathered to him, soon after withered. This was that Rice Jones, that some Years before had said; I was then at the highest, and should fall: But, poor Man! he little thought, how near his own Fall was. We left Nottingham, and went into Warwickshire:1658. Warwicksh. Northamp∣tonshire. Leicestersh. Bedfordsh. Yearly Meeting. and thence passing through some parts of Northamptonshire and Leicestershire, visiting Friends, and having Meetings with them, as we travelled, we came into Bedfordshire; where we had large Gatherings in the Name of Jesus. After some time we came to John Crook's House, where a General Yearly Meeting for the whole Nation was appointed to be held. This Meeting lasted Three Days, and many Friends from most Parts of the Nation came to it; so that the Inns and Towns round thereabouts were filled: for ma∣ny Thousands of People were at it. And although there were some Di∣sturbance
by some rude People,1658. Bedford∣shire. Yearly Meeting. that had run out from Truth; yet the Lord's Power came over all, and a glorious Meeting it was. And the Everlasting Gospel was preached, and many received it, (for there were many sorts of Professors came to the Meeting;) which Gospel brought Life and Immortality to Light in them, and shined over all. Then was I moved, by the Power and Spirit of the Lord, to open unto them the Promise of God, how that it was made to the Seed, not to Seeds, as many, but to One; which Seed was Christ: And that all People, both Males and Females, should feel this Seed in them, which was Heir of the Promise; that so they might all witness Christ in them, the Hope of Glory, the Mystery, which had been hid from Ages and Ge∣nerations, which was revealed to the Apostles, and is revealed again now, after this long Night of Apostacy. So that all might come up into this Seed, Christ Jesus, and walk in it, and sit down together in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus; who was the Foundation of the Pro∣phets and Apostles, and the Rock of Ages, and is our Foundation now. And all sitting down in him, sit down in the Substance, the First and the Last, that changes not, the Seed that bruises the Serpent's Head, and was, before he was; who ends all the Types, Figures and Shadows, and is the Substance of them all, in whom there is no Shadow. Now, these things were upon me to open unto all, that they might mind and see, what it is, they sit down in. For First, They that sit down in Adam in the Fall, sit down in Mi∣sery, in Death, in Darkness and Corruption. Secondly, They that sit down in the Types, Figures and Shadows, and under the first Priesthood, Law and Covenant, sit down in that which must have an End; and which made nothing perfect. Thirdly, They that sit down in the Apostacy, that hath gotten up since the Apostles Days, sit down in spiritual Sodom and Egypt; and are drinking of the Whore's Cup, under the Beast's and Dragon's Power. Fourthly, They that sit down in the State, in which Adam was be∣fore he fell, sit down in that which may be fallen from; for he fell from that State, though it was perfect. Fifthly, They that sit down in the Prophets, sit down in that which must be fulfilled: And they that sit down in the Fellowship of Water, Bread and Wine, these being temporal things, they sit down in that which is short of Christ, and of his Baptism. Sixthly, To sit down in a Profession of all the Scriptures from Genesis to the Revelations, and not be in the Power and Spirit, which they were in, that gave them forth; That was to be turned away from, by them that came into the Power and Spirit, which they were in, that gave forth the Scriptures. Seventhly, They that sit down in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, these sit down in him, that never fell, nor never changed. Here is the safe sitting for all his Elect, his Church, his Spiritual Members, of which he is the living Head, his living Stones, the Houshold of Faith; of which House he is the Corner-stone, that stands and abides all Wea∣thers. For, as the Apostle said, He hath quickned us, who were dead in Sins and Trespasses, &c. and made us to sit together in the heavenly pla∣ces in Christ Jesus; that in the Ages to come he might shew the exceeding
Riches of his Grace, in his Kindness towards us, through Jesus Christ. Now, the Ages are come, that his Kindness and exceeding Riches to∣wards us through Jesus Christ is truly manifested in us, as it was in the Apostles days; even in us, who have been dead in Sins and Tres∣passes, as they were: but now are quickned, and made alive, and made to sit together in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, the First and the Last, by whom all things were created; who is ascended above all, and is over all, and whose glorious presence is now known. And all that sit down here, in Christ Jesus, they see, where all other People sit, and in what. So the Promise of God being to the Seed, which is one, Christ Jesus, every Man and Woman must come to witness this Seed, Christ in them, that they may be Heirs of the Promise; and in∣heriting that, they will inherit Substance. These things were largely declared of, and the state of the Church, and the state of the false Church since the Apostles days, opened; and how the true Church fled into the Wilderness: and the state of the false Prophets, which Christ said should come, and John saw were come, and how all the World won∣dred after them; and how they had filled the World with false Doctrines, Ways, Worships and Religions: and how the Everlasting Gospel was now preached again to all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; for all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People had drunk the Whore's Cup, and she was over them, and sate upon them. And in this Night of Apostacy the pure Religion and Worship in Spirit, which was in the Apostles days, and the way of Life and living Faith, and the Power and Holy Ghost were lost: but now they came to be set up again by Christ Jesus, and his Messengers and Ministers of the Gospel, as in the Apostles days. For as Christ sent his Disciples to go and preach the Gospel, into all the World; and after that, the false Prophets and Antichrists went over the World, and preached their false Doctrines and Traditions, and Heathenish and Jewish Rudiments: So now again, the Everlasting Gos∣pel must be preached to all Nations, and to every Creature, that they may come into the pure Religion, to worship God in the Spirit and Truth, and may know Christ Jesus, their Way to God, and him to be the Author of their Faith, and may receive the Gospel from Heaven, and not from Men; in which Gospel, received from Heaven, is the Heavenly Fellowship, which is a Mystery to all the Fellowships in the World. Now after these things had been largely opened, with many other things concerning Christ Jesus, and his Kingdom, and the People were turned to the divine Light of Christ, and his Spirit, by which they might come both to know God and Christ, and the Scriptures, and to have Fellowship with them, and one with another in the same Spirit; I was moved to declare and open divers other things to those Friends, who had received a part of the Ministry, concerning the Exercise of their Spiritual Gifts in the Church: Which, being taken in writing, by one that was present, was after this manner; Friends, TAke heed of destroying that, which ye have begotten: for that which destroys, goes out, and is the Cast-away. And though that be true, yea, and may be the pure Truth, which such an one speaks; yet if he doth not remain in that, and live in that in his own particular,
but goes out, the same, which he is gone out from, cometh over him. So that, that calms the Spirits, and cools the Spirits, that goes over the World, and brings to the Father, to inherit the Life Eternal; and reaches to the Spirits in Prison in all. Therefore in the living, im∣moveable Word of the Lord God dwell, and in the Renown thereof; and remain on the Foundation, that is pure, and that is sure: for who∣soever goes out from the Pure, and Ministers not in and from that, he comes to an End, and doth not remain; though he may have had a Time, and may have been serviceable for a Time, while he lived in the Thing. And take heed of many Words, but what reacheth to the Life, that settles in the Life: That which cometh from the Life, and is received from God, that reacheth to the Life, and settles others in the Life: For the Work is not now, as it was at first; but the Work now is, to settle and stay in the Life. For as Friends have been led to minister in the Power, and the Power hath gone through, so that there hath grown an Ʋnderstanding among both People of the World, and Friends; so Friends must be kept in the Life, which is pure, that with that they may answer the pure Life of God in others. For if Friends do not live in the pure Life, which they speak of, to answer the Life in those, that they speak to, the other part steps in; and so there comes up an Out∣ward Acquaintance, and he lets that come over him. But as every one is kept living in the Life of God, over all that which is contrary, they are in their places; then they do not lay Hands on any suddenly, which is the Danger now: for if any one do, he may lose his Discern∣ing, and may lay Hands on the wrong Part, and so let the Deceit come too near him; and the Deceit will steal over, so that it will be an hard thing for him, to get it down. There is no one strikes his Fellow-ser∣vants, but first he is gone from the pure in his own particular: for when he goeth from the Light, he is enlightned withal, then he strikes; and then he hath his Reward: the Light, which he is gone from, Christ, he comes, and gives him his Reward. This is the state of the evil Ser∣vants: the boisterous, and the hasty and rash beget nothing to God; but the Life, which doth reach the Life, is that which begets to God. Now when all are settled in the Life, they are in that which remains for ever; and what is received there, is received from the Lord: and what one receiveth from the Lord, he keepeth, and so he sitteth still, and cool, and quiet in his own Spirit, and gives it forth, as he is moved; but to the Harlots, Judgment. So Friends, this is the Word of the Lord to you all, be Watchful and Careful in all Meetings ye come into; for where Friends are sitting together in silence, they are many times gathered into their own mea∣sures. Now, when a Man is come newly out of the World, from ministring to the World's People, he cometh out of the Dirt; and then he had need take heed, that he be not Rash. For now, when he comes into a Silent Meeting, that is another State; then he must come, and feel his own Spirit, how it is, when he comes to them, that sit silent: for if he be Rash, they will judge him; that having been in the World, and amongst the World, the Heat is not yet off him. For he may come in the Heat of his Spirit out of the World; whereas the others are still and cool: and his Condition in that, not being agreeable to
theirs, he may rather do them Hurt, by begetting them out of the Cool State into the Heating State; if he be not in that, which commands his own Spirit, and gives him to know it. There is a great Danger too in Travelling abroad in the World: The same Power, that moves any to go forth, is that which must keep them. For it is the greatest Danger to go abroad, except a Man be moved of the Lord, and go in the Power of the Lord: for then, he keeping in the Power, is kept by it in his Journey, and in his Work; and it will enable him to answer the Transgressed, and keep above the Transgressor. And every one feeling the Danger to his own particular in Travelling abroad, there the pure Fear of the Lord will be placed, and kept in. For now, though they that Travel, may have Openings, when thy are abroad, to Minister to others; yet as for their own particular Growth, they must dwell in the Life, which doth open: and that will keep down that, which would boast. For the Minister comes into the Death to that, which is in the Death and in Prison; and so returns up again into the Life, and into the Power, and into the Wisdom, to preserve him clean. So this is the Word of the Lord God to you all; Feel, that ye stand in the Presence of the Lord: for every Man's Word shall be his Burden; but the Word of the Lord is pure, and answers the pure in every one. The word of the Lord is that, which was in the Beginning, and brings to the Beginning: It is an Hammer, to beat down the Transgressor (not the Transgressed) and as a Fire to burn up that, which is contrary to it. So Friends, come into that, which is over all the Spirits of the world, and fathoms all the Spirits of the world, and stands in the Patience; with that ye may see, where others stand, and reach that which is of God in every one. So here is no Strife, no Contention, out of Transgression: for he that goeth into the Strife, and into the Contention, he is from the 'pure Spirit. For where any goeth into the Contention, if any thing hath been begotten by him before, then that contentious Nature doth get a top, and spoil that, which was begotten; and qencheth his own Prophesying. So if that be not subjected by the Power in the Particu∣lar, which would arise into the Strife, that is dangerous. Now, if any one have a Moving to any Place, and have spoken, what they were moved of the Lord; let them return to their Habitation again, and live in the pure Life of God, and in the Fear of the Lord: and so will ye in the Life, and in the solid and seasoned Spirit be kept, and preach as well in Life, as with Words (for none must be light, or wild.) For the Seed of God is weighty, and brings to be solid; and leads into the Wisdom of God, by which the Wisdom of the Creation is known. But if that Part be up, which runs into the Imaginations, and that Part be standing, in which the Imaginations come up, and the pure Spirit be not throughly come up to rule and reign, then that will run out, and that will glory, and will boast and vapor; and so will such an one spoil that, which opened to him: And this is for Condemnation. So every one mind that, which feels through and commands his Spirit, whereby every one may know, what Spirit he is of: for he should first Trie his own Spirit, and then he may Trie others; and he should first know his own Spirit, and then he may know others. Therefore that, which doth command all these Spirits, where the Heats and Burnings come in and get up, in that wait, which chains them down and cools: That is the
Elect, the Heir of the Promise of God. For no hasty, rash, brittle Spi∣rits (though they have Prophecies) have held our, and gone through, they not being subjected in the Prophecy. The Earthly will not abide, for it is brittle; and in that State the Ministry was another's, not the Son's: for the Son hath Life in himself, and the Son hath the Power; which Man being obedient to, he may be serviceable: but if he go from the pure Power, then he falls, and abuseth it. Therefore let your Faith stand in the pure Power of the Lord God, and do not abuse it; but let that search through, and work through: and let every one stand in the Power of the Lord God, which reacheth the Seed of God; which is the Heir of the Promise of Life without End. And let none be hasty to speak; for ye have Time enough, and with an Eye ye may reach the witness: Neither let any be backward, when ye are moved; for that brings Destruction. Now, Truth hath an Honour in the Hearts of Peo∣ple, which are not Friends; so that all Friends being kept in the Truth, they are kept in the Honour, they are honourable, and that will honour them: but if any lose the Power, they lose the Life, they lose their Crown, they lose their Honour, they lose the Cross, which should crucify them, and they crucify the Just; and by losing the Power, the Lamb comes to be slain. And as it is here, so will it be in other Nations: for all Friends, here and there, are as one Family; the Seed, the Plants, they are as a Family. Now all being kept in that which subjects all, and keeps all under, to wit, the Seed it self, the Life it self, that is the Heir of the Promise; and that is the Bond of Peace: for there is the Ʋnity in the Spirit with God, and with one another. For he that in the Life is kept, hears God, and sees Man's Condition; and with that he answers the Life in others, that hear God also: Thus one Friend, that is come into that, comprehends the world. But that which Friends do speak, they must live in; so may they look, that others may come into that, which they speak, to live in the same. For the Power of the Lord God hath been abused by some, and the worth of Truth hath not been minded: there hath been a Trampling on, and Marring with the Feet, and that abuseth the Power. But now every Friend is to keep in the Power, and to take heed to that: for that must be kept down, which would trample and marr with the Feet, and the pure Life and Power of God is to be lived in over that; that none with the Feet might foul or marr, but every one may be kept in the pure Power and Life of the Lord: Then the water of Life cometh in; then he that Ministreth, drinketh himself, and giveth others to drink. Now, when any shall be moved to go to speak in a Steeple-house or Market, turn in to that which moves, and be Obedient to it; that that which would not go, may be kept down: for that which would not go, will be apt to get up. And take heed on the other Hand, that the lavishing Part do not get up, for it is a bad Savour; therefore that must be kept down, and be kept subject. So wait in the Light of the Lord God, that ye may be all kept in the wisdom of God. For when the Seed is up in every particular, then there is no Danger: But when there is an Opening and Prophecy, and the Power stirs, before the Seed comes up, then there is something, that will be apt to run out rashly; there's the Danger, and there must be the Patience in the Fears. For it is a weighty Thing to be in the work of the Ministry of the Lord God,
and to go forth in that: It is not as a customary Preaching; but it is to bring People to the End of all outward Preaching. For when ye have declared the Truth to People, and they have received it, and are come into that, which ye spake of; the uttering of many Words, and long Declarations out of the Life, may beget them into a Form. And if any should run on rashly into Words again, without the savour of Life, then they, that are come into the Thing, that he spake of, will judge him; whereby he may hurt again that, which he had raised up before. So Friends, ye must all come into the Thing, that is spoken in the Openings of the heavenly Life among you; and walk in the Love of God, that ye may answer the Thing spoken to. And take heed all of running into Inordinate Affections: For when People come to own you, then there is Danger of the wrong Part to get up. There was a Strife among the Disciples of Christ, who should be the Greatest? Christ told them, The Heathen exercise Lordship, and have Dominion over one another; but it shall not be so among you: For Christ the Seed was to come up in every one of them; so then, where is the Greatest? For that part in the Disciples, which looked to be Greatest, was the same, that was in the Gentiles. But who comes here to liue in the Word, that sanctified him, having the Heart sanctified, the Tongue and Lips sanctified, living in the Word of Wisdom, that makes clean the Heart, and reconciles to God, all things being upheld by the Word and Power; as there is an abiing in the Word of God, that upholds Times and Seasons, and gives all things Increase, here dwel∣ling in the Word of Wisdom, if there be but Two or Three agreed in this on Earth, it shall be done for them in Heaven. So in this must all things be ordered by the Word of Wisdom and Power, that upholds all things, the Times and the Seasons, that are in the Father's Hand; to the glo∣ry of God, whereby his Blessing may be felt among you: and this brings to the Beginning. So this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, Keep down, Keep low, that nothing may rule nor reign in you, but Life it self. Now, the Power being lived in, the Cross is lived in: and where∣ever Friends come in this, they draw the Power and the Life over; and they leave a Witness behind them, answering the Witness of God in others. And where this is lived in, there is no want of Wisdom, no want of Power, no want of Knowledge: but he that Ministreth in this, seeth with the Eye, which the Lord openeth in him, what is for the Fire, and what is for the Sword; and what must be fed with Judg∣ment, and what must be nourished. This brings all down, and to be Low, every one keeping to the Power: for let a Man get up never so high, yet he must come down again to the Power, where he left; and what he went from, he must come down again to that. So new, before all these wicked Spirits be got down, which are rambling abroad, Friends must have patience, and must wait in the Patience, and in the cool Life: and who is in this, doing the work of the Lord, he hath the Tasting and the Feeling of the Lamb's Power and Authority. Therefore all Friends, keep cool and quiet in the power of the Lord God; and all that is contrary, will be subjected: the Lamb hath the victory, in the Seed, through the Patience. If any have been moved to speak, and have quenched that, which mo∣ved them; let none such go forth afterward into Words, until they feel the Power to arise and move them thereto again: for after the first Mo∣tion is quenched, the other part will be apt to get up; and if any go
forth in that, he goeth forth in his own, and the Betrayer will come into that.— And all Friends, be Careful not to meddle with the Powers of the Earth; but keep out of all such things: and as ye keep in the Lamb's Authority, ye will answer That of God in them, and bring them to do Justice, which is the End of the Law. And keep out of all Jangling: for all that be in the Transgression, they be out from the Law of Love; but all that be in the Law of Love, come to the Lamb's Power, in the Lamb's Authority, who is the End of the Law outward. For the Law being added because of Transgression, Christ, who was glorified with the Father, before the world began, is the End of the Law; bringing them that live in the Law of Life, to live over all Transgression: which every Particular must feel in himself. More was then spoken to many of these Particulars; which were not taken at large, as they were delivered. After this Meeting was over, and most of the Friends gone away, as I was walking in John Crook's Garden, there came a Party of Horse, with a Constable, to seize on me. I heard them ask, Who was in the House? And some-body made them Answer, I was there: They said, I was the Man, they looked for; and went forthwith into the House, where they had many Words with John Crook, and some few Friends, that were with him. But the Lord's Power so confounded them, that they never came into the Garden to look for me; but went their Way in a Rage. When I came in∣to the House, Friends were very glad to see them so confounded, and that I had escaped them. Next day I passed from thence: and after I had visited Friends in several places, as I went, I came to London; the Lord's Power accompanying me, and bearing me up in his Service. London.I had not been long come to London, before I heard, that a Jesuit, who came over with an Embassador from Spain, had challenged all the Qua∣kers, to dispute with them at the Earl of Newport's House: whereupon some Friends let him know, That we would meet him. Then he sent us word, He would meet with Twelve of the Wisest Learned-Men we had: A while after he sent us word, He would meet with but Six; and after that he sent us word again, He would have but Three to come. We hast'ned what we could, lest, for all his great Boast, he should put it quite off at last. When we were come to the House, I bid Nicholas Bond and Edward Burrough go up, and enter the Discourse with him; and I would walk a while in the Yard, and then come up after them. I advised them to state this Question to him, Whether or no the Church of Rome, as it now stood, was not degenerated from the true Church, which was in the Primitive Times, from the Life and Doctrine, and from the Power and Spirit, that they were in? They stated the Question accordingly; and the Jesuit affirmed, That the Church of Rome now was in the Virginity and Purity of the Primitive Church. By this time I was come to them. Then we asked him, Whether they had the Holy Ghost poured out upon them, as the Apostles had? and he said, No. Then said I, If ye have not the same Holy Ghost poured forth upon you, and the same Power and Spirit, that the Apostles had, then ye are degenerated from the Power and Spirit, which the Primitive Church was in. So there needed little more to be said to that. Then I asked him, What Scripture they had for setting up Cloisters for Nuns, Abbies and Monasteries for Men, and for all their several Orders; and for their Praying by Beads, and to Images, and for making Crosses, and for for∣bidding of Meats and Marriages, and for putting People to Death for Re∣ligion?
If (said I) ye are in the Practice of the Primitive Church,1658. London. in its Pu∣rity and Virginity, then let us see by Scriptures, where-ever they practised any such things? (For it was agreed on both hands, that both he and we should make good by Scriptures, what we said.) Then he told us of a written Word, and an unwritten Word. I asked him, What he cal∣led his unwritten Word? He said; The written Word is the Scriptures: and the unwritten Word is that, which the Apostles spake by Word of Mouth; which (said he) are all those Traditions, that we practise. Ibid him, Prove that by Scripture. Then he brought that Scripture, where the Apostle says (2 Thess. 2.5.) When I was with you, I told you these things. That is, said he, I told you of Nunneries and Monasteries, and of putting to death for Religion, and of Praying by Beads, and to Images, and all the rest of the Practices of the Church of Rome; which, he said, was the unwritten Word of the Apostles, which they told then, and have since been continued down by Tradition unto these Times. Then I desired him to read that Scri∣pture again, that he might see, how he had perverted the Apostle's Words; for that, which the Apostle there tells the Thessalonians, he had told them before, is not an unwritten Word, but is there written down; namely, That the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition shall be revealed, before that great and terrible Day of Christ, which he was writing of, should come: so this was not telling them any of those things, that the Church of Rome practises. In like manner, the Apostle in the third Chapter of that Epi∣stle, tells the Church of some disorderly Persons, he heard, were amongst them, busie-bodies, who did not work at all; concerning whom he had com∣manded them by his unwritten Word, when he was among them, that if any would not work, neither should he eat: which now he commands them again in his written Words in this Epistle, 2 Thess. 3. So this Scripture afforded no Proof for their invented Traditions; and he had no other Scripture-Proof to offer. Therefore I told him, This was another De∣generation of their Church into such Inventions and Traditions, as the Apostles and primitive Saints never practised. After this he came to his Sacrament of the Altar, beginning at the Pas∣chal Lamb, and the Shew-bread: and so came to the Words of Christ, This is my Body, and to what the Apostle writ of it to the Corinthians; Concluding, That after the Priest had Consecrated the Bread and Wine, it was Immortal and Divine, and he that received it, received the whole Christ. I followed him through the Scriptures he brought, till I came to Christ's Words and the Apostle's; and I shewed him, That the same Apostle told the Corinthians, after they had taken Bread and VVine in Remembrance of Christ's Death, that they were Reprobates, if Christ was not in them: But if the Bread they ate, was Christ, he must of necessity be in them, after they had eaten it. Besides, if this Bread and this VVine, which the Co∣rinthians ate and drank, was Christ's Body; then how hath Christ a Body in Heaven? I observed to him also, That both the Disciples at the Sup∣per, and the Corinthians afterwards were to eat the Bread, and drink the VVine in Remembrance of Christ, and to shew forth his Death, till he come; which plainly proves, the Bread and VVine, which they took, was not his Body. For if it had been his Real Body, that they ate, then he had been Come, and was then there present; and it had been impro∣per, to have done such a thing in Remembrance of him, if he had been then present with them: as he must have been, if that Bread and VVine, which they ate and drank, had been his Real Body. Then as to those
Words of Christ, This is my Body, I told him, Christ calls himself a Vine, and a Door, and is called in Scripture a Rock; Is Christ therefore an outward Rock, Door or Vine? O, said the Jesuit, Those words are to be interpreted; So, said I, are those words of Christ, This is my Body. Now having stopt his Mouth as to Argument, I made the Jesuit a Proposal thus: That seeing he said, The Bread and VVine was Immortal and Divine, and the very Christ; and that whosoever received it, received the whole Christ: Let a Meeting be Appointed between some of them (whom the Pope and his Cardinals should Appoint) and some of us; and let a Bottle of VVine and Loaf of Bread be brought, and divided each into two Parts, and let them Consecrate, which of those Parts they would. And then set the Consecrated and the Ʋnconsecrated Bread and VVine in a safe Place, with a sure VVatch upon it; and let Trial thus be made: VVhether the Consecrated Bread and VVine would not lose its Goodness, and the Bread grow dry and mouldy, and the VVine turn dead and sour, as well and as soon, as that which was Ʋnconsecrated? By this means, said I, the Truth of this matter may be made manifest. And if the Consecrated Bread and VVine change not, but retain their Savour and Goodness; this may be a Means to draw many to your Church: If they change, decay and lose their Goodness; then ought you to con∣fess, and forsake your Error, and shed no more Blood about it: for much Blood hath been shed about these things; as in Queen Mary's Days. To this the Jesuit made this Reply: Take (said he) a piece of New Cloth, and cut it into two pieces, and make two Garments of it; and put one of them upon King David's Back, and the other upon a Beggar's: and the one Garment shall wear away, as well as the other. Is this thy Answer, said I? Yes, said he. Then (said I) by this the Company may all be sa∣tisfied, that your Consecrated Bread and VVine is not Christ. Have ye told People so long, that the Consecrated Bread and VVine was Immortal and Divine, and that it was the very and real Body and Blood of Christ, and dost thou now say, it will wear away, or decay, as well as the other! I must tell thee, Christ remains the same to day, as yesterday, and never de∣cays; but is the Saints heavenly Food in all Generations, through which they have Life. He replied no more to this, being willing to let it fall: for the People, that were present, saw his Error, and that he could not defend it. Then I asked him, Why their Church did persecute, and put People to Death for Religion? He replied, It was not the Church did it, but the Magistrates. I asked him, Whether those Magistrates were not counted and called Believers and Christians? He said, Yes: Why then, said I, Are they not Members of your Church? Yes, said he. Then I left it to the People to judge from his own Concessions, Whether the Church of Rome doth not persecute, and put People to Death for Religion? Thus we parted; and his Subtilty was comprehended by Simplicity. Now, during the Time that I was at London, I had many Services lay upon me; for it was a Time of much Suffering. And I was moved to write to O. Cromwell, and lay before him the Sufferings of Friends both in this Nation, and in Ireland. There was also a Talk about this time of mak∣ing Cromwel King: Whereupon I was moved to go to him, and warned him against the same, and of divers Dangers; which if he did not avoid, I told him, He would bring a Shame and Ruin upon himself and his Po∣sterity. He seemed to take well, what I said to him, and thanked me: Yet afterwards I was moved to write unto him more fully concerning that matter.
About this time the Lady Claypool (so called) was sick, and much troubled in Mind, and could receive no Comfort from any that came to her; which, when I heard of, I was moved to write unto her this following Letter: Friend, BE Still and Cool in thy own Mind and Spirit from thy own Thoughts, and then thou wilt feel the Principle of God, to turn thy Mind to the Lord God, from whom Life comes; whereby thou mayest receive his Strength and Power to allay all Blustrings, Storms and Tempests. That is it, which works up into Patience, in∣to Innocency, into Soberness, into Stilness, into Stayedness, into Qui∣etness up to God, with his Power. Therefore mind, that is the Word of the Lord God unto thee, that the Authority of God thou mayst feel, and thy Faith in that, to work down that which troubles thee: For that is it, which keeps Peace, and brings up the Witness in thee, which hath been transgressed, to feel after God with his Power and Life, who is a God of Order and Peace. When thou art in the Transgression of the Life of God in thy own particular, the Mind flies up in the Air, and the Creature is led into the Night, and Nature goes out of its Course, and an old Garment goes on, and an uppermost Clothing; and thy Nature being led out of its Course, it comes to be all on a Fire, in the Transgression; and that defaceth the Glory of the First Body. Therefore be still a while from thy own Thoughts, searching, seeking, Desires and Imaginations, and be stayed in the Principle of God in thee, that it may raise thy Mind up to God, and stay it upon God, and thou wilt find Strength from him, and find him to be a God at hand, a present Help in the time of Trouble, and of Need. And thou being come to the Principle of God, which hath been transgressed, it will keep thee humble; and the humble God will teach his way, which is Peace, and such he doth Exalt. Now as the Principle of God in thee hath been transgressed, come to it, that it may keep thy Mind down low to the Lord God; and deny thy self, and from thy own Will, that is the Earthly, thou must be kept? Then thou wilt feel the Power of God, which will bring Nature into its Course, and give thee to see the Glory of the First Body. And there the Wisdom of God will be received (which is Christ, by which all things were made and Created) to be thereby preserved and ordered to God's Glory. There thou wilt come to receive and feel the Physician of Value, who cloaths People in their right Mind; whereby they may serve God, and do his Will. For all Distractions, Unruliness and Confusion is in the Transgression; which Transgression must be brought down, before the Principle of God, which hath been Transgressed against, be lifted up; whereby the Mind may be seasoned and stilled, and a right understanding of the Lord may be received; whereby his Blessings enter, and are felt, over all that is contrary, in the Power of the Lord God, which raises up the Principle of God within, and gives a feeling after God, and in time gives Dominion. Therefore keep in the Fear of the Lord God; that is the Word of the Lord God unto thee: for all these things happen to thee for thy Good, and for the Good of those concerned
for thee, to make you know your selves, and your own Weakness, and that ye may know the Lord's Strength and Power, and may trust in him. Therefore Let the time, that is past, be sufficient to every one, who in any thing hath been lifted up in Transgression, out of the Power of the Lord: For he can bring down and abase the Mighty, and lay them in the Dust of the Earth. Therefore all keep low in his Fear, that thereby ye may receive the Secrets of God and his Wisdom, and may know the Shadow of the Almighty, and sit un∣der it, in all Tempests, and Storms, and Heats. For God is a God at hand, and the Most-High rules in the Children of Men. So then, this is the Word of the Lord God unto you all, what the Light doth make manifest and discover, as Temptations, Distractions, Confusions, do not look at the Temptations, Confusions, Corruptions; but at the Light, which discovers them, and makes them manifest. And with the same Light you may feel over them, to receive Power to stand against them. The same Light, which lets you see Sin and Trans∣gression, will let you see the Covenant of God, which blots out your Sin and Transgression, which gives Victory and Dominion over it, and brings into Covenant with God. For looking down at Sin, and Corruption, and Distraction, ye are swallowed up in it: But look∣ing at the Light, which discovers them, ye will see over them. That will give Victory; and ye will find Grace and Strength: and there is the first Step to Peace. That will bring Salvation, and by it ye may see to the beginning, and the Glory that was with the Father be∣fore the World began; and so come to know the Seed of God, which is the Heir of the Promise of God, and of the World which hath no end; and which bruises the Head of the Serpent, who stops People from coming to God. That ye may feel the Power of an endless Life, the Power of God, which is Immortal; which brings the Im∣mortal Soul up to the Immortal God, in whom it doth rejoice. So in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, God Almighty strengthen thee. G. F. When the foregoing Paper was read to her, she said, It stay'd her Mind for the present. Afterwards many Friends got Copies of it, both in England and Ireland, and read it to People, that were Troubled in Mind; and it was made useful for the setling of the Minds of se∣veral. About this time came forth a Declaration from O. Cromwel, the Pro∣tector, for a Collection towards the Relief of divers Protestant Churches (so called) driven out of Poland; and of Twenty Protestant-Families driven out of the Confines of Bohemia. And there having been a like Declaration published some time before, to invite the Nation to a Day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, in Order to a Contribution to be made for the suffering Protestants of the Valleys of Lucern, Angrona, &c. who were persecuted by the Duke of Savoy: I was moved to write to the Protector and Chief Magistrates on this occasion, both to shew them the Nature of a true Fast (such as God requires and accepts;) and to make them sensible of their Injustice and Self-Condemnation, in blaming the Papists for persecuting the Protestants abroad, while they
themselves, calling themselves Protestants, were at the same time persecuting their Protestant Neighbours and Friends at home. That which I writ to them, was after this manner: To the Heads and Governours of this Nation, who have put forth a Declaration for the keeping of a Day of So∣lemn Fasting and Humiliation, for the Persecution (as you say) of divers People beyond the Seas, professing the Re∣formed Religion, which, ye say, hath been transmitted unto them from their Ancestors. A Profession of the Reformed Religion may be transmitted to Ge∣nerations, and so holden by Tradition; and in that, wherein the Profession and Tradition is holden, is the Day of Humiliation kept; which stands in the Will of Man, which is not the Fast, that the Lord requires, To bow down the Head like a Bulrush, for a Day, and the Day following be in the same Condition, as they were the Day before. To the Light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences do I speak, which testifieth for God every Day, and witnesseth against all Sin and Persecution; which Measure of God, if ye be guided by it, doth not limit God to a Day, but leads to the Fast, which the Lord requires, which is To loose the Bonds of Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, to break every Yoak, and to let the oppressed go free, Isa. 58.6, 7. This is the Fast the Lord requires; and this stands not in the Transmission of Times, nor in the Traditions of Men: But this stands in that which was before Times were, and which leads out of Time, and shall be, when Time shall be no more. And these that teach for Doctrine the Commandments of Men, are they that ever persecuted the Life and Power, when it came. And whereas ye mention a Decree or Edict, that was made against the said Persecuted Protestants; all such Decrees or Edicts proceed from the Ground of the Pope's Religion and Supremacy, and therein stands his Tyranny and Cruelty, acted in that Will, which is in that Nature, which exerciseth Lordship over one another, (as ye may read, Mark 10.42. Luke 22.25.) as all the Heathen do, and ever did; and in the Heathenish Nature is all the Tyranny and Persecution ex∣ercised, by them that are out of the Obedience to the Light of Christ Jesus in the Conscience, which is the Guider and Leader of all, who are tender of that of God in the Conscience. But who are not led by this, know not what it is to suffer for Conscience sake. Now, whereas ye take into your Consideration the sad Persecution, Ty∣ranny and Cruelty exercised upon them, whom ye call your Prote∣stant Brethren, and do Contribute and Administer to their Wants outwardly; this is good in its place, and we own it; and see it good to administer to the Necessities of others, and to do good to all: and we, who are Sufferers by a Law derived from the Pope, are willing to join, and to contribute with you to their outward Necessities. For the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fulness thereof; who is good to all, and gracious to all, and willing, that all should
be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth. But in the mean time, while ye are doing this, and taking notice of others Cruelty, Tyranny and Persecution, turn your Eye upon your selves, and see, what ye are doing at home? To the Light of Christ Jesus in all your Consciences I speak, which cannot Lie, nor cannot Err, nor cannot bear False Witness; but doth bear Witness for God, and cries for Equity, and Justice, and Righteousness to be executed. See what ye are doing, who profess the Scriptures, which were given forth by the Saints in Light, who dwelt in the Light and in the Life of them. For them, who do now witness the same Light, the same Life, and the same Power, which gave forth the Scriptures, which ye in Words profess, them ye persecute, them ye hale out of your Synagogues and Markets; them ye beat, stock, and Imprison. Now let that of God, in your Consciences, which is just, and righ∣teous, and equal, examin and try, whether ye have any Example, or Precedent to exercise this Persecution, which now many in this Nation suffer under, who are a People harmless and innocent, walk∣ing in Obedience towards God and Man? And though ye account the way of Truth, they walk in, Heresie; yet therein do they ex∣ercise themselves, to have always a Conscience void of Offence towards God and Man; as ye may read, the Saints of Old did; (Acts 24.14, 15, 16.) not wronging any Man, neither giving any just Cause of Offence; only being obedient to the Commands of the Lord, to declare as they are moved by the Holy Ghost; and standing for the Testimony of a Good Conscience, speaking the Truth in Christ, their Consciences bearing them witness, that they lie not: For this do they suffer under you, who in Words profess the same thing, for which they suffer. Now see, if any Age or Gene∣ration did ever persecute, as ye do? For ye profess Christ Je∣sus, who Reveals the Father; and persecute them, that witness the Revelation of the Father by Christ Jesus unto them. Ye profess Christ Jesus, who is the Light of the World, that enlightens every one, that cometh into the World; and yet persecute them, that bear Witness and give Testimony to this Light. Ye profess, that the Word is become Flesh; and yet persecute them that witness it so. Ye profess, that whosoever confesseth not, that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is an Antichrist; and yet persecute them, that do Con∣fess him come in the Flesh, and call them Antichrists and Deceivers. Ye profess, that the Kingdom of Christ is come; and yet persecute them, that witness it come. Ye profess Christ Jesus, the Resurrecti∣on and the Life; and yet persecute them, that witness him to be so. If ye say, How shall we know, that these People, who say, they witness these things, do so, or no? I answer: Turn your Minds to the Light, which Christ Jesus hath enlightned you withal, which is one in all; and if ye walk in the Light, ye shall have the Light of Life, and then ye will know and see, what ye have done, who have per∣secuted the Lord of Glory (in his People) in whom is Life, and the Life is the Light of Men. To no other Touchstone shall we turn you, but into your own Consciences, and there shall ye find the Truth, of what we have declared unto you, and of what we bear Testimony to, according to the Holy Scriptures. And when the
Books of Consciences are opened, and all judged out of them, then shall ye Witness us to be of God, and our Testimony to be true; though now ye may stop your Ears, and harden your Hearts, while it is called to day: But then ye shall know, what ye have done, and whom ye have transgressed against; and then ye will see, that no Persecutors, in any Age or Generation, that ever went before you, did ever Transgress against that Light, and Measure of God made manifest, in such manner as ye have done. For though Christ and the Apostles were persecuted in their times, the Jews (for the most part of them) did not know, that he was the Christ, when he came, notwithstanding that they had the Scriptures, which pro∣phesied of him; neither did they believe, that he was Risen again, when the Apostles preached his Resurrection. But ye say, Ye be∣lieve he is come; and ye say, Ye believe his Resurrection; and yet ye persecute those that witness him come in the Flesh, those that are bu∣ried with him in Baptism, those that are conformable to his Death, and know the Power of his Resurrection, those ye persecute, those ye hale before Magistrates, and suffer to be beaten in your Synagogues; those ye cause to be whipt, and stock't, and shamefully entreated, and into Prison cast, and kept; as many Goals in this Nation at this day testifie to your Faces. Therefore honestly consider, what ye are doing, while ye are taking notice of others Cruelties, lest ye over-look your own. There is some difference, in many things, between the Popish Religion, and that which ye call the Protestant; but in this Persecution of yours there is no difference: For ye will Confess, that the Foundation of your Religion is grounded upon the Scriptures; and yet now ye are persecuting them that be in the same Life, which they were in, who spake forth the Scriptures; your selves being the mean while under a Profession of the Words they spake: and this ye shall one day witness. So ye have a Profession and Form, and persecute them that are in the Possession, Life and Power. Therefore know assuredly, that ye must come to Judg∣ment; for he is made manifest, to whom all Judgment is commit∣ted. Therefore to the Light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences, which searcheth and trieth you, turn your Minds, and stand still, and wait there to receive the Righteous Law, which is according to that of God in the Conscience, which is now rising, and is bearing witness against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men; and they whom ye persecute, are manifest to God, and that of God in all Consciences shall bear witness for us, that we are of God: And this ye shall one day witness, whether ye will hear or forbear. Our Rejoycing is in the Testimony of our Consciences, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity (not with Fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God) we have had our Conversation in the World, not handling the Word of God deceitfully, but, in the Manifestation of the Truth; commending our selves to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God: and if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. And for the witnessing the holding the Mystery of Faith in a pure Con∣science, do we suffer, and are subject for Conscience sake. This is thank-worthy, if a Man, for Conscience sake, endure Griefs and Suf∣fering wrongfully. And in this is our Joy and Rejoicing, having
a good Conscience, that whereas we are evil spoken of, as Evil-Doers, they may be ashamed, that falsly accuse our good Conversa∣tion in Christ; which is not only the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good Conscience towards God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And this we Witness made ma∣nifest, (Eternal Praises to the Living God) and bear Testimony to that, which spake it in the Apostle in Life and Power: And there∣fore do we bear witness and testifie against those, who, being got in∣to a Form and Profession of it, do persecute the Life and Power. Therefore to the Eternal Light of Christ Jesus, the Searcher and Trier of all Hearts, turn your Minds, and see what ye are doing; lest ye overturn your Foundation, and Bottom, whereon ye pretend to stand, while ye are professing the Scriptures, and persecuting the Life, Light and Power, which they were in, who gave them forth. For the Stone, cut out of the Mountains without Hands, is now striking at the Feet of the Image, the Profession, which is set up, and stands in the Will of Man. Now is that made manifest, unto which all must answer, and appear before the Judgment-Seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad. Know∣ing therefore the Terror of the Lord, we perswade Men; but we are made manifest unto God, and shall be made manifest in all your Consciences, which ye shall witness. G. F. Divers times, both in the time of the Long Parliament, and of the Protector (so called) and of the Committee of Safety, when they pro∣claimed Fasts, I was moved to write to them, and tell them, their Fasts were like unto Jesabels: For commonly, when they proclaim∣ed Fasts, there was some Mischief contrived against us: And I knew, their Fasts were for Strife and Debate, to smite with the Fist of Wickedness; as the New-England-Professors soon after did; who, before they put our Friends to Death, proclaimed a Fast also. Now was it a time of great Suffering, and many Friends being in Prisons, many other Friends were moved to go to the Parliament, to offer up themselves to lie in the same Dungeons, where their Friends lay, that they, that were in Prison, might go forth, and not perish in the stinking Dungeons and Goals. And this we did in Love to God and our Brethren, that they might not die in Prison; and in love to them, that cast them in, that they might not bring Innocent Blood upon their own Heads; which we knew would cry to the Lord, and bring his Wrath, Vengeance and Plagues upon them. But little Favour could we find from those Professing Parliaments; but instead thereof they would be in a Rage, and sometimes threaten those Friends, that thus attended them, that they would whip them, and send them home. Then commonly soon after the Lord would turn them out, and send them home; who had not an Heart to do good in the Day of their Power. But they went not off without being forewarned: For I was moved to write to them, in their seve∣ral turns, as I did to the Long-Parliament, unto whom I declared,
before they were broken up, That thick Darkness was coming over them all, even a Day of Darkness that should be felt. And because the Parliament, that now sate, was made up mostly of high Professors, who pretending to be more Religious than others, were indeed greater Persecutors of them, that were truly Religious, I was moved to send them the following Lines, as a Reproof of their Hypocrisie: O Friends, do not cloak and Cover your selves: There is a God, that knoweth your Hearts, and that will Ʋncover you. He seeth your way: Wo be to him that Covereth, but not with my Spirit, saith the Lord. Do ye do contrary to the Law, and then put it from you! Mercy and true Judgment ye neglect. Look, what was spoken against such: My Saviour spake against such; I was sick, and ye visited me not; I was hungry, and ye fed me not; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in; I was in Prison, and ye visited me not. But they said, When saw we thee in Prison, and did not come to thee? In∣asmuch as ye did it not unto one of these Little Ones, ye did it not unto me. Friends, ye Prison them that be in the Life and Power of Truth, and yet profess to be the Ministers of Christ: But if Christ had sent you, ye would bring out of Prison, and out of Bondage, and receive Strangers. Ye have lived in Pleasure on the Earth, and been Wanton; ye have nourished your Hearts, as in a Day of Slaughter: Ye have condemned, and killed the Just, and he doth not Resist you. G. F. After this, as I was going out of Town, having two Friends with me, when we were gone little more than a Mile out of the City, there met us Two Troopers, belonging to Col. Hacker's Regiment; and they took me, and the Friends that were with me, and brought us back to the Mews, and there kept us Prisoners a little while: But the Lord's Power was so over them, that they did not have us be∣fore any Officer; but after a while set us at liberty again. The same Day, taking Boat, I went down to Kingston,Kingston. and from thence went afterward toward Hampton-Court,Hampton-Court. to speak with the Protector about the Sufferings of Friends. I met him Riding into Hampton-Court-Park; and before I came at him, as he rode in the Head of his Life-guard, I saw and felt a Waft (or Apparition) of Death go forth against him; and when I came to him, he look'd, like a dead Man. After I had laid the Sufferings of Friends before him, and had warned him, ac∣cording as I was moved to speak to him; he bid me, come to his House. So I went back to Kingston, and the next day went up to Hampton-Court again, to have spoken further with him. But when I came, he was sick, and — Harvey, who was one that wait∣ed on him, told me, The Doctors were not willing I should come in to speak with him. So I passed away, and never saw him any more.
1658. Bucks. London. Essex.From Kingston I went to Isaac Penington's, in Buckinghamshire, where I had appointed a Meeting; and the Lord's Truth and Power was preciously manifested amongst us. After I had Visited Friends in those parts, I returned to London: And soon after went into Essex; where I had not been long, before I heard, that the Protector was dead, and his Son Richard made Protector in his Room. Whereupon I came up to London again.London. And before this time the Church-Faith (so called) was given forth, which was said to be made at the Savoy in Eleven Days time. I got a Copy of it, before it was published, and writ an Answer to it: And when their Book of Church-Faith was sold up and down the Streets, my Answer to it was sold also. This angred some of the Parliament-Men; so that one of them told me, They must have me to Smithfield. I told him, I was over their Fires, and feared them not. And reasoning with him, I wish'd him to consider; Had all People been without a Faith these Sixteen hundred Years, that now the Priests must make them one? Did not the Apostle say, that Jesus was the Author and Finisher of their Faith? And since Christ Jesus was the Author of the Apostles Faith, and of the Churches Faith in the Primitive Times, and of the Martyrs Faith, should not all People look unto him to be the Author and Finisher of their Faith, and not unto the Priests? A great deal of work we had about the Priests made Faith: For they called us House-creepers, leading silly Women Captive, because We Met in Houses, and would not hold up their Priests and Temples, which they had made and set up. But I told them, that it was they, that Led silly Women Captive, and Crept into Houses, who kept People always Learning under them, who were Covetous, and had got a Form of Godliness, but denied the Power and Spirit, which the A∣postles were in. Such began to Creep in the Apostles Days; but now they had got the Magistrates on their side, who upheld those Houses for them, which they had Crept into, their Temples, with their Tithes: Whereas the Apostles brought People off from even that Temple, and those Tithes and Offerings, which God had for a time Commanded. And the Apostles Met in several private Houses, being to Preach the Gospel in all Nations; which they did freely, as Christ had commanded them. And so do we, who bring People off from these Priests, Temples and Tithes (which God never Com∣manded) to Meet in Houses, or on Mountains, as the Saints of old did, who were gathered in the Name of Jesus; and Christ was their Prophet, Priest and Shepherd. There was present, with the Parliament-Man, that I discoursed with, one Major Wiggan, a very envious Man; yet he bridled himself before the Parliament-Man, and some others that were there in Company. He took upon him to make a Speech, and said, Christ had taken away the Guilt of Sin, but had left the Power of Sin remain∣ing in us. I told him, that was strange Doctrine: For Christ came to destroy the Devil and his Works, and the Power of Sin, and so to cleanse Men from Sin. So Major Wiggan's Mouth was stopt at that time. But the next day desiring to speak with me again, I took a Friend or two with me, and went to him. Then he vented a great deal of Passion and
Rage, beyond the Bounds of a Christian, or Moral Man:1658. London. Whereupon I was made to reprove him: And having brought the Lord's Power over him, and let him see, what Condition he was in, I left him. After some time I passed out of London, and had a Meeting at Ser∣geant Birkheads at Twitnam; to which many People came,Twitnam. and some of considerable Quality in the World. A glorious Meeting it was, wherein the Scriptures were largely and clearly opened, and Christ exalted above all, to the great Satisfaction of the Hearers. But there was great Persecution in many places, both by Impri∣soning, and breaking up of Meetings, At a Meeting about Seven Miles from London, the Rude People usually came out of several Pa∣rishes round about, to abuse Friends, and did often beat and bruise them exceedingly. One day they beat and abused about Eighty Friends, that went to that Meeting out of London, tearing their Coats and Cloaks from off their Backs, and throwing them into Ditches and Ponds; and when they had besmeared them with Dirt, then they said, They look'd like Witches. The next First-day after this,A Meeting near Lon∣don. I was moved of the Lord to go to that Meeting, though at that time I was very weak. When I came there, I bid Friends bring a Table, and set it in the Close, where they used to Meet, to stand upon. Accor∣ding to their wonted course, the Rude People came, and I having a Bible in my hand, shewed them theirs and their Priests and Teachers Fruits; and the People came to be ashamed, and was quiet: And so I opened the Scriptures to them, and our Principles agreeing there∣with; and I turned the People from the Darkness, to the Light of Christ, and his Spirit, by which they might understand the Scrip∣tures, and see themselves and their Sins, and know Christ Jesus to be their Saviour. So the Meeting ended quietly, and the Lord's Power came over all, to his Glory. But it was a time of great Sufferings; for besides the Imprisonments, (through which many died in Prisons) our Meetings were greatly disturbed: For they have thrown Rotten Eggs and Wild-fire into our Meetings, and have brought in Drums beating, and Kettles, to make Noises with, that the Truth might not be heard; and among these, the Priests as Rude as any: as may be seen in the Book of the Fighting Priests, wherein a List is given of some of the Priests, that had actually beaten and abused Friends. Many also of our Friends were brought up to London, Prisoners, to be Tried before the Committee; where Henry Vane being Chair∣man, would not suffer Friends to come in, except they would put off their Hats: but at last the Lord's Power came over him, so that, through the Mediation of some others, that perswaded him, they were admitted. Now many of us having been Imprisoned upon Con∣tempts (as they called them) for not putting off our Hats, it was not a likely thing, that Friends, who had suffered so long for it from others, should put off their Hats to him. But the Lord's Power came over them all, and wrought so, that several Friends were set at Liberty by them. Now inasmuch as Sufferings grew very sharp, I was moved of the Lord to write a few Lines, and send abroad amongst Friends, to encourage them to go on faithfully and boldly through the Exercises of the day; of which a Copy here follows:
My Dear Friends, every where abroad, scattered in Prison, or out of Prison; Fear not, because of the Reports of Sufferings; let not the Evil Spies of the Good Land make you afraid, if they tell you, the Walls are high, and that there be Anakims in the Land: For at the blow∣ing of the Ram's-Horns did the Walls of Jericho fall down; and they that brought the Evil Report, perished in the Wilderness. But dwell ye in the Faith, Patience and Hope, having the Word of Life to keep you, which is beyond the Law; and having the Oath of God, his Covenant, Christ Jesus, which divides the Waters asunder, and makes them to Run all on Heaps; in that stand: and ye will see all things work together for good, to them that love God. And in that Triumph, when Sufferings come, what-ever they be: Your Faith, your Shield, your Helmet, your Armour you have on: ye are ready to skip over a Mountain, or a Wall, or an Hill, and to walk through the deep Waters, though they be Heaps upon Heaps. For the Evil Spies of the good Land may preach up hardness: but Caleb, which signifies an Heart, and Joshua, a Saviour, Triumph over all. G. F. Now after a while I passed into the Country, and went to Read∣ing,Reading. and was there under great Sufferings and Exercises, and in a great Travel in my Spirit for about Ten Weeks time: For I saw, there was great Confusion and Distraction amongst the People, and that the Powers were plucking each other to pieces. And I saw, how many Men were destroying the Simplicity, and betraying the Truth, and a great deal of Hypocrisie, and Deceit, and Strife was got upper∣most in the People, so that they were ready to sheath their Swords in one anothers Bowels. There had been a Tenderness in many of them formerly, when they were low; but when they were got up, and had killed, and taken Possession, they came to be as bad as others: So that we had much to do with them about our Hats, and saying Thou and Thee to them. For they turned their Profession of Patience and Moderation into Rage and Madness; and many of them would be like distracted Men for this Hat-Honour. For they had hardned themselves by persecuting the Innocent, and were at this time Crucifying the Seed, Christ, both in themselves and others; till at last they fell a biting and devouring one another, until they were Consumed one of another; who had turned against, and judged, that which God had wrought in them, and shewed unto them. So shortly after God overthrew them, and turned them upside down, and brought the King over them, who were often surmising, that the Quakers Met together to bring in King Charles, (when as Friends did not concern themselves with the outward Powers, or Government.) But at last the Lord brought him in, and many of them (when they saw, he would be brought in) Voted for the bringing him in So with Heart and Voice praise the Name of the Lord, to whom it
doth belong; who over all hath the Supremacy,1658. Reading. and who will Rock the Nations, for he is over them. Now I had a Sight and Sense of the King's Return a good while before, and so had some others. I writ to Oliver several times, and let him know, that while he was persecuting God's People, they whom he accounted his Enemies, were preparing to come upon him. And when some forward Spirits, that came amongst us, would have bought Somerset-House, that we might have Meetings in it; I forbad them to do so: For I did then foresee the King's Coming in again. Besides, there came a Woman to me in the Strand, who had a Prophecy concerning King Charles's coming in, three Years before he came; and she told me, she must go to him to declare it. I advised her to wait upon the Lord, and keep it to her self: For if it should be known, that she went on such a Message, they would look upon it to be Treason: But she said, She must go, and tell him, that he should be brought into England again. I saw, her Prophecy was true, and that a great Stroke must come upon them in Power: For they that had then gotten Possession, were so exceeding high, and such great Persecution was acted by them, who called them∣selves Saints, that they would take from Friends their Copyhold-Lands, because they could not Swear in their Courts. And some∣times, when we laid these Sufferings before Oliver Cromwel, he would not believe it. Wherefore Thomas Aldam and Anthony Pearson were moved to go through all the Goals in England, and to get Copies of Friends Commitments under the Goalers Hands, that they might lay the Weight of Friends Sufferings upon Oliver Cromwel. And when he would not give Order for the Releasing of them, Thomas Aldam was moved to take his Cap from off his Head, and to Rend it in pieces before him, and to say unto him, So shall thy Government be Rent from Thee and thy House. Another Friend also, a Woman, was mo∣ved to go to the Parliament (that was envious against Friends) with a Pitcher in her hand, which she brake into pieces before them, and told them, So should they be broken to pieces: Which came to pass shortly after. And in my great Suffering, and Travel of Spirit for the Nation, being grievously burdened, and almost choked with their Hypocrisie, Treachery and Falsness, I saw, God would bring that a top of them, which they had been a top of; and that all must be brought down to that, which did Convince them, before they could get over that bad Spirit within and without: For it is the pure, Invi∣sible Spirit, that doth, and only can work down all Deceit in People. Now while I was under that sore Travel at Reading, by reason of Grief and Sorrow of Mind, and the great Exercise that was upon my Spirit, my Countenance was alter'd, and I looked poor and thin; and there came a Company of Ʋnclean Spirits to me, and told me; The Plagues of God were upon me: But I told them, It was the same Spirit spake that in them, that said so of Christ, when he was stricken and smitten; they hid their Face from him. But when I had travelled with the Witness of God, which they had quenched, and had gotten through with it, and over all that Hypocrisie, which the Outside-Pro∣fessors were run into, and saw, how that would be brought down, and turned under, and that Life would rise over it, I came to have
Ease; and the Light, Power and Spirit shined over all. And then, having Recovered, and got through my Travels and Sufferings, my Body and Face swelled, when I came abroad into the Air; and then the bad Spirits said, I was grown fat; and they Envied at that also: So I saw, that no Condition nor State would please that Spirit of theirs. But the Lord preserved me by his Power and Spirit, through and over all;London. and in the Lord's Power I came to London again. Now was there a great Pudder made about the Image or Effigies of Oliver Cromwel lying in State, Men standing and sounding with Trumpets over his Image, after he was dead. At this my Spirit was greatly grieved, and the Lord, I found, was highly offended. Then did I write the following Lines unto them, and sent among them, to Reprove their Wickedness, and warn them to Repent. Oh Friends, what are ye doing! and what mean ye to sound be∣fore a Image! Will not all sober People think, ye are like mad Peo∣ple? Oh, how am I grieved with your Abominations! Oh, how am I wearied! My Soul is wearied with ou, saith the Lord, Will I not be avenged of you, think ye, for yur Abominations? Oh, how have ye plucked down and set up! On how are your Hearts made whole, and not Rent! And how are ye turned to Fooleries! Which things in times past, ye stood over: Therefore, how have e left my Dread, saith the Lord! O! Therefore Fear, and Repent, lest the Snare and the Pit take you all. The great Day of the Lord is come upon all your Abominations, and the swift Hand of the Lord is turned against them all. The sober People in the Nations, stand amazed at your Doings, and are ashamed, as if ye would bring in Popery. G. F. About this time great Stirs were in the Nation, the Minds of People being unsetled, and much Plotting and Contriving there was by the several Factions, to carry on their several Interests. And a great Care being upon me, lest any Young or Raw People, that might sometimes come amongst us, should be drawn into that Snare, I was moved to give forth the following Epistle, as a Warning unto all such. All Friends every where, keep out of Plots, and Busling, and the Arm of Flesh; for all that is amongst Adam's Sons in the Fall, where they are destroying Mens Lives like Dogs, and Beasts, and Swine, goaring, renting, and biting one another, and destroying one another, and wrestling with Flesh and Blood. From whence arise Wars and Killing, but from the Lusts? Now all this is in Adam in the Fall, out of Adam, that never fell, in whom there is Peace and Life. Ye are called to Peace, therefore follow it; and that Peace is in Christ, not in Adam in the Fall. All that pre∣tend to fight for Christ, they are deceived; for his Kingdom is not of this World, therefore his Servants do not fight. Therefore Fighters are not of Christ's Kingdom, but are without Christ's Kingdom: For his Kingdom stands in Peace and Righteousness; but Fighters are in
the Lust: And all that would destroy Men's Lives,1659. London. are not of Christ's Mind, who came to save Men's lives. Christ's Kingdom is not of this World; it is peaceable: and all that be in Strife, are not of his Kingdom. And all that pretend to fight for the Gospel, are decei∣ved: For the Gospel is the Power of God, which was before the De∣vil, or Fall of Man was; and the Gospel of Peace was, before Fighting was. Therefore they, that pretend Fighting, and talk of Fighting so, are Ignorant of the Gospel. And all that talk of Fight∣ing for Sion, are in Darkness: For Sion needs no such Helpers. And all such as profess themselves to be Ministers of Christ, or Christi∣ans, and go about to beat down the Whore with outward, carnal Weapons, the Flesh and the Whore are got up in themselves, and they are in a blind Zeal: For the Whore got up by the Inward Ra∣vening from the Spirit of God; and the beating down of the Whore must be by the inward Stroke of the Sword of the Spirit within. All such as pretend Christ Jesus, and confess him, and yet run into the use of Carnal Weapons, wrestling with Flesh and Blood, throw away the Spiritual Weapons. They that would be Wrestlers with Flesh and Blood, throw away Christ's Doctrine, and Flesh is got up∣on them, and they are weary of their Sufferings. And such as would Revenge themselves, be out of Christ's Doctrine. And such as being stricken on the one Cheek, would not turn the other, be out of Christ's Doctrine. And such as do not love one another, and love Enemies, be out of Christ's Doctrine. Therefore ye, that be Heirs of the Blessings of God, which were before the Curse and the Fall was, come to Inherit your Portions: And ye that be Heirs of the Gospel of Peace, which was before the Devil was, live in the Gospel of Peace, seeking the Peace of all Men, and the Good of all Men: and live in Christ, who came to save men's lives, out of Adam in the Fall, where they destroy men's lives, and live not in him. For the Jews Sword outwardly, by which they cut down the Hea∣then, was a Type of the Spirit of God within, which cuts down the Heathenish Nature within. So live in the peaceable Kingdom of Christ Jesus, and live in the Peace of God, and not in the Lusts, from whence Wars arise, and live in Christ, the Prince of Peace, the Way of God, who is the Second Adam, that never fell; but live not in Adam in the Fall, in the Destruction, where they destroy one another. Therefore come out of Adam in the Fall, into the Adam that never fell; and so live in Love and Peace with all Men: and keep out of all the Buslings in the World, and meddle not with the Powers of the Earth; but mind the Kingdom, the Way of Peace. Ye that be Heirs of Grace, and Heirs of the Kingdom, and Heirs of the Gospel, and Heirs of Salvation, and Saints of the most-High, and Children of God, whose Conversations are in Hea∣ven, that is above the Combustions of the Earth, let your Con∣versation Preach to all Men, and your Innocent Lives, that they which speak Evil of you, beholding your Godly Conversation, may glorifie your Father, which is in Heaven. And all Friends every where, this I charge you, which is the Word of the Lord God unto you all, Live in Peace, in Christ the way of Peace; and therein seek the Peace of all Men, and no Man's Hurt. As I said before, in Adam in the
Fall is no Peace; but in Adam out of the Fall, in him is the Peace: So ye being in Adam, which never fell, it is Love that overcomes, and not Hatred with Hatred, nor Strife with Strife. Therefore live all in the peaceable Life, doing good to all Men, and seeking the Good and Welfare of all Men. G. F. It was not long after this, before George Booth rose in Arms in Cheshire, and Lambert went down against him. At which time some foolish rash Spirits, that came sometimes amongst us, were rea∣dy to have taken up Arms: But I was moved of the Lord to warn them, and forbid them, and they were quiet. In the time of the Committee of Safety, (so called) we were Invited by them to have taken up Arms, and great Places and Commands were offered some of us; but we denied them all, and declared agst it both by Word and Writing; testifying, that our Weapons and Ar were not Car∣nal, but Spiritual. And lest any, that came among s, should be drawn into that Snare, it came upon me from the Lord, to write a few Lines on that occasion, and send them forth, as a Caution to all amongst us. Of which this is a Copy: All Friends every where, Take heed to keep out of the Powers of the Earth, that Run into the Wars and Fightings, which make not for Peace, but go from that; such will not have the King∣dom. And Friends, take heed of Joining with this or the other, or medling with any, or being busie with other Mens matters; but mind the Lord, and his Power, and his Service. And so let Friends keep out of other Mens matters, and keep in that which answers the Witness in them all, out of the Mans-matters-part, where they must expect Wars, and the Dishonour. And all Friends every where, dwell in your own, in the Power of the Lord God, to keep your Minds up to the Lord God, from falling down to the Strength of Egypt, or going thither for Strength, after ye are come out of it, like the Children of Israel, after they were come out of outward E∣gypt. But dwell in the Power of the Lord God that ye may keep over all the Powers of the Earth, amongst whom the just Hand of God is come: For they have turned against the Just, and disobey∣ed the Just in their own particulars, and so gone on in one against the Just; therefore the Just sets them one against another. Now he that goes to help among them, is from the Just in himself, in the mad and unstay'd state, and doth not know by the All-seeing Eye, (that beholdeth) him that recompenseth and rewardeth, and lives not in the Hand, in the Power, that mangles and overturns, which vex∣eth the Transgressors, that come to be blind, and zealous for they do not know what. Therefore keep in Peace, and in the Love and Power of God, and in Unity and Love one to another, lest any go out, and fall with the Ʋncircumcised: That is, they that are from the Spirit in themselves, and they that go from it, go into the Pit to∣gether. Therefore stand in that (it is the Word of the Lord God to you all) in the Fear and Dread of the Lord God, his Power, Life,
Light, Seed and Wisdom, by which ye may take away the occasion of Wars, and so know a Kingdom which hath no end, and fight for that with Spiritual Weapons, which takes away the occasion of the Carnal: and there gather Men to War, as many as ye can, and set up as many as ye can with these Weapons. G. F. Now after I had staid some time in London, and had visited Friends Meetings there and there-abouts, and the Lord's Power was set over all, I travelled into the Countries again,Essex. Suffolk. Norfolk. Norwich. passing through Essex and Suffolk into Norfolk, visiting Friends; till I came to Norwich, where we had a Meeting about the time called Christmas. The Mayor of Norwich, having got notice before-hand of the Meeting I intended to have there, granted out a Warrant to apprehend me. Wherefore when I was come thither, and heard of the Warrant, I sent some Friends to the Mayor to Reason with him about it. His Answer was, The Souldiers should not Meet; and did We think to Meet? He would have had us gone out and Met without the City: For he said, the Towns-People were so rude, that he could hardly order them, and he feared, that our Meeting would make Tumults in the Town. But our Friends told him, we were a peaceable People, and that he ought to keep the Peace; for we could not but Meet to Worship God, as our manner was. So he became pretty moderate, and did not send his Officers to the Meeting. A large Meeting it was, and abun∣dance of rude People came, with an intent to have done Mischief: But the Lord's Power came over them, so that they were Chained by it, though several Priests were there, and Professors, and Ranters. Among the Priests, one, whose Name was Townsend, stood up and Cryed; Error, Blasphemy and an Ʋngodly Meeting? I bad him not burden himself with that, which he could not make good; and I ask∣ed him, what was our Error and Blasphemy: For I told him, he should make good his Words, before I had done with him, or be shamed. As for an Ʋngodly Meeting, I said, I did believe there were many People there, that feared God, and therefore it was both Unchristian and Uncivil in him, to charge Civil, Godly People with an Ʋngodly Meeting. He said, My Error and Blasphemy was, in that I said, that People must wait upon God by his Power and Spirit, and feel his Pre∣sence, when they did not speak Words: I asked him then, Whether the Apostles, and Holy Men of God, did not hear God speak to them in their Silence, before they spake forth the Scripture, and before it was written? He replied, Yes: David and the Prophets did hear God, before they did Pen the Scriptures, and felt his Presence in Silence, before they spake them forth. Then said I, All People take notice, he said, this was Error and Blasphemy in me to say these Words; and now he hath confessed, it is no more, than the Holy Men of God in former times witnessed. So I shewed the People, that as the Holy Men of God, who gave forth the Scriptures, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, did hear and learn of God, before they spake them forth: So must They all hearken, and hear what the Spirit saith, which will lead them into all Truth, that they may know God,
and Christ,1659. Norwich. and may understand the Scriptures. O said the Priest, this is not that George Fox I would speak withal; this is a subtile Man, said he. So the Lord's Power came over all, and the rude People were made moderate, and were reached by it; and some Pro∣fessors, that were there, called to the Priests, saying, Prove the Blasphemy and Errors, which ye have charged them with: Ye have spoken much against them behind their Backs, but nothing ye can prove now (said they) to their Faces. But the Priest began to get away: Whereupon I told him, we had many things to charge him withal, therefore let him set a time and place to answer them; which he did, and went his ways. A glorious Day this was: For Truth came o∣ver all, and People were turned to God by his Power and Spirit, and to the Lord Jesus Christ, their free Teacher, who was Exalted over all. And as we passed away, generally Peoples Hearts were filled with Love towards us; yea, the Ruder sort of them desired another Meeting: For the evil Intentions that they had against us, were thrown out of their Hearts. At Night I passed out of Town to a Friend's House,Col. Den∣nis. and from thence to Col. Dennis's, where we had a great Meeting: And afterwards travelled on through the Countries, visiting Friends up and down in Norfolk,Norfollk. Hunts. Cambridge∣shire. Huntingtonshire and Cam∣bridgeshire, But George Whitehead and Richard Huberthorn staid about Norwich, to meet the Priest, who was soon Confounded and down, the Lord's Power came so over him. After I had travelled through many Countries in the Lord's Ser∣vice, and many were Convinced, notwithstanding that in some places the People were very Rude; I returned to London again, when Ge∣neral Monk was come up thither,London. and the Gates and Posts of the City were pulling down. Long before this I had a Vision, wherein I saw the City lie in heaps, and the Gates down; and it was then repre∣presented to me, just as I saw it, several Years after lying in heaps, when it was burned. Divers times had I, both by Word and Writing, forewarned the several Powers, both in Oliver's time and after, of the Day of Recom∣pence, that was coming upon them: But they rejecting Counsel, and slighting those Visitations of Love to them, I was moved now, be∣fore they were quite overturned, to lay their Back-sliding, Hypocrisie and Treacherous Dealing before them, thus: Friends, Now are the Prophecies fulfilled and fulfilling upon you, which have been spoken to you by the People of God in your Courts, in your Steeple-houses, in your Towns, Cities, Markets, Highways, and at your Feasts, when ye were in your Pleasures, and puffed up, that ye would neither hear God nor Man; when ye were in your Highness and Height of Authority, though raised up from a mean State, none might come nigh you without bowing, or the Respect of Persons, for ye were in the World's Way, Complements and Fashions, which, for Conscience sake towards God, they could not go into, being redeemed there from: Therefore they were by you hated for that Cause. But how are ye to be brought Low, who Exalted your selves above your Brethren, and threw the Just and Harmless
less from among you, until at last God hath thrown you out:1658. London. And when ye cast the Innocent from among you, then ye fell a biting one another, until ye were Consumed one of another. And so the Day is come upon you, which before to you was told, though before ye would not believe it. And are not yet your Hearts so hardned, that ye will hardly yet believe, though ready to go into Captivity? Was it not told you, when ye spilt the Blood of the Innocent in your Steeple houses, in your Markets, in your Highways and Cities, yea, and even in your Courts also, because they said the Word Thou to you, and could not put off their Hats to you, That if something did not arise up amongst your selves, to avenge the Blood of the Innocent. there would come something from beyond the Seas, which lay reserved there; which, being brought by the Arm of God, the Arm of Flesh, and strongest Mountain cannot withstand? Yet ye would not consider, nor regard, nor hear; but cried, Peace, Peace, and feasted your selves, and sate down in the Spoil of your Enemies, being Treache∣rous both to God and Man; And who will trust you now? Have ye not taken Covenants and Oaths? And broken Covenants and Oaths betwixt God and Man, and made the Nations Breakers both of Covenants and Oaths; so that nothing but Hypocrisie, and Rotten∣ness, and Falshood under fair Pretence, was amongst you? When ye pretended to set up the Old Cause, it was but your selves; for which ye long stunk to sober People, who saw, that no good ye would do. But it was a Joy for any of you to get up into Autho∣rity, that ye might have Praise, and Honour, and Respect; and they that were in the Self-denial, were a Derision to you; from amongst whom that was banished. Thus ye became the Nations Masters, and not Servants; whereas the Greatest of all, should be the Servants of all. But there ye lost your Authority, not considering your Estates, from whence ye were, and to what end God had raised you up; but forgot the Lord, and quenched that which was Good in your selves, and per∣secuted them, that lived in it: And so are grown so gross and per∣verse, that at last ye are fit for neither God nor Man. Have not ye used to call the Quakers the Fanatick People, and the Giddy Heads? But whither now are ye Giddying? Into Cain's City Nod, which sig∣nifies Fugitive, or Wandring? Have not ye Persecuted, and Impri∣soned to Death, such as God had Respect to, and is now Reproving you for their sakes, by them whom ye have hated? Were not ma∣ny amongst you cut off for your Persecution, and yet the rest of you would not take Warning? Was there not a Book of Examples set out unto you, of what sudden and strange Deaths happened upon the Persecutors of the Innocent? And yet ye would not take Warn∣ing, until the Overflowing Scourge is now coming upon you. Are not ye They, that have killed like Cain, who have killed about your Sa∣crifice, and mingled the Blood of the Innocent with it? Hath not God now Vagabonded you, that ye should become a Curse upon the Earth, who have persecuted Friends to Death? Did not the Blood of the Righteous cry out of the Ground for Vengeance? And will not the Blood of the Righteous be required? Could ye think, that the Lord would let you sit always with Bloody Hands, and Fists of
Wickedness! Ah! What's become of all your Feasts and your Fasts, the Prayers and Blessings of your Priests! G. F. Being now clear of the City, and finding my Spirit drawn to Vi∣sit Friends in the Western Parts of England, I went out of Town; and passing first into Surrey and Sussex,Surrey. Sussex. came to a great Town, where there was a large Meeting, to which several Friends from Reading came; and a blessed Meeting it was. The Priest of the Town was in a great Rage, but did not come out of his House; wherefore, hearing him make a great Noise in his House, as we were passing from the Meeting, we bid him Come out into the Street, and we would dis∣course with him; but he would not. So the Lord's Power being over all, Friends were refreshed in the Lord's Power and Truth. From thence I went to another Market-Town, where in the Evening we had a precious Meeting; and the fresh Sense of the Presence of the Lord God was sweetly felt amongst us.Hampshire. Dorsetshire. Ringwood. Pool. Then turning into Hampshire and Dorsetshire, I went to Ringwood and Pool, visiting Friends in the Lord's Power, and had great Meetings amongst them. DorchesterAt Dorchester we had a great Meeting in the Evening at our Inn, to which many Souldiers came, and were pretty Civil. But the Con∣stables and Officers of the Town came, under pretence to look for a Jesuite, whose Head (they said) was shaved: And they would have all to put off their Hats, or else they would take them off, to look for the Jesuit's shaven Crown. So they took off my Hat (for I was the Man they aimed at) and they looked very narrowly; but not finding any bald or shaven place on my Head, they went away with shame; and the Souldiers, and other sober People were greatly offend∣ed with them. But it was of good Service for the Lord, and all things wrought together for good; for it affected the People: and af∣ter the Officers were gone, we had a fine Meeting; and People were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher, who had bought them, and would reconcile them to God. From thence we passed into Somersetshire, where the Presbyterians, and other Professors were very wicked, and often used to disturb Friends Meetings.Example. One time especially (as we were then informed) there was a very wicked Man, whom they had got to come to the Quakers Meeting. This Man put a Bears-Skin on his Back, and un∣dertook with that to play Pranks in the Quakers Meeting. Accord∣ingly, setting himself just opposite to the Friend, that was speak∣ing, he Lolled his Tongue out of his Mouth, having his Bears-Skin on his Back, and so made sport to his Wicked Followers, and caused a great Disturbance in the Meeting. But an Eminent Judgment over∣took him, and his Punishmet slumbred not: For as he went back from the Meeting, there was a Bull-baiting in the way, which he stayed to see; and coming within the Bulls reach, the Bull struck his Horn under the Man's Chin into his Throat, and struck his Tongue out of his Mouth, so that it hung Lolling out, as he had used it before, in Derision, in the Meeting. And the Bull's Horn running up into the
Man's Head, he swung him about upon his Horn,1659. Example. in a most re∣markable and fearful manner. Thus he that came to do Mischief a∣mongst God's People, was Mischieved himself: and well would it be, if such apparent Examples of Divine Vengeance would teach others to beware. We travelled through Somersetshire, and Devonshire,Devonshire. Plymouth. Cornwall. till we came to Plymouth, and so went up into Cornwal, visiting the Meetings of Friends, till we came to Land's-End. Many precious and blessed Meetings we had, all along through the Countries as we went, where∣in they that were Convinc'd, were established, and many others were added to them. At the Land's-End in Cornwal,Lands End. there was an honest Fisher-man Convinc'd, who became a Faithful Minister of Christ. I took notice of him to Friends, and told them, He was like Peter. While I was in Cornwall, there were great Ship-wracks about the Lands-End. Now it was the Custom of that Country, that at such a time both Rich and Poor went out, to get as much of the Wrack, as they could, not caring to save the Peoples Lives: And in some parts of the Country, they called Shipwracks, God's Grace. These things troubled me, and grieved my Spirit, to hear of such unchri∣stian Actions, considering, how far they were below the Heathen at Melita, who received Paul, and made him a Fire, and were courteous towards him, and them, that had suffered Shipwrack with him. Where∣fore I was moved to write a Paper, and send it to all the Parishes, Priests and Magistrates, High and Low, to reprove them for such greedy Actions. and to Warn and Exhort them, that, if they could assist to save Peoples Lives, and preserve their Ships and Goods, they should use their Diligence therein, and consider, if it had been their own Condition, they would judge it hard; if they should be upon a Wrack, and People should strive to get what they could from them, and not matter their Lives. A Copy of that Paper here follows: All Friends and People, TAke heed of Greediness, and Covetousness: for that is Idolatry; and the Idolater must not enter into the Kingdom of God. Take heed of Drunkenness, and Oaths, and Cursings; for such are Destroy∣ers of the Creation, and make it to groan. Lay away all Fightings, and Quarrellings, and Brawlings, and Evil Speakings, which are the Works of the Flesh, and not of the Spirit: for who follow such things, are not like to have the Kingdom of God. Put away all Corrupt Words, which be unsavoury; and misnaming one another: for ye must give an Account for every idle Word. Lay aside all Profession and Religion that is vain, and come to the Possession, and the pure Religion, which is to visit the Fatherless, the Widow and the Stranger, and receive them: For some thereby may entertain Angels unawares, and the Servants of the Lord, as Paul was enter∣tained, after the Shipwrack at Melita. And do not ye take Peoples Goods from them, by force, out of their Ships, which be the Sea∣mens, or others, neither covet ye after them; but rather endeavour to preserve their Lives and their Goods for them: For that shews a Spirit of Compassion, and a Spirit of a Christian. But if ye be greedy,
and covetous after other men's Goods,1659. ands End. not mattering, what becomes of the Men; would ye be served so your selves? If ye should have a Ship cast away in other places, and the People should come to tear the Goods and Ship in pieces, not regarding to save the Men's Lives, but be ready to fight one with another for your Goods, do not ye believe, such Goods would become a Curse to them? And may ye not as well believe, such kind of Actions will become a Curse unto you? When the Spoil of one Ships Goods is idly spent, and consu∣med upon the Lusts in Ale-houses, Taverns, and otherwise, then ye gape for another. Is this to do, as ye would be done by; which is the Law and the Prophets? Therefore, Priest Hull, Are these thy Fruits? What dost thou take Peoples Labour and Goods for? Hast thou taught the People no better Manners and Conversation, who are so Brutish and Heathenish? Now all such things we judge in whom∣soever. But if any Friend, or others, do preserve Mens Lives, and endeavour to save their Goods and Estates, and restore, what they can save of a Wrack, to the Owners; and then if they consider them for their Labour, doing in that case unto them, what they would have done unto themselves; that we own. And if they buy or sell, and do not make a Prey; that is allowed of still, in the way of do∣ing, as ye would be done by, keeping to the Law and to the Prophets: (that is) that if ye should be in another Country, ye would have other People to save your Lives and Goods, and have your Goods re∣stored to you again, and you to consider them for so doing. All ye, that do otherwise, that wait for a Wrack, and get the Goods for your selves, not regarding the Lives of the Men; but if any of them escape drowning, let them go a begging up and and down the Country; and if any scape with a little, sometimes they are rob∣bed of it in the Country: All such, that do so, are not for the pre∣serving of the Creation, but for the destroying of it: And those Goods which are so gotten, shall be a Curse, and a Plague, and a Judg∣ment to them; and them the Judgments of God will follow, for act∣ing such things: The Witness in your Consciences shall Answer it. Therefore all ye, who have done such things, do so no more, lest a worse thing come unto you. But that which is good, do; to pre∣serve Men's Lives and Estates, and labour to restore the Loss and Breach; that the Lord requires. Be not like a Company of Greedy Dogs, and worse than Heathens, as if ye had never heard tell of God, nor Christ, nor the Scriptures, nor pure Religion. And Priest Hull, Have People spent their Money upon thee, for that which is no Bread? For a thing of nought, that thou hast such Fruits? All such Teachers, that make a Trade of the Scriptures, (which are given forth from the Spirit of God, to be believed, and read, and practised, and Christ, whom they testifie of, enjoyed) we utterly deny; who own Christ, and are come off from all your Steeple-houses, which were the Old Mass-houses: For there are their bad Fruits harboured; those are the Cages of them. But come to the Church, which is in God, (1 Thess. 1.) and come all to the Light, which Christ Jesus hath enlightned you withal, which shews you all the Ʋngodly Words ye have spoken, the ungodly Thoughts which ye have thought, the un∣godly Actions, which ye have done. This will be your Teacher, if ye
love it; your Condemnation, if ye hate it. For the mighty Day of the Lord is coming upon all Wickedness and Ungodliness: There∣fore your Whoredoms and Fornications lay aside. And ye Magi∣strates, who are to do Justice, think ye not, that the Hand of the Lord God is against you, and that his Judgments will come upon you, who do not look after these things, and stop them with the Law, which is, To do unto all men, as they would have done unto them, whereby ye might be a good Savour in your Country? Is not the Law to pre∣serve Mens Lives and Estates, Doing unto all Men, as they would Men should do unto them? For all Men would have their Lives and Estates preserved: Therefore, should not ye preserve others, and not suffer them to be devoured and destroyed? The Evil of these things will lie upon you, both Priests and Magistrates? G. F. POSTSCRIPT. ALL Dear Friends, which fear the Lord God, keep out of the Ravenous World's Spirit, whose Spirit is to Raven and De∣stroy; which is out of the Wisdom of God. That when Ships are wrackt, ye do not run to destroy and make Havock of Ship and Goods with the World; but rather, that ye do run to save the Men, and the Goods for them: and so deny your selves, and do unto them, as ye would they should do unto you. G. F. This Paper had a good Service among People:1660. And Friends have endeavoured much to save the Lives of the Men in times of Wracks, and to preserve the Ships and Goods for them. And when some, that have suffered Shipwrack, have been almost dead and starved, some Friends have taken them to their Houses, to succour them and recover them; which is an Act to be practised by all true Christians. Now turned I back again from the Lands-End; and after I had had many precious and blessed living Meetings in Cornwall, several Eminent People being Convinced in that County, whom neither Priests nor Magistrates, by spoiling Goods or Imprisonments, could make to forsake their Shepherd, the Lord Jesus Christ that had bought them; and all Friends, who were turned to Christ their Teacher and Sa∣viour, being setled in Peace and Quietness upon him, their Fundation, we left them unto the Lord Jesus Christ's Teaching and Ordering, fresh and green; and Thomas Lower, who had accompanied me through all that County, brought me over Horse-Bridge into Devonshire again.Devonshire. And after several Meetings up and down in Devonshire, we came into Somersetshire, where we had divers large and peaceable Meetings;Somerset∣shire. and so passing through the County visiting Friends, till we came to Bristol.
1660. Bristol.I came into Bristol on the Seventh Day of the Week, and the Day before, the Souldiers came with their Muskets into the Meeting, and were exceeding rude, beating and striking Friends with their Muskets, and drove them out of the Orchard in a great Rage, threatning, what they would do, if Friends came there again. For the Mayor and the Commander of the Souldiers had (it seems) combined together to make a Disturbance amongst Friends. Now when I came to Bristol, and Friends told me, what a Rage there was in the Town, how they were threatned by both the Mayor and Souldiers, and how unruly the Souldiers had been to Friends the day before; I sent for several Friends, as George Bishop, Thomas Gouldney, Thomas Speed and Edward Pyot, and desired them, to go to the Mayor and Aldermen, and desire them, seeing he and they had broke up our Meetings, to let Friends have the Town-Hall to Meet in; and for the use of it Friends would give them Twenty Pounds a Year, to be distributed amongst the Poor: and when the Mayor and Aldermen had business to do in it, Friends would not Meet in it, but only on the First Days. Those Friends were astonished at this, and said, The Mayor and Aldermen would think, that they were Mad: But I said, Nay; for they should offer them a considerable Benefit to the Poor. And it was upon me from the Lord to bid them Go; and at last they Consented, and went, though in the Cross to their own Wills. When they had laid the thing before the Mayor, it came so over him, that he said, For his part, he could consent to it; but he was but one: And he told Friends of another Great Hall they might have; but that they did not accept of, it being inconvenient: So Friends came away, leaving the Mayor in a very loving Frame towards them: For they felt, the Lord's Power had come over him. When they came back, I spake to them to go also to the Colonel, that Commanded the Souldiers, and lay be∣fore him the rude Carriage of his Souldiers, how they came Armed amongst naked innnocent People, who were waiting upon, and worshipping the Lord: But they were backward to go to him. Next Morning, being the First Day of the Week, we went to the Meeting in the Or∣chard, where the Souldiers had so lately been so rude. And after I had declared the Truth a pretty while in the Meeting, there came in many rude Souldiers and People, some with Drawn Swords. The In-keepers had made some of them drunk; and one of them had bound himself with an Oath, to cut down and kill the Man that spoke. So he came pressing in, through all the Crowd of People, to within two Yards of me, and stopt at those Four Friends before-mentioned, (who should have gone to the Colonel, as I would have had them) and fell a jangling with them. On a sudden I saw, his Sword was put up and gone: For the Lord's Power came over all, and chained him and the rest, and we had a blessed Meeting, and the Lord's Everlasting Power and Pre∣sence was felt amongst us. On the Day following, those Four Friends went and spake with the Colonel, and he sent for the Souldiers, and Cut and Slasht some of them before the Friends Faces. Which when I heard of, I blamed the Friends for letting him do so; and also for that they did not go on the Seventh Day, as I would have had them, which might have prevented this Cutting of the Souldiers, and the Trouble they gave at our Meeting. But thus the Lord's Power came
over all those persecuting, bloody Minds, and the Meeting there was settled in Peace, for a good while after without Disturbance. I had then also a General Meeting at Edw. Pyot's near Bristol, at which it was judged, there were divers Thousands of People: For be∣sides Friends from many parts thereabouts, some of the Baptists and Independents, with their Teachers, came to it, and very many of the sober People of Bristol; insomuch that the People, that staid behind, said, The City looked naked, there were so many gone out of it to this Meeting. It was a very quiet Meeting, and many glorious Truths were opened to the People, and the Lord Jesus Christ was set up, who was the End of all Figures and Shadows, and the Law, and the first Covenant. And it was declared to the People, how that all Fi∣gures and Shadows were given to Man, after Man fell; and how that all the Rudiments and Inventions of Men, which have been set up in Christendom, many of which were Jewish and Heathenish Ceremo∣nies, were not set up by the Command of Christ; and all Images and Likenesses Man has made to himself, or for himself, whether of things in Heaven or things in Earth, have been, since he lost the Image and Likeness of God, which God made him in. But now Christ was come to Redeem, Translate, Convert and Regenerate Man out of all these things, that he hath set up in the Fall, and out of the true Types, Fi∣gures and Shadows also, and out of Death and Darkness, up into the Light, and Life, and Image and Likeness of God again, which Man and Woman were in, before they fell. Therefore all now should come, and all might come to receive Christ Jesus, the Substance, by his Light, Spirit, Grace and Faith; and should live and walk in him, the Redeemer and Saviour. And whereas we had had a great deal of work with the Priests and Professors, who pleaded for Imperfection: I was opened to declare and manifest unto them, how that Adam and Eve were perfect, be∣fore they fell; and all that God made, he saw that it was good, and he blessed it. But the Imperfection came in by the Fall, through Man's and Woman's hearkening to the Devil, who was out of Truth. And though the Law made nothing perfect, yet it made way for the bringing in of the better Hope; which Hope is Christ, who destroys the Devil and his Works, that made Man and Woman Imperfect. Now Christ saith to his Disciples, Be ye perfect, even as your Heavenly Father is perfect: And he, who himself was perfect, comes to make Man and Woman perfect again, and brings them again to the State, which God made them in. So he is the Maker up of the Breach, and the Peace betwixt God and Man. That this might the better be un∣derstood by the lowest Capacities, I used a Comparison of Two Old People, that had their House broken down by an Enemy, so that they, with all their Children, were liable to all Storms and Tempests. And there came some to them, that pretended to be Workmen, and offered to build up their House again, if they would give them so much a Year: But when they had gotten their Money, they left their House, as they found it. After this manner came a First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth, each with his several pretence, to build up the Old House, and each got the Peoples Money; and then cried, They could not rear up the House, nor the Breach could not be made up: For there
is no Perfection here. Cry they; the House can never be perfectly built up again in this Life: Though they have taken the Peoples Money for the doing of it. For all the Sects in Christendom (so called) have pretended to build up Adam's and Eve's fallen House; and when they have got Peoples Money, they tell them, the Work cannot be perfectly done here; and so their House lies, as it did. But I told the People, Christ was come to do it freely, who, by one Offering, hath perfected for ever all them that are sanctified, and renews them up into the Image of God, which Man and Woman were in, before they fell, and makes Man's and Woman's House as perfect again, as God had made them at the first: And this Christ, the Heavenly Man, has done freely. Therefore all are to look unto him, and all that have recei∣ved him, are to walk in him, the Life, the Substance, the First and the Last, The Rock of Ages, and Foundation of many Generations. Largely were these, and many other things opened and declared unto the People, and the Word of Life was Preached, which doth live and abide; and all were Exhorted to hear and obey that, which did live and abide, that by it all might be born again of the Immor∣tal Seed, and feed of the Milk of the Word. A glorious Meeting there was, wherein the Lord's Everlasting Seed, Christ Jesus, was set over all, and Friends parted in the Power and Spirit of the Lord, in Peace, and in his Truth, that is over all. About this time the Souldiers, under General Monk's Command, were rude and troublesome at Friends Meetings in many places: Whereof Complaint being made to him, he gave forth the following Order, which did somewhat restrain them: St. James's the 9th. of March, 1659. I Do Require all Officers and Souldiers, to forbear to disturb the peaceable Meetings of the Qua∣kers, they doing nothing prejudicial to the Parlia∣ment or Common-wealth of England. GEORGE MONK. Oldeston. Nails∣worth.After this Meeting at Edward Pyott's I passed through the Countries to Oldeston, and to Nailsworth, and to Nathaniel Crisp's, where there was a large Meeting, and several Souldiers at it, but quiet. And from thence we passed through Friends to Gloucester,Gloucester visiting their Meetings. And in Glou∣cester we had a Meeting, that was peaceable, though the Town was very rude, and divided: For one part of the Souldiers were for the King, and ano∣ther
for the Parliament:1660. Glouceser And as I passed out of the Town over the Bridge, Edward Pyott being with me, the Souldiers there said, They were for the King. But after we were gone past them, and they un∣derstood, it was I, they were in a great rage, that I had scaped them; and said, Had they known it, it had been I, they would have shot me with Hail-shot, rather than I should have escaped them. But the Lord prevented their Devilish Design, and brought me safe to Col. Grimes his House, where we had a large general Meeting,Col. Grimes and the Lord's Truth and Power was set over all, and Friends were established upon the Rock, and settled under the Lord Jesus Christ's Teaching. We passed from thence to Tewksburg, and so to Worcester,Tewksbu∣ry. Worcester. visiting Friends in their Meetings in the Towns as we went. And in all my time I never saw the like Drunkenness, as then in the Towns: For they had been then chusing Parliament-Men. But at Worcester the Lord's Truth was set over all, and People were finely settled therein, and Friends praised the Lord; Nay, I saw, the very Earth Rejoiced. Yet great fears and troubles were in many People, and a looking for the King's Coming in, and that all things should be altered: and they would ask me, what I thought of Times and Things? I told them the Lord's Power was over all, and his Light shined over all; and that the Fear would take hold only on the Hypocrites, such as had not been faithful to God; and on our Persecutors. For in my Travel and Sufferings at Reading, when People were at a stand, and could not tell, what might Come in, and who might Rule; I told them, the Lord's Power was over all (for I had travelled through in it) and his Day shined, whosoever should come in; and whether the King came in or no, all would be well, to them that loved the Lord, and were faithful to him. Therefore I bid all Friends; Fear none but the Lord, and keep in his Power, that was over all. From Worcester I came through the Countries,Badgely. Leicester∣shire. Drayton. visiting Friends in their Meetings, till I came to Badgely; and from thence I went to Drayton in Leicestershire, to visit my Relations, While I was there, one Burton, a Justice, hearing that I had a good Horse, sent forth a Warrant to search for me and my Horse: But I was gone, before they came, and so he missed of his wicked End. I passed on to Twy Cross,Twy-Cross Swaning∣ton. Darby. and Swanington, and so to Darby, where I visited Friends, and found my old Goaler amongst them, who had formerly kept me in the House of Correction there, and was now Convinced of the Truth, which I then suffered under him for. Passing still further up into Darbyshire,Darbyshire. Nottin∣ghamshire. Synderhill∣green. Yorkshire. Balby. Yearly Meeting. and Nottinghamshire, I came to Synderhill-green, visiting Friends through all those parts in their Meetings; and so passed on to Balby in Yorkshire, where our Yearly Meeting at that time was holden, in a great Orchard of John Killams, where it was suppos'd, some Thousands of People and Friends were gathered together. In the Morning I heard, that a Troop of Horse was sent from York, about Thirty Miles off, to break up our Meeting, and that the Militia newly raised, was to join with them. So I went into the Meeting, and stood up on a great Stool; and, after I had spoken sometime, Two Trumpeters came up, sounding their Trumpets pretty near me; and the Captain of the Troop cried, Divide to the Right and Left, and make way: Then
they rid up to me.1660. Balby Yearly Meeting. Now I was declaring the Everlasting Truth, and Word of Life, in the mighty Power of the Lord. The Captain bid me, Come down, for he was come (he said) to disperse our Meeting. After some time I spake to him, and told him, He, and they all knew, we were a peaceable People, and that we used to have such great Meetings: But if he did question, that we Met in an hostile Way, I desired him to make search among us, and if he found either Sword or Pistol about any there, let such suffer. He told me, he must see us dispersed; for he came all Night on purpose to disperse us. I ask∣ed him, What Honour it would be to him, to Ride with Swords and Pistols, amongst so many Ʋnarmed Men and Women, as there was? But if he would be still and quiet, our Meeting probably might not continue above two or three Hours; and when it was done, as we came Peaceably and Civilly together, so we should part: For he might perceive, the Meeting was so large, that all the Country thereabouts could not entertain them, but that they intended to depart towards their Homes at Night. He said, He could not stay to see the Meeting ended, but must disperse them, before he went. I desired him then, if he himself could not stay, that he would let a dozen of his Soul∣diers stay, and see the Order and Peaceableness of our Meeting. He said, He would permit us an Hour's time; and left half a dozen Soul∣diers to stay with us. Then went the Captain away with his Troop, and Friends of the House gave those Souldiers, that staid, and their Horses, some Meat. When the Captain was gone, the Souldiers, that were left, told us, We might stay till Night, if we would. But we staid but about three Hours after, and had a glorious, power∣ful Meeting: For the presence of the Living God was manifest a∣mongst us, and the Seed, Christ, was set over all, and Friends were built upon him the Foundation, and settled under his glorious, hea∣venly Teaching. And after the Meeting was done, Friends passed away in Peace, greatly refreshed with the Presence of the Lord, and filled with Joy and Gladness, that the Lord's Power had given them such Dominion. For many of the Militia-Souldiers staid also, and were much vexed, that the Captain and Troopers had not broken up our Meeting; and Cursed the Captain and his Troopers: For it was reported, that they intended to have done us some Mischief that day; but the Troopers, instead of Assisting them, were rather As∣sistant unto us, in not joining with them, as they expected; but preventing them from doing the Mischief, they designed. And yet this Captain was a desperate Man: For it was he, that had said to me in Scotland, That he would obey his Superiors Commands, and if it were to Crucifie Christ, he would do it; or execute the Great Turk's Com∣mands against the Christians, if he were under him. So that it was an Eminent Power of the Lord, which chained down both him, and all his Troopers, and those envious Militia-Souldiers also; so that they went away, not having power to hurt any of us, nor to break up our Meeting. Warms∣worth.The next day we had an heavenly Meeting at Warmsworth, of Friends in the Ministry, and several others; and then Friends part∣ed: And as they passed through the Countries, several were taken up. For that day, that our first Meeting was on, Lambert was Rout∣ed; and it made a great Blunder in the Country: but Friends were
not kept long in Prison at that time,1658. Nottin∣ghamshire. Skegby. As I went to this Meeting at Balby, there came several to me at Skegby in Nottinghamshire, that were then going to be Souldiers under Lambert, and would have bought my Horse of me; and because I would not sell him to them, they were in a great Rage against me, using many Threatning Words: But I told them, God would confound and scatter them; and within two or three Days after, they were scattered indeed. From Warmsworth I passed, in the Lord's Power, to Barton-Abby,Barton-Abby. T. Taylor's Skipton-General Meeting of Men-Friends. where I had a great Meeting; and from thence to Thomas Taylor s, and so to Skipton, where there was a General Meeting of Men-Friends out of many Counties, concerning the Affairs of the Church. There was a Friend went Naked through the Town, declaring Truth; and he was much beaten: Some other Friends also came to me all bloody. And as I walked in the Street, there was a desperate Fellow, had an Intent to have done me a Mischief: But he was prevented, and our Meeting was quiet. To this Meeting came many Friends out of most parts of the Nation: for it was about Business relating to the Church, both in this Nation, and beyond the Seas, Several Years before, when I was in the North, I was moved to recommend to Friends the setting up of this Meeting for that Service: For many Friends suf∣fered in divers parts of the Nation, and their Goods were taken from them, contrary to the Law, and they understood not, how to help themselves, or where to seek Redress. But after this Meeting was set up, several Friends, that had been Justices and Magistrates, and others, that understood something of the Law, came thither, and were able to Inform Friends, and to assist them in gathering up the Sufferings, that they might be laid before the Justices, Judges, or Par∣liament. Now this Meeting had stood several Years, and divers Ju∣stices and Captains had come to brake it up; but when they have understood the Business Friends Met about, and have seen Friends Books, and Accompts of Collections for Relief of the Poor, how we took Care one County to help another, and to help our Friends be∣yond the Seas, and provide for our Poor, that none of them should be chargeable to their Parishes, &c. The Justices and Officers would Confess, that we did their Work; and would pass away peaceably and lovingly, Commending Friends Practices. And sometimes there would come Two hundred of the World's Poor People, and wait there, till the Meeting was done (for all the Country knew, we met about the Poor) and then after the Meeting was over, Friends would send to the Ba∣kers for Bread. and give every one of those Poor People a Loaf, how many soever there were of them: For we were taught to do good unto all; though especially to the Houshold of Faith. After this Meeting I passed through the Countries, visiting Friends in their Meetings, till I came to Lancaster;Lancaster. Arnside. General Meeting. from whence I went to Robert Withers, and so to Arnside, where I had a General Meeting for all the Friends in those Countries, as Westmorland, Cumberland and Lancashire. This Meeting was quiet and peaceable, and the living Presence of the Lord was amongst us. After Meeting I went back with Robert Withers, and Friends all passed away,R. W. fresh in the Life and Power of Christ, in which they had Dominion, being settled up∣on him, the Heavenly Rock and Foundation. But after the Meeting,
there came several Rude Fellows (Serving-men,1660. Arnside. belonging to one called Sir George Middleton, a Justice, that lived not far off) to have made some disturbance (as it was thought;) but the Meeting being ended, they did nothing there: But lighting on Three Women-Friends, who were going from the Meeting, they set upon them with impudent Scoffs, and one of them (whose Name was Thomas —) said, He would kiss one of them; and carried himself very abusively and immodestly towards them. The same Man did abuse other Friends also, and was so outragious, that he would have Cut Friends with an Ax; but that he was restrained by some of his Fellows. At another time, the same Man set upon Six Friends, that were going to a Meeting to wait upon the Lord, at a place called Yellan, and beat and abused them very much; so that he bruised their Faces, and shed much of their Blood, wounding them very sore, and one of them in several parts of his Bo∣dy; yet they lifted not up an Hand against him, but gave him their Backs and their Cheeks to beat. Swarth∣more.From Robert Withers's I went next day to Swarthmore, Francis Howgil and Thomas Curtis being with me. I had not been long there, before one Henry Porter, who was called a Justice, sent a Warrant by the Chief Constable, and Three Petty Constables, to apprehend me. I had a sense of the thing before-hand; and being in the Parlour with Richard Richardson and Margaret Fell, some of her Servants came, and told her, that there were some come to search the House for Arms: and they went up into some of the Chambers under that Pre∣tence. It came upon me to go out to them; and as I was going by some of them, I spake some Words to them: whereupon they asked me my Name.G.F. taken Prisoner. I readily told them my Name: and then they laid hold on me, saying, I was the Man they looked for; and led me away to Ʋlverstone.Ulverstone There they kept me all Night, at the Constables House, and set a Guard of Fifteen or Sixteen Men to watch me; some of whom sate in the Chimney, for fear I should go up the Chimney: such dark Imaginations possessed them. They were very Rude and Ʋncivil to me, and would neither suffer me to speak to Friends, nor suffer Friends to bring me Necessaries; but with Violence thrust out Friends, and kept a strong Guard upon me. Very Wicked and Rude they were, and a great Noise they made about me. One of the Constables, whose Name was Askburnham, said, He did not think, a Thousand Men could have taken me. Another of the Constables, whose Name was Mount, a very wicked Man, said, He would have served Judge Fell himself so, if he had been alive, and he had a Warrant for him. Next Morning, about the Sixth Hour, I was putting on my Boots and Spurs, to go with them before some Justice; but they pul∣led off my Spurs, and took my Knife out of my Pocket, and so hast∣ned me away along the Town, with a Party of Horse, and abundance of People; not suffering me to stay, till my own Horse came down. When I was gone about a quarter of a Mile with them, some Friends, with Margaret Fell and her Children came towards me; and then a great Party of Horse gathered about me in a mad Rage and Fury, crying out, Will they rescue him! Will they rescue him! Whereupon I said unto them, Here is my Hair, here is my Back, here are my Cheeks, strike on! With which Words their Heat was a little asswaged. Then
they brought a little Horse, and two of them took up one of my Legs,1660. Ulverstone. and put my Foot in the Stirrup, and two or three lifting over my other Leg, set me upon the little Horse, behind the Saddle; and so led the Horse by the Halter: but I had nothing to hold by. When they were come a pretty way out of the Town, they beat the little Horse, and made him kick and gallop: Whereupon I slipped off him, and told them, They should not abuse the Creature. They were much enraged at my getting off, and took me by the Legs and Feet, and set me upon the same Horse, behind the Saddle again; and so led the Horse on, about two Miles, till they came to a great Water, cal∣led the Carter-Ford. By this time my own Horse was come to us,Carterford and the Water being deep, and their little Horse scarce able to have carried me through, they let me get upon my own Horse, through the Perswasion of some of their own Company; they leading him through the Water. There was one Wicked Fellow kneeled down, and lifting up his Hands, blessed God, that I was taken. When I was come over the Sands, I told them, I had heard, I had liberty to choose, what Justice I would go before: But Mount, and the other Constables cry'd No, I should not. Then they led me on to Lancaster, about Fourteen Miles, and a great Triumph they thought to have had: but as they led me, I was moved to sing Praises to the Lord, in his triumphing Power over all. When I was come to Lancaster,Lancaster. the Spirits of the People being mightily up, I stood and looked earnestly upon them; and they cried, Look at his Eyes! After a while I spake to them; and then they were pretty sober. Then came a Young Man, and had me to his House: and after a little time the Officers had me to Major Por∣ter's House, who was called a Justice, and who had sent forth the War∣rant against me; and he had several others with him. When I came in, I said; Peace be amongst you. Then Porter asked me, Why I came down into the Country that troublesome time? I told him, To visit my Brethren. But, said he, you have great Meetings up and down. I told him, Though we had so, our Meetings were known throughout the Nation to be peaceable, and we were a peaceable People. He said, We saw the Devil in Peoples Faces. I told him, If I saw a Drunkard, or a Swearer, or a peevish heady Man, I could not say, I saw the Spirit of God in him. And I asked him, If he could see the Spirit of God? He said, We cry'd against their Ministers. I told him, While we were as Saul, sitting under the Priests, and running up and down with their Packets of Letters, we were never called Pestilent Fellows, nor Makers of Sects; but when we were come to exercise our Consciences towards God and Man, then we were called Pestilent Fellows, as Paul was. He said, We could Express our selves well enough; and he would not Dispute with me: but he would restrain me. I deslred to know, for what, and by whose Order he sent forth his Warrant for me? And I complained to him of the Abuse of the Constables, and o∣ther Officers to me, after they had taken me, and in their bringing me thither. He would not take notice of that, but told me, He had an Order, but would not let me see it; for he would not reveal the King's Secrets, he said: And besides, A Prisoner (he said) was not to see, for what he was Committed. I told him, That was not Reason: For how should he make his Defence then? I said, I ought to have a Copy of
it.1660. Lancaster. But he said, there was a Judge once, that fined one, for letting a Prisoner have a Copy of his Mittimus: And, said he, I have an Old Clerk, though I am a young Justice. Then he called to his Clerk, say∣ing, Is it not ready yet? Bring it; meaning the Mittimus: But it not being ready, he told me, I was a Disturber of the Nation. I told him, I had been a Blessing to the Nation, in and through the Lord's Power and Truth; and the Spirit of God in all Consciences would answer it. Then he charged me to be an Enemy to the King, that I endeavoured to raise a new War, and imbrue the Nation in Blood again. I told him, I had never learned the Postures of War; but was Clear and Innocent, as a Child, concerning those things; and there∣fore was bold. Then came the Clerk with the Mittimus, and the Goa∣ler was sent for, and commanded to take me, and put me into the Dark-House; and to let none come at me, but to keep me there a Close Prisoner, until I should be delivered by the King or Parliament. Then the Justice asked the Constables, where my Horse was? For I hear, said he, that he hath a good Horse; have ye brought his Horse? I told him, where my Horse was; but he did not meddle with him. As they had me to the Jail, the Constable gave me my Knife again; and then asked me, to give it him: But I told him, Nay; he had not been so civil to me. So they put me into the Jail, and the Un∣der-Goaler, one Hardy, a very wicked Man, was exceeding Rude and Cruel, and many times would not let me have Meat brought in; but as I could get it under the Door. Many of the World's People came to look at me; some in great Rage, and very uncivil and rude. One time there came Two Young Priests, and very abusive and rude they were; the worst of People could not be worse. Amongst those that came in this manner, old Preston of Howker his Wife was one; and she used many abusive Words to me, telling me, my Tongue should be cut out, and that I should he hanged; shewing me the Gallows. But the Lord God Cut her off, and she died in a miserable Con∣dition. Lancaster Jail.Being now a Close Prisoner in the Common Jail at Lancaster, I de∣sired Two Friends, Thomas Cummings and Tho. Green, to go to the Goaler, and desire of him a Copy of my Mittimus; that I might know, what I stood Committed for. They went; and the Goaler answered them, He could not give a Copy of it; for another had been Fined for so doing: but he gave them liberty to read it over. And to the best of their remembrance, the Matters therein charged against me, were, That I was a Person generally suspected to be a common Disturber of the Peace of the Nation, an Enemy to the King, and a chief Ʋpholder of the Quakers Sect: And that I, together with others of my Fanatick Opinion, have of late endeavoured to raise Insurrections in these parts of the Coun∣try, and to imbroil the whole Kingdom in Blood. Wherefore the Goaler was commanded to keep me in safe Custody, till I should be released by Order from the King and Parliament. When I had thus gotten the Heads of the Charge, contained in the Mittimus, by which I stood committed, I writ a plain, down-right Answer, in Vindication of my Innocency, to each Particular, as fol∣loweth:
I am a Prisoner at Lancaster, committed by Justice Porter.1660. Lancaster Jail. A Copy of the Mittimus I cannot get; but such like Expressions I am told are in it; which are very untrue. As that I am generally su∣pected to be a common Disturber of the Nations Peace, an Enemy to the King and that I with others should endeavour to raise Insurrections, to imbroil the Nation in Blood. All which is utterly false; and I do, in every part thereof, deny it. For I am not a Person generally suspe∣cted to be a Disturber of the Nations Peace; nor have given any Cause for any such Suspicion: For through the Nation I have been tried of these things formerly. In the days of Oliver I was taken up, on pretence of Raising Arms against him; which was also false: for I medled not with Raising Arms at all. Yet I was then carried up Prisoner to London, and kept Prisoner, till I was brought before him; and then I cleared my self, and denied the drawing of a Carnal Weapon against him, or any Man upon the Earth: For my Weapons are Spiritual, which take away the occasion of War, and lead into Peace: And upon my declaring this to Oliver, I was set at liberty by him. After this I was taken, and sent to Prison by Major Ceely in Cornwall, who, when I was brought before the Judge, informed against me, That I took him aside, and told him, that I could raise Forty Thousand Men in an hours time, to involve the Nation in Blood, and bring in King Charles. This also was utterly false, and a Lie of his own inventing; as was then proved upon him: For I never spake any such Word to him. I never was found in any Plot; I ne∣ver took any Engagement, or Oath, nor ever learned War-Po∣stures. And as those were False Charges against me then, so are these, which come from Major Porter now, who is lately appointed to be Justice, but wanted Power formerly, to exercise his Cruelty against us: Which is but the Wickedness of the Old Enemy. For the Peace of the Nation I am not a Disturber of, nor ever was; but seek the Peace of it, and of all Men, and stand for all Nations Peace, and all Men's Peace upon the Earth; and wish, that all Nations, and Men knew my Innocency in these things. And whereas Major Porter saith, I am an Enemy to the King; this is false: For my Love is to him, and to all Men; though they be Enemies to God, to themselves, and to me. And I can say, It is of the Lord, that he is come in, to bring down many unrighteously set up; of which I had a Sight Three Years before he came in. It is much, he should say, I am an Enemy to the King; for I have no reason so to be, he having done nothing against me. But I have been often Imprisoned and Persecuted these Eleven or Twelve Years, by them that have been against both the King, and his Father; even the Party, that Porter was made a Major by, and bore Arms for: but not by them, that were for the King. I was never an Enemy to the King, nor to any Man's Person upon the Earth; but I am in the Love, that fulfils the Law, which thinks no Evil, but loves even Enemies; and would have the King saved, and come to the Know∣ledge of the Truth, and be brought into the Fear of the Lord, to re∣ceive his Wisdom from above, by which all things were made and
created; that with that Wisdom he may order all things to the Glo∣ry of God, by whom they were Created. Whereas he calleth me, A Chief Ʋpholder of the Quakers Sect. I Answer: The Quakers are not a Sect, but are in the Power of God, which was, before Sects were, and witness the Election, before the World began; and are come to live in the Life, which the Prophets and Apostles lived in, who gave forth the Scriptures: Therefore are we hated by envious, wrathful, wicked and persecuting Men. But God is the Ʋpholder of us all, by his mighty Power, and preserves us from the Wrath of the Wicked, that would swallow us up. And whereas he saith, That I, together with others of my Fanatick Opinion (as he calls it) have of late endeavoured to raise Insurrecti∣ons, and to imbroil the whole Kingdom in Blood: I say, this is altogether false; to these things I am as a Child, and know nothing of them. The Postures of War I never learned: My Weapons are Spiritual and not Carnal; for with Carnal Weapons I do not fight: I am a Follow∣er of him, who said, My Kingdom is not of this World. And though these Lies and Slanders are raised upon me, I deny drawing of any Carnal Weapon against the King or Parliament, or any Man upon the Earth: For I am come to the end of the Law, To love Enemies, and wrestle not with Flesh and Blood; but am in that, which saves Men's Lives: And a Witness I am against all Murderers, Plotters, and all such as would Imbrue the Nation in Blood; for it is not in my Heart to have any Man's Life destroyed. And as for the Word Fa∣natick, which signifies furious, foolish, mad, &c. He might have considered himself, before he had used that Word; and have learn∣ed the Humility, which goes before the Honour: For we are not fu∣rious, foolish or Mad; but through Patience and Meekness have born Lies and Slanders, and Persecutions many Years, and undergone great Sufferings. The Spiritual Man, that wrestles not with Flesh and Blood, and the Spirit, that reproves Sin in the Gate, which is the Spirit of Truth, Wisdom, and sound Judgment; this is not mad, foolish, furious, which Fanatick signifies: But all are of a mad, furious, foolish Spirit, that wrestle with Flesh and Blood with Carnal Wea∣pons, in their Furiousness, Foolishness and Rage. This is not the Spi∣rit of God, but of Error, that persecutes in a mad, blind Zeal, like Nebuchadnezer and Saul. Now, inasmuch as I am ordered to be kept Prisoner, till I be de∣livered by Order from the King or Parliament; therefore have I written these things to be laid before you, the King and Parliament, that ye may Consider of them, before ye act any thing therein: that ye may weigh, in the Wisdom of God, the Intent and End of Men's Spirits; lest ye act the thing, that will bring the hand of the Lord upon you, and against you: as many have done before you, who have been in Authority, whom God hath overthrown; in whom we trust, whom we fear and cry unto Day and Night: Who hath heard us, and doth hear us, and will hear us; and avenge our Cause. For much Innocent Blood hath been shed, and many have been perse∣cuted to Death, by such as have been in Authority before you; whom God hath vomited out, because they turned against the Just. There∣fore
consider your Standing, now that ye have the Day;1660. Lancaster-Castle. and re∣ceive this as a Warning of Love to you, From the Innocent, a Sufferer in Bonds, and close Prisoner in Lancaster-Castle, called GEORGE FOX. Upon my being taken, and forcibly carried away from Margaret Fell's House, and charged with things of so high a Nature, she was concerned; as looking upon it, to be an Injury offered to her. Where∣upon she writ the following Lines, and sent them abroad, directed thus: To all Magistrates, concerning the wrong taking up, and Imprisoning of George Fox at Lan∣caster. I Do Inform the Governours of this Nation, that Henry Porter, Ma∣jor of Lancaster, sent a Warrant with Four Constables to my House, for which he had no Authority, nor Order. They searched my House, and apprehended George Fox in it; who was not guilty of the Breach of any Law, or of any Offence against any in the Na∣tion. After they had taken him, and brought him before the said Henry Porter; there was Bail offered, what he would demand for his Appearance, to Answer, what could be laid to his Charge: But he (contrary to Law, if he had taken him lawfully) denied to accept of any Bail; and clapt him up in Close Prison. After he was in Prison, a Copy of his Mittimus was demanded: which ought not to be denied to any Prisoner; that so he may see, what is laid to his Charge: But it was denied him; a Copy he could not have: only they were suffered to read it over. And every thing that was there charged against him, was utterly false; he was not guilty of any one Charge in it; as will be proved, and manifested to the Nation. So, let the Governours consider of it. I am concerned in this thing, inasmuch as he was apprehended in my House; and if he be guilty, I am so too. So I desire to have this searched out. MARGARET FELL. After this, Margaret Fell determined to go to London, to speak with the King about my being taken; and to shew him the manner of it, and the Ʋnjust Dealing and Evil Ʋsage I had received. Which when Justice Porter heard of, he vapoured, that he would go, and meet her in the Gap. But when he came before the King, he ha∣ving been a Zealous Man for the Parliament against the King, several of the Courtiers spake to him concerning his plundering of their Houses:
So that he had quickly enough of the Court, and soon returned into the Country. Mean while the Jailer seemed very fearful, and said, he was afraid, Major Porter would hang him, because he had not put me in the Dark-House, But when the Jailer went to wait on him, after he was come back from London, he was very blank and down; and asked, how I did? pretending, that he would find a way to set me at Liberty. But having overshot himself in his Mittimus, by order∣ing me to be kept Prisoner, till I should be delivered by the King or Parliament, he had put it out of his Power to Release me, if he would. He was the more down also, upon reading a Letter, which I sent him. For when he was in the height of his Rage and Threats against me, and thought to ingratiate himself into the King's Favour, by Imprisoning me, I was moved to write to him, and put him in mind, How fierce he had been against the King and his Party, though now he would be thought zealous for the King. And among other Pas∣sages in my Letter, I called to his remembrance, how, when he held Lancaster-Castle for the Parliament, against the King, he was so rough and fierce against those that favoured the King, that he said, He would leave them neither Dog nor Cat, if they did not bring him in Provision to his Castle. I asked him also, Whose great Bucks-Horns those were, that were in his House? and where he had both them and the Wainscot, that he Ceiled his House withal? Had he them not from Hornby-Castle? About this time Ann Curtis of Reading came to see me: and un∣derstanding, how I stood Committed; it was upon her also to go to the King about it. For her Father, who had been Sheriff of Bristol, was hanged near his own Door, for endeavouring to bring the King in: Upon which Consideration she had some hopes, that the King might hear her on my behalf. Accordingly when she returned to London, she and Margaret Fell went to the King together: Who, when he un∣derstood, whose Daughter she was, received her kindly. And her Re∣quest to him being To send for me up, and hear the Cause himself; he promised her, he would: and commanded his Secretary to send down an Order, for the bringing me up. But when they came to the Se∣cretary for the Order, he (being no Friend to us) said, It was not in his Power; but that he must go according to Law, and I must be brought up by an Habeas Corpus before the Judges. So he writ to the Judge of the King's-Bench, signifying, That it was the King's Pleasure, that I should be sent for up by an Habeas Corpus. Accordingly a Writ was sent down, and delivered to the Sheriff; but because it was di∣rected to the Chancellor of Lancaster, the Sheriff put it off to him: On the other hand, the Chancellor would not make the Warrant upon it; but said, the Sheriff must do that. At length both Chancellor and Sheriff were got together: But being both Enemies to Truth, they sought occasion for Delay; and found (they said) an Error in the Writ, which was, that being directed to the Chancellor, it said, Geo. Fox in Prison under YOƲR Custody; whereas the Prison I was in, was not (they said) in the Chancellor's Custody, but in the Sheriff's: So the Word YOƲR should have been HIS. Upon this they Re∣turned the Writ to London again; only to have that one Word al∣tered. When it was altered, and came down again, the Sheriff re∣fused
to carry me up; unless I would Seal a Writing to him, and be∣come bound, and pay for the Sealing, and the Charge of carrying me up: Which I denied; telling them, I would not Seal any thing to them, nor be Bound: So the matter rested a while; and I continued in Pri∣son. Mean while the Assize came on: But inasmuch as there was a Writ come down for removing me up, I was not brought before the Judge. At the Assize many People came to see me, and I was mo∣ved to speak out at the Jail-Window to them, and shew them, How uncertain their Religion was, and that every sort that had been up∣permost, persecuted the rest. For when Popery was uppermost, Peo∣ple had been persecuted for not following the Mass; and they that did hold up the Mass, cried then, It was the Higher Power, and Peo∣ple must be subject to the Higher Power. Afterwards, they that held up the Common-Prayer, persecuted others for not following that; and they said, It was the Higher Power then also, and we must be subject to that. Since that, the Presbyterians and Independents cried each of them, We must be subject to the Higher Power, and submit to the Directory of the one, and the Church-Faith of the other. Thus all, like the Apostate-Jews, have cried, Help Men of Israel against the True Christians: So People might see, how uncertain they are of their Religions. But I directed them to Christ Jesus, that they might be built upon him, the Rock and Foundation that changeth not. Much, on this wise, I declared to them, and they were quiet, and very attentive. Afterwards I gave forth a little Paper concern∣ing True Religion, as followeth: TRue Religion is the True Rule, and right way of serving God. And Religion is a pure Stream of Righteousness, flowing from the Image of God, and is the Life and Power of God planted in the Heart and Mind by the Law of Life in the Heart, which bringeth the Soul, Mind, Spirit and Body to be Conformable to God, the Fa∣ther of Spirits, and to Christ; so that they come to have Fellowship with the Father and the Son, and with all his Holy Angels and Saints. And this Religion is pure from Above, undefiled before God, and is to visit the Fatherless, and Widows, and Strangers, and keeps from the Spots of the World. So this Religion is above all the defiled, spotted Religions in the World, that keep not themselves from De∣filement and Spots, but are Impure, and below, and spotted; whose Fatherless, and Widows, and Strangers do beg up and down the Streets. G. F. Soon after this, I gave forth another Paper against Persecution, as followeth:
THe Papists, Common-Prayer-Men, Presbyterians, Independents and Baptists persecute one another about their Inventions, which they have invented, their Mass, their Common-Prayer, their Directory, their Church-Faith, which they have made and framed; their Inven∣tions and Handy-works, and not for the Truth: For they know not, what Spirit they be of, who persecute, and would have Mens Lives destroyed about Church-Worship and Religion, as saith Christ; who also said, He came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. Now they, that know not, what Spirit they be of, but will persecute and destroy Men's Lives, and not save them; we cannot trust our Bodies, Souls nor Spirits into their hands: They know not, what Spirit they be of themselves; and therefore they are not fit to be trusted with others. They would destroy by a Law, as the Disci∣ples once would have done by Prayer; who would have command∣ed Fire to come down from Heaven, to destroy them that would not receive Christ. But Christ rebukes them, and tells them, They did not know, what Spirit they were of. And if they did not know, what Spirit they were of; do these, who have persecuted about Church and Religion since the Apostles days, who would Compel Mens Bodies, Goods, Lives, Souls and Estates into their hands by a Law, or make them suffer else? Those that destroy Mens Lives, are not the Ministers of Christ, the Saviour: And seeing, they know not what Spirit they be of; the Lives, Bodies and Souls of Men are not to be trusted in their hands. And ye, that do persecute, shall have no Resurrection to Life with God, except ye repent. But they that do know, what Spirit they are of themselves, they are in the unre∣bukable Zeal; and by the Spirit of God they offer up their Spirits, Souls and Bodies to the Lord, which are his, to keep them. G. F. While yet I was kept in Lancaster-Jail, I was moved to give forth the following Paper, For the Staying the Minds of any such, as might be burried, or troubled about the Change of Government. ALL Friends, Let the Dread and Majesty of God fill you! And as concerning the Changing of Times and Governments, let not that trouble any of you; for God hath a mighty Work and Hand therein. And he will yet Change again, until that come up, which must Reign; and in vain shall Powers and Armies withstand the Lord: for his de∣termined Work shall come to pass. But what is now come up, it is just with the Lord, that it should be so; and he will be served by it. Therefore let none murmur, nor distrust God; for God will pro∣voke many to Zeal against Ʋnrighteousness, and for Righteousness, through things, which are suffered now to work for a Season: yea many, whose Zeal was even dead, shall revive again; and they shall see their Backslidings, and bewail them bitterly. For God shall thun∣der down from Heaven, and break forth in a mighty Noise; and his Enemies shall be astonished, and the Workers of Iniquity confounded: and all, that have not on the Garment of Righteousness, shall be
amazed at the mighty and strange Work of the Lord, which shall be certainly brought to pass. But, my Babes, look ye not out, but be still in the Light of the Lamb; and he shall fight for you. So the Almighty Hand, which must break, and split, and divide your Ene∣mies, and take away Peace from them, preserve and keep you whole, and in Ʋnity and Peace with itself, and one with another. Amen. G. F. I was moved also to write To the King, both to Exhort him to exer∣cise Mercy and Forgiveness towards his Enemies, and to warn him to Restrain the Prophaneness and Looseness, that was gotten up in the Na∣tion upon his Return. It was thus: To the KING. King Charles, THou camest not into this Nation by Sword, nor by Victory of War; but by the Power of the Lord: Now if thou dost not live in it, thou wilt not prosper. And if the Lord hath shewed thee Mercy, and forgiven thee, and thou dost not shew Mercy, and for∣give; the Lord God will not hear thy Prayers, nor them that pray for thee. And if thou do not stop Persecution, and Persecutors, and take away all Laws, that do hold up Persecution about Religion; but if thou do persist in them, and uphold Persecution; that will make thee as blind, as them that have gone before thee. For Persecution hath always blinded those, that have gone into it: And such God by his Power overthrows, and doth his Valiant Acts upon; and bring∣eth Salvation to his Oppressed ones. And if thou dost bear the Sword in vain, and let Drunkenness, Oaths, Plays, May-games, (with Fidlers, Drums, Trumpets, to play at them) with such like Abomi∣nations and Vanities be encouraged, or go unpunished; as setting up of May-poles, with the Image of the Crown a top of them, &c. the Nations will quickly turn like Sodom and Gomorrah, and be as bad as the Old World; who grieved the Lord, till he overthrew them: And so he will you, if these things be not suddenly prevented. Hard∣ly was there so much Wickedness at Liberty before now, as there is now at this day; as though there was no Terror, nor Sword of Ma∣gistracy: which doth not grace a Government, nor is a Praise to them that do well. Our Prayers are for them that are in Authority; that under them we may live a Godly Life, in which we have Peace: and that we may not be brought into Ungodliness by them. So hear, and consider, and do good in thy time, whilst thou hast Power: and be Merciful and forgive; that is the way to Overcome, and obtain the Kingdom of Christ. G. F.
It was long, before the Sheriff would yield to Remove me to London; unless I would Seal a Bond to him, and bear their Charges: which I still refused to do. Then they Consulted, how to convey me up; and at first concluded, to send up a Party of Horse with me. And I told them, If I were such a Man, as they had represented me to be, they had need send a Troop or two of Horse to Guard me. When they considered, what a Charge it would be to them, to send up a Party of Horse with me, they alter'd their purpose; and concluded, to send me up guarded only by the Jailer and some Bayliffs. But upon further Consideration they found, that would be a great Charge to them also: and thereupon sent for me down from the Prison into the Jailer's House, and told me, If I would put in Bail, that I would be in London such a Day of the Term, I should have leave to go up with some of my own Friends. I told them, I would neither put in any Bail, nor give one piece of Silver to the Jailer; for I was an Innocent Man, and they had Imprisoned me wrongfully, and laid a false Charge upon me. Nevertheless, I said, If they would let me go up with one or two of my Friends, to bear me Company, I might go up, and be in London such a Day, if the Lord did permit; and if they desired it, I, or any of my Friends, that went with me, would carry up their Charge against my self. So at last, when they saw, they could do no otherwise with me, the Sheriff yielded, and came under; consenting, that I should come up, with some of my Friends, without any other Engagement, than my Word, as aforesaid, to appear before the Judges at London such a day of the Term, if the Lord did permit.Swarth∣more. Whereupon I was set out of Prison, and went to Swarth∣more; where I stay'd two or three days; and from thence went to Lancaster again,Lancaster. Preston. Cheshire. and so to Preston; having Meetings amongst Friends in the way, till I came into Cheshire to William Gandy's; where was a large Meeting without Doors (the House not being sufficient to con∣tain it.) That Day the Lord's everlasting Seed was set over all, and Friends were turned to it, who is the Heir of the Promise. Thence passing on,Stafford∣shire. Warwick∣shire. Non-Ea∣ton. I came into Staffordshire and Warwickshire, till I came to Anthony Bickliff's; and at Non-Eaton, at a Priest's Widow's House, we had a blessed Meeting, wherein the everlasting Word of Life was pow∣erfully declared, and many settled in it. Then Travelling on again through the Countries, visiting Friends Meetings, as I went, in about three Weeks time from my coming out of Prison,London. I came to London; Richard Huberthorn and Robert Withers being with me. When we came to Charing-Cross, there were Multitudes of People gathered together, to see the Burning of the Bowels of some of them, that had been the Old King's Judges, and had been hanged, drawn and quartered. We went next Morning to Judge Mallet's Chamber, who was put∣ting on his Red Gown, to go sit upon some more of the King's Judges: He was then very peevish and froward; and said, I might come ano∣ther time. We went another time to his Chamber, and then there was with him Judge Foster, who was called the Lord Chief Justice of England: With me was one called Esquire Marsh, who was one of the Bed-Chamber to the King. When we had delivered to the Judges the Charge, that was against me, and they had read to those Words, That I and my Friends were Imbroiling the Nation in Blood, &c. they struck
their Hands on the Table. Whereupon I told them,1660. London. I was the Man, whom that Charge was against; but I was as Innocent of any such thing, as a new-born Child, and had brought it up my self: and some of my Friends came up with me without any Guard. As yet they had not minded my Hat; but now, seeing my Hat on, they said, What, did I stand with my Hat on! I told them, I did not stand so in any Con∣tempt to them. Then they commanded one to take it off: And when they had called for the Marshal of the King's-Bench, they said to him; You must take this Man, and secure him: but you must let him have a Chamber, and not put him amongst the Prisoners. My Lord, said the Marshal, I have no Chamber to put him into; my House is so full, that I cannot tell where to provide a Room for him, but amongst the Prisoners. Nay, said the Judges, you must not put him amongst the Prisoners. But when he still answered, He had no other place to put me in; Judge Foster said to me, Will you appear to mor∣row about Ten of the Clock, at the King's Bench-Bar in Westminster-Hall? I said, Yes, if the Lord give me Strength. Then said Judge Foster to the other Judge, If he say Yes, and promises it, you may take his Word: So I was dismissed for that time. And next day I appeared at the King's Bench-Bar at the hour appointed, Robert Withers,King's-Bench-Bar. Richard Huberthorn, and that Esquire Marsh before named going with me. I was brought into the middle of the Court; and as soon as I was come in, I was moved to look about, and turning to the People, said, Peace be among you; and the Power of the Lord sprang over the Court. The Charge against me was read openly: the People were moderate, and the Judges cool and loving; and the Lord's Mercy was to them. But when they came to that part of it, which said, That I and my Friends were Imbroiling the Nation in Blood, and raising a new War; and that I was an Enemy to the King, &c. they lifted up their hands. Then, stretching out my Arms, I said, I am the the Man, whom that Charge is against; but I am as Innocent, as a Child, concerning the Charge, and have never learned any War-Postures. And, said I, do ye think, that if I and my Friends had been such Men, as the Charge declares, that I would have Brought it up my self against my self? Or that I should have beed suffered to come up with only one or two of my Friends with me? For had I been such a Man, as this Charge sets forth, I had need have been guarded up with a Troop or two of Horse. But the Sheriff and Magistrate of Lancashire had thought fit to let me and my Friends come up with it our selves, almost two hundred Miles, without any Guard at all; which ye may be sure, they would not have done, if they had looked upon me to be such a Man. Then the Judge asked me, Whether it should be Filed? or what I would do with it? I answered, Ye are Judges, and able (I hope) to Judge in this matter: therefore do with it, what ye will: for I am the Man these Charges are against; and here ye see, I have brought them up my self: Do ye what ye will with them, I leave it to you. Then Judge Twisden beginning to speak some angry Words, I appealed to Judge Foster and Judge Mallet, who had heard me over∣night. Whereupon they said, They did not accuse me, for tney had no∣thing against me. Then stood up he that was called Esquire Marsh, who was of the King's Bed-Chamber, and told the Judges, It was the
King's Pleasure that I should be set at Liberty, seeing no Accuser came up against me.1660. King's Bench-Bar. Then they asked me, Whether I would put it to the King and Council. I said, Yes, with a good Will. Thereupon they sent the Sheriff's Return, which he made to the Writ of Habeas Cor∣pus, containing the matter charged against me in the Mittimus, to the King, that he might see, for what I was Committed. Now the Return of the Sheriff of Lancaster was thus: BY Vertue of his Majesty's Writ to me directed, and hereunto an∣nexed, I certifie, that before the Receipt of the said Writ, George Fox, in the said Writ mentioned, was committed to his Majesties Jail, at the Castle of Lancaster, in my Custody, by a Warrant from Henry Porter, Esq one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace within the County Palatine aforesaid, bearing Date the Fifth of June now last past; for that he, the said George Fox, was generally suspected to be a common Di∣sturber of the Peace of this Nation, an Enemy to our Sovereign Lord the King, and a chief Ʋpholder of the Quakers Sect; and that he, to∣gether with others of his Fanatick Opinion, have of late endeavoured to make Insurrections in these parts of the Country, and to Imbroil the whole Kingdom in Blood. And this is the Cause of his taking and detaining. Nevertheless, the Body of the said George Fox I have ready before Thomas Mallet Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices, assigned to hold Pleas before his said Majesty, at his Chamber in Sergeants Inn in Fleet∣street, to do and receive those things, which his Majesties said Justice shall determin concerning him in this behalf, as by the aforesaid Writ is required. GEORGE CHETHAM, Esq Sheriff. Upon Perusal of this, and Consideration of the whole matter, the King, being satisfied of my Innocency, commanded his Secretary to send an Order to Judge Mallet for my Release; which the Secretary did, thus: IT is his Majesty's Pleasure, That you give Order for the Releasing, and setting at full Liberty, the Person of George Fox, late a Pri∣soner in Lancaster-Goal, and commanded hither by an Habeas Corpus. And this signification of his Majesty's Pleasure shall be your sufficient Warrant. For Sir Thomas Mallet, Kt. one of the Justices of the King's Bench. Dated at Whitehall the 24th of October, 1660. EDWARD NICHOLAS. When this Order was delivered to Judge Mallet, he forthwith sent his Warrant to the Marshal of the King's-Bench, for my Release. Which Warrant was thus Worded:
BY Vertue of a Warrant, which this morning I have received from the Right Honourable Sir Edward Nicholas,1660. King's Bench-Prison. Kt. one of his Ma∣jesty's Principal Secretaries, for the releasing and setting at Liberty of George Fox, late a Prisoner in Lancaster-Jail, and from thence brought hither by Habeas Corpus, and yesterday committed unto your Custody; I do hereby require you accordingly to Release, and set the said Prisoner George Fox at Liberty: For which this shall be your Warrant and Dis∣charge. To Sir John Lenthal Knight, Marshal of the King's-Bench, or his Deputy. Given under my Hand the 25th day of October, in the Year of our Lord God 1660. THOMAS MALLET. Thus,London. after I had been a Prisoner somewhat more than Twenty Weeks, I was freely set at liberty, by the King's Command; the Lord's Power having wonderfully wrought for the clearing of my Innocency; and Porter, who committed me, not daring to Appear, to make good the Charge he had falsly suggested against me. But after it was known, I was discharged, there was a Company of envious, wicked Spirits, that were troubled I was set at Liberty; and Terror took hold of Ju∣stice Porter: For he was afraid, I would take the advantage of the Law against him for my wrong Imprisonment, and thereby undo him, his Wife and Children. And indeed, I was put on by some in Au∣thority, to have made him, and the rest, Examples: But I said, I should leave them to the Lord; if the Lord did forgive them, I should not trouble my self with them. Now did I see the End of the Travel, which I had had in my sore Exercise at Reading: for the everlasting Power of the Lord was over all, and his blessed Truth, Life and Light shined over the Nation, and great and glorious Meetings we had, and very quiet; and many flock∣ed in unto the Truth. For Richard Hubberthorn had been with the King, and the King said, None should molest us, so long as we lived peaceably; and promised this to us upon the Word of a King; tel∣ling him, We might make use of his Promise. Some Friends also were admitted to go into the House of Lords, before them and the Bishops, and had liberty given them to declare their Reasons, Why they could not pay Tithes, nor Swear, nor go to the Steeplehouse-Worship, or join with others in Worship: and they heard them moderately. And there being about Seven Hundred Friends in Prison in the Nation, who had been committed under Oliver's and Richard's Government, upon Con∣tempts (as they call them,) when the King came in, he set them all at Liberty. For there seemed at that time an Inclination and Intention in the Government to have granted Friends Liberty, because they were sensible, that we had suffered, as well as they, in the former Power's days. But still, when any thing was going forward in order thereun∣to, some dirty Spirits or other, that would seem to be for us, threw something in the way to stop it. It was said, there was an Instru∣ment drawn up, for Confirming our Liberty, and that it only wanted Signing; when on a suddain that wicked Attempt of the Fifth-Mo∣narchy-People
brake forth,1660. London. and put the City and Nation in an Up∣roar. This was on a First-Day Night; and very glorious Meetings we had had that Day, wherein the Lord's Truth shined over all, and his Power was exalted above all: But about Mid-night, or soon after, the Drums beat, and the Cry was, Arm, Arm. I got up out of Bed, and in the Morning took Boat, and Landing at Whitehall Stairs, wal∣ked through Whitehall.Whitehall. They looked strangely on me there; but I passed through them, and went to the Pell-Mell,Pell-mell. whither divers Friends came to me, though it was now grown dangerous passing the Streets: For by this time both the City and Suburbs were up in Arms, and exceeding rude the People and Souldiers were; insomuch that a Friend, Henry Fell, going to a Friends House, the Soldiers knockt him down: and he had been killed, if the Duke of York had not come by. Great Mischief was done in the City this Week; and when the next First-Day came, that Friends went to their Meetings, as they used to do, many were taken Prisoners. I stay'd at the Pell-mell, in∣tending to be at the Meeting there: But on the Seventh-Day at Night, a Company of Troopers came, and knockt at the Door. The Maid let∣ting them in, they rushed into the House, and strait laid hold upon me: and there being amongst them one, that had served under the Parliament, he clapt his Hand to my Pocket, and asked, Whether I had any Pistols? I told him, He knew, I did not use to carry Pistols; why therefore did he ask such a Question of me, whom he knew to be a Peaceable Man? Others of the Souldiers run up into the Chambers, and there found in Bed that Squire Marsh before mentioned; who, tho' he was one of the King's Bed-Chamber, out of his love to me, came, and lodged where I did. When they came down again, they said, Why should we take this Man away with us? We will let him alone. Oh, said the Parliament-Souldier, he is one of the Heads, and a chief Ring-leader. Upon this the Souldiers were taking me away; but — Marsh hearing of it, he sent for him that Commanded the Party, and desired him to let me alone; for he would see me forth-coming in the Morning. In the Morning, before they could fetch me, and before the Meeting was gathered, there came a Company of Foot to the House; and one of them drawing out his Sword, held it over my Head. I asked him, Wherefore he drew his Sword at a Naked Man? At which his Fellows being ashamed, bid him, put up his Sword. These Foot-Souldiers took me away to Whitehall,G F. taken Prisoner. Whitehall. before the Troopers came for me. As I was going out, several Friends were coming in to the Meeting, whose Boldness and Chearfulness I commended, and encouraged them to persevere therein. When I was brought to Whitehall, the Soldiers and People were exceeding rude; yet I declared Truth to them: But some great Persons coming by, who were very full of Envy, What, said they, do ye let him Preach? Put him into such a place, where he may not stir. So into that place they put me, and the Soldiers watch∣ed over me: I told them, Though they could confine my Body, and shut that up; yet they could not stop up the Word of Life. Some thereupon came, and asked me, What I was? I told them, I was a Preacher of Righteousness. After I had been kept there two or three Hours, — Marsh spake to him, that was called the Lord Gerrard; and he came, and bid them set me at liberty. Then the Marshal,
when I was discharged, demanded Fees. I told him,1660. Whitehall. I could not give him any; neither was it our Practice: And I asked him, How he could demand Fees of me, who was Innocent? Nevertheless, I told him, in my own Freedom I would give him Two Pence, to make him and the Souldiers drink: But they shouted at that, and took it disdainfully. So I told them, If they would not accept it, choose they: for I should give them no Fees. Then went I through the Guards, the Lord s Power being over them; and after I had de∣clared Truth to the Guards and Souldiers, I went up the Streets with two Irish Colonels, that came from Whitehall, and went to an Inn, where many Friends were at that time Prisoners under a Guard. I de∣sired those Colonels to speak to the Guard to let me go in, to visit my Friends, that were Prisoners there: but they would not. Then I stept to the Centry, and desired him to let me go up; and he did so. While I was there, the Souldiers went to the Pell-Mell again, to search for me there: but not finding me, they turned towards the Inn, and bid all come out, that were not Prisoners; so they went out. But I asked the Souldiers, that were within, Whether I might not stay there a while with my Friends? And they said, Yes. I stay'd a while, and so escaped their Hands again. Towards Night I went down to the Pell-Mell, to see, how it was with the Friends there; and after I had stay'd a while, I went up into the City.London. Great Rifling of Hou∣ses there was at this time, to search for People: but I went to a pri∣vate Friend's House, and Richard Huberthorn was with me. There we drew up a Declaration against Plots and Fightings, to be presented to the King and Council: But when we had finished it, and sent it to the Press, it was taken in the Press. Upon this Insurrection of the Fifth Monarchy-Men, great Havock was made both in City and Country, so that it was dangerous for sober Peo∣ple to stir abroad for several Weeks after; and hardly could either Men or Women go up and down the Streets to buy Provisions for their Families, without being abused. In the Countries they drag∣ged Men and Women out of their Houses, and some Sick Men out of their Beds by the Legs. Nay, one Man, that was in a Fever, the Souldiers dragged out of his Bed to Prison; and when he was brought thither, he died. His Name was Thomas Pachyn. Margaret Fell went to the King, and told him, what sad Work there was in the City, and in the Nation; and shewed him, that we were an Innocent, peaceable People, and that we must keep our Meet∣ings, as we used to do, whatever we suffered: but that it concerned him to see, that Peace was kept, that so no Innocent Blood might be shed. Now were the Prisons every where filled with Friends, and others, in City and Country; and the Posts were so laid, for the searching of Letters, that none could pass unsearched: Yet we heard of several Thousands of our Friends, that were cast into Prison in several places throughout the Nation; and Margaret Fell carried an Account of them to the King and Council. The next Week we had an Account of se∣veral Thousands more, that were cast into Prison: and she went, and laid them also before the King and his Council. They wondered, how we could have such Intelligence, seeing they had given such strict
Charge for the intercepting of all Letters: But the Lord did so order it, that we had an Account, notwithstanding all their Stoppings. For in the deep Sense I had of the grievous Sufferings, Friends underwent, and of their Innocency towards God and Man, I was moved to send the following Epistle to them, as a Word of Consolation, and to put them upon sending up their Sufferings. My Dear Friends, IN the Immortal Seed of God, which will plead its own Innocency, who be Inheritors of an Everlasting Kingdom, that is Incorrup∣tible; and of a World and Riches, that fade not away, Peace and Mercy be multiplied amongst you in all your Sufferings, who never feared them; whose Backs were not unready, but your Hair and Cheeks prepared; who never feared Sufferings, as knowing it is your Portion in the World, from the Foundation of which the Lamb was slain; who reigns in his Glory, which he had with his Father, before the World began: who is your Rock in all Floods and Waves, upon which ye can stand safe, with a chearful Countenance, beholding the Lord God of the whole Earth on your side. So in the Seed of God, which was before the Unrighteous World, in which the Sufferings are, live and feed, wherein the Bread of Life is felt, and no cause of Complaint of Hunger or Cold. Friends, your Sufferings all, that are or have been of late in Prison, I would have you send up an Account of them, and how things are amongst you; that it may be delivered to the King and his Council; for things are pretty well here, after the Storm. London, the 28th of the Eleventh Month, 1660. G. F. Having lost our former Declaration in the Press; we made haste, and drew up another against Plots and Fighting, and got it Printed; and sent some of them to the King and Council: others of them were sold up and down the Streets, and at the Exchange. Which Declarati∣on was some Years after Re-printed, and is as followeth:
A Declaration from the Harmless and Innocent People of God, called Quakers, against all Sedition, Plotters and Fighters in the World: For the removing of the Ground of Jealousie and Suspicion from both Magi∣strates and People in the Kingdom, con∣cerning Wars and Fightings. Presented unto the King, upon the 21th day of the 11th Month, 1660. OUR Principle is, and our Practices have always been, to seek Peace, and ensue it, and to follow after Righteousness, and the Knowledge of God; seeking the Good and Welfare, and doing that which tends to the Peace of All. We know, that Wars and Fight∣ings proceed from the Lusts of Men, as Jam. 4.1, 2, 3. out of which Lusts the Lord hath redeemed us; and so out of the Occasion of War: the occasion of which War, and the War itself (wherein envious Men, who are lovers of themselves more than lovers of God, Lust, Kill, and desire to have Men's Lives or Estates) ariseth from the Lust. All Bloody Principles and Practices We (as to our own particu∣lar) do utterly deny; with all outward Wars and Strife, and Fight∣ings with Outward Weapons, for any end, or under any pretence whatsoever: and this is our Testimony to the whole World. And whereas it is Objected: But although you now say, That you cannot Fight, nor take up Arms at all; yet if the Spirit do move you, then you will change your Principle, and then you will sell your Coat, and buy a Sword, and Fight for the Kingdom of Christ. Answ. As for this, we say to you, that Christ said to Peter, Put up thy Sword in his place; though he had said before, he that had no Sword, might sell his Coat and buy one, (to the fulfilling of the Law and Scripture) yet after, when he had bid him put it up, he said, He that taketh the Sword, shall perish with the Sword. And further, Christ said to Pilate, Thinkest thou, that I cannot now pray to my Fa∣ther, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of An∣gels? And this might satisfie Peter, Luke 22.36. after he had put up his Sword, when he said to him, He that took it, should perish by it; which satisfieth us, Mat. 26.51, 52, 53. And in the Revelati∣on it's said; He that kills with the Sword, shall perish with the Sword; and here is the Faith and the Patience of the Saints. And so Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, therefore do not his Servants Fight; as he told Pilate the Magistrate, who Crucified him: and did they not look upon Christ, as a Raiser of Sedition? and did not he say, Forgive them? But thus it is, that we are numbred amongst Trans∣gressors,
and numbred amongst Fighters,1660. London. that the Scriptures might be fulfilled. That Spirit of Christ, by which we are guided, is not changeable, so as once to command us from a thing, as Evil, and again to move unto it; and we do certainly know, and so testifie to the World, That the Spirit of Christ, which leads us into all Truth, will never move us to Fight and War against any Man with outward Weapons, nei∣ther for the Kingdom of Christ, nor for the Kingdoms of this World. First, Because the Kingdom of Christ God will exalt, according to his Promise, and cause it to grow and flourish in Righteousness; Not by Might, nor by Power (of outward Sword) but by my Spirit, saith the Lord, Zech. 4.6. So those that use any Weapon to Fight for Christ, or for the establishing of his Kingdom or Government, both the Spi∣rit, Principle and Practice in that, we deny. Secondly, We do earnestly desire and wait, That (by the Word of God's Power, and its effectual Operation in the Hearts of Men) the Kingdoms of this World may become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; that he might Rule and Reign in Men by his Spirit and Truth: that thereby all People out of all different Judgments and Professions, might be brought into Love and Ʋnity with God, and one with another; and that they might all come to witness the Prophets Words, who said, Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more, Isa. 2.4. Mich. 4.3. So we, whom the Lord hath called into the Obedience of his Truth, have denied Wars and Fightings, and cannot again any more learn it. And this is a certain Testimony unto all the World, of the Truth of our Hearts in this particular, that as God perswadeth every Man's Heart to believe, so they may receive it. For we have not (as some others) gone about cunningly with devised Fables; nor have we ever denied in Practice, what we have professed in Principle; but in Sincerity and Truth, and by the Word of God have we laboured to be made manifest unto all Men, that both we and our ways might be witnessed in the Hearts of all People. And whereas all manner of Evil hath been falsly spoken of us, we hereby speak forth the plain Truth of our Hearts, to take away the occasion of that Of∣fence: that so we being Innocent, may not suffer for other Men's Of∣fences, nor be made a Prey upon by the Wills of Men for that, of which we were never Guilty; but in the Uprightness of our Hearts we may, under the Power ordained of God for the Punishment of Evil∣doers, and for the Praise of them that do well, live a peaceable and godly Life, in all Godliness and Honesty. For although we have al∣ways suffered, and do now more abundantly suffer; yet we know, that it's for Righteousness sake: For our rejoycing is this, the Testimo∣ny of our Consciences, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God we have had our Conversation in the World, 2 Cor. 1.12. Which for us is a Witness, for the con∣vincing of our Enemies. For this we can say to all the World, we have wronged no Man's Persons or Possessions; we have used no Force nor Violence against any Man; we have been found in no Plots, nor guilty of Sedition; when we have been wronged, we have not sought to revenge our selves; we have not made resistance against Autho∣rity:
but wherein we could not obey for Conscience-sake, we have suffered even the most of any People in the Nation. We have been counted as Sheep for the Slaughter, Persecuted and Despised, Beaten, Stoned, Wounded, Stocked, Whipped, Imprisoned, Haled out of Syna∣gogues, cast into Dungeons and Noisom Vaults, where many have died in Bonds, shut up from our Friends, denied needful Sustenance for many days together; with other the like Cruelties. And the Cause of all these our Sufferings is not for any Evil, but for things re∣lating to the Worship of our God, and in obedience to his Requirings of us; For which Cause we shall freely give up our Bodies a Sacrifice, rather than disobey the Lord: For we know, as the Lord hath kept us Innocent, so he will plead our Cause, when there is none in the Earth to plead it. So we, in Obedience unto his Truth, do not love our Lives unto Death, that we may do his Will, and wrong no Man in our Generation; but seek the Good and Peace of all Men. And he that hath commanded us, That we shall not Swear at all, Matth. 5.34. hath also commanded us, That we shall not Kill, Matth. 5. So that we can neither Kill Men, nor Swear for, nor against them. And this is both our Principle and Practice, and hath been from the Be∣ginning; so that if we suffer, as suspected to take up Arms, or make War against any, it is without any Ground from us: For it neither is, no ever was in our Hearts, since we owned the Truth of God; neither shall we ever do it: because it is contrary to the Spirit of Christ, his Doctrine, and the Practices of his Apostles; even contra∣ry to him, for whom we suffer all things, and endure all things. And whereas Men come against us with Clubs, Staves, Drawn Swords, Pistols cock't, and do beat, cut and abuse us; yet we never resisted them, but to them our Hair, Backs and Cheeks have been ready: But it is not an Honour to Manhoood or Nobility, to run up∣on harmless People, who lift not up an Hand against them, with Arms and Weapons. Therefore consider these things, ye Men of Understanding: For Plotters, Raisers of Insurrections, Tumultuous Ones, and Fighters, running with Swords, Clubs, Staves and Pistols one against another; we say, these are of the World, and have their Foundation from this Unrighteous World; from the Foundation of which, the Lamb hath been slain: which Lamb hath redeemed us from this unrighteous World, and we are not of it; but are Heirs of a World, in which there is no End; and of a Kingdom, where no corruptible thing en∣ters. And our Weapons are Spiritual, and not Carnal, yet Mighty through God, to the pulling down of the Strong Holds of Sin and Satan, who is Author of Wars, Fighting, Murder, and Plots; and our Swords are broken into Plow shares, and Spears into Pruning-hooks; as Prophesied of in Micah 4. Therefore we cannot learn War any more, neither rise up against Nation or Kingdom with outward Wea∣pons, tho' you have numbred us amongst the Transgressors and Plot∣ters: the Lord knows our Innocency herein, and will plead our Cause with all Men and People upon Earth, at the day of their Judg∣ment, when all Men shall have a Reward according to their Works.
Therefore in love we warn you for your Souls good, not to wrong the Innocent, nor the Babes of Christ, which he hath in his Hand, which he tenders as the Apple of his Eye; neither seek to destroy the Heritage of God, neither turn your Swords backward, upon such as the Law was not made for, i. e. the Righteous; but for the Sinners and Transgressors, to keep them down. For those are not the Peace∣makers, neither the Lovers of Enemies; neither can they overcome Evil with Good, who wrong them that be Friends to You and All Men, and wish Your Good, and the good of all People on the Earth. If you oppress us, as they did the Children of Israel in Egypt; and if you oppress us, as they did, when Christ was Born, and as they did the Christians in the Primitive Times; we can say, The Lord forgive you: and leave the Lord to deal with you, and not revenge our selves. And if you say, as the Council said to Peter and John, You must speak no more in that Name; and if you serve us, as they served the Three Children spoken of in Daniel; God is the same, as ever he was, that lives for Ever and Ever, who hath the Innocent in his Arms. Oh Friends! Offend not the Lord and his Little Ones, neither af∣flict his People; but consider, and be moderate. And do not run hastily into things; but mind, and consider Mercy, Justice and Judgment: that is the way for you to prosper, and get the Favour of the Lord. Our Meetings were stopped and broken up in the days of Oliver, in pretence of Plotting against him; and in the days of the Committee of Safety we were looked upon, as Plotters, to bring in KING CHARLES: and now our Peaceable Meetings are termed Seditious. Oh that Men should lose their Reason, and go contrary to their own Conscience; knowing, that we have suffered all things, and have been accounted Plotters all along, though we have declared against them both by Word of Mouth, and Printing, and are clear from any such thing! Though we have suffered all a∣long, because we would not take up Carnal Weapons to fight withal against any; and are thus made a Prey upon, because we are the In∣nocent Lambs of Christ, and cannot avenge our selves! These things are left upon your Hearts to consider: But we are out of all those things, in the Patience of the Saints: and we know, that as Christ said, He that takes the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, Mat, 26.52. Rev. 13.10. This is given forth from the People called Quakers, to satisfie the King and his Council, and all those, that have any Jealousie con∣cerning Ʋs; that all occasion of Suspicion may be taken away, and our Innocency cleared. Given forth on the behalf of the whole Body of the Elect People of God, who were called Quakers, in the Year 1660.
POSTSCRIPT. THough we are numbred amongst Transgressors, and so have been given up to all Rude, Merciless Men, by which our Meetings are broken up, in which we Edified one another in our Holy Faith, and prayed together to the Lord, that lives for ever; yet he is our Pleader for us in this Day. The Lord saith, They that feared his Name, spake often together, (as in Malachy) which were as his Jewels: And for this Cause, and no Evil-doing, are we cast into Holes, Dun∣geons, Houses of Correction, Prisons, (they sparing neither Old nor Young, Men nor Women) and made a Prey on in the sight of all Nati∣ons, under pretence of being Seditious, &c. so that all rude People run upon us to take Possession: For which we say, The Lord forgive them, that have thus done to us; who doth, and will enable us to suffer; and never shall we lift up hand against any Man, that doth thus use us: But that the Lord may have mercy upon them, that they may consider, what they have done. For how is it possible for them, to requite us for the Wrong they have done to us? Who to all Nations have sounded us abroad as Seditious, or Plotters, who were never found Plotters against any Power or Man upon the Earth, since we knew the Life and Power of Jesus Christ manifested in us, who hath redeemed us from the World, and all Works of Darkness, and Plotters that be in it; by which we know our Election, before the World began. So we say, The Lord have Mercy upon our Enemies, and forgive them, for that they have done unto us. Oh! do as you would be done by; and do unto all Men, as you would have them do unto you; for this is but the Law and the Prophets. And all Plots, Insurrections and Riotous Meetings we do deny, knowing them to be of the Devil, the Murtherer; which we in Christ (who was before they were) Triumph over them. And all Wars and Fightings with Carnal Weapons we do deny, who have the Sword of the Spirit: and all that wrong us, we leave them to the Lord. And this is to clear our Innocency from that Aspersion cast upon us, That we are Seditious or Plotters. Added in the Reprinting. Courteous Reader, THis was our Testimony above Twenty Years ago; and since then we have not been found Acting contrary to it, nor ever shall: For the Truth, that is our Guide, is unchangeable. And this is now Reprinted to the Men of this Age, many of whom were then Children; and doth stand, as our certain Testimony against all Plotting and Fighting with Carnal Weapons: And if any by depart∣ing from the Truth, should do so, this is our Testimony in the Truth against them, and will stand over them, and the Truth will be clear of them.
This Declaration did somewhat clear the Dark Air, that was over the City and Country. And soon after the King gave forth a Procla∣mation, That no Soldiers should go to search any House, but with a Con∣stable. But the Jails were still full, many Thousands of Friends be∣ing in Prison in the Nation: Which Mischief was occasioned by that wicked Rising of those Fifth-Monarchy-Men. But when those of them, that were taken, came to be executed, they did us that Right, to clear us openly, from having any hand in, or knowledge of their Plot. And after that the King, being continually Importuned thereunto, Issued forth a Declaration, That Friends should be set at liberty, with∣out paying Fees. But great Labour and Travel, Care and Pains was taken in it, before this was obtained; for Thomas Moor and Margaret Fell went often to the King about it. Much Blood was shed this Year; many of them, that had been the Old King's Judges, being hanged, drawn and quartered. And amongst them, that so suffered, Col. Hacker was one; he who sent me Prisoner from Leicester to London in Oliver's time: of which an Account is given be∣fore. A sad Day it was, and a Repaying of Blood with Blood. For in the time of O. Cromwel, when several Men were put to Death by him, being hanged, drawn and quartered for pretended Treasons; I felt from the Lord God, that their Blood would not be put up, but would be required: And I said as much then to several. And now, upon the King's Return, when several of them that had been against the King, were put to Death, as the others, that were for the King, had been before by Oliver: This was sad Work, destroying of People contrary to the Nature of Christians, who have the Nature of Lambs and Sheep. But there was a Secret Hand in bringing this Day upon that Hypocritical Generation of Professors; who being got into Power, grew Proud, Haughty and Cruel beyond others, and persecuted the People of God without pity. Therefore when Friends were under cruel Persecutions and Sufferings in the Common-wealth's time, I was mo∣ved of the Lord to write unto Friends, to draw up their Sufferings, and lay them before the Justices at their Sessions. And if they would not do them Justice, then to lay it before the Judges at the Assize: And if they would not do them Justice, then to lay it before the Par∣liament, and before the Protector and his Council; that they might all see, what was done under their Government: And if they would not do Justice, then to lay it before the Lord; who would hear the Cries of the Oppressed, and of the Widows and Fatherless, that they had made so. For that which we suffered for, and which our Goods were spoiled for, it was for our Obedience to the Lord in his Power and in his Spirit, who was able to help and to succour; and we had no Helper in the Earth, but him. And he did hear the Cries of his People, and did bring an overflowing Scourge over the Heads of all our Persecutors; which brought a Quaking, and a Dread, and a Fear amongst and on them all: So that they, who had nick-named us (who are the Children of Light) and in scorn called us Quakers, the Lord made them Quake; and many of them would have been glad to have hid themselves a∣mongst us: and some of them, through the Distress that came upon them, did at length come to Confess to the Truth. Oh! the daily
Reproaches, Revilings and Beatings we underwent amongst them, even in the High-ways, because we could not put off our Hats to them; and for saying Thou and Thee to them! Oh! the Havock and Spoil the Priests made of our Goods, because we could not put into their Mouths, and give them Tithes! Besides casting into Prisons; and besides the great Fines laid upon us, because we could not Swear! But for all these things did the Lord God plead with them. Yet some of them were so hardened in their Wickedness, that, when they were turned out of their Places and Offices, they said; If they had Power, they would do the same again. And when this Day of overturning was come upon them, they said; It was all long of us. Wherefore I was moved to write to them, and to ask them, Did we ever resist them, when they took away our Ploughs and Plough-Gears, our Carts and Horses, our Corn and Cattel, our Kettles and Platters from us, and whipt us, and set us in the Stocks, and cast us into Prison; and all this only for serving and worshipping God in Spirit and Truth, and because we could not Conform to their Religions, Manners, Customs and Fashions? Did we ever resist them? Did we not give them our Backs to beat, and our Cheeks to pull off the Hair, and our Faces to spit on? Had not their Priests, that prompted them on to such Work, plucked them with themselves into the Ditch? Why then would they say, It was all long of us? when it was long of them∣selves, and their Priests, their blind Prophets, that followed their own Spirits, and could fore-see nothing of these times and things, that were come upon them, which we had long forewarned them of; as Je∣remiah and Christ had forewarned Jerusalem. And they thought to have wearied us out, and undone us; but they undid themselves: Whereas we could praise God, notwithstanding all their plundering of us, that we had a Kettle, and a Platter, and an Horse, and Plow still. Many ways were these Professors warned, both by Word, by Writing and by Signs; but they would believe none, till it was too late. William Sympson was moved of the Lord to go at several times for Three Years, Naked and Bare-foot before them, as a Sign unto them, in Markets, Courts, Towns, Cities, to Priest's Houses, and to Great Men's Houses, telling them; So should they be all stripped Naked, as he was stripped Naked! And sometimes he was moved to put on Hair-Sack-cloth, and to besmear his Face, and to tell them; So would the Lord God besmear all their Religion, as he was besmeared! Great Sufferings did that poor Man undergo, sore Whippings with Horse-whips and Coach-whips on his bare Body, grievous Stonings and Imprisonments in three years time, before the King came in, that they might have taken Warning, but they would not; but rewarded his Love with cruel Ʋsage. Only the Major of Cambridge did nobly to him; for he put his Gown about him, and took him into his House. Another Friend, one Robert Huntington, was moved of the Lord to go into Carlisle-Steeple-house with a White Sheet about him, amongst the great Presbyterians and Independents there, to shew them, that the Surplice was coming up again: and he put an Halter about his Neck, to shew them, That an Halter was coming upon them: which was fulfilled upon some of our Persecutors not long after.
Another, whose Name was Richard Sale, living near West-Chester, and being Constable of the place, where he lived, had a Friend sent to him with a Pass, (whom those wicked Professors had taken up for a Vagabond, because he travelled up and down in the Work of the Ministry) and this Constable being convinced by the Friend, that was thus brought to him, gave him his Pass and Liberty; and was after∣wards himself cast into Prison. After this, on a Lecture-day, this Richard Sale was moved to go to the Steeple-house in the time of their Worship, and to carry those persecuting Priests and People a Lanthorn and Candle, as a Figure of their Darkness: But they cruelly abused him, and like dark Professors, as they were, they put him into their Prison, called Little-Ease; and so squeezed his Body therein, that not long after he Died. Many Warnings of many sorts were Friends moved in the Power of the Lord to give unto that Generation; which they not only rejected, but abused Friends, calling us Giddy-headed Quakers: But God brought his Judgments upon those Persecuting Priests and Magistrates. For when the King came in, most of them were turned out of their Places and Benefices; and the Spoilers were Spoiled: And then we could ask them, Who were the Giddy-heads now? Then many did confess, we had been True Prophets to the Nation; and said, Had we cried against some Priests only, they should have liked us then; but we crying against All, that made them dis∣like us: But now they did see, that those Priests, which then were looked upon to be the best, were as bad as the Rest. For indeed, some of those, that were counted the most-Eminent Priests, were the bit∣terest and greatest Stirrers up of the Magistrates to Persecution: And it was a Judgment upon them, to be denied the Free Liberty of their Consciences, when the King came in; because when they were upper∣most, they would not have had Liberty of Conscience been granted un∣to others. For there was one Hewes of Plymouth, a Priest of great Note in Oliver's Days, who, when some Liberty was granted, pray'd, That God would put it into the Hearts of the Chief Magistrates of the Na∣tion, to remove this cursed Toleration: And others of them prayed against it, by the name of Intolerable Toleration. But a while after, when the King was come in, and Priest Hewes turned out of his great Benefice, for not Conforming to the Common-Prayer; a Friend of Ply∣mouth meeting with him, asked him, Whether he would account Tole∣ration Accursed now? And Whether he would not now be glad of a To∣leration? To which the Priest returned no Answer, save by the sha∣king of his Head. But as stiff as this sort of Men were then against Toleration, it is well known, that many of them petitioned the King for Toleration, and for Meeting-Places; and paid for Licences too. But to return to the present Time, the latter end of the Year 1660. and beginning of 1661. Although those Friends, that had been Imprisoned upon the Rising of those Monarchy-Men, were set at Liberty; yet Meetings were much disturbed, and great Sufferings Friends went under: For besides what was done by Officers and Souldiers, many wild Fellows and rude People often came in. There came one time, when I was at Pell-Mell, an Embassador with a Company of Irish Men with rude Fellows: The Meeting was done before they came, and I was gone
up into a Chamber, where I heard one of them say, he would kill all the Quakers. So I went down to him, and was moved in the Power of the Lord to speak to him: and I told him, The Law said, An Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth: but thou threatens to kill all the Quakers, though they have done thee no hurt. But said I, here is Gospel for thee: Here's my Hair, and here's my Cheek, and here's my Shoulder, turning it to him. This came so over him, that he and his Companions stood as Men amazed, and said; If that was our Principle, and if we were as we said, they never saw the like in their Lives. I told them, What I was in Words, I was the same in Life. Then the Embassador came in (for he had stood without; for he said, that Irish Colonel was such a desperate Man, that he durst not come in with him, for fear, he should have done us some Mischief:) but Truth came over him, and he carried himself lovingly towards us; and so did the Embassador also: for the Lord's Power was over them all. At Mile-End Friends were kept out of their Meeting-Place by Soul∣diers; but Friends stood Nobly in the Truth, and were Valiant for the Lord's Name: and at last the Truth gave them Dominion. About this time we had Account, that John Love, a Friend, that was moved to go and bear Testimony against the Idolatry of the Papists, was dead in Prison at Rome: and it was suspected, he was privately put to Death in Prison. John Perrot was also Prisoner there; and being released, came over again: But after his Arrival here, he with Charles Baily, and some others, turned aside from the Ʋnity of Friends and Truth. Whereupon I was moved to give forth a Paper, declaring, how the Lord would blast them all, both him and his Followers (if they did not Repent and Return) and that they should wither, like the Grass on the House-top: and so many of them did; but others of them returned and repented. Also before this time we received Account from New-England, That the Government there had made a Law to Banish the Quakers out of their Colonies, upon pain of Death, in case they returned; and that several of our Friends, having been so banished, and returning, were thereupon taken, and actually Hanged: and that divers more were in Prison, in danger of the like Sentence to be executed upon them. When those were put to Death, I was in Prison at Lancaster, and had a perfect Sense of their Sufferings, as though it had been my self; and as though the Halter had been put about my own Neck; though we had not at that time heard of it. But as soon as we heard of it, Edward Burrough went to the King, and told him; There was a Vein of Innocent Blood opened in his Dominions, which, if it were not stopt, would over-run all. To which the King replied, But I will stop that Vein. Edward Burrough said; Then do it speedi∣ly; for we know not, how many may soon be put to Death. The King answered, As speedily, as ye will. Call (said he to some present) the Secretary, and I will do it presently So the Secretary being cal∣led, a Mandamus was forthwith granted. A Day or two after, Ed. Burrough going again to the King, to desire, the matter might be expedited; the King said, He had no Occasion at present to send a Ship thither: but if we would send one, we might do it, as soon as we would. Ed. Burrough then asked the King, If it would please him,
to grant his Deputation to one called a Quaker, to carry the Manda∣mus to New-England, (which is hereafter inserted.) He said, Yes, to whom ye will. Whereupon E. B. named one Samuel Shattock (as I remember) who being an Inhabitant of New-England, was banished by their Law, to be hanged, if he came again: and to him the De∣putation was granted. Then we sent for one Ralph Goldsmith, an ho∣nest Friend, who was Master of a good Ship; and with him we agreed for Three Hundred Pounds, (Goods, or no Goods) to Sail in Ten Days. He forthwith prepared to set Sail; and with a prosperous Gale, in about Six Weeks time, arrived before the Town of Boston in New-England, upon a First-Day Morning, called Sunday. With him went many Passengers, both of New and Old England, that were Friends, whom the Lord did move to go to bear their Testimony against those Bloody Persecutors, who had exceeded all the World in that Age, in their Bloody Persecutions. The Towns-men at Boston, seeing a Ship come into the Bay with English Colours, soon came on Board, and ask∣ed for the Captain: Ralph Goldsmith told them, He was the Command∣er. They asked him, if he had any Letters? He said, Yes. They asked, If he would deliver them? He said, No, not to day. So they went a-shore, and reported, There was a Ship full of Quakers, and that Samuel Shattock was among them; who they knew, was by their Law to be put to Death, for coming again after Banishment: but they knew not his Errand, nor his Authority. So all being kept close that day, and none of the Ships-Company suffered to go on Shore; next morning Samuel Shattock, the King's Deputy, and Ralph Goldsmith, the Commander of the Vessel, went on Shore; and sending back to the Ship the Men that landed them, they two went through the Town to the Governour's, John Endicott's, Door, and knock't. He sent out a Man, to know their Business: They sent him Word, their Business was from the King of England, and they would deliver their Message to none, but the Governour himself. Thereupon they were admitted to go in, and the Governour came to them; and having received the De∣putation and the Mandamus, he laid off his Hat, and look'd upon them: then going out, he bid the Friends follow him. So he went to the Deputy-Governour; and after a short Consultation, came out to the Friends, and said, We shall obey his Majesty's Commands. After this the Master gave liberty to the Passengers to come on Shore; and pre∣sently the Noise of the business flew about the Town: and the Friends of the Town, and the Passengers of the Ship Met together, to offer up their Praises and Thansgivings to God, who had so wonderfully deliver∣ed them from the Teeth of the Devourer. While they were thus met, in came a poor Friend, who being Sentenc'd by their bloody Law to Die, had lain some time in Irons, expecting Execution. This ad∣ded to their Joy, and caused them to lift up their Hearts in High Prai∣ses to God, who is worthy for ever to have the Praise, the Glory and the Honour; for he only is able to deliver, and to save, and to support all, that sincerely put their Trust in him. Here follows a Copy of the said Mandamus.
CHARLES R.1661. London. TRusty and Well Beloved. We Greet you Well. Having been Informed, that several of Our Subjects amongst you, called Qua∣kers, have been and are Imprisoned by you, whereof some have been Ex∣ecuted, and others (as hath been represented unto Ʋs) are in Danger to undergo the like; We have thought fit to signifie our Pleasure in that be∣half for the future: And do hereby require, That if there be any of those People called Quakers amongst you, now already Condemned to suffer Death, or other Corporal Punishment; or that are Imprisoned, and ob∣noxious to the like Condemnation, you are to forbear to proceed any fur∣ther therein; but that you forthwith send the said Persons (whether Con∣demned or Imprisoned) over into this our Kingdom of England, toge∣ther with the respective Crimes or Offences laid to their Charge: to the end such Course may be taken with them here, as shall be agreeable to our Laws, and their Demerits. And for so doing, these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge. Given at Our Court at White∣hall, the 9th day of September, 1661. in the Thirteenth Year of Our Reign. Subscribed: To Our Trusty and Well Beloved John Endicot, Esq and to all and every other the Governour or Governours of our Plantations of New-England, and of all the Colonies thereunto belonging, that now are, or hereafter shall be; and to all and every the Ministers and Officers of our Plantations and Colonies whatsoever, within the Continent of New-England. By His Majesty's Command. WILLIAM MORRIS. Some time after this, several of New-England's Magistrates came over hither, and one of their Priests; and we had several Discourses with them, at several times, concerning their Murdering our Friends, the Servants of the Lord: but they were ashamed to stand to their Bloody Actions. At one of those Meetings I asked Simon Broadstreet, (who was one of the New England-Magistrates) Whether he had not an hand in putting to Death those Four Servants of God, whom they hanged for being Quakers only, as they had nick-named them? And he confessed, he had. I then asked him, and the rest of his Associates, that were present; Whether they would acknowledge themselves to be Subjects to the Laws of England? And if they did, By what Law they had put our Friends to Death? They said; They were Subjects to the Laws of England; and they had put our Friends to Death by the same Law, as the Jesuits were put to Death here in England. I asked them then; Whether they did believe, that those Friends of ours, whom they had put to Death, were Jesuits, or Jesuitically affected? And the said, Nay. Then, said I, Ye have murdered them, if ye have
put them to Death by the Law. that Jesuits are put to Death here in England; and yet confess, they were no Jesuits. By this it plainly appears, ye have put them to Death in your own Wills, without any Law. Then Simon Broadstreet, finding himself and his Company ensnared by their own Words, said; Did we come to Catch them? I told them, they had Catched themselves, and they might justly be questioned for their Lives; and if the Father of William Robinson (who was one of them, that was put to Death) were in Town, it was pro∣bable, he would question them, and bring their Lives into Jeopardy. Hereupon they began to excuse themselves, saying; There was no Per∣secution now amongst them: But next morning we had Letters from New-England, giving us Account, that our Friends were persecuted there afresh. Thereupon we went to them again, and shewed them our Letters; which put them both to Silence and to Shame: and in great Fear they seemed to be, lest some should call them to Account, and prosecute them for their Lives; especially Simon Broadstreet: for he had at first, before so many Witnesses, confess'd, He had a hand in putting our Friends to death; that he could not get off from it; though he afterwards through Fear shuffled, and would have unsaid it again. But after this, he and the rest of them soon left the City, and got back to New-England again. I went also to Governour Winthrop, and discoursed with him about these matters: but he assured me, he had no hand in putting our Friends to Death, or in any way persecuting of them; but was one of them that protested against it. Now these stingy Persecutors of New-England were a People, that fled out of Old England thither, from the Persecution of the Bishops here: But when they had got Power into their hands, they so far exceeded the Bishops in Severity and Cruelty, that whereas the Bishops had made them pay Twelve Pence a Sunday (so called) for not coming to their Worship here, they imposed a Fine of Five Shillings a Day upon such, as should not conform to their Will-Worship there; and spoiled the Goods of Friends, that could not pay it. Besides, ma∣ny they Imprisoned, divers they Whipt, and that most Cruelly; of some they Cut off Ears, and some they Hanged: as the Books of Friends Sufferings in New-England largely shew; particularly, A Book written by Geo. Bishop of Bristol, Entituled, New-England judged. (In Two Parts.) Some of the old Royalists were earnest with Friends to have prosecuted them; but we told them, we left them to the Lord, to whom Vengeance belonged, and he would Repay it. And the Judgments of God have since fallen heavy on them: For the Indi∣ans have been raised up against them, and have Cut off many of them. About this time I lost a very good Book, being taken in the Printer's Hands: It was a useful, teaching Book, containing the Signification and Explanation of Names, Parables, Types and Figures in the Scrip∣tures. They who took it, were so affected with it, that they were loth to have destroyed it; but thinking to have made a great Ad∣vantage of it, they would have let us have had it again, if we would have given them a great Sum of Money for it: which we were not free to do.
And some time before this, while I was Prisoner in Lancaster-Castle, the Book called the Battledoor came forth, which was written to shew, that in all Languages Thou and Thee is the proper and usual Form of Speech to a Single Person; and You to more than one. This was set forth in Examples or Instances taken out of the Scriptures, and out of Books of Teaching, in about Thirty Languages. John Stubbs and Benjamin Furly took great Pains in the Compiling of it, which I put them upon; and some things I added to it. When it was finished, some of them were presented to the King and his Council, to the Bi∣shops of Canterbury and London, and to the Two Ʋniversities one a piece; and many bought of them. The King said, It was the pro∣per Language of all Nations: And the Bishop of Canterbury being ask∣ed what he thought of it, was so at a stand, that he could not tell what to say to it. For it did so Inform and Convince Pople, that few afterward were so Rugged towards us, for saying Thou and Thee to a single Person, which before they were exceeding fierce against us for. For this Thou and Thee was a sore Cut to proud Flesh, and them that sought Self-honour; who though they would say it to God and Christ, would not endure to have it said to themselves. So that we were of∣ten Beaten and Abused, and sometimes in danger of our Lives, for using those Words to some proud Men; who would say, What, you ill-bred Clown, do you Thou me! as though there lay Breeding in saying You to one; which was contrary to all their Grammars and Teaching-Books, by which they had taught and instructed their Youth. Now the Bishops and Priests being busie and eager, to settle and  up their Form of Worship, and Compel all to come to it; I was md to give forth the following Paper, to open unto People the Nature of the True Worship, which Christ set up, and which God accepts; Thus: CHrist's Worship is free in the Spirit to all Men; and such as Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth, are they, that God seeks to Worship him: for he is the God of Truth, and is a Spirit▪ and the God of the Spirits of all Flesh. And he hath given to all the Na∣tions of Men and Women Breath and Life, to live, and move, and have their Being in him; and hath put into them an Immortal Soul. So all the Nations of Men and Women are to be Temples for him to dwell in; and they that defile his Temple, them will he destroy. Now as the outward Jews, while they had their outward Temple at outward Jerusalem, were to go up thither to Worship (which Tem∣ple God hath long since thrown down, and destroyed that Jerusalem, the Vision of Peace; and cast off the Jews and their Worship: and in the room thereof hath set up his Gospel-Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth;) so now all are to Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth. And this is a free Worship: for where the Spirit of the Lord is, and ruleth, there is Liberty; and the Fruits of the Spirit are seen, and will manifest themselves: and the Spirit is not to be li∣mited, but to be lived and walked in; that the Fruits of it may appear. The Tares are such, as hang upon the Wheat to weigh it down; and thereby to draw it down to the Earth: yet the Tares and the Wheat must grow together, till the Harvest; lest they, that
take upon them to pluck up the Tares, should pluck up the Wheat with the Tares. The Tares are such, as Worship not God in the Spi∣rit and in the Truth; but do grieve the Spirit, and vex it, and quench it in themselves, and walk not in the Truth: yet will scraul and hang about the Wheat, the true Worshippers in the Spirit and in the Truth. Christ's Church was never established by Blood, nor held up by Pri∣sons; neither was the Foundation of it laid by Carnal, Weaponed Men, nor is it preserved by such. But when Men went from the Spi∣rit and Truth, then they took up Carnal Weapons to maintain their outward Forms; and yet cannot preserve them with their Carnal Weapons: For one plucketh down another's Form with his outward Weapons. And this Work and Doing hath been among the Christi∣ans in Name, since they lost the Spirit, and Spiritual Weapons, and the true Worship, which Christ set up, that is in the Spirit and in the Truth; which Spirit and Truth they that Worship in, are over all the Tares. All that would be plucking up the Tares, are forbidden by Christ, who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him: for the Tares and the Wheat must grow together till the Harvest; as Christ hath commanded. The Stone, that smote the Image, became a great Mountain, and filled the whole Earth: Now, if the Stone do fill the whole Earth, all Nations must be Temples for the Stone. And all that say, they do travel for the Seed, and yet bring forth nothing but a Birth of Strife, and Contention, and Confusion; their Fruit shews their Travel to be wrong: for by the Fruit the End of every one's Work is seen of what sort it is. G. F. About this time many Papists and Jesuits began to fawn upon Friends, and talk'd up and down, where they came, that of all the Sects the Quakers were the best and most self-denying People: And said, It was great pity, that they did not return to the Holy Mother Church, Thus they made a Busz among the People, and said; They would willingly discourse with Friends. But Friends were loth to meddle with them, because they were Jesuits; looking upon it to be both dangerous and scandalous. But when I understood it, I said to Friends; Let us discourse with them, be they what they will. So a time being ap∣pointed at Gerrard Roberts his House, there came two of them, like Courtiers. When we were come together, they asked our Names; which we told them: But we did not ask their Names: for we un∣derstood, they were called Papists; and they knew, we were called Quakers. I asked them the same Question, that I had formerly asked a Jesuit, namely; Whether the Church of Rome was not degenerated from the Church in the Primitive Times, from the Spirit, and Power, and Practice, that they were in in the Apostles times? He to whom I put this Question, being subtile, said, He would not Answer it. I ask'd him, Why? But he would shew no Reason. His Companion said, he would answer me: and he said, They were not degenerated from the Church in the Primitive times. I asked the other, Whether he was of the same Mind? And he said, Yes. Then I told them, that for the better un∣derstanding one another, and that there might be no Mistake, I would
repeat my Question over again after this manner; Whether the Church of Rome now was in the same Purity, Practice, Power and Spirit, that the Church in the Apostle's time was in? When they saw, we would be exact with them; they flew off, and denied that, saying: It was Presumption in any to say, they had the same Power and Spirit, which the Apostles had. But I told them: It was Presumption in them, to med∣dle with the Words of Christ and his Apostles, and make People be∣lieve, they succeeded the Apostles, and yet be forced to Confess, They were not in the same Power and Spirit, that the Apostles were in: This, said I, is a Spirit of Presumption, and rebuked by the Apostles Spirit. Then I shewed them, how different their Fruits and Practices were from the Fruits and Practices of the Apostles. Then got up one of them, and said; Ye are a Company of Dreamers. Nay, said I, ye are the filthy Dreamers, who dream, ye are the Apostles Successors; and yet Confess, Ye have not the same Power and Spirit, which the Apostles were in. And are not they Defilers of the Flesh, who say, It is Pre∣sumption for any to say, they have the same Power and Spirit, which the Apostles had? Now, said I, if ye have not the same Power and Spi∣rit, which the Apostles had; then it is manifest, that ye are led by ano∣ther Power and Spirit, than the Apostles and Church in the Primitive times were led by. Then I began to tell them, how that Evil Spi∣rit, which they were led by, had led them to Pray by Beads, and to Images; and to set up Nunneries, and Frieries, and Monasteries, and to put People to Death for Religion: and this Practice of theirs I shewed them, was below the Law, and far short of the Gospel, in which is Liberty. They were soon weary of this Discourse, and went their way; and gave a Charge (as we heard) to the Papists, That they should not dispute with us, nor read any of our Books: So we were rid of them. But we had Reasonings with all the other Sects, as Presby∣terians, Independents, Seekers, Baptists, Episcopal-men, Socinians, Brownists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians, Fifth-Monarchy-Men, Familists, Muggletonians and Ranters; none of which would Affirm, they had the same Power and Spirit, that the Apostles had, and were in: So in that Power and Spirit the Lord gave us Dominion over them all. As for the Fifth-Monarchy-Men, I was moved to give forth a Paper to them, to manifest their Error to them: For they looked for Christ's Personal Coming in an outward Form and Manner; and they fixed the time of it to the Year 1666; at which time some of them did pre∣pare themselves, when it Thundered and Rained, thinking Christ was then come to set up his Kingdom: and then they imagined, they were to kill the Whore without them. But I told them, the Whore was alive in them, and was not burnt with God's Fire, nor judged in them with the same Power and Spirit, the Apostles were in. And their looking for Christ's Coming outwardly, to set up his Kingdom, was like the Pharisees Lo here, and Lo there. But Christ was come, and had set up his Kingdom above Sixteen Hundred Years ago (according to Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, and Daniel's Prophecy) and he had dash'd to pieces the Four Monarchies, the great Image, with its Head of Gold, Breast and Arms of Silver, Belly and Thighs of Brass, Legs of Iron, and Feet part of Iron, part of Clay: and they were all blown away
with God's Wind, as the Chaff in the Summer-threshing-Floor. And when Christ was on Earth, he said, his Kingdom was not of this World: If it had been, his Servants would have fought; but it was not, therefore his Servants did not fight. And therefore all the Fifth-Monarchy-Men, that be Fighters with Carnal Weapons, are none of Christ's Servants, but the Beast's and the Whore's. Christ said, All Power in Heaven and in Earth is given to me: So then, his Kingdom was set up above Sixteen Hundred Years ago, and he Reigns. And we see Jesus Reign, said the Apostle, and he shall Reign, till all things be put un∣der his Feet; though all things are not yet put under his Feet, nor sub∣dued. This year several Friends were moved to go beyond the Seas, to publish Truth in Forreign Countries. John Stubbs, and Henry Fell, and Richard Costrop were moved to go towards China, and Prester John's Country; but no Masters of Ships would carry them. With much ado they got a Warrant from the King; but the East-India-Company found ways to avoid it, and the Masters of their Ships would not carry them. Then they went into Holland, hoping to have got Pas∣sage there; but no Passage could they get there neither. Then John Stubs and Henry Fell took Shipping to go to Alexandria in Egypt, in∣tending to go by the Carravans from thence. Mean while Daniel Ba∣ker being to go to Smirna, he drew Richard Costrop, contrary to his own Freedom, to go along with him. And in the passage Richard falling sick, D. Baker left him sick in the Ship; where he died: But that hard-hearted Man afterwards lost his own Condition. John Stubbs and Henry Fell got to Alexandria in Egypt; but they had not been long there, before the English Consul banished them from thence: Yet before they came away, they dispersed many Books and Papers there, for the opening the Principles and Way of Truth to the Turks and Grecians. They gave the Book called, The Popes Strength broken, to an Old Frier, for him to give or send to the Pope: which Book, when the Frier had perused, he clapped his Hand upon his Breast, and confess'd, What was written therein, was Truth: but, said he, if I should confess to it openly, they would burn me. So John Stubs and Henry Fell not being suffered to go farther, returned to England; and came to London again. And John had a Vision, that the English and Dutch, who had joined together not to carry them, would fall out one with the other: And so it came to pass. Having now stay'd in London some time, I felt drawings to visit Friends in Essex.Essex. Colchester Cogshall. So I went down to Colchester, where I had very large Meetings: and from thence to Cogshall; not far from which there was a Priest Convinced, and I had a Meeting at his House. And so tra∣velling a little up and down in those Parts, and visiting Friends in their Meetings there-aways,London. I returned pretty quickly to London, where I found great Service for the Lord: For a large Door was opened, and many flocked in to our Meetings, and the Lord's Truth spread mighti∣ly this Year. Yet Friends had great Travels, and sore Labours; the rude People having been so heightned by the Monarchy-Men's Rising a little before. But the Lord's Power was over all, and in it Friends had Dominion: though we had not only those Sufferings without, but Sufferings within also by John Perrot and his Company; who giving
heed to a Spirit of Delusion, sought to introduce and set up among Friends that evil and uncomely Practice of keeping on the Hat in time of publick Prayers. Now Friends had spoken to him, and divers of his Followers about it; and I had written to them concerning it; but He and some others rather strengthened themselves against Friends there∣in. Wherefore feeling the Judgment of Truth rise against it, I gave forth the following Lines, as a Warning to all, that were concerned therein. WHosoever is tainted with this Spirit of John Perrot, it will perish. Mark theirs and his End, that are turned into those outward things and Janglings about them, and that which is not savoury; all which is for perpetual Judgment, and is to be swept and cleansed out of the Camp of God's Elect. This is to that Spirit, that is gone into Jangling about that, which is below, (the Rotten Princi∣ple of the old Ranters) and gone from the Invisible Power of God, in which is the Everlasting Fellowship: and so many are become like the Corn on the House-top, and like the untimely Figs; and now cla∣mour and speak against them, that be in the Power of God. O con∣sider, the Light and Power of God goes over you all, and leaves you in the fretting Nature, out of the Unity, which is in the Everlasting Light, Life and Power of God. Consider this, before the Day be gone from you; and take heed, that your Memorial be not rooted out from among the Righteous. G. F. Among the Exercises and Troubles, that Friends had from without, one was concerning Friends Marriages, which sometimes were lled in question. And in this Year there happened to be a Cause Tryed at the Assize at Nottingham concerning a Friend's Marriage: The Case was thus. Some Years before, Two Friends were joined together in Marriage amongst Friends, and lived together as Man and Wife about two Years. Then the Man died, leaving his Wife with Child; and leaving an Estate in Lands of Copy-hold. When the Woman was delivered, the Jury presented the Child Heir to its Father's Lands; and accordingly the Child was admitted: Afterwards another Friend married the Widow. And after that a Man, that was Near of Kin to her former Husband, brought his Action against the Friend, that had last married her; endeavouring to dispossess them, and deprive the Child of the Inheritance, and to possess himself thereof, as next Heir to the Woman's first Husband. And to effect this, he endeavoured to prove the Child Illegitimate, alledging; The Marriage was not according to Law. In opening the Cause, the Plaintiff's Counsel did use unseemly Words concerning Friends, saying; That they went together like Brute Beasts: with other ill Expressions. After the Counsels on both sides had pleaded, the Judge (viz. Judge Archer) took the matter in hand, and opened it to the Jury, telling them; That there was a Marriage in Paradise, when Adam took Eve, and Eve took Adam; and that it was the Consent of the Parties that made a Marriage. And for the Qua∣kers, (he said) he did not know their Opinions; but he did not believe,
they went together, as Brute Beasts, as had been said of them; but as Christians: and therefore he did believe, the Marriage was lawful, and the Child lawful Heir. And the better to satisfie the Jury, he brought them a Case to this purpose. A Man, that was weak of Body, and kept his Bed, had a desire in that Condition to Marry; and did declare be∣fore Witnesses, that he did take such a Woman to be his Wife; and the Woman declared, that she took that Man to be her Husband. This Marriage was afterwards called in Question; and (as the Judge said) all the Bishops did at that time conclude it to be a Lawful Marriage. Hereupon the Jury gave in their Verdict for the Friend's Child, and against the Man, that would have deprived it of its Inheritance. About this time the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were tendred unto Friends, as a Snare, because it was known, we could not Swear; and thereupon many were Imprisoned, and divers Premunired. Upon that occasion Friends published in Print the Grounds and Reasons, why they refused to swear: Besides which I was moved to give forth these few Lines following, to be given to the Magistrates: THE World saith, Kiss the Book: But the Book saith, Kiss the Son, lest he be angry. And the Son saith, Swear not at all; but keep to Yea and Nay in all your Communications: for whatso∣ever is more than this, cometh of Evil. Again, the World saith, Lay your hand on the Book; but the Book saith, Handle the Word: And the Word saith, Handle not the Traditions, nor the Inventions, nor the Rudiments of the World. And God saith, This is my beloved Son, hear him; who is the Life, and the Truth, and the Light, and the Way to God. G. F. Now there being very many Frionds in Prison in the Nation, Ri∣chard Hubberthorn and I drew up a Paper concerning them; and got it delivered to the King, that he might understand, how we were dealt with by his Officers. It was directed thus: For the KING. FRiend, who art the Chief Ruler of these Dominions, here is a List of some of the Sufferings of the People of God, in scorn called Quakers, that have suffered under the Changeable Powers before thee, by whom there have been Imprisoned, and under whom there have suffered for good Conscience-sake, and for bearing Testimony to the Truth as it is in Jesus, Three Thousand, One Hundred, Seventy Three Persons: And there lie yet in Prison in the Name of the Com∣monwealth, Seventy Three Persons, that we know of. And there have died in Prison in the time of the Commonwealth, and of Oliver and Richard the Protectors, through cruel and hard Imprisonments, upon Nasty Straw, and in Dungeons, Thirty Two Persons. There have been also Imprisoned in thy Name, since thy Arrival, by such as thought to ingratiate themselves thereby to thee, Three Thousand, Sixty and
Eight Persons. Besides this,  our Meetings are daily broken up by Men with Clubs and Arms, (though we Meet peaceably, according to the Practice of God's People in the Primitive times) and our Friends are thrown into Waters; and trod upon, till the very Blood gusheth out of them: the number of which Abuses can hardly be uttered. Now this we would have of Thee, to set them at Liberty, that lie in Prison in the Names of the Common-wealth, and of the two Protectors, and them that lie in Thy own Name, for speaking the Truth, and for good Conscience sake; who have not lifted up an Hand against thee, nor any Man: and that the Meetings of our Friends, who meet peaceably together in the Fear of God, to Wor∣ship him, may not be broken up by rude People with their Clubs, and Swords, and Staves. One of the greatest things, that we have suffered for formerly, was, because we could not Swear to the Pro∣tectors, and all the changeable Governments; and now we are Im∣prisoned, because we cannot take the Oath of Allegiance. Now, if Yea be not Yea, and Nay, Nay to thee, and to all Men upon the Earth, let us suffer as much for breaking of that, as others do for breaking an Oath. We have suffered these many years, both in Lives and Estates under these Changeable Governments, because we cannot Swear; but obey Christ's Doctrine, who commands, We should not swear at all: (Matth. 5. Jam. 5.) and this we Seal with our Lives and Estates, with our Yea and Nay, according to the Doctrine of Christ. Hearken to these things, and so consider them in the Wisdom of God, that by it such Actions may be stopped, Thou that hast the Government, and may'st do it. We desire, that all that are in Pri∣son, may be set at Liberty; and that for the time to come they may not be Imprisoned for Conscience, and for the Truth's sake: And if thou question the Innocency of their Sufferings, let them and their Accusers be brought up before thee; and we shall produce a more particular and full Account of their Sufferings, if required. G. F. & R. H. I mentioned before, how that in the Year 1650. I was kept Pri∣soner Six Months in the House of Correction at Darby, and that the Keeper of the Prison, being a Cruel Man, and one that had dealt very wickedly by me, was smitten in himself, the Plagues and Terrors of the Lord falling upon him because thereof; this Man being afterwards Convinced of Truth, wrote me the following Letter. Dear Friend: HAving such a Convenient Messenger, I could do no less, than give thee an Account of my present Condition; remembring, that to the first Awakening of me to a Sense of Life, and of the Inward Principle, God was pleased to make use of thee as an Instrument: So that some∣times I am taken with Admiration, that it should come by such a means, as it did, that is to say; That Providence should order thee to be my Prisoner, to give me my first, real sight of the Truth: It makes me ma∣ny times to think of the Jailer's Conversion by the Apostles. O happy
George Fox!1662. London. that first breathed that Breath of Life within the Walls of my Habitation! Notwithstanding my outward Losses are since that time such, that I am become nothing in the World; yet I hope, I shall find, that all these light Afflictions, which are but for a moment, will work for me a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory. They have taken all from me: and now instead of keeping a Prison, I am rather waiting, when I shall become a Prisoner my self. Pray for me, that my Faith fail not; but that I may hold out to the Death, that I may receive a Crown of Life. I earnestly desire to hear from thee, and of thy Condi∣tion, which would very much rejoice me. Not having else at present, but my kind Love unto thee, and all Christian Friends with thee; in haste, I rest, Derby, the 22th of the 4th Month, 1662. Thine in Christ Jesus, Thomas Sharman. There were Two of our Friends in Prison in the Inquisition at Mal∣ta; they were both Women: The name of the one was Katharine Evans, and of the other Sarah Chevers. I was told, that One, cal∣led the Lord D' Aubeny, could procure their Liberty; wherefore I went to him: And having Informed him concerning their Imprisonment, desired him to write to the Magistrates there for their Release. He readily promised me, he would; and said, If I would come again with∣in a Month, he would tell me of their Discharge. I went agan about that time; and he said, he thought, his Letters had Miscarried, be∣cause he had received no Answer. But he promised, he would write again; and he did so: and thereupon they were both set at Liberty. With this Great Man I had a great deal of Reasoning about Re∣ligion; and he did confess, that Christ hath enlightned every Man, that cometh into the World, with his Spiritual Light; and that he had ta∣sted Death for every Man; and that the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, hath appeared to all Men; and that it would teach them, and bring their Salvation, if they did obey it. Then I asked him, What would They (the Papists) do with all their Relicks and Images, if they did own and believe in this Light, and receive the Grace to teach them, and bring their Salvation? And he said, Those things were but Policies, to keep People in Subjection. Very free he was in Dis∣course; and I never heard a Papist Confess so much as he did. Now though several about the Court began to grow Loving to Friends, yet the Persecution was very hot; and several Friends died in Prison. Whereupon I gave forth a little Paper, concerning the Grounds and Rise of Persecution; which was thus: ALL the Sufferings of the People of God in all Ages were, because they could not Join to the National Religions and Worships, which Men had made and set up; and because they would not forsake God's Religion, and his Worship, which he had set up. And ye may see through all Chronicles and Histories, how that the Priests joined with the Powers of the Nations: The Magistrates, and Soothsayers, and Fortune-tellers,
all these joined against the People of God, and did imagin vain things against them in their Counsels. And when the Jews did badly, they turned against Moses; and when the Jewish Kings transgressed the Law of God, then they persecuted the Prophets: as may be seen in the Prophets Writings. And when Christ the Substance came, then the Jews persecuted Christ and his Apostles, and Disciples: And when the Jews had not Power enough of themselves to persecute answerable to their Wills; then they got the Heathen-Gentiles to help them against Christ, and against his Apostles and Disciples, who were in the Spirit and Power of Christ. G. F. Now after I had made some stay in London, and had cleared my self of those Services, that at that time lay upon me there, I went into the Country; having with me Alexander Parker and John Stubbs (who was lately come back from Alexandria in Egypt, as was men∣tioned before.) We travelled down through the Countries, visiting Friends Meetings, till we came to Bristol.Bristol. When we were come thi∣ther, we understood, that the Officers were likely to come, and break up the Meeting.Broad∣mead-Meeting. Yet on the First-Day we went to the Meeting at Broad∣mead: And Alexander Parker standing up first to Declare, while he was speaking, the Officers came up, and took him away. After he was gone, I stood up in the Eternal Power of God, and declared the Everlasting Truth of the Lord God; and the Heavenly Power came over all, and the Meeting was quiet the rest of the time, and brake up peaceably. I tarried, till the First-Day following; visiting Friends, and being visited by Friends. On the First-Day in the Morning se∣veral Friends came to me to Edward Pyot's House, (where I lay the Night before) and used great Endeavours to perswade me, not to go to the Meeting that day; for the Magistrates (they said) had threatned to take me, and had raised the Trained Bands. I wisht them to go their way to the Meeting; not telling them, what I intended to do: but I told Ed. Pyot, I intended to go to the Meeting; and he sent his Son with me, to shew me the Way from his House by the Fields. As I went, I met divers Friends, who were coming to me to prevent my going; and did what they could, to stop me: What, said one, Wilt thou go into the Mouth of the Beast! Wilt thou go into the Mouth of the Dragon, said another! But I put them by, and went on. When I came into the Meeting, Margaret Thomas was speaking; and when she had done, I stood up. Now I saw a Concern and Fear upon Friends for me; but the Power of the Lord, in which I declared, soon struck the Fear out of them: and Life sprang, and an Heavenly, Glori∣ous Meeting we had. After I had Cleared my self, of what was upon me from the Lord to the Meeting, I was moved to Pray: and after I had prayed, and was stept down; I was moved to stand up again, and tell Friends, Now they might see, there was a God in Israel, that could deliver. A very large, full Meeting this was, and very hot: but Truth was over all, and the Life was up, which carried through all; and the Meeting broke up in Peace. For the Officers and Souldiers had been breaking up another Meeting, which had taken up their time;
so that our Meeting was ended,1662. Broad∣mead-Meeting. before they came. But I understood afterwards, they were in a great Rage, that they had missed me; for they were heard to say one to another before, I'll warrant, we shall have him: but the Lord prevented them. I went from the Meeting to Joan Hily's, where many Friends came to see me; rejoycing and blessing God for our Deliverance. In the Evening I had a fine fresh Meeting among Friends, at a Friend's House over the Water, where Friends were much refreshed in the Lord. After this I stay'd most part of that Week in Bristol,Bristol. and at Edward Pyott's. Edward was brought so low and weak with an Ague, that when I came first thi∣ther, he was lookt upon as a Dying Man: but it pleased the Lord to raise him up again; so that, before I went away, his Ague left him, and he was finely well. Now having been two First-Days together at the Meeting at Broad∣mead, and feeling my Spirit clear of Bristol; I went next First-Day to a Meeting in the Country not far from Bristol, And after the Meeting was over, some Friends, that came from Bristol, told me, that the Souldiers that day had beset the Meeting-House round at Bri∣stol; and then went up, saying. They would be sure to have me now: But when they came up, and found me not there, they were in a great Rage; and kept the Friends in the Meeting-house most part of the day, before they would let them go home; and queried of them, Which way I was gone, and how they might send after me? For the Major, they said, would fain have spoken with me. But I had a Vision of a great Mastiff Dog, that would have bitten me: but I put one hand above his Jaws, and the other hand below, and tore his Jaws to pieces. So the Lord by his Power tore their Power to pieces, and made way for me to escape them. Then passed I through the Countries, visiting Friends in Wiltshire and Barkshire,Wiltshire. Barkshire. London. till I came to London; and had great Meetings amongst Friends, as I went: and the Lord's Power was over all; and a blessed time it was for the spreading of his glorious Truth. It was indeed the Immediate Hand and Power of the Lord, that did preserve me out of their hands at Bristol, and over the Heads of all our Persecutors; and the Lord alone is worthy of all the Glory, who did uphold and preserve for his Name and Truth's sake. At London I staid not long this time; but was drawn in my Spirit to visit Friends Northward,Leicester∣shire. Notting∣hamshire. Skegby. Barnet-hills. as far as Leicestershire; John Stubbs being with me. So we travelled down through the Countries, having Meetings amongst Friends, as we went; and at Skegby we had a great Meeting. Thence passing on, we came to a place called Barnet-Hills, where lived then one Captain Brown, a Baptist, whose Wife was Con∣vinced of Truth. This Captain Brown, after the Act for breaking up Meetings came forth, being afraid, lest his Wife should go to Meetings, and be cast into Prison, left his House at Barrow, and took a place on these Hills, saying; His Wife should not go to Prison. And this being a free Place, many, both Priests and others, got thither, as well as he. But he, who would neither stand to Truth himself, nor suffer his Wife; was in this place, where he thought to be safe, found out by the Lord: whose hand fell heavy upon him for his Ʋnfaithfulness; so that he was sorely plagued, and grievously judged in himself for fly∣ing, and drawing his Wife into that private place. We went to see his
Wife; and being come into the House, I asked him,1662. Barnet-Hills. How he did? How do I? said he, The Plagues and Vengeance of God are upon me, a Runnagate, a Cain as I am: God may look for a Witness for me, and such as me; for if all were no faithfuller, than I, God would have no Witness left in the Earth. In this Condition he lived there on Bread and Water; and thought, it was too good for him. At length he got home again with his Wife, to his own House at Barrow; where afterwards he came to be Convinced of God's Eternal Truth, and died in it. A little before his Death be said; Though he had not born a Te∣stimony for Truth in his Life, he would bear a Testimony in his Death, and would be buried in his Orchard: and was so. He was an Example to all the Flying Baptists in the time of Persecution; who could not bear Persecution themselves, and yet persecuted us, when they had Power. From Barnet-Hills we came to Swanington in Leicestershire,Leicester∣shire. Swaning∣ton. where Wil. Smith, and some other Friends came to me; but they passed away towards Night, leaving me at a Friend's House in Swanington. At Night, as I was sitting in the Hall, speaking to a Widow-Woman and her Daugh∣ter, there came one called Lord Beaumont, with a Company of Soul∣diers, who slapping their Swords on the Door, rusht into the House with their Swords and Pistols in their hands, crying, Put out the Can∣dles, and make fast the Doors. Then they seized upon the Friends in the House, and asked; If there were no more about the House? The Friends told them, there was one Man more in the Hall. Now there being some Friends, that came out of Darbyshire, one of them was named Thomas Fauks; and this Lord Beaumont (so called) after he had asked all their Names, bid his Man, set down that Man's Name Thomas Fox: but the Friend said, Nay; his Name was not Fox, but Fauks. In the mean time some of the Souldiers came, and fetcht me out of the Hall, and brought me to him; and he asked me my Name: I told him, my Name was George Fox, and that I was well known by that Name. Ay, said he, you are known all the World over: I said, I was known for no Hurt, but for Good. Then he put his Hands into my Pockets to search them, and pluck'd out my Comb-Case: and af∣terwards commanded one of his Officers to search further, for Letters, as he pretended. I told him, I was no Letter-Carrier: and askt him, Why would he come amongst a Peaceable People with Swords and Pistols, without a Constable; which was contrary to the King's Procla∣mation, and to the late Act? For he could not say, there was a Meet∣ing; I being only talking with a poor Widow-Woman and her Daughter. By reasoning thus with him, he came somewhat down: yet sending for the Constables, he gave them Charge of us that Night; and to bring us before him next Morning. Accordingly the Constables set a Watch of the Town's People upon us that Night; and had us up next Morning to his House, about a Mile from Swanington. When we came before him, he told us, We Met contrary to the Act: Whereupon I desired him to shew us the Act. Why, says he, you have it in your Pocket. I told him, he did not find us in a Meeting. Then he asked us, Whether we would take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? I told him, I never took any Oath in all my Life, nor Engagement, nor the Covenant: Yet still he would force the Oath upon us. Then I
desired him to shew us the Oath, that we might see, whether we were the Persons the Oath was to be tendred to;1662. waning∣on. and whether it was not for the Discovery of Popish Recusants. At length he brought forth a little Book: but we called for the Statute-Book. He would not shew us that; but caused a Mittimus to be made, which mentioned, That we were to have had a Meeting: And with this Mittimus he delivered us to the Constables to Convey us to Leicester-Jail. But when the Constables had brought us back to Swanington, it being Harvest-time, it was hard to get any body to go with us; for the People were loth to go with their Neighbours to Prison, especially in such a busie time. They would have given us our Mittimus, to have carried it our selves to the Jail; for it had been usual for Constables, to give Friends their own Mittimus, (for they durst trust Friends;) and they have gone themselves with their Mittimus to the Jailer. But we told them, though our Friends had sometimes done so, yet we would not take this Mittimus; but some of them should go with us to the Jail. At last they hired a poor, labouring Man to go with us; who yet was loth to have gone, though hired. So we rid through the Coun∣try to Leicester, being Five of us in number; some carried their Bibles open in their hands, declaring the Truth to the People, as we rode, in the Fields and through the Towns, and telling them; We were the Prisoners of the Lord Jesus Christ, going to suffer Bonds for his Name and Truth-sake: and one Woman's Friend carried her Wheel on her Lap, to spin on in Prison: and the People were mightily affected. At Lei∣cester we went to an Inn; and the Master of the House seemed to be troubled, that we should go to Prison: and being himself in Commissi∣on, he sent for Lawyers in the Town to advise with; and would have taken up the Mittimus, and kept us in his own House, and not have let us gone into the Jail. But I told Friends, it would be great Charge to lie at an Inn, and many Friends and People would be coming to Visit us; and it might be hard for him to bear our having Meetings in his House: and besides, we had many Friends in the Prison already; and we had rather be with them. So we let the Man know, that we were sensible of his Kindness: and to Prison we went;Leicester-Prison. the Poor Man, that brought us thither, delivering both the Mittimus and us to the Jailer. This Jailer had been a very wicked, cruel Man: and there being Six or Seven Friends in Prison, before we came, he had taken some occasion to quarrel with them, and had thrust them into the Dungeon amongst the Fellons; where was hardly room for them to lie down, they were so thronged. We stay'd all that day in the Prison-Yard, and desired the Jailer to let us have some Straw: He surlily answered, You do not look like Men that would lie on Straw. After a while William Smith, a Friend, came to me; and he being acquainted in the House, I asked him, What Rooms there were in the House, and what Rooms Friends usually had been put into, before they were put into the Dungeon? I asked him also, Whe∣ther the Jailer or his Wife was Master? He said, The Wife was Master; and that, though she was Lame, and sate mostly in her Chair, not being able to go but on Crutches; yet she would beat her Husband, when he came within her reach, if he did not do as she would have him do. Now I considered, that probably many Friends
might come to Visit us; and that,1662. Leicester-Prison. if we had a Room to our selves, it would be better for them to speak to me, and for me to speak to them, as there should be occasion. Wherefore I desired William Smith to go speak with the Woman, and let her know, if she would let us have a Room, and let our Friends come up out of the Dungeon; and leave it to us and them, to give her what we would, it might be better for her. He went: and after some reasoning with her, she consented; and we were had into a Room. Then we were told, that the Jailer would not suffer us to fetch any Drink out of the Town into the Prison; but that what Beer we drank, we must take of him. I told them, I would remedy that, if they would: for we would get a Pale of Water, and a little Wormwood once a day; and that might serve us: So we should have none of his Beer; and the Water he could not deny us. Before we came there, when those few Friends, that were Prison∣ers there, did Meet together on the First-Days, if any of them was moved to pray to the Lord, the Jailer would come up with his great Quarter-staff in his Hand, and his Mastiff-Dog at his Heels, and would pluck them down by the Hair of the Head, and strike them with his Staff: but when he struck Friends, the Mastiff-Dog, instead of falling upon Friends, would take the Staff out of his Hand. Now when the First-Day came, after we came in, I spake to one of my Fellow-Prisoners, to carry down a Stool, and set it in the Yard; and give notice to the Debtors and Fellons, that there would be a Meeting in the Yard; and they that would hear the Word of the Lord decla∣red, might come thither. So the Debtors and Prisoners went into the Yard, and we went down, and had a very precious Meeting: the Jailer not meddling. Thus every First-Day we had a Meeting there, as long as we stay'd in Prison: and several came in out of the City and Country, and many were Convinced; and some received the Lord's Truth there, who stood faithful Witnesses for it ever since. When the Sessions came, we were had up before the Justices;Leicester-Sessions. with many more Friends, that were sent to Prison, whilst we were there, to the number of about Twenty. Being brought into the Court, the Jailer put us into the Place, where the Thieves were put; and then some of the Justices began to tender the Oaths of Allegiance and Su∣premacy to us. I told them: I never took any Oath in my Life; and they knew, we could not Swear, because Christ and his Apostle forbad it: and therefore they put it but as a Snare to us. But we told them, if they could prove, that after Christ and the Apostle had for∣bid Swearing, they did ever command Christians to Swear, then we would take these Oaths; otherwise we were resolved, to obey Christ's Command, and the Apostle's Exhortation. They said, We must take the Oath, that we might manifest our Allegiance to the King. I told them, I had been formerly sent up a Prisoner by Col. Hacker, from that Town to London, under pretence, that I held Meetings to plot to bring in King Charles. I also desired them to read our Mittimus, which set forth the Cause of our Commitment to be, that we were To have a Meeting; and I said, he that was called Lord Beaumont, could not by that Act send us to Jail, unless we had been taken at a Meeting, and found to be such Persons, as the Act speaks of: therefore we desired,
they would read the Mittimus,1662. Leicester-Sessions. and see, how wrongfully we were Im∣prisoned. They would not take notice of the Mittimus; but called a Jury, and Indicted us for Refusing to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. When the Jury was Sworn and Instructed, as they were going out, one, that had been an Alderman of the City, spake to them, and bid them Have a good Conscience: and one of the Jury, being a peevish Man, told the Justices, There was One affronted the Jury: Whereupon they called him up, and tendred him the Oath al∣so; and he took it. While we were standing in the Place, where the Thieves used to stand, there was a Cut-Purse had his Hand in several Friends Pockets; and Friends declared it to the Justices, and shewed them the Man: They called him up before them; and upon Examination he could not deny it: yet they set him at Liberty. It was not long, before the Jury Returned, and brought us in Guilty: and then, after some Words, the Justices Whispered together, and bid the Jailer take us down to Prison again: But the Lord's Power was over them, and his Everlasting Truth, which we declared boldly a∣mongst them. And there being a great Concourse of People, most of them followed us; so that the Cryer, and Bayliffs were sain to call the People back again to the Court: We declared the Truth, as we went down the Streets all along,Leicester-Jail. till we came to the Jail, the Streets be∣ing full of People. When we were in our Chamber again, after some time the Jailer came to us, and desired all to go forth, that were not Prisoners. And when they were gone, he said, Gentlemen, it is the Court's Pleasure, that ye should all be set at liberty, except those that are in for Tithes: and you know, there are Fees due to me; but I shall leave it to you, to give me what you will. Thus were we all set at Liberty on a sudden. And being thus set at Liberty, the rest passed every one into their Services; only Leonard Fell (being come thither) stay'd with me, and we two went again to Swanington.Swaning∣ton. I had a Letter from him they called the Lord Hastings; who hearing of my Imprisonment, had written from London to the Justices at the Sessions, to set me at Liberty. Now I had not deli∣vered this Letter to the Justices; but whether they had any knowledge of his Mind from any other hand, which made them discharge us so suddenly, I know not. But this Letter I carried to him called the Lord Beaumont, who had sent us to Prison; and when he had broken it open, and read it, he seemed much troubled: but at last came a lit∣tle lower; yet threatned us, if we had any more Meetings at Swa∣nington, he would break them up, and send us to Prison again. But notwithstanding his Threats, we went to Swanington, and had a Meet∣ing with Friends there: and he came not, nor sent not to break it up. From Swanington we passed through the Country, and came to a Place called Twy-Cross;Twy-Cross where that Great Man formerly mentioned, whom the Lord God had raised up from his Sickness in the Year 1649, (and whose Serving-man came at me with a Drawn Sword, to have done me a Mischief) He and his Wife came to see me. From thence we travelled through Warwickshire,Warwick∣shire. where we had brave Meetings;
and so into Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire, visiting Friends,1662. Northam∣ptonshire. Bedford∣shire. London. Essex. Norfolk. Norwich. Sutton. Cambridge∣shire. till we came to London. I stay'd not long at this time in London, but went into Essex, and so into the East, and to Norfolk; having great Meetings. At Nor∣wich, when I came to Capt. Lawrence's, there was great Threatning of Disturbance; but the Meeting was quiet. Passing from thence to Sut∣ton, and so into Cambridgeshire, there I heard of Edward Burrough's Decease. And being sensible, how great a Grief and Exercise it would be to Friends to part with him, I writ the following Lines to Friends, for the staying and settling of their Minds. Friends, BE still and quiet in your own Conditions, and settled in the Seed of God, that doth not Change; that in that ye may feel Dear E. B. among you in the Seed, in which and by which he begat you to God, with whom he is: and that in the Seed ye may all see and feel him, in which is the Ʋnity with him in the Life. And so En∣joy him in the Life, that doth not Change, which is Invisible. G. F. From thence I passed to Little-Port, and the Isle of Ely; where he,Isle of Ely. Little-port that had been the Major, with his Wife, and the Wife of the then present Major of Cambridge came to the Meeting. So travelling on into Lincolnshire and Huntingtonshire, I came to Thomas Parnel's,Lincoln∣shire. Hunting∣tonshire. Fen-Coun∣try. where the Major of Huntington came to see me, and was very loving. From thence passing on, I came into the Fen-Country, where we had large and quiet Meetings. While I was in that Country, there came so great a Flood, that it was dangerous to get out; yet we did get out, and went to Lyn, where we had a blessed Meeting.Lyn. Next Morning I went to visit some Prisoners there; and then went back to the Inn, and took Horse: And as I was riding out of the Yard, the Officers (it seems) came to search the Inn for me. I knew nothing of it then; only I felt a great Burden come upon me, as I rid out of the Town, till I was got without their Gates: and when some Friends, that came after, overtook me, they told me, that the Officers had been search∣ing for me in the Inn, as soon as I was gone out of the Yard. So, by the good Hand of the Lord, I escaped their Cruel Hands. After this we passed through the Countries, visiting Friends in their Meetings. And the Lord's Power carried us over the Persecuting Spirits, and through many Dangers; and his Truth spread and grew, and Friends were established therein: Praises and Glory to his Name for ever! And so having pass'd through Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex and Hertfordshire,Norfolk. Suffolk. Essex. Hertford∣shire. London. Kent. Ashford. Cranbrook Tenterden we came to London again; where I staid a while, visiting Friends in their Meetings, which were very large, and the Lord's Power was over all. After some time I left the City again, and travelled into Kent, having Thomas Briggs with me; and we went to Ashford, where we had a quiet and a very blessed Meeting: and on the First-Day we had a very good and peaceable Meeting at Cranbrook. Then we went to Tenterden, and
had a Meeting there,1663. Tenderden. to which many Friends came from several parts; and many of the World's People came in, and were reached by Truth. When the Meeting was done, I walked with Thomas Briggs into a Close, while our Horses were got ready; and turning my Head, I spied a Cap∣tain coming, and a great Company of Souldiers with lighted Matches and Muskets. Some of the Souldiers came to Thomas and me, and said; We must go to their Captain: and when they had brought us before him, he asked, Where was George Fox? Which was he? I said, I am the Man. Then he came to me, and was somewhat struck, and said; I will secure you among the Souldiers. So he called for the Souldiers to take me; and then he took Thomas Briggs, and the Man of the House, and many more: but the Power of the Lord was mightily over him and them all. Then he came to me again, and said; I must go along with him to the Town; and he carried himself pretty civilly, bidding the Souldiers, bring the rest after. As we walked, I asked him; Why they did thus? for I had not seen so much ado a great while: and I bid him be Civil to his Neighbours, who were peaceable. When we were come to the Town, they had us to an Inn, that was the Jailer's House; and after a while the Major of the Town, and this Captain, and the Lieutenant, who were Justices, came together, and Examined me; Why I came thither to make a Disturbance? I told them, I did not come to make a Disturbance; neither had I made any Disturbance, since I came. They said, There was a Law, which was against the Quakers Meetings, made only against them. I told them, I knew no such Law. Then they brought forth the Act, that was made against Quakers and others: I told them; That was against such, as were a Terror to the King's Subjects, and were Enemies, and held dangerous Principles to the Go∣vernment; and therefore that was not against us: for we held Truth, and our Principles were not dangerous to the Government, and our Meetings were peaceable, as they knew, who knew their Neighbours were a peaceable People. They told me, I was an Enemy to the King: I told them, We loved all People, and were Enemies to none: and that I, for my own part, had been cast into Darby-Dungeon many years ago, about the time of Worcester-Fight, because I would not take up Arms against him; and that I was afterward brought up by Col. Hacker to London, as a Plotter to bring in King Charles; and was kept Prisoner at London, till I was set at liberty by Oliver. They ask∣ed me, Whether I was Imprisoned in the time of the Insurrection? I said, Yes, I had been Imprisoned then, and since that also; and had been set at Liberty by the King's own Command. So I opened the Act to them, and shewed them the King's late Declaration, and gave them the Examples of other Justices; and told them also, what the House of Lords had said of it. I spake also to them concerning their own Conditions; Exhorting them to live in the Fear of God, and to be tender towards their Neighbours, that feared God; and to mind God's Wisdom, by which all things were made and created, that they might come to receive it, and be ordered by it; and by it order all things to God's Glory. They demanded Bond of us for our Appea∣rance at the Sessions; but we pleading our Innocency, refused to give Bond. Then they would have had us promise to come no more there: But we kept clear of that also. When they saw, they could not bring
us to their Terms; they told us, We should see, they were civil to us: for it was the Mayor's Pleasure, we should all be set at liberty. I told them. Their Civility was Noble: and so we parted. Then leaving Tenterden, we went into Sussex,Sussex. Newick. and came to Ne∣wick, where were some Friends, whom we visited; and from thence passed on through the Country, visiting Friends, and having great Meetings; and all quiet and free from Disturbance (except by some Jangling Baptists) till we came into Hampshire:Hampshire. Where after we had had a good Meeting at Southampton,Southam∣pton. Ringwood-Parish. Pulner Mo. Meeting we went to a place called Pul∣ner in the Parish of Ringwood, where there was to be a Monthly Meet∣ing next day, to which many Friends came from Southampton, Pool, and other places; and the Weather being very hot, some of them came pretty early in the Morning. I took a Friend, and walked out with him into the Orchard, inquiring of him, how the Affairs of Truth stood amongst them? (For many of them had been Convinced by me, before I was Prisoner in Cornwal.) While we were discoursing, another Young-Man came to us, and told us, the Trained Bands were raising; and he heard, they would come, and break up the Meeting. It was not yet Meeting-time by about three hours; and there being other Friends walking in the Orchard also, the Friend that I was dis∣coursing with before, desired me to walk into a Corn-Field adjoining to the Orchard; and so we did. After a while the Young-Man, that spake of the Trained Bands, left us, and went away: and when he was gone a pretty way, he stood, and waved his Hat. Whereupon I spake to the other Young-Man, that was with me, to go see, what he ailed? and he went, but came not to me again: for the Souldiers, it seems, were come, and were in the Orchard. And as I kept walking, I could see the Souldiers; and some of them (as I heard afterwards) did see me but had no mind to meddle. So the Souldiers coming so long before the Meeting-time, they did not Tarry; but took, what Friends they found at the House, and some that they met in the Lane coming, and  th m away. After they were gone, and it grew towards the E eventh Hour, Friends began to come in apace; and a large and glorious Meeting we had: for the Everlasting Seed of God was set over all, and the People were settled in the New-Covenant of Life, up∣on the Foundation Christ Jesus. Toward the latter part of the Meet∣ing there came a Man in gay Apparel, and looked into the Meeting, while I was declaring; and went away again presently. This Man came with an evil Intent: for he went forthwith to Ringwood, and told the Magistrates: They had taken two or three Men at Pulner, and had left George Fx there preaching to two or three hundred People. Upon this  Magistrates sent the Officers and Souldiers again: but the Meeting being near ended, when that Man lookt in; and he ha∣ving about a Mile and an half to go with his Information to Ringwood, to feth the Souldiers, and they as much to come back, after they had received their Orders; before they could come, our Meeting was over: ending about the third hour peaceably and orderly. After the Meeting I spake to the Friends of the House, where this Meeting was; (the Woman of the House lying then dead in the House) and then some Friends had me to another Friend's House at a little distance from the Meeting-place: where, after we had refresh'd our selves, I took
Horse,1663. Wiltshire at Frye's having about Twenty Miles to ride that Afternoon, to one — Frye's House in Wiltshire, where a Meeting was appointed to be next day. After we were gone, the Officers and Souldiers came in a great Heat: and when they found, they were come too late, and had missed their Prey, they were much Enraged: and the Officers were offended with the Souldiers, that they had not seized my Horse in the Stable, the first time they came. But the Lord by his good Providence did de∣liver me, and prevented them of their Mischievous Design. For the Officers were envious Men, and had an evil Mind against Friends: but the Lord brought his Judgments upon them; so that it was taken no∣tice of by their Neighbours.Example. For whereas before they were Wealthy Men; after this their Estates wasted away: and John Line, who was the Constable, (and who was not only very forward in putting on the Souldiers to take Friends; but also carried those that were taken, to Prison, and took a False Oath against them at the Assize, upon which they were Fined, and continued Prisoners) he was a sad Spectacle to behold. For his Flesh rotting away, while he lived, he died in a ve∣ry miserable Condition, wishing, he had never medled with the Quakers; and confessing, that he never prospered, since he had an hand in persecuting them: and that he thought, the Hand of the Lord was against him for it. At — Frye's in Wiltshire we had a very blessed Meeting, and quiet; though the Officers had a purpose to have broken it up, and were coming on their way in order thereunto. But before they were got to the Meeting, Word was brought after them, that there was an House newly broken up by Thieves; and they were required to go back again with speed, to search after and pursue the Thieves: by which means our Meeting scaped Disturbance, and we were delivered out of their Hands. We passed through Wiltshire into Dorsetshire, having large and good Meetings,Dorsetshire. and the Lord's Everlasting Power was with us, and carried us over all; in which we sounded forth his saving Truth, and Word of Life, which many gladly received. Thus travelling through the Coun∣tries,Devonshire. Topsham. we visited Friends, till we came to Topsham in Devonshire, tra∣velling some Weeks Eight or Ninescore Miles a Week, and had Meet∣ings every day. At Topsham we met with Margaret Fell, and two of her Daughters, Sarah and Mary, and with Leonard Fell and Thomas Salthouse.Totness. Kings∣bridge. To H. Pollex∣fen's. Plymouth. Cornwall. From thence we passed to Totness, where we visited some Friends; and then on to Kingsbridge, and so to old Henry Pollexfen's, who had been an Ancient Justice of Peace. There we had a large Meeting. And from thence this old Justice passed with us to Plymouth and so into Cornwall, to one Justice Porters; and from thence to Tho∣mas Mount's, where we had another large Meeting. After which we went to Humphrey Lower's, where also we had a large Meeting; and from thence to Loveday Hamblye's, where we had a General Meeting for the whole Country: and all was quiet. A little before this, there had been in those parts Joseph Hellen and G. Bewly, and they had been at Loo, to visit one Blanch Pope, a Rant∣ing Woman, under pretence to Convince and Convert her; but before they came from her, she had so darkned them with her Principles, that
they seemed to be like her Disciples, especially Joseph Hellen.1663. Cornwal. For she had asked them, Who made the Devil? Did not God? This Idle Question so puzzled them, that they could not Answer her. They af∣terwards asked me that Question; and I told them, No: for all that God made, was good, and was blest; so was not the Devil. And he was called a Serpent, before he was called a Devil and an Adversary; and then he had the Title of Devil given to him: And afterward he was called a Dragon, because he was a Destroyer. The Devil abode not i the Truth; and by departing from the Truth, he became a De∣vil: and so the Jews, when they went out of the Truth, were said to be of the Devil; and were called Serpents. Now, there is no Promise of God to the Devil, that ever he shall return into Truth again: but to Man and Woman, who have been deceived by him, the Promise of God is, that The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head; shall break his Power and Strength to pieces. Now, when these things were opened more at large to the satisfaction of Friends; those Two, who had let up the Spirit of that Ranting Woman, were judged by the Truth: and one of them, viz. Joseph Hellen, run quite out from Truth, and was denied by Friends: But George Bewly was recovered; and came afterwards to be serviceable to Truth. We passed from Loveday Hambley's to Francis Hodges,Falmouth. Penryn. Helstone. near Fal∣mouth and Penryn, where we had a large Meeting; and from thence we went to Helstone that Night, where some Friends came to visit us: and the next day we passed to Thomas Teage's, where we had another large Meeting, at which many were Convinced: for I was led to open the state of the Church in the Primitive Times, and the state of the Church in the Wilderness, and the state of the False Church, that was got up since; and to shew, that now the Everlasting Gospel was preached again over the Head of the Whore, Beast and false Prophets, and Antichrists, which had got up since the Apostles days: and now the Everlasting Gospel was received and receiving, which brought Life and Immortality to Light; that they might see over the Devil, that had darkned them. And the People received the Gospel and the Word of Life gladly, and a glorious, blessed Meeting we had for the exalting the Lord's everlasting Truth, and his Name. After the Meeting was done, I walked out; and as I was coming in again, I heard a Noise in the Court: and coming nearer, I found the Man of the House speaking to the Tinners, and others of the World's People, and telling them; It was the Everlasting Truth, that had been declared there that day: and the People generally confessed to it. From thence we passed to the Land's End, to John Ellis's house,Lands End where we had a precious Meeting: and there was a Fisherman, one Nicholas Jose, that was Convinced; and he spake in Meetings, and declared the Truth amongst the People: and the Lord's Power was over all. I was glad, that the Lord had raised up his Standard in those dark parts of the Nation, where since there is a fine Meeting of honest-hearted Friends; and many there are come to sit under Christ's Teaching: and a great People the Lord will have in that Country. From thence we returned to Redruth; and the next day to Truro,Redruth. Truro. where we had a Meeting. Next Morning some of the Chief of the Town desired to speak with me, and I went to them; amongst whom was
Col. Rouse.1663. Truro. A great deal of Discourse I had with them concerning the things of God; and in their Reasoning they said, The Gospel was the Four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John; and they called it Natural. But I told them, the Gospel was the Power of God; which was preached, before Matthew, Mark, Luke and John or any of them were printed or written: And it was preached to Every Creature, (of which a great part might never see nor hear of those Four Books;) so that Every Creature was to obey the Power of God: for Christ, the Spiritual Man, would Judge the World according to the Gospel, that is, according to his Invisible Power. When they heard this, they could not gain-say; for the Truth came over them. So I directed them to their Teacher, the Grace of God, and shewed them the Sufficiency of it; which would teach them how to live, and what to deny; and be∣ing obeyed, would bring them their Salvation. And so to that Grace I recommended them, and left them. Then returned we through the Country, visiting Friends, and had Meetings at Humphrey Lower's again, and at Thomas Mount's. And afterwards at George Hawkins at Stoke we had a large Meeting,Stoke. to which Friends came from Lanceston, and several other places; and a living, precious Meeting it was, in which the Lord's Presence and Power was richly manifested amongst us: and I left Friends there un∣der the Lord Jesus Christ's Teaching. Example.In Cornwall I was Informed, that there was one Col. Robinson, a very wicked Man, who after the King came in, was made a Justice of the Peace, and became a Cruel Persecutor of our Friends; of whom he sent many to Prison. And hearing, that they had some little Li∣berty, through the Favour of the Jailer, to come home sometimes, to visit their Wives and Children, he made a great Complaint thereof to the Judge at the Assize against the Jailer: Whereupon the Jailer was fined an Hundred Marks, and Friends were kept very strictly up for a while. After he was come home from the Assize, he sent to a Neighbouring Justice, to desire them to go a Fanatick-hunting with him. So on the Day, that he intended and was prepared to go a Fanatick-hunting, he sent his Man about with his Horses, and walk∣ed himself on Foot from his Dwelling-House to a Tenement, that he had, where his Cows and Dairy were kept, and where his Servants were then milking. When he came there, he asked for his Bull; and the Maid-Servants said, They had shut him into the Field, be∣cause he was Ʋnruly amongst the Kine, and hindred their Milking. Then went he into the Field to his Bull; and having formerly ac∣customed himself to play with the Bull, he began to fence at him with his Staff, as he used to do. But the Bull snufft at him, and passed a little back; and then turning upon him again, ran fiercely at him, and struck his Horn into his Thigh, and heaving him upon his Horn, threw him over his Back, and so tore up his Thigh to his Belly. And when he came to the Ground again, he gored him with his Horns, and would run them into the Ground in his Rage and Violence; and roared, and licked up his Master's Blood. The Maid-Servant hearing her Master Cry out, came running into the Field, and came to the Bull, and took him by the Horns, to pull him off from her Master. The Bull, without hurting her, put her
gently by with his Horns; but still fell to goring of him,1663. Cornwal. and licking up his Blood. Then she ran, and got some Work-men, that were at Work not far off, to come in and rescue her Master: but they could not at all beat off the Bull, till they brought Mastiff-Dogs to set on him; and then the Bull fled in a great Rage and Fury. Upon no∣tice of it his Sister came, and said to him; Alack Brother, what a heavy Judgment is this, that is befallen you! And he Answered, Ah, Sister, It is an heavy Judgment indeed: Pray let the Bull be killed, and the Flesh given to the Poor, said he. So they carried him home; but he died soon after. And the Bull was grown so fierce, that they were forced to shoot him with Guns: for no Man durst come near him, to kill him. Thus does the Lord sometimes make some Exam∣ples of his just Judgment upon the Persecutors of his People, that others may fear, and learn to beware. Now after I had cleared my self of Cornwall, and Thomas Lower (who had rid with us from Meeting to Meeting through that County) had brought us over Horse-bridge into Devonshire again,Horse-bridge. Devonshire we took our leave of him. And Thomas Briggs, Robert Widders and I came through the Country to Tiverton: and it being their Fair,Tiverton. and many Friends there, we had a Meeting amongst them; and the Magistrates gather∣ed in the Street, but the Lord's Power stopt them: I saw them in the Street over against the Door; but they had not Power to come in to meddle with us, though they had Will enough to have done it. After the Meeting was done,Collum∣pton. Welling∣ton. we passed to Collumpton and to Welling∣ton: For we had appointed a Meeting Five Miles off; where we had a large Meeting at a Butcher's House, and a blessed Meeting it was: for the People were directed to their Teacher, the Grace of God, which would bring them Salvation; and many were settled under it's Teach∣ing: and the Lord's Presence was amongst us, and we were refreshed in him, in whom we laboured and travelled; and the Meeting was quiet. There had been very great Persecution in that Country, and in that Town a little before, insomuch that some Friends questioned the Peaceableness of our Meeting; but the Lord's Power chained all, and his Glory shined over all. The Friends told us, how they had broken up their Meetings by Warrants from the Justices, and how by their Warrants they were required to carry Friends before the Justices; and Friends bid them, Carry them then. The Officers told Friends, they must Go: but Friends said Nay, that was not according to their War∣rants, which required them to Carry them. Then they were fain to hire Carts and Wagons, and Horses, and to lift Friends up into their Wagons and Carts, to carry them before a Justice. And when they came to a Justice's House, sometimes he happened to be from home: and if he were a Moderate Man, he would get out of the way; and then they were forced to Carry them before another: So that they were Many Days Carting and Carrying Friends up and down from place to place. And when afterward the Officers came to lay their Charges for this upon the Town, the Town's People would not pay it; but made them bear it themselves: and that brake the Neck of their Persecution there for that time. The like was done in several other places, till the Officers had shamed and tired themselves; and then were fain to give over.
At one place they warned Friends to come to the Steeple-house;1663. Welling∣ton. and the Friends met together to consider of it; and had freedom to go to the Steeple-house, and Meet together there. Accordingly when they came thither, they sate down together, to Wait upon the Lord in his Power and Spirit, and minded the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher and Saviour; but did not mind the Priest. When the Officers saw that, they came to them to put them out of the Steeple-house again; but the Friends told them, it was not time for them to break up their Meeting yet. A while after, when the Priest had done his Stuff, they came to the Friends again, and would have had them go home to Dinner; but the Friends told them: They did not use to go to Dinner; but were feeding upon the Bread of Life. So there they sate, Waiting upon the Lord, and enjoying his Power and Presence, till they found Freedom in themselves to depart. Thus the Priest's People were offended, because they could not get them to the Steeple-house: and when they were there, they were offended, because they could not get them out again. Taunton.From the Meeting near Collumpton we went to Taunton, where we had a large Meeting; and the next day we came to a General Meeting in Somersetshire,Somerset∣shire. which was very large; and the Lord's everlasting Word of Life and Truth was largely declared, and the People were refreshed thereby, and settled upon Christ their Rock and Foundation, and brought to sit under his Teaching: and the Meeting was peaceable. But about the Second Hour in the Night there came a Company of Men about the House, and knocked at the Door, and bid, Open the Door, or they would break it open; for they wanted a Man, that they came to search the House for. I heard the Noise, and got up; and at the Win∣dow saw a Man at the Door with his Sword by his Side, When they had let him in, he came into the Chamber, where I was, and looked on me, and said; You are not the Man I look for: and so went his way. Street. Puddi∣more.We came from thence to Street, and so to Puddimore to William Beaton's, where we had a very large General Meeting; wherein the Lord's everlasting Truth was declared, and the People refreshed there∣by, and all quiet. From thence we went to John Dandy's, where we had another large and very precious Meeting; and then passed on to Bristol,Bristol. where we had good Service for the Lord, and all quiet. Here we met with Margaret Fell and her Daughters again. And after some time we went to Slattenford in Wiltshire,Wiltshire. Slatten∣ford. where was a very large Meeting in a great Barn; and good Service we had there: for the Truth, as it is in Jesus, was published amongst them, and many were gathered by it into the Name of the Lord. Gloucester∣shire. Hereford∣shire. Hereford.After this I passed into Gloucestershire and Herefordshire, having large Meetings in each. In Hereford I had a Meeting in the Inn; and after the Meeting was over, and I was gone, the Magistrates hearing, there had been a Meeting, came to search the Inn for me; and were vexed, that they had missed of me. But the Lord so ordered it, that I escaped their Snare; and Friends were established upon Christ their Foundation, and the Rock of Ages.
Then went I into Wales, into Radnorshire,1663. WALES. Radnor∣shire. At a Mar∣ket-Town towards ENG∣LAND. and had several precious Meetings there: and the Lord's Name and Standard was set up, and many were gathered to it; and are settled under the Teaching of Christ Jesus, their Saviour, who hath bought them. After I was clear of Wales, I turned towards England again, and came to a Market-Town betwixt England and Wales, where was a great Fair that day: and several Friends being at the Fair, we went to an Inn, and Friends came to us. And after we had had a fine Oppor∣tunity with Friends, we parted from them, and went on our way. The Officers of the Town took notice (it seems) of our being there, and Friends gathering together to us; and they began also to get toge∣ther to Consult among themselves, how to ensnare us, though it was the Fair-time: but before they could do any thing, we were gone on our Journey, and so escaped them. From thence we came into Shropshire,Shropshire. where we had a large and precious Meeting: And after we had had many Meetings in those parts, we came into Warwickshire, and visited Friends there:Warwick∣shire. Darbyshire. Stafford∣shire. White-Haugh. At Captain Lingard's. and so came into Darbyshire and Staffordshire, visiting Friends Meetings as we went. At a place called White-Haugh we had a large blessed Meeting, and quiet: And after the Meeting was done, we took Horse, and rode about Twenty Miles that Night to one Captain Lingard's. We heard af∣terwards, that when we were gone, the Officers came to have seized on us; and were much disturbed, that they mist us: but the Lord dis∣appointed them, and delivered us out of their wicked Hands; and Friends were joyful in the Lord, that we escaped them. At Captain Lingard's we had a blessed Meeting, the Lord's Presence being wonderfully amongst us. After this Meeting we passed through the Peak-Country in Darbyshire;Darbyshire. Peak-Country. Sunderhil-Green. and after we had been at a Friend's House there, we went on to Sunderhill-Green, where we had a large Meeting. Here John Whitehead came to me, and several other Friends; and then I passed through the Country, visiting Friends, till I came into Holderness. We went to the farther End of Holderness,Holderness Scarbo∣rough. Whitby. Malton. and so passed down by Scarborough and Whitby, and near Malton, and then to York, having many Meetings in the way, and the Lord's ever∣lasting Power was over all. At York I heard of a Plot:York. whereupon I was moved to declare against all Plots and Plotters, both in publick and private; and also to give forth a Paper against Plotting; of which a Copy here followeth: ALL Friends every where: Keep out of Plots and Buslings, and the Arm of Flesh; for all that is among Adam's Sons in the Fall, where they are destroying Mens Lives like Dogs and Beasts, and Swine; Goring, rending, biting and destroying one another, and wrestling with Flesh and Blood. From whence riseth Wars and Killings, but from the Lusts? And all this is in Adam in the Fall, out of Adam, that never fell; in whom there is Peace and Life. And ye are called to Peace, therefore follow it; and Christ is that Peace: for all that pretend to Fight for Christ, they are deceived; and are in Adam, in the Fall; for Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, there∣fore his Servants do not Fight. Therefore Fighters are not of Christ's Kingdom, and are without Christ's Kingdom; for his Kingdom stands
in Peace and Righteousness.1663. York. And so Fighters are in the Lust: and all that would destroy Mens Lives, are not of Christ's Mind, who comes to save Men's Lives. Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, it is peaceable; and all that be in Strifes, are not of his Kingdom; nor any such, as pretend to Fight for the Gospel. The Gospel is the Pow¦er of God, which was, before the Devil or Fall of Man was, or Fighters either; which is the Gospel of Peace: and they that pretend to Fighting, and talk so for Fighting, are Ignorant of the Gospel of Peace. And all that talk of Fighting for Sion, are in Darkness; for Sion needs no such Helpers: And all such as profess themselves to be Ministers of Christ and Christians, and to beat down the Whore with outward Carnal Weapons; the Flesh and the Whore are got up in them∣selves, in a blind Zeal. That which beats down the Whore, which got up by the Inward Ravening from the Spirit of God, the Beating down of the Whore, must be by the Inward Rising of the Sword of the Spirit within. All such, as pretend Christ Jesus, and Confess him, and run into Carnal Weapons, wrestling with Flesh and Blood, throw away the Spiritual: That are Wrestlers with Flesh and Blood, they throw away Christ's Doctrine, and Flesh is got up in them; and they are weary of their Sufferings. And such as would Revenge them∣selves, be out of Christ's Doctrine: and such as would be stricken on the one Cheek, and would not turn the other, be out of Christ's Do∣ctrine: and such as do not love one another, and Love Enemies, be out of Christ's Doctrine. And therefore you, that be Heirs of the Blessings of God; (which was before the Curse and the Fall was) come to Inherit your Portions. And you that be Heirs of the Gospel of Peace, before the Devil was, live in the Gospel of Peace, seeking the Peace of all Men, and the Good of all Men. And Live in Christ, which comes to save Men's Lives, out of Adam in the Fall, where they destroy Men's Lives, and live not in him. For the Jews Sword outwardly, by which they cut down the Heathen, was a Type of the Spirit of God within, which Cuts down the Heathenish Nature within: So live in the Peaceable Kingdom of Christ Jesus, and in the Peace of God; and not in the Lusts, from whence Wars arise. And Live in Christ the Way of God, who is the Second Adam, who never fell; and live not in Adam in the Fall, in the Destruction, where they destroy one another: Therefore come out of Adam in the Fall, in∣to that Adam that never fell; and so live in Love and Peace with all Men. And keep out of all the Buslings in the World, and meddle not with the Powers of the Earth; but mind the Kingdom, and the way of Peace. You that be Heirs of Grace, and Heirs of the King∣dom, and Heirs of the Gospel, and Heirs of Salvation, and Saints of the Most-High, and Children of God, whose Conversations are in Heaven, that is above the Combustions of the Earth, let your Conversations preach to all Men, and your Innocent Lives; that they beholding your Godly Conversation, may glorifie your Father, which is in Heaven. And all Friends every where, this I charge you, which is the Word of the Lord God unto you all, Live in Peace in Christ, the way of Peace, in which seek the Peace of all Men, and no Man's Hurt; as I said before. In Adam in the Fall is no Peace; but in Adam out of the Fall, in him is the Peace: So you being in Adam,
that never fell; it's Love, that overcomes the Evil, and not Hatred with Hatred, nor Strife with Strife. And therefore Live in the Peaceable Life, doing Good to all Men, and seeking the Good and Welfare of all Men. Let this go among Friends every where. G. F. We went from York to Burrowbridge,Burrow∣bridge. where I had a glorious Meet∣ing. Thence we passed into the Bishoprick, to one Richmond's, where there was a General Meeting: and the Lord's Power was over all;Bishoprick of Durham tho' People were grown exceeding Rude about this time. After the Meet∣ting we went to Henry Draper's, where we stay'd all Night: and the next Morning a Friend came to me, as I was passing away, and told me; If the Priests and Justices (for many Priests were made Justices in that Country at that time) could light on me, they would Destroy me. But I being clear of the Bishoprick,Stainmoor Yorkshire. Sedberg. Westmore∣land. Lancashire Swarth∣more. Arnside. went over Stainmoore into part of Yorkshire, and to Sedberg; where having visited Friends, I went into Westmorland, visiting Friends there also. From thence I passed into Lancashire, and came to Swarthmore, where I staid but a little while, before I went over the Sands to Arnside; where I had a Gene∣ral Meeting. After that Meeting was ended, there came some Men to have broken it up; but understanding, before they got thither, that the Meeting was over, they turned back. I went to Robert Wid∣der's, and from thence to Ʋnderbarrow,Underbar∣row. where I had a glorious Meet∣ing; and the Lord's Power was set over all. From thence I passed to Grayrigge: and having visited Friends there, I went to Ann Audland's;Grayrigge where they would have had me to have staid their Meeting the next day: but I felt a stop in my Spirit, and it was upon me to go to John Blaykling's in Sedberg, and to be next day at the Meeting there;Sedberg. which is large, and a precious People there is. So we had a very good Meeting next day at Sedberg; but the Constables went to Ann Aud∣land's to their Meeting, to look for me. Thus by the good Hand and Disposing Providence of the Lord I escaped their Snare. I went from John Blaykling's with Leonard Fell to Strickland-head,Strick∣land-head. where on the First-Day we had a very precious Meeting on the Com∣mon. That Night we staid amongst Friends there; and the next day passed into Northumberland.Northum∣berland. After the Justices had heard of this Meeting at Strickland-head, they made Search for me: but by the good hand of the Lord I escaped them again; though there were some ve∣ry wicked Justices. We went to Hugh Hutchinson's House in Northum∣berland (a Friend in the Ministry) from whence we visited Friends thereabouts; and then went to Darwin-Water,Darwin-water. where we had a very glorious Meeting. There came an Ancient Woman to me, and told me, her Husband remembred his Love to me; and she said, I might call him to mind by this Token, that I used to call him, the Tall White Old Man. She said, he was Six score and two Years old; and that he would have come to the Meeting, but that his Horses were all im∣ployed upon some urgent Occasion. I heard, he lived some Years after.
1663. Darwin∣water. Cumber∣land.Now when I had visited Friends in those parts, and they were settled upon Christ, their Foundation, their Rock and their Teacher; I passed through Northumberland, and came into Cumberland to old Thomas Bew∣ley's. And Friends came about me, and said, Would I come there, to go into Prison! For there was great Persecution in that Country at that time: Yet I had a General Meeting at Thomas Bewley's, which was large and precious: and the Lord's Power was over all. One Musgrave was at that time Deputy Governour of Carlisle, and I passing along the Country, came to a Man's House, that had been Convinced, whose Name was Fletcher; and he told me, If Musgrave knew, that I was there, he would be sure to send me to Prison; he was such a severe Man. But I staid not there; only called on the way to see this Man:Wigton. and then went on to one William Pearson's near Wig∣ton, where the Meeting was; which was very large and precious Some Friends were then Prisoners at Carlisle; whom I visited by▪ Letter, which Leonard Fell carried. From William Pearson's I passed through the Countries,Pardsey-Crag. visiting Friends, till I came to Pardsey-Crag, where we had a General Meeting, which was large; and all was quiet and peaceable, and the glorious, powerful Presence of the Everlasting God was with us. So eager were the Magistrates about this time to stir up Persecution in those parts, that they offered some Five Shillings, some a Noble a day, to any that could apprehend the Speakers amongst the Quakers: but it being now the time of the Quarter-Sessions in that County, the Men, who were so hired, were gone to the Sessions, to see to get their Wages; and so all our Meetings were at that time quiet. Westmore∣land. Keswick.From Pardsey-Crag we went into Westmorland; calling in the way upon Hugh Tickell near Keswick, and upon Thomas Laythes, where Friends came to visit us: and we had a fine opportunity to be refresh∣ed together.At Fr. Ben∣son's. We went that Night to one Francis Benson's in Westmor∣land, near Justice Fleming's House. This Justice Fleming was at that time in a great Rage against Friends, and me in particular; insomuch that in the open Sessions at Kendal just before, he had bid Five Pounds to any Man, that should take me; that Friend Francis Benson told me. And it seems, as I went to this Friend's House, I met one Man coming from the Sessions, that had this Five Pounds offered him to take me, and he knew me; for as I passed by him, he said to his Companion, That is George Fox: Yet he had not Power to touch me; for the Lord's Power preserved me over them all. And the Justices being so eager to haue me; and I being so often nigh them, and yet they missing me, it tormented them the more. Lancashire. Cartmel.I went from thence to James Taylor's at Cartmel in Lancashire, where I staid the First-Day, and had a precious Meeting; and after the Meeting was done, I came over the Sands to Swarthmore. Swarth∣more.When I came there, they told me, Col. Kirby had sent his Lieute∣nant thither to search for me; and that he had searched Trunks and Chests for me. That Night, as I was in Bed, I was moved of the Lord to go next day to Kirby-Hall,Kirby-Hall which was Col. Kirby's House, about Five Miles off, to speak with him; and I did so. When I came thither, I found there the Flemmings, and several others of the Gentry (so called) of the Country, who were come to take their Leave of
Col. Kirby, he being then to go up to London to the Parliament.1663. Kirby-Hall. I was had into the Parlour amongst them; but Col. Kirby was not then within, being gone forth a little way: So they said little to me, nor I much to them. But after a little while Col. Kirby came in; and then I spake to him, and told him; I came to Visit him, understanding, that he would have seen me; and to know, what he had to say to me, and whether he had any thing against me? He said before all the Company; As he was a Gentleman, he had nothing against me. But, said he, Mistress Fell must not keep great Meetings at her House; for they meet contrary to the Act. I told him; That Act did not take hold on us, but on such as did Meet to Plot and Contrive, and to raise Insurrections against the King; whereas we were no such Peo∣ple: for he knew, that they, that met at Margaret Fell's House, were his Neighbours, and a Peaceable People. After many Words had passed, he shook me by the hand, and said again, He had nothing against me; and others of them said, I was a deserving Man. So we parted, and I returned to Swarthmore. Shortly after, when Col. Kirby was gone to London,Swarth∣more. there was a private Meeting of the Justices and Deputy Lieutenants at Houlker-Hall, where Justice Preston lived; and there they granted forth a War∣rant to Apprehend me. I heard over Night both of their Meeting, and of the Warrant; and so could have gone away, and got out of their reach, if I would: for I had not appointed any Meeting at that time; and I had cleared my self of the North; and the Lord's Power was over all. But I considered, there being a Noise of a Plot in the North, if I should go away, they might fall upon poor Friends; but if I gave up my self to be Taken, it might stop them and Friends should escape the better. So I gave up my self to be Taken, and pre∣pared my self against they came. Next Day an Officer came with his Sword and Pistols, to Take me: I told him, I knew his Errand before, and had given up my self to be Taken; for if I would have escaped their Imprisonment, I could have been gone Forty Miles off, before he came: but I was an Innocent Man. and so mattered not, what they could do to me. He asked me, How I heard of it, see∣ing the Order was made privately in a Parlour? I said, it was no mat∣ter for that; it was sufficient, that I heard of it. Then I asked him to let me see his Order; whereupon He laid his Hand on his Sword, and said, I must go with him before the Lieutenants, to answer such Questions, as they should propound to me. I told him, It was but civil and reasonable for him to let me see his Order; but he would not. Then said I, I am ready. So I went along with him; and Margaret Fell went with us to Houlker-Hall. And when we came thither,Houlker-Hall. there was one Rawlinson, called a Justice, and one called Sir George Middle∣ton, and many more, that I did not know; besides Old Justice Pre∣ston, who lived there. They brought one Thomas Atkinson, a Friend of Cartmel, as a Witness against me, for some Words which he had told to one Knipe, who had Informed them; which Words were; That I had written against the Plotters, and had knockt them down: Which Words they could not make much of; for I told them. I had heard of a Plot, and had written against it. Then Old Preston asked me, Whether I had an hand in that Script? I asked him what he
meant? He said, in the Battledoor? I answered, Yes. Then he asked me, Whether I did understand Languages? I said, Sufficient for my self: and that I knew no Law, that was transgressed by it. I told them also, That to understand those outward Languages, was no mat∣ter of Salvation: for the many Tongues began but at the Confusion of Babel: And if I did understand any thing of them, I Judged and knockt them down again, for any matter of Salvation, that was in them. Thereupon he turned away, and said, George Fox knocks down all the Languages: Come, said he, we will examin you of higher matters. Then said George Middleton, You deny God, and the Church, and the true Faith. I replied, Nay: I own God, and the true Church, and the true Faith. But what Church dost thou own, said I? (for I understood, he was a Papist.) Then he turned again, and said, You are a Rebel, and a Traytor. I asked him, Whom he spake to? or whom did he call Rebel? He was so full of Envy, that for a while he could not speak; but at last he said, He spake it to me. With that I struck my Hand on the Table, and told him; I had suffered more than Twenty such as he, or than any that was there: for I had been cast into Darby-Dungeon for Six Months together; and had suffered much, be∣cause I would not take up Arms against this King before Worcester-Fight: And I had been sent up Prisoner out of my own Country by Col. Hacker to O. Cromwell, as a Plotter to bring in King Charles, in the Year 1654; and I had nothing but Love and Good Will to the King, and desired the Eternal Good and Welfare of him and all his Subjects. Did you ever hear the like, said Middleton? 'Nay, said I, ye may hear it again, if ye will. For ye talk of the King, a Compa∣ny of you; but where were ye in Oliver's days? and what did ye do then for him? But I have more Love to the King for his Eter∣nal Good and Welfare, than any of you have. Then they asked me, Whether I had heard of the Plot? And I said, Yes, I had heard of it. They asked me, How I had heard of it? and whom I knew in it? I told them, I had heard of it through the High-Sheriff of Yorkshire, who had told Dr. Hodgson, That there was a Plot in the North; and that was the way I heard of it: But I never heard of any such thing in the South; nor till I came into the North. And as for knowing any in the Plot, I was as a Child in that; for I knew none of them. Then said they; Why would you Write against it, if you did not know some, that were in it? I said, My Reason was, Be∣cause you are so forward to mash the Innocent and Guilty together; therefore I writ against it to clear the Truth from such things, and to stop all forward, foolish Spirits, from running into such things. And I sent Copies of it into Westmorland, Cumberland, Bishoprick and Yorkshire, and to you here: And I sent another Copy of it to the King, and his Council; and it is like, it may be in Print by this time. One of them said, O! this Man hath great Power! I said, Yes, I had Power to write against Plotters. Then said one of them: You are against the Laws of the Land. I answered, Nay; for I and my Friends direct all the People to the Spirit of God in them, to mortifie the Deeds of the Flesh: This brings them into the Well-doing, and from that which the Magistrate's Sword is against; which eases the Magistrates, who are for the Punishment of the Evil-Doers. So
People being turned to the Spirit of God, which brings them to mortifie the Deeds of the Flesh, this brings them from under the occasion of the Magistrate's Sword; and this must needs be one with Magistracy, and one with the Law, which was added, because o Transgression, and is for the Praise of them that do well. So in this we establish the Law, and are an Ease to the Magistrates; and are not against, but stand for all Good Government. Then Geo Middleton cried, Bring the Book, and put the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to him. Now he himself being a Papist, I asked him, Whether he had taken the Oath of Supremacy, who was a Swearer? But as for us, we could not Swear at all, because Christ and the Apostle had forbidden it. Some of them would not have had the Oath put to me; but have let me have my Liberty: but the rest would not agree to that: For this was their last Snare, and they had no other way to get me into Prison; for all other things had been cleared to them. But this was like the Papists Sacrament of the Altar, by which they ensnared the Martyrs. So they tendered me the Oath, and I could not take it: Whereupon they were about to make my Mittimus, to send me to Lancaster-Jail: But considering to∣gether of it, they only engaged me to Appear at the Sessions; and so for that time dismist me. Then I went back with Margaret Fell to Swarthmore: and soon after there came Col. West to see me;Swarth∣more. who was at that time a Justice of the Peace. He told us, He told some of the rest of the Justices, that he would come over to see me and Margaret Fell; but it may be, said he to them, some of you will take Offence at it. I asked him, What he thought, they would do with me at the Sessions? And he said, They would tender the Oath to me again. Now whilst I was at Swarthmore, there came William Kirby into Swarthmore-Meeting, and brought the Constables with him. I was sit∣ting with Friends in the Meeting, and he said to me; How now, Mr. Fox! you have a fine Company here. Yes, said I, we do meet to Wait upon the Lord. So he began to take the Names of Friends; and them that did not readily tell him their Names, he committed to the Constables hands, and sent some to Prison. The Constables were unwilling to take them without a Warrant; whereupon he threatned to set them by the Heels: But the Constable told him; He could keep them in his Presence; but after he was gone, he could not keep them without a Warrant. The Sessions now coming on, I went to Lancaster,Lancaster. and Appeared ac∣cording to my Engagement. There was upon the Bench that Justice Flemming, that had bidden Five Pounds in Westmorland to any Man, that would apprehend me: for he was a Justice both in Westmorland and Lancashire. There was also Justice Spencer and Col. West, and Old Justice Rawlinson the Lawyer; who gave the Charge, and was very Sharp against Truth and Friends: but the Lord's Power stopt them. The Session was large, and the Concourse of People great:Lancaster-Sessions. and way bein made, for me, I came up to the Bar, and stood there with my Hat on; they looking earnestly upon me, and I upon them for a pretty space. Then Proclamation being made for all to keep Silence vpon pain of Imprisonment: And all being quiet, I said twice, Peace be among you. Then spake the Chair-man, and asked; If I knew, where
I was?1663. Lancaster-Sessions. I said, Yes, I do; but it may be, said I, my Hat offends you: that's a low thing, that's not the Honour, that I give to Magi∣strates; for the true Honour is from Above, which, said I, I have re∣ceived; and I hope, it is not the Hat, which ye look upon to be the Honour. The Chair-man said, They looked for the Hat too; and asked. Wherein I shewed my Respect to Magistrates, if I did not put off my Hat? I replied; In coming, when they called me. Then they bid one, Take off my Hat. After which it was some time, before they spake to me; and I felt the Power of the Lord to arise. After some pause, old Justice Rawlinson (the Chair-man) asked me. If I did know of the Plot? I told him, I had heard of it in Yorkshire by a Friend, that had it from the High-Sheriff. Then they asked me, Whether I had declared it to the Magistrates? I said, I had sent Papers abroad against Plots and Plotters: and also to you, as soon as I came into the Country, to take all Jealousies out of your Minds concerning me and my Friends: For it was and is our Principle, to declare against such things. They asked me then, If I knew not of an Act against Meetings? I said, I knew, there was an Act, that took hold of such as met to the terrifying of the King's Subjects, and were Enemies to the King, and held dangerous Principles; but I hoped, they did not look upon us to be such Men: for our Meetings were not to ter∣rifie the King's Subjects, neither are we Enemies to him, or any Man. Then they tendered me the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. I told them, I could not take any Oath at all, because Christ and his Apo∣stle had forbid it: And they had had sufficient Experience of Swear∣ers, (I told them) first one way, then another; but I had never taken any Oath in my Life. Then Rawlinson the Lawyer asked me, Whether I held, it was unlawful to Swear? This Question he put on purpose to ensnare me; for by an Act that was made, such were liable to Banish∣ment, or a great Fine, that should say, it was Ʋnlawful to Swear. But I seeing the Snare, avoided it; and told him, That in the time of the Law, amongst the Jews, before Christ came, the Law command∣ed them to Swear: but Christ, who doth fulfil the Law, in his Go∣spel-time commands, not to swear at all; and the Apostle James forbids Swearing, even to them that were Jews, and that had the Law of God. So after much other Discourse had passed, they called for the Jailer,G. F. com∣mitted to Prison. and committed me to Prison. I had about me that Paper, which I had written as a Testimony against Plots, which I de∣sired they would read, or suffer to be read in open Court; but they would not. So I being Committed for refusing to Swear, I bid them and all the People take notice, that I suffered for the Doctrine of Christ, and for my Obedience to his Command. Afterwards I understood, the Justices did say, that they had private Instructions from Col. Kirby to prosecute me, notwithstanding his fair Carriage and seeming Kindness to me before, when he declared before many of them, That he had nothing against me. There were several Friends besides Committed to Prison, some for Meeting to Worship God, and soe for not Swearing; so that the Prison was very full. And many of them being poor Men, that had nothing to maintain their Families by, but their Labour, which now they were taken off from; several of their Wives went to the Justices, that had committed their Husbands to
Jail, and told them.1663. Lancaster-Prison. If they kept their Husband's in Jail, for nothing but the Truth of Christ, and for good Conscience-sake, they would bring their Children t them, to be maintained. A mighty Power of the Lord rose in Friends, and gave them great Boldness; so that they spake much to the Justices: Friends also, that were Prisoners, writ unto the Justices, laying the Weight of their Sufferings upon them; and shewing them both their Injustice, and wat of Pity and Compassion towards their poor Neigh∣bours, whom they knew to be honest, consciencious and peaceable People, that in tenderness of Conscience could not take any Oath; yet they sent them to Prison, for refusing to take the Oath of Alle∣giance. Though several of them, who were Imprisoned on that Ac∣count, were known to be Men, that had served the King in his Wars, and had hazarded their Lives in the Field in his Cause, and had suf∣fered great Hardships, with the loss of much Blood for him; and had always stood faithful to him from First to Last, and had never received any Pay for their Service: and to be thus requited for all their Faithful Services and Sufferings, and that by them, that pre∣tended to be the King's Friends, was hard, unkind and ungrateful Dealing. At length the Justices, being continually attended with Complaints of Grievances, released some of the Friends, that were Prisoners, but kept divers of them still in Prison. Amongst those that were then in Prison, there were Four Friends Prisoners for Tithes, who were sent to Prison at the Suit of the Coun∣tess of Derby (so called) and had lain there then near Two Years and an half. One of these, whose Name was Oliver Atherton, being a Man of a Weakly Constitution, was through his long and hard Impri∣sonment in a cold, raw, unwholsom place, brought so low and weak in his Body, that there appeared no hopes of his Recovery, or Life, un∣less he might be removed from thence. Wherefore a Letter was writ∣ten on behalf of the said Oliver Atherton to the said Countess, and sent by his Son Godfrey Atherton, wherein was laid before her the Rea∣sons, why he, and the rest, could not pay Tithes; because if they did, they should deny Christ come in the Flesh, who by his coming had put an end to Tithes, and to the Priesthood, to which they had been given, and to the Commandment, by which they had been paid under the Law. And his Weak Condition of Body was also laid be∣fore her, and the apparent likelyhood of his Death, if she did conti∣nue to hold him there: that she might be moved to Pity and Compassion; and also warned, not to draw the Guilt of his Innocent Blood upon her self. But when his Son went to her with his Father's Letter, a Servant of hers abused him; and pluck'd off his Cap, and threw it away, and put him out of the Gate. Nevertheless the Let∣ter was delivered into her own hand; but she shut out all Pity and Tenderness, and continued him in Prison, till Death. So when his Son came back to his Father in Prison, and told him, as he lay on his Dying-Bed, that the Countess denied his Liberty, he only said: She hath been the Cause of shedding much Blood; but this will be the heavi∣est Blood, that ever she spilt: and soon after he died. Then Friends having his Body delivered to them to bury, as they carried it from the Prison to Ormskirk, the Parish, wherein he had lived, they stuck up
Papers upon the Crosses at Garstang, Preston, and other Towns, through which they passed, with this Inscription: This is Oliver Atherton of Ormskirk-Parish, persecuted to Death by the Countess of Derby for good Conscience sake towards God and Christ, because he could not give her Tithes, &c. Setting forth at large the Reasons of his refusing to pay Tithes, the Length of his Imprisonment, the Hardships he underwent, her hard-heartedness towards him, and the manner of his Death. After his Death, Richard Cubban, another of the said Countess her Prisoners for Tithe, writ a large Letter to her, on behalf of himself, and his other Fellow-Prisoners at her Suit; laying their Innocency before her: And that it was not out of Wilfulness, Stubbornness or Covetousness, that they refused to pay her Tithes; but purely in good Conscience towards God and Christ: and letting her know, that if she should be suffered to keep them there, till they every one died there, as she had done their Fellow-Sufferer, Oliver Atherton; yet they could not yield to pay her. And therefore desired her to consider their Case in a Christian Spirit, and not bring their Blood upon her self also. But she would not shew any Pity or Compassion towards them, who had now suffered hard Imprisonment about two Years and an half under her; but instead thereof she sent to the Town of Garstang, and threatned to complain to the King and Council, and bring them into trouble, for suffering the Paper con∣cerning Oliver Atherton's Death to be stuck upon their Cross. The Rage, that she express'd, made the People take the more notice of it; and some of them said, The Quakers had given her a Bone to pick. But she, that regarded not the Life of an Innocent Sufferer for Christ, lived not long after her self: For That day three Weeks, that Oliver Ather∣ton's Body was carried through Ormskirk to be buried, she died; and her Body was carried dead that day Seven Weeks through the same Town to her Burying Place. And thus the Lord pursued the hard-hearted Persecutor. Lancaster-Assize.As for me, I was kept to the Assize: and then Judge Turner and Judge Twisden coming that Circuit, I was brought before Judge Twis∣den, on the 14th day of the Month called March, in the latter end of the Year 1663. When I was set up to the Bar, I said, Peace be amongst you all. The Judge lookt upon me, and said; What! do you come into the Court with your Hat on! Upon which Words the Jailer taking it off, I said, 'The Hat is not the Honour, that comes from God. Then said the Judge to me, Will you take the Oath of Allegi∣ance, George Fox? I said, I never took any Oath in my Life, nor any Covenant or Engagement. Well, said he, will you Swear, or no? I answered, I am a Christian: and Christ commands me not to swear; and so does the Apostle James likewise: and whether I should obey God or Man, do thou Judge. I ask you again, said he, Whether you will Swear, or no? I answered again, I am neither Turk, Jew nor Heathen, but a Christian, and should shew forth Christianity. And I asked him, If he did not know, that Christians in the Primitive
times, under the Ten Persecutions,1663. Lancaster-Assize. and some also of the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days refused Swearing, because Christ and the Apostle had forbidden it? I told him also; They had had Experience enough, how many Men had first sworn for the King, and then against the King. But as for me, I had never taken an Oath in all my Life: and my Allegiance did not lie in Swearing, but in Truth and Faith∣fulness; for I honour all Men, much more the King. But Christ, who is the Great Prophet, who is the King of Kings, who is the Savi∣our of the World, and the great Judge of the whole World, he saith, I must not Swear: Now, whether must I obey Christ, or Thee? For it is in tenderness of Conscience, and in Obedience to the Commands of Christ, that I do not Swear: And we have the Word of a King for tender Consciences. Then I asked the Judge, If he did own the King? Yes, said he, I do own the King. Why then, said I, dost thou not observe his Declaration from Breda, and his Promises made, since he came into England, That no man should be called in question for matters of Religion, so long as they lived peaceably? Now, if thou ownest the King, said I, why dost thou call me into question, and put me upon taking an Oath, which is a matter of Religion; seeing thou nor none else can charge me with unpeaceable living? Then he was moved; and looking angrily at me, said: Sirrah, Will you Swear. I told him, I was none of his Sirrahs; I was a Christian: and for him, that was an Old Man and a Judge, to sit there, and give Nick-names to Prisoners; it did not become either his Gray Hairs, or his Office. Well, said he, I am a Christian too. 'Then do Christians Works, said I. Sirrah! said he, Thou thinkest to frighten me with thy Words. Then catching himself, and looking aside, he said; Heark! I am using the word [Sirrah] again; and so check'd himself. I said, I spake to thee in love; for that Language did not become thee, a Judge: Thou oughtest to Instruct a Prisoner in the Law, if he were Ignorant, and out of the way. And I speak in Love to thee too, said he. But, said I, Love gives no Nick-names. Then he roused himself up, and said; I will not be afraid of thee, George Fox: Thou speakest so loud, thy Voice drowns mine and the Court's; I must call for three or four Criers, to drown thy Voice: Thou hast good Lungs. I am a Prisoner here, said I, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake; for his sake do I suffer, and for him do I stand this day: and if my Voice were five times louder, yet I should lift it up, and sound it out for Christ's sake, for whose Cause I stand this day before your Judgment-Seat, in Obedience to Christ, who commands not to Swear; before whose Judgment-Seat you must all be brought, and must give an Account. Well, said the Judge, George Fox say, Whether thou wilt take the Oath, Yea or Nay? I replied, I say, as I said before, Whether ought I to obey God or Man, Judge thou? 'If I could take any Oath at all, I should take this: for I do not deny some Oaths only, or on some Oc∣casion; but all Oaths, according to Christ's Doctrine, who hath commanded his, Not to swear at all. Now if thou, or any of you, or any of your Ministers or Priests here will prove, that ever Christ or his Apostle, after they had forbidden all Swearing, commanded Christians to Swear, then I will Swear. I saw several Priests there; but never an one of them offered to speak. Then said the Judge, I am
a Servant to the King, and the King sent me not to dispute with you, but to put the Laws in Execution: Therefore tender him the Oath of Allegiance. If thou love the King, said I, why dost thou break his Word, and not keep his Declarations and Speeches, wherein he pro∣mised Liberty to Tender Consciences? I am a Man of a tender Con∣science; and in obedience to Christ's Command I cannot Swear. Then you will not Swear, said the Judge: Take him away, Jailer. I said, It is for Christ's sake, that I cannot Swear, and for Obedience to his Command I Suffer; and so the Lord forgive you all. So the Jailer took me away: but I felt, the mighty Power of the Lord was over them all. Upon the Sixteenth Day of the same Month I was brought before Judge Twisden again, and he was somewhat offended at my Hat; but it being the last Morning of the Assize, before he was to go out of Town, and not many People there, he made the less of it. He asked me, Whether I would Traverse, or stand Mute, or Submit? But he spake so fast, and in such haste, that it was hard to know, what he said. However, I told him, I desired, I might have Liberty to Tra∣verse the Indictment, and Try it. Then said he, Take him away, I will have nothing to do with him, take him away. I said, Well, live in the Fear of God, and do Justice. Why, said he, have not I done you Ju∣stice? I replied, That which thou hast done, hath been against the Command of Christ.Lancaster-Prison. So I was taken away, and had to the Jail again; and there kept Prisoner, till the next Assizes. Sometime before this Assize, Margaret Fell was sent Prisoner to Lancaster-Jail by Flemming, Kirby and Preston Justices; and at the Assize the Oath was tendered to her also, and she was committed again to Prison, to lie till the next Assize. Now Justice Flemming being one of the fiercest and most-violent Justices in Persecuting Friends, and sending his honest Neighbours to Prison for Religion's sake; and there being many Friends at this time in Lancaster-Jail committed thither by him, and some having died in Prison; we that were then Prisoners, had it upon us to write to him, as followeth. O Justice Fleming! MErcy, and Compassion, and Love, and Kindness adorns and graces Men and Magistrates. Oh! dost thou not hear the Cry of the Widows, and the Cry of the Fatherless, who were made so through Persecution! Were they not driven, like Sheep, from Constable to Constable, as though they had been the greatest Transgressors, or Malefactors in the Land? Which grieved and tendered the Hearts of many sober People, to see, how their Innocent Neighbours and Coun∣trymen (who were of a peaceable Carriage, and honest in their Lives and Conversations amongst Men) were used and served! One more is dead, whom thou sentest to Prison, having left Five Children, both Fatherless and Motherless. Now, how canst thou do other∣wise, than take Care of these Fatherless Infants, and also of the other's Wife and Family? Is it not thy place? Consider Job, (c. 29th.) how he was a Father to the Poor; he delivered the Poor that cried,
and the Fatherless, that had none to help:1663. Lancaster-Prisons. how he brake the Jaws of the Wicked, and plucked the Spoil out of his Teeth. But Oh! measure thy Life and his, and take heed of the day of God's Eter∣nal Judgment, which will come; and the Sentence and Decree from Christ, when every Man must give an Account, and receive a Re∣ward according to his Deeds: and then it will be said, Oh, where are the Months, that are past! Again, Justice Fleming, consider; when John Stubbs was brought before thee, having a Wife and four small Children, and little to live on, but what they honestly got by their own Diligence; as soon as he appeared, thou cried'st out, Put the Oath to that Man. And when he confessed, he was but a poor Man; yet then thou hadst no regard: but cast away Pity, not hearing, what he would say. And now he is kept up in Prison, because he could not Swear, and break the Command of Christ and the Apo∣stle: It is to be hoped, thou wilt take Care for his Family, that his Children do not starve; and see, that they do not want Bread. Can this be Allegiance to the King, to do that, which Christ and his Apo∣stle say, is Evil, and brings into Condemnation? And would not you have cast Christ and the Apostle into Prison, who command not to Swear, if they had been in your days? Consider also thy poor Neigh∣bour William Wilson, who was known to all the Parish and Neighbours to be an Industrious Man, and careful to maintain his Wife and Chil∣dren; but had little, but what he got with his Hands in Diligence and Travels, to supply himself: How should his Wife maintain her Children, when thou hast cast her Husband into Prison, and thereby made him uncapable of working for them? Therefore it may be ex∣pected, thou wilt have a care of his Wife and Children, and see, they do not want: for how should they live, having no other way to be sustained, but by the little that he got? Surely, the noise of this is in the very Markets; and the Death of thy two Neighbours, and the Cry of the Widows, and the Cry of the Fatherless is heard: And all those Fatherless, and those Widows are made so for Righteousness sake. For might not John Stubbs and William Wilson have had their Liberty still, if they would have Sworn; though they had been such as go after Mountebanks and Stage-Plays, or run a hunting? O con∣sider! for the Lord's Mind is otherwise; for he is tender: And the King hath declared his Mind to be, that there should be no Cruelty inflicted upon his peaceable Subjects. Besides, several poor, honest Peo∣ple were Fined, who had need to have something given them: And it had been more honourable, to have given them something; than to Fine them, and send them to Prison: some of whom live upon the Charity of other People. Now, what Honour or Grace can it be to thee, to cast thy poor Neighbours into Prison, who be peaceable; see∣ing thou knowest, these People cannot do that, which thou requi∣rest of them, if it were to save their Lives, or all that they have? because in tenderness they cannot take any Oath, Thou makest that a Snare to them. What, thinkest thou, do the People say concern∣ing this? We know (say they) the Quakers Principle, that keep to Yea and Nay; but we see others Swear and Forswear: For many of you have Sworn first one way, and then another. So we leave it to the Spirit of God in thy Conscience, Justice Fleming, who was't so eager
for the taking of George Fox, and so offended with them, that had not taken him; and now hast fallen upon thy poor Neighbours. But Oh! where's thy Pity for their poor, Fatherless Children, and Motherless Infants? O take heed of Herod's Hard-heartedness, and casting away all Pity! Esau did so, not Jacob. Here is also Thomas Walters of Boulton cast into Prison, and the Oath Imposed on him through Thee; and for denying to Swear at all, in Obedience to Christ's Command, he is continued in Prison: who hath Five small Children, and his Wife near down-lying. Surely, thou should take Care for them also; and see, that his Wife and small Children do not want: who are as Fatherless, and she as a Widow through Thee. Dost thou not hear in thy Ears the Cry of the Fatherless, and the Cry of the Widows, and the Blood of the Innocent speak, who through thee have been persecuted to Prison, and now dead? Oh! heavy Sentence at the Day of Judgment! How wilt thou Answer, when Thou and thy Works come to be Judged, when thou shalt be brought before the Judgment-Seat and Bar of the Almighty, who in thy Prosperity hast made Widows and Fatherless for Righteousness sake, and for Tenderness of Conscience towards God? The Lord knows and sees it! O Man! Consider in thy Life-time, how thou hast stained thy self with the Blood of the Innocent! When thou had'st Power, and might'st have done Good amongst thy peaceable Neigh∣bours, thou wouldest not; but used'st thy Power not to a good Intent, but contrary to the Lord's Mind, and to the King's. The King's Fa∣vour, and his Mercy and Clemency to sober People, and to tender Con∣sciences hath been manifested by Declarations and Proclamations; which thou hast abused and slighted, by persecuting his peaceable Subjects. For at London, and in other parts the Quakers Meetings are peaceable: and if thou look but as far as Yorkshire, where the Plot hath been, Friends Innocency hath cleared it self in the Hearts of sober Justices; and for you here to fall upon your peaceable Neighbours and People, and to be rigorous and violent against them, that are tender, godly and righteous, it is no Honour to you. How many Drunkards, and Swearers, and Fighters, and such as are sub∣ject to Vice, have you caused to be brought before you to your Courts? It were more honourable for you to look after such: for the Law was not made for the Righteous, but for Sinners and Trans∣gressors. Therefore Consider, and be humbled for these things; for the Lord may do to thee, as thou hast done to others: and thou dost not know, how soon there may be a Cry in thy own Family, as the Cry is amongst thy Neighbours, of the Fatherless and Widows, that are made so through thee. But the Quakers can and do say; The Lord forgive thee, and lay not these things to thy Charge, if it be his Will. Besides this, which went in the Name of Many, I sent him also a Line or two, subscribed by my self only, and directed—
To Daniel Fleming.1664. Lancaster-Prison. Friend, THou hast Imprisoned the Servants of the Lord, without the Breach of any Law: Therefore take heed, what thou dost, (for in the Light of the Lord God thou art seen) lest the Hand of the Lord be turned against thee! G. F. It was not long after this, e're Fleming's Wife died, and lest him Thirteen or Fourteen Motherless Children. When I was Prisoner at Lancaster, there was Prisoner also one Ma∣jor Wiggan, a Baptist-Preacher. He boasted much before-hand, what he would say at the Assize, if the Oath should be put to him; and that he would refuse to Swear. But when the Assize came, and the Oath was tendered him, he desired Time to consider of it: and that being granted him, till the next Assize; he got leave to go to Lon∣don, before the Assize came again: and came no more back, but staid at London, till the Plague brake forth: and there both he and his Wife were Cut off. He was a very Wicked Man, and the Judgments of God came upon him: For he had published a very wicked Book against Friends, full of Lies and Blasphemies; the Occasion of which was this. Whilst he was in Lancaster-Castle, he challenged Friends to have a Dispute with them: Whereupon I got leave of the Jailer to go up to them. And entring into Discourse with him, he affirmed: That some Men never had the Spirit of God; and that the true Light, which enlightneth every one, that cometh into the world, is natural. For Proof of his first Assertion, he instanced Balaam, affirming; That Ba∣laam had not the Spirit of God. I affirmed and proved, That Bala∣am had the Spirit of God; and that Wicked Men have the Spirit of God, else how could they quench it, and vex it, and grieve it, and resist the Holy Ghost, like the stiff-necked Jews? To his Second As∣sertion I answered; That the true Light, which enlightneth every Man, that cometh into the World, was the Life in the Word; and that was Divine and Eternal, and not Natural. And he might as well say, that the Word was Natural, as that the Life in the Word was Natural. And Wicked Men were enlightned by this Light, else how could they hate it? Now it is expresly said, that they did hate it: And the Reason given, why they did hate it, was, because their Deeds were evil; and they would not come to it, because it reproved them: and that must needs be in them, that reproved them. Besides, that Light could not be the Scriptures of the New-Testament; for it was testified of, before any part of the New-Testament was written: So it must be the Divine Light, which is the Life in Christ the Word, before Scriptures were. And the Grace of God, which brought Salvation, had appeared unto all Men; and taught the Saints: but they that turned it into Wan∣tonness, and walked despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, were the Wicked. Again, the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, which leads the Disciples of Christ into all Truth;
the same should Reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, and of their Ʋnbelief. So the Wicked World had it to reprove them; and the true Disciples and Learners of Christ, that believed in the Light, as Christ commands, they had it to lead them. But the World, that did not believe in the Light, though they were lighted; but hated the Light, which they should have be∣lieved in, and loved the Darkness rather than it, this World had a Righteousness and a Judgment, which the Holy Ghost reproved them for, as well as for their Ʋnbelief. So having proved, that the Good and the Bad were enlightned, and that the Grace of God had ap∣peared unto them all, and that all had the Spirit of God, else they could not vex and grieve it; I told Major Wiggan, The least Babe there might see him: and presently stood up one Richard Cubham, and proved him an Anti-christ, and a Deceiver, by Scripture. Then the Jailer had me away to my Prison again. And afterwards Wig∣gan wrote a Book of this Dispute, and put in abundance of abomina∣ble Lies: But his Book was soon Answered in Print; and he himself not long after was cut off, as afore is said. This Wiggan was poor; and while he was a Prisoner at Lancaster, he sent into the Country, and got Money gathered for Relief of the Poor People of God in Prison: and many People gave freely, thinking it had been for Ʋs; when-as indeed it was for himself. But when we heard of it, we laid it upon him: and writ also into the Country, that 'Friends might let the People know the Truth of the Matter; that it was not our manner to have Collections made for us: and that those Collections were only for Wiggan and another, a drunken Preacher of his Society; who would be so drunk, that once he lost his Britches. After this it came upon me to write a Paper to the Judges, and other Magistrates, concerning their Giving Evil Words and Nick-names to such, as were brought before them. And that which I writ, was after this manner, and thus directed: To all you, that be Judges, or other Officers whatsoever, in the whole World, who profess your selves to be Christians. Friends, HErein and by reading the Scriptures, ye may see both your own Words and Carriage, and the Words, Carriage, and Practice of both Jews and Heathens; and of the great King of Kings, the great Law-giver, and Judge of the whole World. First, For the Words and Carriage of the Jews, when such as were worthy of Death, were brought before such as were Rulers amongst them. When Achan had taken the Babylonish Garment, and the two hundred She∣kels of Silver, and the Wedge of Gold of Fifty Shekels weight, and Joshua, who was then Judge of Israel, had by the Lot found him out; he did not say unto him, Sirrah, nor, You Rascal, Knave, Rogue, as some, that are called Christian Magistrates, are too apt to do. But Joshua said unto Achan, My Son; Mark his clean Language and Sa∣voury
Expression, and gracious Words, My Son, said he, give, I pray thee, Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make Confession unto him; and tell me now, what thou hast done; hide it not from me. Then Achan confessed, that he had sinned against the Lord God of Israel; and thus and thus he had done. And then Joshua, the Judge, said; Why hast thou troubled Israel? The Lord shall trouble thee this day: and they stoned him and his with Stones, and burnt his Goods with Fire. But there was no unsavoury Word given to him, that we read of; though he was worthy of Death. Josh. 7. So when the Man, that gathered Sticks upon the Sabbath-day, was taken, and brought before Moses, the Judge in Israel, and put in Ward, until the Mind of the Lord was known concerning him; We read not of any reviling Language given him: but the Lord said to Moses, and Moses to the People; The Man shall surely be put to Death, Numb. 15.35. So likewise in the Rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, where Moses called them to Trial, he did not Sirrah them, or mis-call them; but said to Corah and the rest, Hear, I pray you, ye Sons of Levi, Numb. 16.8. And when he gave the Sentence against them, he said; If these Men die the common Death of all Men, &c. He did not say, If these Rascals, or Knaves, — as many, that profess them∣selves Christians, will now do. When Elihu spake to Job, who was a Judge, and to his Friends, and said, Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's Person, neither let me give flattering Titles unto Man; for I know not to give flattering Titles: in so doing my Maker would soon take me away, Job 32. Job did not say, Sirrah, hold thy Tongue; nor gave him any unsavoury Expression. Then for the Words of David and Solomon, and other Kings and Officers, see in the Books of the Kings and Chronicles the Savoury Language, that they gave to them, that were brought before them. Nay, though Shimei cursed David the King, yet neither did David then, or afterward, nor Solomon, when he caused him to be put to Death, give him any reproachful Language, or so much as call him Sirrah, 2 Sam. 16. and 1 Kings 2. Read the Prophecies of Isaiah and Micha, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the rest of the Prophets, who Prophesied to several Peoples, and against Rulers, Kings and Magistrates; yet where can it be found, that they had any bad Language given them, as Sirrah, or the like, by any Ruler either of the Jews or Heathens? Nay, though Jeremiah was cast into the Prison, and into the Dungeon; yet there was no such Word, as Sirrah, or Knave, given to him, Jer. 37. Then for the Words and Carriage of the Heathens: When Abra∣ham was brought before Abimelech, who was a King, he gave Abraham no unsavoury Expressions, Gen. 20. And when Isaac came before Abimelech, he gave him no taunting Language neither, Gen. 26. When Joseph was cast into Prison, and that in Egypt, we do not read, that he had any railing Language given him, Gen. 39. Neither did Pharaoh, when Moses and Aaron went before him, give them bad Language, as Sirrah, Knave, or the like.
When Nebuchadnezzar Sentenced the Three Children to the Fiery Furnace, there was no such Language given them, as Sirrah, Knave, Rascal; but called them by the Names, they were known by, Dan. 3. And when Daniel was brought before King Darius, and sentenced to be cast into the Lions Den, he had no such Ill Names given him, as many give now; who call those, Heathen Rulers, but themselves Christians. If ye look into the New Testament, there in the Parable of the Wedding-Supper, the King, that came to view his Guests, did not say unto him, that was found without a Wedding-Garment, Sirrah, how camest thou in hither? but, Friend, how camest thou in hi∣ther? &c. though he was one, that was to be bound hand and foot, and cast into utter Darkness, Matth. 22. Nay, when Judas had betrayed his Master, Christ Jesus the Lord of Life, and had sold him to the Priests, Christ did not call him Sirrah, when he came to apprehend him; but Friend: Matth. 26.50. Stephen in his Ex∣amination, Sentence and Death had no such reproachful Word giv∣en him, as Sirrah, or Knave, Acts 6. & 7. Chapt. When the Apo∣stles Peter and John were brought before the High-Priest, and Rulers of the Jews, and commanded not to preach in the Name of Jesus, Acts 4. they were not called Sirrah, or Knaves, nor had any such Ill Names given them. And when Paul and Silas were cast into Pri∣son by the Magistrates, there was no such Word given them in their Examination, nor in their Sentence, Acts 16. They called them Men, not Rogues, Sirrahs, nor Knaves. And when the Magistrates had done contrary to Law, they feared: So ye may see, how short of this Example many are, that call themselves Christian Rulers; who are not afraid to cast Innocent People into Prison, and give them Ill Names besides, below both Jews and Heathens. When the Ʋproar was at Ephesus about Diana's Shrine, Demetrius, who bore great Sway among the Crafts-men, did not call Paul Sir∣rah; but called him by his Right Name Paul, Acts 19. And when Paul was brought Prisoner before the High-Priest Ananias, and the Council of the Jews, and told them, He had lived in all good Con∣science towards God, until that day; though they (who professed the Scriptures, but lived out of the Life of them) could not abide to hear of Living in a good Conscience (as Professors of the Scriptures now, that live not in the Life, cannot abide to hear of living in a good Conscience now-a-days:) But Ananias caused Paul to be smitten on the Mouth; yet he did not call him Knave, nor Sirrah, Acts 23. The Apostate-Jews indeed, (who, though they professed Scripture, were out of the Life thereof, and had rejected Christ) in their accusing Paul before the Roman Magistrates, did once call him a Pestilent Fellow, Acts 24. as the Accusing Professors, who live out of the Life, will sometimes call us now. But Felix gave Paul no such Lan∣guage; neither did Festus, nor King Agrippa in all their Examina∣tions of him, give Paul any such Words, as Sirrah, Rascal, Knave, or the like: but heard him patiently. So now Christians may see through all the Scriptures, that when any Persons were brought before Rulers, Kings, or Magistrates, whether Jews or Heathen, they did not use to call them Evil Names, as Sirrah, Rascal, Knave, and
the like; they had no such foul-mouth'd Language in their Courts: Nor did they use to say to them, Sirrah, put off your Hat. Now ye, that profess Christianity, and say, the Scripture is your Rule, may see, that more Corrupt Words proceed out of your Mouths, than ei∣ther out of the Jews or Heathens; if ye will Try your Practice by the Scriptures: And doth not the Apostle tell you, that no Corrupt Communication should proceed out of your Mouths? and that your Words should be gracious? Now I query, Where and whence ye, that call your selves Christians, have got all these bad Words and Names, seeing, neither God, nor Christ, nor the Prophets, nor the Judges, nor Kings, nor Rulers ever gave any such Names, so far as appears by Scripture, either amongst the Heathens, Jews or Christians? G. F. Before the next Assizes came, there was a Quarter-Sessions holden at Lancaster by the Justices: To which though we were not brought; yet I put Friends upon drawing up an Account of their Sufferings, and laying them before the Justices in their open Sessions. For Friends had suffered deeply by Fines and Distresses; the Bayliffs and Officers making great Havock and Spoil of their Goods: But no Redress was made. And because some Evil-minded Magistrates would be telling us sometimes of the late Plot in the North; we gave forth the following Paper to stop their Mouths, and to clear Truth and Friends there∣from: Which was as followeth: A Testimony from us, the People of God, whom the World call Quakers, To all the Magistrates and Officers of what sort soever, from the Highest to the Lowest. WE are peaceable, and seek the Peace, and Good, and Welfare of all Men and Women upon the Earth; as in our Lives and peaceable Carriages is manifested: and we desire the Eternal Good and Welfare of all, and their Souls everlasting Peace. We are Heirs of the Blessing, before the Curse was; and of the Power of God, be∣fore the Devil was, and before the Fall of Man. We are Heirs of the Gospel of Peace, which is the Power of God; and we are Heirs of Christ, who have inherited him and his Everlasting Kingdom, and do possess the Power of an Endless Life. Knowing this our Portion and Inheritance, this is to take off all Jealousies out of your Minds, and out of the Minds of all People concerning us, That all Plots and Con∣spiracies, Plotters and Conspirators against the King, and all Aiders or Assisters thereunto we always did, and do utterly deny to be any of us, or to be of the Fellowship of the Gospel, or to be of Christ's Kingdom, or to be his Servants. For Christ said; His Kingdom was not of this World; if it were, his Servants would fight. And there∣fore he bid Peter, Put up his Sword: for, said he, he that taketh the Sword, shall perish by the Sword. Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints, to bear and suffer all things; knowing (as we know) that Vengeance is the Lord's, and he will repay it to them that hurt his Peo∣ple, and that do wrong to the Innocent: Therefore cannot we avenge,
but suffer for his Name's sake. And we do know, that the Lord will judge the World in Righteousness, according to their Deeds: and that, when every one shall give an Account to him of the Deeds done in the Body, then will the Lord give every Man according to his Works, whether they be Good, or whether they be Evil. Christ saith, he came not to destroy Men's Lives: And when his Disciples would have had Fire to come down from Heaven, to have consumed them that did not receive him, he told them; They knew not, what Spirit they were of, that would have Mens Lives destroyed: and therefore he rebuked them, and told them; That he came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. Now we are of Christ's Mind, who is the great Prophet, whom all ought to hear in all things, who saith to his; If they strike thee on one Cheek, turn the other; and render to no Man Evil for Evil. This Doctrine of his have we learned; and do not only confess him in Words, but follow his Doctrine: and therefore have and do we suffer all manner of Re∣proaches, Scandals and Slanders, and spoiling of Goods, Buffetings and Whippings. Stripes and Imprisonments for these many years; and can say: The Lord forgive them, that have thus served us; and lay not these things to their Charge! And we know, that the Jews outward Sword, by which they cut down the Heathen outwardly, was a Type of the inward Sword of the Spirit, which cuts down the inward Hea∣then, the raging Nature in People. And the Blood of Bulls, Lambs, Rams, and other Offerings, and that Priesthood that offered them, to∣gether with other things in the Law, were Types of Christ, the one Offering, and of his Blood: who is the Everlasting Priest and Cove∣nant, Christ, our Life and Way to God, and who is the great Pro∣phet, and Shepherd that looks to his Flock, and the Head of his Church, and the great Bishop of our Souls, whom we witness come; and he doth oversee and keep his Flock. For in Adam in the Fall we know, the striving, quarrelling, unpeaceable Spirits are in the Enmity one with another, and not in Peace: But in Christ Jesus, the Second Adam, that never fell, is Peace, Rest and Life. And the Doctrine of Christ, who never sinned, is to love one another; and who be in this Doctrine, hurt no man: in which we are, in Christ, who is our Life. Therefore it is well for you to distinguish betwixt the Precious and the Vile, between them that fear God, and serve him, and them that do not; and to put a difference between the Innocent and the Guilty, and between him that is Holy and Pure, and the Ungodly and Pro∣phane: for they that do not so, bring Troubles, Burdens and Sorrows upon themselves. And this we write in Love to your Souls, that ye may consider these things: for they that hate Enemies, and hate one another, we cannot say, they are of God, nor in Christ's Doctrine; but are Opposers of it. And such, as wrestle with Flesh and Blood, with Carnal Weapons, are gone into the Flesh, out of the Spirit: They are not in our Fellowship in the Spirit, in which is the Bond of Peace; neither are they of Ʋs, nor have we Ʋnity with them in their fleshly state, and with their Carnal Weapons. For our Unity and Fellowship stands in the Gospel, which is the Power of God, before the Devil was, the Liar, and the Murderer, the Man-slayer and the Envious Man: Now Christ's Mind, and his Doctrine being to save Men's Lives, we, who are of Christ's Mind, are out of, and above these
things. And our desire is,1664. Lancaster-Castle. that in the Fear of the Lord ye may all Live; that in that ye may all receive God's Wisdom, by which all things were created; that by it all may be ordered to God's Glory. This is from them that love all your Souls, and seek your Eternal Good. Being now a Prisoner in Lancaster Castle, a deep sense came upon me of a Day of sore Trial and Exercise, that was come and coming upon all, that had been high in Profession of Religion: And I was mo∣ved to give forth the following Paper, as a Warning unto such: NOw is the Day, that every one's Faith and Love to God and Christ will be Tried; and who are Redeemed out of the Earth, and who are in the Earth, will be manifested; and who is their Master they serve: and whether they will run to the Mountains, to Cover them. Now will it appear, who are the Stony Ground, who are the Thorny Ground, and who are the High-way-Ground, in whom the Fowls of the Air take away the Seed, and the Thorns and Cares of the World Choke, and the Heat of Persecution scorches, and burns up your green Blade: For the Day trieth all things. There∣fore let not such, as forsake Truth, for saving the Earth, say, that your Brother Priest only serveth not the Lord Jesus Christ, but his own Belly, and mindeth Earthly things; for such themselves also do the same, and do hug and embrace Self, and not the Lord. Now it will be made manifest, who is every ones God, and Christ, and Sa∣viour; and their Love will be manifest, whether it be of the World, or the Love of God: for if it be the Love of the World, it is En∣mity; and the Enmity will manifest it self, what it is: and the Day will Try every Spirit and his Fruits. Therefore, all my dear Friends, In the Everlasting Seed of God live, that is over all the House of Adam and his Works in the Fall: and so dwelling in the Seed, Christ, that never fell, in him you all have Vertue, and Life, and Peace; and through him ye will overcome all, that is in the Fall. G. F. I writ also another Short Epistle to Friends, to Warn them to keep out of that Spirit, that wrought in John Perrot and his Company against the Truth. Dear Friends, DWell in the Love of God, and in his Righteousness, that will preserve you above all Changeable Spirits, that be foul and unclean, and that dwell not in the Truth, but in Quarrels. Avoid such, and keep your Habitations in the Truth, and dwell in the Truth, and in the Word of God, by which ye are reconciled to God. And keep your Meetings in the Name of Jesus Christ, that never fell;
and then ye will see over all the Gatherings of Adam's Sons and Daughters, you being Met in the Life over them all; in which is your Ʋnity, and Peace, and Fellowship with God, and one with an∣other, in the Life, in which ye may enjoy God's Presence among you. So remember me to all Friends in the everlasting Seed of God. And all they, that are gotten into Fellowship in outward things, their Fellowship will corrupt, and rot, and wither away. Therefore live in the Gospel, the Power of God, which Power of God, the Gospel was, before the Devil was. And this Fellowship in the Go∣spel, the Power of God, is a Mystery to all the Fellowships in the World. So look over all outward Sufferings, and look at the Lord, and the Lamb, who is the First and Last, the Amen; in whom fare∣well. G. F. Lancaster-Assizes.In the Sixth Month the Assizes were held again at Lancaster, and the same Judges, Twisden and Turner, came that Circuit again: but Judge Turner then sate on the Crown-Bench; and so I was brought before him. But before I was called to the Bar, I was put among the Mur∣derers and Fellons for about the space of two hours; the People, the Justices, and the Judge also gazing upon me. After they had Tried several others, they called me to the Bar; and impanneled a Jury: And then the Judge asked the Justices, Whether they had tendered me the Oath at the Sessions? And they said, They had. Then he bid, Give them the Book, that they might swear, they had tendered me the Oath according to the Indictment, Some of the Justices refused to be Sworn: but the Judge said, he would have it done to take away all Occasion of Exception. Now when the Jury were sworn, and the Ju∣stices had sworn, That they had tendered me the Oath, according to the Indictment; then the Judge asked me, Whether I had not refused the Oath at the last Assizes? I said, I never took Oath in my Life; and Christ, the Saviour and Judge of the World, said, Swear not at all. The Judge seemed not to take notice of my Answer; but asked me: Whether or no I had not refused to take the Oath at the last Assize? I said: The Words, that I then spake to them, were, That if they could prove, either Judge, Justices, Priest or Teacher, that after Christ and the Apostle had forbidden Swearing, they commanded, that Christians should Swear, I would Swear. The Judge said, He was not at that time to dispute, whether it was lawful to Swear; but to Inquire, whether I had refused to take the Oath, or no. I told him, Those things mentioned in the Oath, as Plotting against the King, and owning the Pope's, or any other Forreign Power, I utterly deny. Well, said he, You say well in that: but did you deny to take the Oath? What say you? What would'st thou have me to say, said I? for I have told thee before, what I did say. Then he asked me, If I would have these Men to Swear, that I had taken the Oath? I asked him, 'If he would have those Men to Swear, that I had refused the Oath? At which the Court burst out into Laughter. I was grieved, to see so much Lightness in a Court, where such Solemn Matters are handled; and thereupon asked them: If this Court was a Play-house? Where
is Gravity and Sobriety, said I?1664. Lancaster-Assizes. for this Behaviour doth not become you. Then the Clerk read the Indictment; and I told the Judge, I had something to speak to it, (for I had Informed my self of the Errors, that were in it.) He told me, He would hear me after∣ward any Reasons, that I could alledge, why he should not give Judg∣ment. Then I spake to the Jury, and told them, That they could not bring me in Guilty, according to that Indictment; for the In∣dictment was wrong laid, and had many gross Errors in it. The Judge said, I must not speak to the Jury, but he would speak to them: and he told them, I had denied to take the Oath at the last Assizes; and, said he, I can tender the Oath to any Man now, and Premunire him for not taking it: And he said, They must bring me in Guilty, seeing I refused to take the Oath. Then, said I, what do ye do with a Form? Ye may throw away your Form then. And I told the Ju∣ry, it lay upon their Consciences, as they would answer it to the Lord God before his Judgment-Seat. Then the Judge spake again to the Jury; and I bid him, do me Justice. So the Jury brought me in Guilty. Whereupon I told them, That both the Justices, and they too had forsworn themselves; and therefore they had small cause to laugh, as they did a little before. Oh the Envy, and Rage, and Ma∣lice, that was there against me, and the Lightness! But the Lord con∣founded them, and they were wonderfully stopt. So they set me aside; and called up Margaret Fell, who had a great deal of good Ser∣vice amongst them: and then the Court brake up near the Second Hour. In the Afternoon we were brought up again, to have Sentence pas∣sed upon us: And Margaret Fell desired, that Sentence might be deferred, till the next Morning. I desired nothing, but Law and Justice at his hands; for the Thieves had Mercy: Only I desired the Judge, to send some to see my Prison; which was so bad, they would put no Creature they had, in it: and I told him, that Col. Kirby, who was then on the Bench, said, I should be locked up, and no Flesh alive should come to me. The Judge shook his Head, and said; When the Sentence was given, he would leave me to the favour of the Jailer. Now most of the Gentry of the Country were gathered together, expecting to hear the Sentence; and the Noise among the People was, That I should be Transported. But they were all crossed at that time: for the Sentence being deferred, till next Morning; I was had back, as I came, to Prison again. Upon my complaining of the badness of my Prison, some of the Justices, with Col. Kirby went up to see it: But when they came to it, they durst hardly go into it; the Floor was so bad and dangerous, and the place so open to Wind and Rain: and some that came up, said; Sure, it was a Jakes-house. When Col. Kirby saw it, and heard, what others said of it, he excused the matter as well as he could, and said; I should be removed from that place, ere it was long, to some more convenient place. Next day, towards the Eleventh Hour, we were called forth again to hear the Sentence: And Margaret Fell being called first to the Bar, she had some Counsels to plead; who found many Errors in her In∣dictment: Whereupon, after the Judge had acknowledged them, she was set by. Then the Judge asked, What they could say to mine? Now
I was not willing to let any Man plead for me; but to speak to it my self: And indeed, though Margaret had some, that pleaded for her: yet she spake as much her self, as she would. But before I came to the Bar, I was moved in my Spirit to pray, That God would con∣found their Wickedness and Envy, and set his Truth over all; and ex∣alt his Seed. And the Lord heard and answered, and did Confound them in their Proceedings against me. And though they had most Envy against me; yet the most-gross Errors were found in my Indict∣ment. Now, I having put by others from pleading for me, the Judge asked me; What I had to say, why he should not pass Sentence upon me. I told him, I was no Lawyer; but I had much to say, if he would but have Patience to hear. At that he laughed, and others laughed also, and said; Come, what have you to say? He can say nothing. 'Yes, said I, I have much to say: have but the Patience to hear me. Then I asked him, Whether the Oath was to be tendred to the King's Subjects, or to the Subjects of Forreign Princes? He said, To the Sub∣jects of this Realm. Then said I, Look the Indictment, and ye may see, that ye have left out the Word Subject: so not having named me in the Indictment, as a Subject, ye cannot Premunire me for not taking the Oath. Then they looked the Statute, and the Indict∣ment, and saw, that it was, as I said: and the Judge confessed, it was an Error. I told him, I had something else to stop his Judgment. And I desired him to look, What day the Indictment said the Oath was tendered to me at the Sessions there? They lookt, and said, It was the Eleventh day of January. What Day of the Week was that Session held on, said I? On a Tuesday, said they. Then said I, Look your Almanacks, and see, whether there was any Sessions held at Lancaster on the Eleventh Day of January, so called? So they looked, and found, that the Eleventh day was the Day called Monday, and that the Sessions was on the day called Tuesday, which was the Twelfth day of that Month. Look ye now, said I; ye have Indict∣ed me for refusing the Oath in the Quarter-Sessions held at Lancaster on the Eleventh Day of January last, and the Justices have Sworn, that they tendered me the Oath in open Sessions here that day; and the Jury upon their Oaths have found me Guilty thereupon: and yet ye see, there was no Session held in Lancaster that day. Then the Judge, to have covered the matter, asked, Whether the Sessions did not be∣gin on the Eleventh day? But some in the Court Answered, No; The Session held but one day, and that was the Twelfth. Then the Judge said, This was a great Mistake, and an Error. Some of the Justices were in a great Rage at this, and were ready to have gone off the Bench, and stampt, and said; Who hath done this? Some body hath done it on purpose: and a great Heat was amongst them. Then said I, Are not the Justices here, that have Sworn to this Indictment, forsworn Men in the face of the Country? But this is not all, said I; I have more yet to offer, why Sentence should not be given against me. Then I asked; 'In what Year of the King the last Assize here was holden, which was in the Month called March last? And the Judge said, It was in the Sixteenth Year of the King. But, said I, the Indictment says, It was in the Fifteenth Year: and they looked,
and found it so. This also was acknowledged to be another Error. But then they were all in a Fret again, both Judge and Justices, and could not tell, what to say: For the Judge had sworn the Officers of the Court, that the Oath was tendered to me at the Assize mentioned in the Indictment. 'Now, said I, Is not the Court here forsworn also, who have sworn, that the Oath was tendered to me at the Assize hol∣den here in the Fifteenth Year of the King, when-as it was in his Six∣teenth Year; and so they have sworn a whole Year false? The Judge bid them Look, whether Margaret Fell's Indictment was so, or no? And they lookt; and found, it was not so. I told the Judge, I had more yet to offer, to stop Sentence: And I asked him; 'Whether All the Oath ought to be put into the Indictment, or no? Yes, said he, it ought to be All put in. Then said I, 'Compare the Indictment with the Oath, and there thou may'st see these Words, viz. [or by any Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him, or his Sea] left out of the Indictment; which is a principal part of the Oath: And in another place the Words [Heirs and Successors] are left out. The Judge did acknowledge these also to be great Errors. But said I, I have not yet done; I have yet something further to alledg. Nay, said the Judge, I have enough; you need say no more. If (said I) thou hast enough, I desire nothing but Law and Justice at thy hands: for I don't look for Mercy. You must have Justice, said he, and you shall have Law. Then I asked, Am I at Liberty, and free from all, that ever hath been done against me in this matter? Yes, said the Judge, You are free from all that hath been done against you. But then, starting up in a Rage, he said; I can put the Oath to any man here: and I will tender you the Oath again. I told him, He had Examples enough yesterday of Swearing and False-swearing, both in the Justices and in the Jury: For I saw before mine Eyes, that both Justices and Jury had forsworn themselves. The Judge asked me, If I would take the Oath? I bid him, Do me Justice for my false Imprisonment all this while: For what had I been Imprisoned so long for? And I told him, I ought to be set at Liberty. You are at Liberty, said he; but I will put the Oath to you again. Then I turned me about, and said; All People, take notice, this is a Snare: for I ought to be set free from the Jailer, and from this Court. But the Judge cried, Give him the Book: and the Sheriff, and the Justices, cried, Give him the Book. Then the Power of Darkness rose up in them, like a Mountain: and a Clerk lift up a Book to me. I stood still, and said, If it be a Bible, give it me into my hand. Yes, yes, said the Judge and Justices, give it him into his hand. So I took it, and lookt in it, and said, 'I see, it is a Bible; I am glad of it. Now he had caused the Jury to be called, and they stood by (for after they had brought in their former Verdict, he would not dismiss them, though they desired it; but told them, He could not dismiss them yet; for he should have business for them: and therefore they must attend, and be ready, when they were called. And when he said so, I felt his Intent, that if I was freed, he would come on again.) So I looked him in the Face; and the Witness of God started up in him, and made him blush, when he looked at me again: for he saw, that I saw him. Nevertheless har∣dening himself, he caused the Oath to be read to me, the Jury standing
by: And when it was read, he asked me, Whether I would take the Oath, or no? Then said I, Ye have given me a Book here to kiss, and to swear on; and this Book, which ye have given me to kiss, says, Kiss the Son; and the Son says in this Book, Swear not at all: and so says also the Apostle James. Now (said I) I say as the Book says; and yet ye Imprison me: How chance, ye do not Imprison the Book for saying so? How comes it, that the Book is at Liberty amongst you, which bids me not swear; and yet ye Imprison me, for doing as the Book bids me? Why don't ye Imprison the Book? Now as I was speaking this to them, and held up the Bible open in my hand, to shew them the place in the Book, where Christ forbid swearing, they pluckt the Book out of my hand again; and the Judge said, Nay, but we will Imprison George Fox. Yet this got abroad over all the Coun∣try, as a By word, That they gave me a Book to swear on, that comman∣ded me, Not to swear at all; and that the Bible was at Liberty, and I in Prison, for doing as the Bible said. Now when the Judge still ur∣ged me to Swear, I told him, I never took Oath, Covenant nor En∣gagement in my Life; but my Yea or Nay was more binding to me, than an Oath was to many others: For had they not had Experi∣ence, how little Men regarded an Oath? and how they had Sworn one way, and then another? and how the Justices and Court had for∣sworn themselves now? And I told him, I was a Man of a tender Conscience; and if they had any sense of a tender Conscience, they would consider, that it was in Obedience to Christ's Command, that I could not Swear, But, said I, if any of you can Convince me, that after Christ and the Apostle had commanded not to swear, they did alter that Command, and commanded Christians to swear, then ye shall see, I will swear. And there being many Priests by, I said; If ye cannot do it, let your Priests stand up, and do it: But not one of the Priests made any Answer. O, said the Judge, all the World cannot Convince you. No, said I, how is it like, the World should Con∣vince me? for the whole World lies in Wickedness: but bring out your Spiritual Men (as ye call them) to Convince me. Then the Sheriff said, and the Judge said the same, That the Angel swore in the Revelations. I replied, When God bringeth in his First-begotten Son into the World, he saith. Let all the Angels of God Worship him; and he saith, Swear not at all. Nay, said the Judge, I will not di∣spute. Then I spake to the Jury, telling them, It was for Christ's sake, that I could not swear; and therefore I warned them, not to act contrary to that of God in their Consciences: for before his Judg∣ment-seat they must all be brought. And I told them, that as for Plots, and Persecution for Religion, and Popery, I do deny them in my Heart; for I am a Christian, and shall shew forth Christianity amongst you this day: And it is for Christ's Doctrine I stand. More Words I had both with the Judge and Jury, before the Jailer took me away. In the Afternoon I was brought up again, and put among the Thieves a pretty while; where I stood with my Hat on, till at length the Jailer took it off. Then the Jury, having found this New Indict∣ment against me for not taking the Oath, I was called to the Bar? And the Judge asked me, What I would say for my self? I bid them,
Read the Indictment: for I would not Answer to that, which I did not hear. The Clerk read it, (and as he read, the Judge said, Take heed, it be not false again:) but he read it but in such a manner, that I could hardly understand, what he read. But when he had done, the Judge asked me, What I said to the Indictment? I told him, At once hearing so large a Writing read, and that at such a distance, that I could not distinctly hear all the parts of it; I could not well tell, what to say to it: but if he would let me have a Copy of it, and give me time to consider of it, I should Answer it. This put them to a little stand: but after a while the Judge asked me, What time I would have? I said, 'Till the next Assize. But, said he, What Plea will ye now make? Are you Guilty, or Not Guilty? I said, I am Not Guilty at all of denying Swearing obstinately and wilfully: and as for those things mentioned in the Oath, as Jesuitical Plots, and Forreign Powers, I utterly deny them in my Heart: and if I could take any Oath, I should take that; but I never took any Oath in all my Life. The Judge said, I said well: But, said he, The King is sworn, the Parliament is sworn, I am sworn, and the Justices are sworn, and the Law is preserved by Oaths. I told him, They had had sufficient Experience of Men's Swearing; and he had seen, how the Justices and Jury had sworn wrong the other day: And if he had read in the Book of Martyrs, how many of the Mar∣tyrs had refused to Swear, both within the time of the Ten Persecu∣tions, and in Bishop Bonner's days, he might see, that to deny Swearing in Obedience to Christ's Command, was no new thing. Then he said; He wisht, the Laws were otherwise. I said, Our Yea is Yea, and our Nay is Nay: and if we transgress our Yea, and our Nay, let us suffer, as they do, or should do, that Swear falsely: And this, I told him, we had offered to the King; and the King said, It was reasonable. So, after some further Discourse had passed,Lancaster-Prison. they committed me to Prison again; there to lie till the next Assize: and Col. Kirby gave order to the Jailer, To keep me Close, and suffer no Flesh alive to come at me; for I was not fit, he said, to be discoursed with by Men. Then was I put up into a smoky Tower, where the Smoke of the other Pri∣soners came up so thick, that it stood as Dew upon the Walls; and sometimes the Smoke would be so thick, that I could hardly see the Candle, when it burned: and I being locked under Three Locks, the Ʋnder-Jailer, when the Smoke was great, would hardly be perswaded to come up, to unlock one of the upper-most Doors, for fear of the Smoke: so that I was almost smothered. Besides it Rained in upon my Bed; and many times, when I went to stop out the Rain in the Cold Winter-Season, my Shirt would be as wet as Muck with the Rain, that came in upon me, while I was labouring to stop it out. And (the place being high, and open to the Wind) sometimes as fast, as I stopt it, the Wind being high and fierce, would blow it out again. In this manner did I lie all that long, cold Winter, till the next Assize: In which time I was so starved with Cold and Rain, that my Body was greatly swelled, and my Limbs much benummed. The Assize began on the 16th day of the Month called March,Lancaster-Assize. 1664/5. And the same Judges, Twisden and Turner, coming that Cir∣cuit again, Judge Twisden sate this time on the Crown-Bench; and be∣fore
him I was brought. Now I had Informed my self again of the Errors, that were in this Indictment also: For though at the Assize be∣fore, Judge Turner had said to the Officers in Court, Pray see, that all the Oath be in the Indictment, and that the word, Subject, be in; and that the Day of the Month, and Year of the King be put in right: For it is a shame, that so many Errors should be seen, and found in the face of the Country; yet there were many Errors, and those great ones, in this Indictment, as well as in the former. And surely, the Hand of the Lord was in it, to confound their mischievous Work against me, and to blind them therein: Insomuch, that although, after the Indictment was drawn at the former Assize, the Judge Examined it him∣self, and tried it with the Clerks; yet the Word, Subject, was left out of this Indictment also, and the Day of the Month was put in wrong, and several Material Words of the Oath were left out: Yet they went on confidently against me, thinking, all was safe and well. And when I was set to the Bar, and the Jury called over to be sworn, the Clerk asked me, First; Whether I had any Objection to make against any of the Jury? I told him, 'I knew none of them. Then having sworn the Jury, they swore three of the Officers of the Court, to prove, That the Oath was tendred to me at the last Assizes, according to the Indictment. Come, come, said the Judge, It was not done in a Corner. Then he asked me, What I had said to it? or, Whether I had taken the Oath at the last Assize? I told him, what I had said, viz. That the Book they gave me to Swear on, saith, Swear not at all: And I repeated more, of what I had formerly said to them, as it now came to my remembrance. Whereupon the Judge said; I will not dispute with you, but in point of Law. Then, said I, I have something to speak to the Jury concerning the Indictment. He told me, I must not speak to the Jury: but if I had any thing to say, I must speak to him. Then I asked him, Whether the Oath was to be tendred to the King's Subjects only, or to the Subjects of Forreign Princes? He re∣plied, To the Subjects of this Realm: for I will speak nothing to you, said he, but in point of Law. Then, said I, Look the Indictment, and thou may'st see, that the Word, Subject, is left out of this In∣dictment also. And therefore, seeing the Oath is not to be tendred to any, but the Subjects of this Realm, and ye have not put me in as a Subject; the Court is to take no notice of this Indictment. I had no sooner spoke thus, but the Judge cried; Take him away, Jailer, take him away: So I was presently hurried away. And the Jailer and People looked, when I should be called for again; but I was never brought forth to the Court any more, though I had many other great Errors to assign in the Indictment. But after I was gone, the Judge asked the Jury, If they were agreed? And they said, Yes; and found for the King against me: as I was told. But I was never called to hear Sentence given; nor was any Sentence given against me, that I could hear of. For I heard, that when they had looked more narrow∣ly into the Indictment, they saw, and were sensible themselves, that the Indictment was not good: and the Judge having sworn the Officers of the Court, that the Oath was tendred me at the Assize before, such a day, according as was set in the Indictment, and that proving to be the wrong day, I should have proved the Officers of the Court forsworn Men again, if the Judge would have suffered me to go on to plead to
the Indictment: which was thought to be the Reason, why he hur∣ried me away so soon. The Judge had passed Sentence of Premunire upon Margaret Fell, before I was brought before him: and it seems, when I was hurried away so, they recorded me, as a Premunired Per∣son; though I was never brought to hear the Sentence, nor knew of it: Which was very Illegal. For they ought to have not only had me pre∣sent, to hear the Sentence given; but also to have asked me first, What I could say, why Sentence should not be given against me? But they knew, I had so much to say, that they could not give Sentence, if they heard it. While I was a Prisoner in Lancaster-Castle, there was a great Noise and Talk of the Turk's overspreading Christendom;Lancaster-Prison. and great Fears en∣tred many. But one day, as I was walking in my Prison-Chamber, I saw the Lord's Power turn against him; and that he was turning back again. And I declared to some, what the Lord had let me see, when there were such Fears of his over-running Christendom; and within a Month after the News-Books came down, wherein it was mentioned, that They had given him a Defeat. Another time, as I was walking in my Chamber, with my Eye to the Lord, I saw the Angel of the Lord with a glittering, drawn Sword stretched Southward, as though the Court had been all on a Fire. Not long after, the Wars brake out with Holland, and the Sickness brake forth; and afterwards the Fire of London: So the Lord's Sword was drawn indeed. Now by reason of my long and close Imprisonment in so bad a place, I was grown very weak of Body: but the Lord's Power was over all, and supported me through all, and enabled me to do Service for him, and for his Truth and People, as the place would admit. For while I was in Lancaster-Prison, I Answered several Books, as the Mass, and the Common-Prayer, and the Directory, and the Church-Faith; which are the Four Chief Religions, that are got up since the Apostles days. And there being several Friends in Prison at Lancaster, and other Prisons, for not paying Tithes, I was moved to give forth the following Lines to the World concerning Tithes: IN the time of the Law, they that did not bring their Tithes into the Store-house, they robbed God; and then there was not Meat in their House: Therefore the Lord commanded them To bring them into his House, that there might be Meat in the Store-house; which was to fill the Fatherless, Stranger and Widow. But these Priests, who are Counterfeits, who take Peoples Tithes now by a Law, are from the Beast; and if any will not pay them, they Prison them, or make them pay Treble. So these Rob the Poor People, and Rob the Fa∣therless; and the Stranger, and the Widow is not filled: So their Cry is gone up to Heaven against these. And many are made almost Beggars by these Oppressing Priests; their Cattle and their Corn being taken away from them, and they cast into Prison. Others are Sued at the Law by these Priests, and have Treble Damage taken from them; and yet such Priests are cried up to be Ministers of the Go∣spel. Though when the Ʋnchangeable Priest was come, the Priest∣hood,
that was Changeable,1665. Lancaster-Prison. was denied, as we now deny these. But if any be moved now to Cry against them, they are stocked, or beat, or imprison'd; as there are many now in Prison at Lancaster, and in other places, by a National Law: the like whereof was never done by the Law of God, which was delivered to Moses. For we do not read, that under Moses his Law any suffered Imprisonment, or spoiling of their Goods for not paying Tithes; or was to pay Treble Damage. Surely, surely, the Cry for Vengeance will be heard, which arises from the Oppressed Souls, that lie under the Altar. And there are many, which be Prisoners at Kendal, because they cannot pay Tithes; as Capt. Ward, and Thomas Robertson, and the Widow Garland, who hath many small Children; and these suffer, because they cannot pay Tithes. Others there be in Kendal-Prison, who were moved of the Lord to speak to the Priests; whereof one was moved to go in Sack-cloth, and of late with Ashes upon her Head. And others have been moved to go in Sack-cloth, as a Lamentation for the miserable Estate of this Nation; seeing so much Crying up of the Preach∣ing of the Gospel, and yet so much Strife, Debate, and Oaths, and Dissension among People: But where the Gospel is received indeed, Strife and Contention is ended, and Oppression is taken off. But Oh! The Land mourns, because of the Oppression of them called Ministers! And though the Cry of the Oppressed hath not entred into the Ears of the Magistrates: Yet is the Cry of the poor, oppressed People of God entred into the Ears of the Lord of Sabaoth; who now will be avenged of all his Adversaries. And all you Ʋnjust Law-givers, and Ʋnjust Judges, to that in all your Consciences I speak, to be Clear'd, when ye are Judged by the Just Judge of Heaven and Earth; whose Terror is gone out, and is gone forth against all the Ʋngodly, and all the Oppressors of God's People whatsoever, whether ye will hear or forbear. G. F. After the Assize at Lancaster was over, Col. Kirby, and some others of the Justices were very uneasie with my being at Lancaster, (for I had gauled them sore at my Trials there) and they laboured much to get me removed from thence to some Remote Place. Col. Kirby threat∣ned, that I should be sent far enough; and sometimes he said, I should be sent beyond the Seas. So about Six Weeks after the Assizes they got an Order from the King and Council, to remove me from Lanca∣ster; and with it they brought a Letter from the Earl of Anglesey, wherein was written; That if those things were found true against me, which I was charged withal, I deserved no Clemency nor Mercy: And yet the greatest Matter they had against me was, because I could not diso∣bey the Command of Christ, and Swear. When they had prepared for my Removal, the Ʋnder-Sheriff, and the Head-Sheriff's Man, with some Bayliffs came, and fetched me out of the Castle; when I was so weak with lying in that cold, wet, and smoky Prison, that I could hardly go or stand. They had me down in∣to the Jailer's House, where was William Kirby, a Justice, and several others; and they called for Wine to give me. I told them, 'I would
have none of their Wine. Then they cried; Bring out the Horses. I desired them first to shew me their Order, or a Copy of it, if they in∣tended to Remove me: But they would shew me none, but their Swords. Then I told them; 'There was no Sentence passed upon me, nor was I Premunired, that I knew of; and therefore I was not made the King's Prisoner, but was the Sheriff's: For they and all the Country knew, that I was not fully heard at the last Assize, nor suffered to shew forth the Errors, that were in the Indictment; which were sufficient to quash it, though they had kept me from one Assize to another, to the end they might Try me. But they all knew, there was no Sentence of Premunire passed upon me: And therefore I not being the King's Prisoner, but the Sheriff's, did desire to see their Order. Instead of shewing me their Order, they haled me out, and lifted me up upon one of the Sheriff's Horses. And when I was on Horseback in the Street, the Town's People being gathered to gaze upon me, I told the Officers; I had received neither Christianity, Civility, nor Humanity from them. So they hurried me away about Fourteen Miles to Ben∣tham; and I was so very weak, that I was hardly able to sit on Horse∣back: and my Cloaths smelt so of Smoke, that they were loathsom to my self. And the Wicked Jailer, one Hunter, a young Fellow, would come behind, and give the Horse a Lash with his Whip, and make him skip and leap; that I, being weak, had much a-do to sit him: and then he would come and look me in the Face, and say; How do you, Mr. Fox? I told him, It was not Civil in him to do so: but the Lord cut him off soon after. When we were come to Bentham in Yorkshire,Yorkshire. Bentham. there met us many Troopers, and a Marshal; and many of the Gentry of the Country were come in, and abundance of People to stare at me. I being very Weak and Weary, desired them to let me lie down on a Bed; which the Souldiers permitted me: for they, that brought me thither, gave their Order to the Marshal; and he set a Guard of his Souldiers upon me. When they had stayed there a while, they press'd Horses, and raised the Bayliff of the Hundred, and the Constables, and others, and had me to Giggleswick that Night: but an exceeding Weak Man I was. There they raised the Constables, with their Clog-Shoes,Giggle∣wick. who sate drinking all Night in the Room by me; so that I could not get much Rest. The next day we came to a Market Town, where several Friends came to see me; and Robert Widders, and divers Friends, came to me up∣on the Road. The next Night I asked the Souldiers, Whither they intended to carry me, and whither I was to be sent? Some of them said, Beyond Sea; others said, To Tinmouth-Castle. And a great Fear there was amongst them, lest some should Rescue me out of their hands: but that Fear was needless. Next Night we came to York, where the Marshal put me up into a great Chamber,York where there came most part of Two Troops to see me. One of those Troopers, being an envious Man, and hearing, that I was Premunired, asked me, What Estate I had? and whether it was Copy-hold, or Freee-Land? I took no notice of his Question; but was moved to declare the Word of Life to the Souldiers; and many of them were very loving. At night the Lord Frecheville (so called) who commanded those Horse, came to me, and was very Civil and Loving; and I gave him an Account
of my Imprisonment,1665. York. and declared many things to him relating to Truth. They kept me at York two days; and then the Marshal and Four or Five Souldiers were sent to convey me to Scarborough-Castle. Indeed, these were very Civil Men, and carried themselves civilly and lovingly to me.Malton. On the way we baited at Malton; and they per∣mitted Friends to come and visit me. When we were come to Scar∣borough,Scarbo∣rough. they had me to an Inn, and gave notice to the Governour; and he sent half a dozen Souldiers to be my Guard that Night. Next day they conducted me up into the Castle,Scarbo∣rough-Ca∣stle. and there put me into a Room, and set a Centry on me: and I being so very weak, and sub∣ject to fainting, they for a while let me go out sometimes into the Air with the Centry. They soon removed me out of this Room, and put me into an Open Room, where the Rain came in: and the Room smoked exceedingly; which was very offensive to me. One day the Governour, who was called Sir Jo. Crosland, came to see me; and brought with him one called Sir Francis Cobb. I desired the Gover∣nour to go into my Room, and see, what a Room I had. Now I had got a little Fire made in it, and the Room was so filled with Smoke, that when they were in, they could hardly find their way out again: And he being a Papist, I told him, That was his Purgatory, which they had put me into. I was forced to lay out a matter of Fifty Shillings, to stop out the Rain, and keep the Room from smoking so much. But when I had been at that Charge, and made the Room somewhat tole∣rable; they removed me out of it, and put me into a worse Room, where I had neither Chimney, nor Fire-Hearth. And the Room being to the Sea-side, and lying much open, the Wind drove in the Rain for∣cible; so that the Water came over my Bed, and ran about the Room, that I was fain to skim it up with a Platter. And when my Cloaths were wet, I had no Fire to dry them; so that my Body was nummed with Cold, and my Fingers swell'd, that one was grown as big as two: and though I was at some Charge on this Room also; yet I could not keep out the Wind and Rain. Besides, they would suffer few Friends to come at me, and many times not any; no, not so much as to bring me a little Food; but I was forced, for the First-Quarter, to hire one of the World to bring me Necessaries: and sometimes the Souldiers would take it from her, and then she would scuffle with them for it. Afterwards I hired a Souldier to fetch me Water and Bread, and some∣thing to make a Fire of, when I was in a Room, where a Fire could be made. Commonly a Three-penny-Loaf served me Three Weeks, and sometimes longer: and most of my Drink was Water, that had Wormwood steeped or bruised in it. But one time, when the Weather was very sharp, and I had taken great Cold, I got a little Elicampane-Beer: and I heard one of the Souldiers say to the other, That they would play me a pretty Trick: for they would send for me up to the Depu∣ty-Governour, and in the mean time they would drink my Strong-Beer out; and so they did, When I came back, one of the Souldiers came to me in a Jeer, and asked me for some Strong Beer, I told him, they had play'd their pretty Trick: and so I took no further notice of it. But inasmuch as they kept me so very strait, not giving Li∣berty for Friends to come to me; I spake to the Keepers of the Castle to this effect; I did not know, till I was removed from Lancaster-Castle,
and brought Prisoner to this Castle of Scarborough,1665. Scarbo∣rough-Ca∣stle. that I was Convicted of a Premunire; for the Judge did not give Sentence up∣on me at the Assizes, in open Court. But seeing, I am now a Prisoner here, if I may not have my Liberty and Enlargement, let my Friends and Acquaintance have their Liberty to come and visit me; as Paul's Friends had among the Romans, who were not Christians, but Hea∣thens. For Paul's Friends had their Liberty, and all that would, might come to him; and he had his Liberty to preach to them in his hired House: But I cannot have Liberty to go into the Town, nor for my Friends to come to me here. So you, that go under the Name of Christians, are worse in this respect, than those Heathens were. But though they would not let Friends come to me; they would often bring others, either to Gaze upon me, or to Contend with me. One time there came a great Company of Papists to discourse with me: and they affirmed; The Pope was Infallible, and had stood Infal∣lible ever since Peter's time. But I shewed them the contrary by Hi∣story: For one of the Bishops of Rome (Marcellinus by Name) de∣nied the Faith, and Sacrificed to Idols; and therefore he was not Infallible. And I told them; If they were in the Infallible Spirit, they need not have Jails, Swords and Staves, Racks and Tortures, Fires and Faggots, Whips and Gallows, to hold up their Religion by, and to destroy Men's Lives about Religion: for if they were in the Infallible Spirit, they would preserve Men's Lives, and use none but Spiritual Weapons about Religion. I told them also, what one, that had been of their Society, told me. It was a Woman, who lived in Kent, and had not only been a Papist her self, but had brought over several to that Religion: but she coming to be Convinced of God's Truth, and turned by it to Christ her Saviour, exhorted the Papists to the same. And one time having one of them, a Tailor, at work at her House; while she opened to him the Falseness of the Popish Reli∣gion, and endeavoured to draw him from it to the Truth, he drew his Knife at her, and got between her and the Door: But she spake bold∣ly to him, and bid him put up his Knife: for she knew his Principle. I asked the Woman, What she thought he would have done with his Knife? and she said, He would have stabbed her. Stab thee! said I; what would he have Stabbed thee for? thy Religion? Yes, said she, It is the Principle of the Papists, if any turn from their Religion, to kill them, if they can. This Story I told those Papists: and told them, I had it from one, that had been one of them; but had forsook their Principles, and had discovered their Practices. They did not deny this to be their Principle, but said; What! would I declare this abroad? I told them, Yes, such things ought to be declared abroad, that it might be known, how contrary their Religion was to true Christianity: Whereupon they went away in a great Rage. Another Papist came to discourse with me, and he said; All the Patriarchs were in Hell, from the Creation, till Christ came: and that when Christ suffered, he went into Hell, and the Devil said to him; What comest thou hither for, to break open our Strong Holds? And Christ said, To fetch them all out. And so, he said, Christ was three days and three Nights in Hell, to bring them out. I told him, that was false: for Christ said to the Thief, This day thou shalt be with me in
Paradise. And Enoch and Elijah were translated into Heaven. And Abraham was in Heaven: for the Scripture saith, Lazarus was in his Bosom: and Moses and Elias were with Christ upon the Mount, before he suffered. These Instances stopt the Papist's Mouth, and put him to a stand. Another time there came one called Doctor Witty, who was esteem∣ed a great Doctor of Physick: He came with him, that was called the Lord Falconbridge, with whom came also the Governour of Tin∣mouth-Castle, and several Knights. And I being called to them, this Witty undertook to discourse with me, and asked me; What I was in Prison for? I told him, Because I would not disobey the Command of Christ, and Swear. He said; I ought to swear my Allegiance to the King. Now he being a great Presbyterian, I asked him; Whe∣ther he had not Sworn against the King and House of Lords, and taken the Scotch-Covenant? And had he not since Sworn to the King? And what then was his Swearing good for? But my Allegiance, I told him, did not consist in Swearing; but in Truth and Faithfulness. So after some further Discourse, I was had away to my Prison again: And af∣terwards, this Dr. Witty boasted in the Town amongst his Patients, That he had Conquered me. When I heard of his Boasting, I told the Go∣vernour, It was a small Boast in him, to say, He had conquered a Bond∣man: And I desired to bid him come to me again, when he came to the Castle. He came again a while after, with a matter of Sixteen or Seventeen great Persons; and then he ran himself worse on ground, than before. For in Discourse he affirmed before them all, That Christ had not enlightned every Man, that cometh into the World; and That the Grace of God, that brought Salvation, had not apppeared unto all Men: and That Christ had not died for all Men. I asked him, 'What sort of Men those were, which Christ had not enlightned? and whom his Grace had not appeared to? and whom he had not died for? He said, Christ did not die for Adulterers, and Idolaters, and Wicked Men. Then I asked him, Whether Adulterers, and Wicked Men were not Sinners? And he said, Yes. 'And did not Christ die for Sinners, said I? Did he not come to call Sinners to Repentance? Yes, said he. Then, said I, Thou hast stopt thy own Mouth. So I proved, That the Grace of God had appeared unto all Men, though some turned it into Wan∣tonness, and walked despightfully against it; and that Christ had en∣lightned all Men, though some hated the Light. Several of the Peo∣ple, that were present, confess'd, it was true; but he went away in a great Rage, and came no more at me. Another time the Governour brought a Priest: but his Mouth was soon stopt. Not long after he brought two or three Parliament-Men, and they asked me, Whether I did own Ministers and Bishops? I told them, Yes, such as Christ sent forth, such as had freely received, and would freely give; and such as were qualified, and were in the same Power and Spirit, that they were in in the Apostles days. But such Bishops and Teachers, as theirs were, that would go no further, than they had a great Benefice, I did not own; for they were not like the Apostles. For Christ saith to his Ministers, Go ye into all Nations, and preach the Gospel: But ye Parliament-men, that keep your Priests and Bishops in such great, fat Benefices, ye have spoiled them all.
for do ye think, they will go into all Nations to preach? or will go any further, than they have a great, fat Benefice? Judge your selves, whether they will or no. There came another time the Widow of him, who was called the Old Lord Fairfax, and with her a great Company; and one of the Company was a Priest. I was moved to declare the Truth to them; and the Priest asked me. Why we said Thou and Thee to People? for he counted us but  and iots for speaking so. I asked him, Whe∣ther they, that Trans  Scriptures, and that made the Grammar and Accidence, were Fools and Idiots, seeing they translated the Scrip∣tures so, and made the Grammar so, Thou to one, and You to more than one; and left it so to us? And if they were Fools and Idiots, then why had not He, and such as he, that looked upon themselves as Wise Men, and that could not bear Thou and Thee to a Singular, alter'd the Grammar, Accidence and Bible, and put the Plural instead of the Singular? But if they were Wise Men, that had so translated the Bible, and had made the Grammar and Accidence so; then I wisht him to consider, Whether they were not Fools and Idiots themselves, that did not speak, as their Grammars and Bibles taught them; but were offended with us, and called us Fools and Idiots, for speaking so? Thus the Priest's Mouth was stopt; and many of the Company did acknowledge the Truth, and were pretty loving and tender: and some of them would have given me Money; but I would not re∣ceive it. After this came one called Doctor Cradock, with three Priests more, and the Governour, and his Lady (so called) and another, that was called a Lady; and a great Company with them. Dr. Cradock asked me, What I was in Prison for? I told him; For obeying the Com∣mand of Christ, and the Apostle, in not Swearing. But if he, being both a Doctor and a Justice of Peace, could Convince me, that after Christ and the Apostle had forbidden Swearing, they commanded Christians to Swear, then I would Swear. Here was the Bible, I told him, He might, if he would, shew me any such Command. He said, It is written, Ye shall Swear in Truth and Righteousness. Ay, said I, it was written so in Jeremiah's time; but that was many Ages before Christ commanded not to swear at all: but where is it written so, since Christ forbad all Swearing? I could bring as many Instances out of the Old Testament for Swearing, as thou, and it may be, more too; but of what Force are they, to prove Swearing lawful in the New-Te∣stament, since Christ and the Apostle forbad it? Besides, said I, in that Text, where it is written, Ye shall Swear, What [Ye] was this? Was it Ye Gentiles, or Ye Jews? To this he would not Answer. But one of the Priests, that were with him, Answered, and said; It was to the Jews, that this was spoken: and then Dr. Cradock confessed, it was so. Very well, said I; but where did God ever give a Command to the Gentiles to Swear? For thou knowest, that we are Gentiles by Nature. Indeed, said he, in the Gospel-times every thing was to be established out of the Mouths of two or three Witnesses: but there was to be no Swearing then? Why then, said I, dost thou force Oaths upon Christians, con∣trary to thy own Knowledge, in the Gospel-times? And why, said I, dost thou Excommunicate my Friends? (for he had Excommunicated
abundance, both in Yorkshire and Lancashire.) He said, For not co∣ming to Church. 'Why, said I, ye left us above Twenty Years ago, (when we were but young Lads and Lasses) to the Presbyterians, Independents (and Baptists,) many whereof made Spoil of our Goods, and persecuted us, because we would not follow them. Now we being but Young, knew little then of your Principles: and the Old Men, that did know them, if ye had intended to have kept them to you, and have kept your Principles alive, that we might have known them, ye should either not have fled from us, as ye did; or ye should have sent us your Epistles, and Collects, and Homilies, and Evening-Songs, (for Paul writ Epistles to the Saints, though he was in Prison:) But they and we might have turned Turks or Jews, for any Collects, Homilies or Epistles we had from you all this while. And now thou hast Excommunicated us, both Young and Old, and so have others of you done; that is, ye have put us out of your Church, before ye have got us into it, and before ye have brought us to know your Principles. And is not this Madness in you, to put us out, before we were brought in? Indeed, if ye had brought us into your Church; and when we had been in, if we had done some bad thing, that had been something like a ground for Excommunication, or putting out again. But, said I, What dost thou call the Church? Why, said he, That which you call the Steeple-house. Then I asked him, Whether Christ shed his Blood for the Steeple-house? and purchased and sanctified the Steeple-house with his Blood? And seeing, the Church is Christ's Bride and Wife, and that he is the Head of the Church, Dost thou think, the Steeple-house is Christ's Wife and Bride, and that he is the Head of that Old House, or of his People? No, said he, Christ is the Head of the People, and they are the Church. Then said I, But you have given that Title Church to an Old House, which belongs to the People; and you have taught People to believe so. I asked him also, Why he persecuted Friends for not paying Tithes? And whether God did ever give a Command to the Gentiles, that they should pay Tithes? And whether Christ had not ended Tithes, when he ended the Levitical Priesthood, that took Tithes? And whether Christ, when he sent forth his Disciples to preach, had not command∣ed them to preach freely, as he had given them freely? And whe∣ther all the Ministers of Christ are not bound to observe this Command of Christ? He said, He would not dispute that: Neither did I find, he was willing to stay on that Subject; for he presently turned to an∣other matter, and said, You Marry, but I know not how. I replied, 'It maybe so: but why dost thou not come and see? Then he threat∣ned, that he would use his Power against us, as he had done. I bid him, Take heed: for he was an Old Man. I asked him also, 'Where he did read from Genesis to the Revelations, that ever any Priest did Marry any? And I wisht him to shew me some Instance thereof, if he would have us come to them to be Married: For, said I, thou hast Excommunicated one of my Friends two Years, after he was dead, about his Marriage. And why dost thou not Excommunicate Isaac, and Jacob, and Boaz, and Ruth? Why dost thou not use thy Power against these? For we do not read, that they were ever Mar∣ried by the Priests: but they took one another in the Assemblies of
the Righteous, in the Presence of God and his People: and so do we.  So that we have all the Holy Men and Women, that the Scripture speaks of in this Practice, on our side. Much Discourse we had; but when he found, he could get no Advantage on me, he went away with his Company. With such sorts of People I was much exercised, while I was there: for most, that came to the Castle, would desire to speak with me; and great Disputes and Reasonings I had with them. But as to Friends, I was as a Man buried alive: for though many Friends came from far to see me, yet few were suffered to come at me; and when any Friend came into the Castle about Business, if he looked but towards me, they would Rage at him. But at last the Governour came under some Trou∣ble himself: for he having sent out a Privateer to Sea, they took some Ships, that were not Enemies-Ships, but their Friends; whereupon he was brought into some Trouble: after which he grew somewhat more Friendly to me. For before, I had a Marshal set over me, on purpose, to get Money out of me; but I was not to give him a Farthing: and when they found, they could get nothing of me, then he was taken off again. And the Officers would often be threatning me, that I should be hanged over the Wall. Nay, the Deputy-Governour told me one time, That the King, knowing, that I had a great Interest in the People, had sent me thither; that if there should be any Stirring in the Nation, they should hang me over the Wall, to keep the People down. And there being a while after, a Marriage at a Papist's House, upon which occa∣sion a great many of them were Met together; they talked much then of hanging me. But I told them, If that was it they desired, and it was permitted them, I was ready: for I never feared Death, nor Sufferings in my Life; but I was known to be an Innocent, peaceable Man, free from all Stirrings and Plottings, and one that sought the Good of all Men. But afterwards, the Governour grow∣ing kinder, I spake to him, when he was to go to London to the Parli∣ament, and desired him to speak to him, that was called Esq Marsh, and to Sir Francis Cob (so called) and to some others; and let them know, How long I had lain in Prison, and for what: and he did so. And when he came down again, he told me, that Esq Marsh said, He would go an Hundred Miles bare-foot for my Liberty, he knew me so well: And several others, he said, spake well of me. From which time the Governour was very Loving to me. There were amongst the Prisoners, that were there, Two very bad Men, that would often sit drinking with the Officers and Souldiers; and because I would not sit and drink with them too, that made them the worse against me. One time, when these Two Prisoners were drunk, one of them (whose Name was William Wilkinson, who was a Presbyterian, and had been a Captain) came to me, and challenged me to fight with him. I seeing, what Condition he was in, got out of his way; and next Morning, when he was grown more sober, told him, How unmanly a thing it was in him, to challenge a Man to fight, whose Principle, he knew, it was not to strike; but if he was strick∣en on one Ear, to turn the other. And I told him, If he had a mind to fight, he should have challenged some of the Souldiers, that could have answered him in his own way. But however, I told him, seeing
he had Challenged me, I was now come to Answer him, with my Hands in my Pockets: and (reaching my Head towards him) Here, said I, here is my Hair, here are my Cheeks, here is my Back. With that he skipt away from me, and went into another Room: At which the Souldiers fell a laughing; and one of the Officers said, You are a happy Man, that can bear such things. Thus he was Conquered with∣out a Blow: But after a while he took the Oath, and gave Bond, and got out of Prison; and not long after the Lord cut him off. There were great Imprisonments in this and the former Years, while I was Prisoner at Lancaster and Scarborough. At London many Friends were crowded into Newgate, and other Prisons, where the Sickness was; and many Friends died in Prison: Many Friends also were Ba∣nished, and several sent on Ship-board by the King's Order. Some Masters of Ships would not carry them, but set them on Shore again; yet some were sent to Barbados, and to Jamaica, and to Mevis, and the Lord blessed them there. There was one Master of a Ship was very wicked and cruel to Friends, that were put on Board his Ship: for he kept the Friends down under Decks, though the Sickness was amongst them; so that many died of it. But the Lord plagued him for his Wickedness: for he lost most of his Sea-men by the Plague, and lay several Months crossed with Contrary Winds; though other Ships went out, and made their Voyages. At last he came before Plimouth; and there the Governour and Magistrates would not suffer him, nor any of his Men to come ashore, though he wanted many Necessaries for his Voyage: but Thomas Lower, and Arthur Cotton, and John Light and some other Friends went to the Ship's-side, and carried Necessaries for the Friends, that were Prisoners on Board. The Master being thus crost, and plagued and vext, he cursed them, that put him upon this Freight; and said, He hoped he should not go far, before be was taken. And the Vessel was but a little while gone out of sight of Plimouth, but she was taken by a Dutch-man of War, and carried into Holland. When they came into Holland, the States there sent the Banished Friends back to England, with a Letter of Pasport and a Certificate, That they had not made an Escape, but were sent back by them. But in time the Lord's Power wrought over this Storm; and many of our Persecutors were Confounded, and put to shame. After I had lain Prisoner above a Year in Scarborough-Castle, I sent a Letter to the King, in which I gave him an Account of my Imprison∣ment, and the bad Ʋsage I had had in Prison; and also that I was In∣formed, no Man could deliver me, but he. After this, John Whitehead being at London, and having Acquaintance also with him, that was cal∣led Esq Marsh, he went to Visit him, and spake to him about me: And he undertook, if John Whitehead would get the State of my Case drawn up, to deliver it to the Master of Requests, whom he called Sir John Birkenhead, he would endeavour to get a Release for me. So John Whitehead and Ellis Hookes drew up a Relation of my Imprisonment and Sufferings, and carried it to Marsh; and he went with it to the Master of Requests, who procured an Order from the King for my Release. The Substance of the Order was, That the King being cer∣tainly Informed, that I was a Man principled against Plotting and Fight∣ing, and had been ready at all times to discover Plots, rather than to
make any, &c. that therefore his Royal Pleasure was, that I should be discharged from my Imprisonment, &c. As soon as this Order was ob∣tained, John Whitehead came down to Scarborough with it, and deli∣vered it to the Governour: Who upon Receipt thereof, gathered the Officers together, and without requiring Bond or Sureties for my peaceable Living, being satisfied, that I was a Man of a peaceable Life, he discharged me freely, and gave me the following Pasport. PErmit the Bearer hereof, George Fox, late a Prisoner here, and now discharged by His Majesty's Order, quietly to pass about his Lawful Occasions, without any Mo∣lestation. Given under my hand at Scarborough-Castle this First Day of September, 1666. JORDAN CROSLANDS, Governour of Scarborough-Castle. After I was Released, I would have given the Governour something,Scarbo∣rough. for the Civility and Kindness he had of late shewed me; but he would not receive any thing: but said, Whatever Good he could do for me and my Friends, he would do it, and never do them any hurt. And afterwards, if at any time the Mayor of the Town sent to him for Soul∣diers to break up Friends Meetings, if he sent any down, he would pri∣vately give them a Charge, Not to meddle: and so he continued Loving to his Dying-Day. The Officers also and the Souldiers were mightily changed, and grown very Respectful to me; and when they had occasion to speak of me, they would say, He is as stiff, as a Tree; and as pure as a Bell; for we could never bow him. The very next day after I was Released from Scarborough-Prison, the Fire brake out at London; and the Report of it came quickly down into the Country. Then I saw, the Lord God was true and just in his Word, which he had shewed me before in Lancaster-Jail, when I saw the Angel of the Lord with a glittering, drawn Sword South∣ward, as is before expressed. And the People of London were fore∣warned of this Fire: yet few laid it to Heart, or believed it; but ra∣ther grew more Wicked, and higher in Pride. For we had a Friend, that was moved to come out of Huntington-shire a little before the Fire, and to scatter his Money up and down the Streets, and to turn his Horse loose in the Streets, and to untie the Knees of his Britches, and let his Stockings fall down, and to unbutton his Doublet; and told the People, So should they run up and down, scattering their Money and their Goods, half undrest, like mad People, as he was a Sign to them: And so they did, when the Fire brake out, and the City was burning. Thus hath the Lord exercised his Prophets and Servants, by his Power, and shewed them Signs of his Judgments, and sent them to fore-warn the Peo∣ple: but instead of Repenting, they have beaten and cruelly entreated some; and some they have Imprisoned, both in the former Power's days,
and since.1666. Scarbo∣rough. But the Lord is just; and happy are they, that obey his Word. Some have been moved to go Naked in their Streets, in the other Power's days, and since, as Signs of their Nakedness; and have decla∣red amongst them, That God would strip them out of their Hypocritical Professions, and make them as bare and naked, as they were. But instead of considering it, they have many times whipt, or otherwise abused them, and sometimes Imprisoned them. Others have been moved to go in Sack cloth, and to denounce the Woes and Vengeance of God against the Pride and Haughtiness of the People: But few regarded it. And in the other Powers days, the Wicked, Envious, Professing Priests put up several Petitions both to Oliver and Richard called Protectors, and to the Parliaments, Judges and Justices against us, stuft full of Lies, and vilifying Words and Slanders: but we got Copies of them, and through the Lord's Assistance answered them all; and cleared the Lord's Truth, and our selves of them. But oh! the Body of Dark∣ness, that rose against the Truth in them, that made Lies their Re∣fuge! But the Lord swept them away; and in and with his Power, Truth, Light and Life hedged his Lambs about, and did preserve them, as on Eagle's Wings. Therefore we all had, and have great Encou∣ragement to Trust the Lord, whom we did see by his Power and Spi∣rit, how he did overturn and bring to nought all the Confederacies and Counsels, that were hatched in the Darkness against his Truth and People; and by the same Truth gave his People Dominion, that in it they might serve him. And indeed, I could not but take notice, how the Hand of the Lord turned against those my Persecutors, who had been the cause of my Imprisonment, or had been Abusive or Cruel to me in it. For the Officer, that fetched me to Houlker-Hall, wasted his Estate, and soon after fled into Ireland. And most of the Justices, that were upon the Bench at the Sessions, when I was sent to Prison, died in a while after; as Old Tho. Preston, Rawlinson, and Porter, and Matthew West of Bor∣wick. And though Justice Fleming did not die, (yet his Wife died, and left him thirteen or fourteen Motherless Children) who had Impri∣soned Two Friends to Death, and thereby made several Children Fa∣therless. Col. Kirby never prospered after: And the Chief Constable, Richard Dodgson died soon after; and Mount, the Petty-Constable, and the other Petty-Constable, John Ashburnham his Wife, who railed at me in her House, died soon after. And William Knipe, that was the Witness they brought against me, died soon after also. And Hunter, the Jailer of Lancaster, who was very wicked to me, while I was his Prisoner, he was cut off in his Young Days. And the Ʋnder-Sheriff, that carried me from Lancaster-Prison towards Scarborough, he lived not long after. And one Joblin, the Jailer of Durham, who was Pri∣soner with me in Scarborough-Castle, and had often incensed the Go∣vernour and Souldiers against me; though he got out of Prison, yet the Lord cut him off in his Wickedness soon after. When I came into that Country again, most of these, that dwelt in Lancashire, were dead, and others ruined in their Estates: So that, though I did not seek Re∣venge upon them, for their actings against me contrary to the Law; yet the Lord had executed his Judgments upon many of them.
Being now set free from my Imprisonment in Scarborough-Castle, I went about three Miles to a large, General Meeting at a Friend's House, that had been a Chief-Constable; and all was quiet and well. On the Fourth Day after I came into Scarborough again, and had a Meeting in the Town at Peter Hodgson's House. To this Meeting came one called a Lady, and several other Great Persons; also a Young-man, that was Son to the Bayliff of the Town, and had been Convinced, while I was there in Prison. That Lady (so called) came to me, and said; I spake against the Ministers, I told her; Such as the Prophets and Christ declared against formerly, I declared against now. From hence I went to Whitby; and having visited Friends there,Whitby. I passed thence to Burlington, where I had another Meeting;Burling∣ton. Oram. and from thence to Oram, where I had another Meeting: and from thence to Oram, where I had another Meeting: and from thence to Marmaduke Stor's, and had a large Meeting at a Constable's House,Mar. Stor. on whom the Lord had wrought a great Miracle. Next Day Two Friends being to take each other in Marriage, there was a very great Meeting, which I was at. And I was moved to open to the People the State of our Marriages, declaring; How the People of God took one another in the Assemblies of the Elders: and how that it was God, that did Join Man an Woman together be∣fore the Fall. And though Men had taken upon them to Join in the Fall, yet in the Restoration it was God's Joining, that was the right and honourable Marriage: But never any Priest did Marry any, that we read of in the Scriptures, from Genesis to the Revelations. Then I shewed them the Duty of Man and Wife, how they should serve God, being Heirs of Life and Grace together. After the Meeting, I passed from thence to Grace Barwick,G. Barwick where I had a General Meeting, which was very large: and when that was over, I came to Richard Shipton's, where I had another Meeting;Whitby. and so to a Priest's House, whose Wife was Convinced, and himself grown very Loving, and glad to see me. This was that Priest, that in the Year 1651. threatned, If ever he met with me again, he would have my Life, or I should have his; and said, He would lose his Head, if I were not knockt down in a Month: But now he was partly Convinced, and be∣come very kind. I went from his House towards the Sea, where se∣veral Friends came to visit me; and amongst others, one Philip Scarff, who had formerly been a Priest, but having received the Truth, was now become a Preacher of Christ freely, and continued so. Passing on, I called to see an Ancient Man, who was Convinced of Truth, and was above an Hundred Years old. Then came I to a Friend's House, where I had a great Meeting, and quiet.Near Malton. And passing on through the Country, I had a great Meeting near Malton; and another large Meeting near Hull: from which I went to a place called Holdendike.Near Hull. Holden∣dike. As we went into the Town, the Watch-men questioned me, and those that were with me; but they not having any Warrant to stay us, we went on by them, and they in a Rage threatned, they would search us out. I went to the House of one, that was called the Lady Moun∣tague, and there I lodged that Night; and several Friends came thither to Visit me. Next Morning being up betimes, I walked out into the Orchard, and saw a Man about Sun-rising go into the House,
in a great Cloak.1666. L. Mounta∣gue. He stay'd not long; but came soon out again, and went away, not seeing me. I felt something strike at my Life; and went into the House; where I found the Maid-Servant affrighted and trembling: and she told me, That Man had a Naked Rapier under his Cloak. By which I perceived, he came with an Intent to have done Mischief; but the Lord prevented him. From this place passing through the Country, I visited Friends, till I came to York,York where we had a large Meeting. After the Meeting I went to visit Justice Robinson, an ancient Justice of the Peace: who had been very loving to me and Friends from the beginning. There was at this time a Priest with him; and he told me, It was said of us, that we loved none, but our selves. I told him, We loved all Man∣kind, as they were God's Creation, and as they were Children of Adam and Eve by Generation; and we loved the Brotherhood in the Holy Ghost. This stopt him: so that after some other Discourse, we parted friendly, and we passed away. About this time I had written a Book, Intituled; Fear God, and Ho∣nour the King: In which I shewed, That none could rightly Fear God, and Honour the King, but they, that departed from Sin and Evil: This Book did much affect the Souldiers, and most People. Now having visited Friends at York, we passed thence to a Market-Town,G Watkin∣son. where we had a Meeting at one George Watkinson's, who for∣merly had been a Justice. A glorious, blessed Meeting it was, and ve∣ry large, and the Seed of Life was set over all. But we had been troubled to have got into this Town, had not Providence made way for us; for the Watch-men stood ready to stop us: but there being a Man riding just before us, the Watch-men questioned him first: and perceiving, that he was a Justice of Peace, they let him pass; and we riding close after him, by that means we escaped. T. Tailor.From this place we passed to Thomas Taylor's, who had formerly been a Captain, where we had a precious Meeting. Hard by Thomas Taylor's, there lived one called a Knight, who was much displeased, when he heard, I was like to be Released out of Prison; and threat∣ned, That if the King set me at Liberty, he would send me to Prison again the next day. But though I had this Meeting so near him, yet the Lord's Power stopt him from meddling, and our Meeting was quiet. Col. Kirby also, who had been the Chief Means of my Imprisonment at Lancaster- and Scarborough-Castles, when he heard, I was set at Li∣berty, got another Order for the Taking me up; and said, He would ride his Horse Forty Miles to take me, and would give Forty Pounds to have me taken. Yet a while after I came so near him, as to have a Meeting within Two Miles of him: and then was he struck with the Gout, and kept his Bed; so that it was thought, he would have died. From Thomas Taylor's I passed through the Country, visiting Friends,Sinderhill-Green. till I came to Synderhill-Green, where I had a large and Ge∣neral Meeting. The Priest of the place hearing of it, he sent the Constable to the Justices for a Warrant; and they rid their Horses so hard, that they almost spoiled them: But the notice they had, being short, and the way long, the Meeting was ended, before they came. I heard not of them, till I was going out of the House, after Meeting
was over; and then a Friend came to me, and told me,1666. Sinderhill-Green. They were searching another House for we; which was the House I was then go∣ing to. As I went along the Closes towards it, I met the Constables and Wardens, and the Justice's Clerk with them; so I passed through them: and they looked at me, and I went to the House, that they had been searching. I hus the Devil and the Priest lost their Design: for the Lord's Power bound them, and preserved me over them; and Friends parted, and all escaped them. And the Officers went away, as they came; for the Lord God had frustrated their Design: praised be his Name for ever! After this I went into Darbyshire, where I had a large Meeting:Darbyshire. And some Friends were apprehensive of the Constables coming in; for they had had a great Persecution in those parts: but our Meeting was quiet. There was a Justice of Peace in that Country, had taken away much of Friend's Goods: whereupon one Ellen Fretwell had made her Ap∣peal to the Sessions; and the rest of the Justices granted her her Goods again, and spake to that persecuting Justice, That he should not do so any more. And she was moved to speak to that Justice, and to Warn him; whereupon he bid her, Come and sit down on the Bench. Ay, said she, If I may perswade you to do Justice to the Country, I will sit down with you: No, said he, then you shall not; and bid her Get her out of the Court. But as she was gong out, she was moved of the Lord to turn again, and say; She should be there, when he should not. After the Sessions were ended, he got amongst some of his Persecuting Companions, and said; They would get some more of the Quakers Goods, if the Devil did not raise up that Woman to hinder them. So he went home, and drove away her Brother's Oxen for going to Meetings: and then another Woman, a Friend of Chesterfield, whose Name was Susan Frith, was moved of the Lord to tell him; That, if he con∣tinued on in his persecuting of the Innocent, the Lord would execute his Plagues upon him. Soon after which, this Justice, whose Name was Clark, fell distracted, and was bound with Ropes;☜ but he gnawed the Ropes in pieces, and had like to have spoiled his Maid: for he fell up∣on her, and bit her; so that they were fain to put an Iron Instrument into his Mouth, to wrest his Teeth out of her Flesh: And afterwards he died distracted. This Relation I had from Ellen Fretwel her self. I travelled out of Darbyshire into Nottinghamshire,Notting∣hamshire. Skegby. Mans field. and had a large Meeting at Skegby: and from thence went to Mansfield; where also I had a Meeting: and thence went to another Town, where there was a Fair, at which I met with many Friends. Then passing through the Forrest in a mighty thundering and rainy day,Notting∣ham. I came to Notting∣ham: and so great was the Tempest that day, that many Trees were torn up by the Roots, and some People killed; but the Lord preserved us. On the First-Day following I had a large Meeting in Nottingham, very quiet; and Friends were come to sit under their Teacher, the Grace of God, which brought them Salvation, and were established upon the Rock and Foundation Christ Jesus. After the Meeting I went to visit the Friend, that had been Sheriff about the Year 1649, whose Prisoner I had then been.
1666. Leicester∣shire. Syleby. Leicester.From Nottingham I passed into Leicestershire, and came to Sy∣leby, where we had a large, blessed Meeting. After which I went to Leicester, to visit the Prisoners there; and then came to John Pen∣ford's, where we had a General Meeting, large and precious. From thence I passed through the Country, visiting Friends and my Relati∣ons, till I came into Warwickshire, and to Warwick; where having vi∣sited the Prisoners,Warwick∣shire. Warwick. Badgley. Northam∣ptonshire. Bedford∣shire. Bucking∣hamshire. Oxfordshire London. I passed from thence to Badgley, and had a preci∣ous Meeting there. Then I travelled through Northamptonshire, Bed∣fordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Oxfordshire, visiting Friends in each County. In Oxfordshire the Devil had laid a Snare for me, but the Lord brake it: and his Power came over all, and his blessed Truth spread, and Friends were Increased therein. Thus after I had passed through many Counties, visiting Friends, and had had many large and precious Meetings amongst them, I came at last to London. But I was so weak with lying almost Three Years in cruel and hard Impri∣sonments, and my Joints, and my Body were so stiff and benummed, that I could hardly get on my Horse, or bend my Joints, nor well bear to be near the Fire, or to eat Warm Meat; I had been kept so long from it. Being come to London, I walk't a little among the Ruins, and took good notice of them; and I saw the City lying, according as the Word of the Lord came to me concerning it, several Years before. Now after I had been a time in London, and had visited Friends Meetings through the City, I went into the Country again, and had large Meetings in the Countries,Kingston. Reading. Wiltshire. Bristol. as I went; at Kingston, Reading, and in Wiltshire, till I came to Bristol. At Bristol also I had many large Meetings; and Thomas Lower came thither out of Cornwal to meet me: and Friends were there from several parts of the Nation, it being then the Fair-time. After I was clear of Bristol, I left that City, and went to Nath. Crips's:N. Crips's London. and so through the Countries, till I came back to London again; having large Meetings in the way, and all quiet, blessed be the Lord. And thus, though I was very Weak, yet I travelled up and down in the Service of the Lord; and the Lord enabled me to go through in it. About this time, some that had run out from Truth, and clashed against Friends, were reached unto by the Power of the Lord, which came wonderfully over; and made them Condemn and Tear their Pa∣pers of Controversies to pieces. Several Meetings we had with them, and the Lord's Everlasting Power was over all, and set Judgment on the Head of that, that had run out. And in these Meetings which lasted whole Days, several, that had Run out with John Perrot and others, came in again, and Condemned that Spirit, that led them to Keep on their Hats, when Friends prayed, and when they themselves prayed; and some of them said, That Friends were more righteous than they: and that if Friends had not stood, they had been gone, and had fallen in∣to Perdition. And thus the Lord's Power was wonderfully manifested, and came over all. Then was I moved of the Lord to recommend the setting up of Five Monthly Meetings of Men and Women in the City of London, (besides the Womens-Meetings and the Quarterly Meetings) to take care of God's Glory, and to admonish and exhort such, as walked disorderly, or care∣lesly, and not according to Truth. For whereas Friends had had only
Quarterly Meetings; now Truth was spread,1667. London. and Friends were grown more Numerous, I was moved to Recommend the setting up of Monthly Meetings throughout the Nation. And the Lord opened to me, and let me see, What I must do, and how the Mens and Womens Monthly and Quarterly Meetings should be ordered and established in this Nati∣on, and in other Nations; and that I should Write to them, where I came not, to do the same. So, after things were well settled at Lon∣don, and the Lord's Truth, and Power, and Seed, and Life reigned and shined over all in the City, then I passed forth into the Countries again; and went down into Essex:Essx. Suffolk. Norfolk. And after the Monthly Meetings were set∣tled in that County, I went from thence into Suffolk and Norfolk, Tho∣mas Dry being with me. And when we had Visited Friends in their Meetings in those parts, and the Monthly Meetings were settled there, we pass'd from thence, and went into Huntingtonshire;Hunting∣toshire. where we had very large and blessed Meetings: and though we met with some Op∣position there, yet the Lord's Power came over all; and the Monthly Meetings were established there also.Bedford∣shire. When we came into Bedford∣shire, we had great Opposition; but the Lord's Power came over it all. Afterwards we went into Nottinghamshire,Notting∣hamshire. where we had many pre∣cious Meetings; and the Monthly Meetings were settled there. Then passing into Lincolnshire,Lincoln∣shire. we had a Meeting of some Men-Friends of all the Meetings in the County, at his House, who had been formerly Sheriff of Lincoln; and all was quiet.Trent. Notting∣hamshire. After this Meeting we passed over Trent into Nottinghamshire again, (he that had been the Sheriff of Lin∣coln, being with me) where we had some of all the Meetings in that County together; and our Meeting was glorious and peaceable: And many precious Meetings we had in that County. At that time William Smith was very Weak and Sick: and the Con∣stables and others had seized upon all his Goods, to the very Bed he lay upon, for Truth's sake, These Officers threatned, to come and break up our Meeting; but the Lord's Power chained them, so that they had not power to meddle with us, blessed be his Name. After the Meeting was over, I went to visit William Smith; and there were the Constables and others watching his Corn and his Beasts, that none of them might be Removed. From thence we passed into Leicestershire, and so into Warwickshire;Leicester∣shire. Warwick∣shire. where many blessed Meetings we had: and the Order of the Gospel was set up, and the Men's Monthly Meetings established in all those Counties. Then we went into Darbyshire,Darbyshire. where we had several large and blessed Meetings: And in many places we were threatned by the Officers; but through the Power of the Lord we escaped their hands. So leaving things well settled in Darbyshire, we travelled over the Peak-Hills, (which were very cold;Peak-Hills. Stafford∣shire. for it was then Frost and Snow) and so came into Staffordshire: and at Thomas Hammersley's we had a General Mens-Meeting; where things were well settled in the Gospel-Order, and the Monthly Meetings were established there also. But I was so exceeding weak, I was hardly able to get on or off my Horse's Back: But my Spirit being earnestly engaged in the Work, the Lord had concerned me in, and sent me forth about, I travelled on therein, notwithstanding the Weakness of my Body; having Confidence in the Lord, that he would carry me through: as he did by his Power.
So we came into Cheshire,1667. Cheshire. where we had several blessed Meetings, and a General Mens Meeting; wherein all the Monthly Meetings for that County were settled, according to the Gospel-Order, in and by the Power of God: And after the Meeting was done, I passed away. But when the Justices heard of it, they were very much troubled, that they had not come, and broken it up, and taken me: but the Lord prevented them. So after I had cleared my self there in the Lord's Service, I passed into Lancashire,Lancashire. Near War∣rington. to William Barnes's, near Warrington, where met some of most of the Meetings in that County; and there all the Monthly Meetings were established in the Gospel-Order also. From thence I sent Papers into Westmorland by Leonard Fell and Robert Widders,(Westmor∣land. Bish∣oprick of Durham. Cleaveland Northum∣berland. Cumber∣land. SCOT∣LAND.) and also into Bishoprick, Cleaveland and Northumber∣land, and into Cumberland and Scotland, to exhort Friends, to settle the Monthly Meetings in the Lord's Power in those places; which they did. And so the Lord's Power came over all, and the Heirs of it came to inherit it. For the Authority of our Meetings is the Power of God, the Gospel, which brings Life and Immortality to Light; that they may see over the Devil, that hath darkned them, and that all the Heirs of the Gospel might walk according to the Gospel, and glo∣rifie God with their Bodies, Souls ond Spirits, which are the Lord's: For the Order of the Glorious Gospel is not of Man, nor by Man. To this Meeting in Lancashire Margaret Fell,Warring∣ton. Cheshire. being a Prisoner, got liberty to come, and went with me from thence to Jane Milners in Cheshire, where we parted.Shropshire. And I passed out of Cheshire into Shropshire, and from thence into Wales,WALES. and had a large General Mens-Meeting at Charles Floid's, where some Opposers came in; but the Lord's Power brought them down. Denbyshire. Montgome∣ryshire. Meri¦sh.Having gone through Denbyshire and Montgomeryshire, we passed in∣to Merionethshire; where we had several blessed Meetings: and then went to the Sea side, where also we had a precious Meeting. And ha∣ving passed through several Countries, and Friends there being esta∣blished upon Christ their Foundation, we left Wales, the Monthly Meet∣ings being settled there in the Power of God; and returned into Shrop∣shire,Shropshire. where the Friends of the Country gathering together, the Month∣ly Meetings were established there also. Then coming into Worcester∣shire,Worcester∣shire. after we had had many Meetings up and down amongst Friends in that Country, we had a General Mens-Meeting at Henry Gibs's House at Pashur;Pashur. where also the Monthly Meetings were settled in the Gospel-Order. The Sessions were held that day in that Town; and some Friends were pretty much concerned, lest they should send some Officers to break up our Meeting: but the Lord's Power restrained them, so that our Meeting was quiet; through which Power we had Dominion. Af∣ter the Meeting I passed away, and had several Meetings amongst Friends in that Country,Worcester till I came to Worcester; and it being the Fair-time, we had a precious Meeting there. There was then in Wor∣cester one Major Wild, a persecuting Man; and after I was gone out of Town, some of his Souldiers inquired after me: but I having left the Friends there settled in good Order,Draitwich. was passed away to Draitwich.
From thence we passed to Shrewsbury,1667. Shrewsbu∣ry. where also we had a very precious Meeting. But the Mayor hearing, that I was in Town, got the rest of the Officers together to Consult, what to do against me: For they said, The Great Quaker of England was come to Town. But when they were come together, the Lord Confounded their Counsels; so that, when some were for Imprisoning me, others of them opposed it: and so being divided amongst themselves, I escaped their hands. We went also into Radnorshire,Radnor∣shire. where we had many precious Meet∣ings; and the Monthly Meetings were settled in the Lord's Power. As we came forth of that Country, staying a little at a Market Town, a Justice's Clerk and some other Rude Fellows combined together, to do us a Mischief upon the Road. Accordingly they followed us out of Town, and soon overtook us: but there being many Market-People on the way, they were some-what hindred from doing, what they in∣tended. Yet observing, that Two of our Company rid at some di∣stance behind, they set upon them Two; and one of them drew his Sword, and cut one of those two Friends, whose Name was Richard Moor, the Chirurgeon of Shrewsbury. Mean while another of these Rude Fellows came galloping after me and the other Friend, that was with me; and we being to pass over a Bridge, that was somewhat of the narrowest for him to pass by us, he, in his Eagerness to get before us, rid into the Brook, and plunged his Horse into a deep Hole in the Water. I saw the Design, and stopt; and desired Friends to be patient, and give them no occasion: and in this time came Richard Moor up to us, with the other Friend, that was with him; who knew the Men and their Names. Then we rid on the Road again; and a little further we met another Man on foot, who was Drunk, and had a na∣ked Sword in his hand. And not far beyond him, in a Bottom, we met Two Men and Two Women, one of which Men had his Thumb cut off by this Drunken Man, that had the Naked Sword: for he being in Drink, would have Ravished one of the Women; and this Man with∣standing him, and rescuing the Young-Woman from him, he whipt out his Sword, and cut off the Man's Thumb. Now though this Drunken Man was then on foot, having alighted to do his Wickedness; yet he had a Horse, that, being loose, followed him a pretty way behind. Wherefore I rid after the Horse: and having caught him, I brought him to the Man, that had his Thumb cut off; and bid him, Take the Horse to the next Justice of Peace, and by that means they might find out, and pursue the Man, that had wounded him. Upon this occasion I writ a Letter to the Justices, and to the Judge of the Assize, which was then at hand: And I imployed some Friends to carry it to the Justices first. The Justice, to whom the Clerk be∣longed, rebuked his Clerk and the others also, for disturbing and abu∣sing us upon the High-Way: So that those Men were glad to come and make Intreaty to Friends, not to appear against them at the Assize; which, upon their Submission and Acknowledgment of their Fault, Friends granted. And this thing was of good Service in the Country: for it stopt many rude People, that before had been forward to abuse Friends.
1667. Hereford∣shire.We passed into Herefordshire, where we had several blessed Meet∣ings: and we had a General Mens-Meeting also, where all the Monthly Meetings were settled. There was about this time a Proclamation against Meetings: and as we came through Herefordshire, we were told of a great Meeting there was of the Presbyterians; who had en∣gaged themselves to stand, and give up all, rather than forsake their Meetings. But when they heard of this Proclamation, the People came, but the Priest was gone: and then they were at a loss. Then they met in Lemster privately; and provided Bread, and Cheese, and Drink in readiness, that if the Officers should come, they would put up their Bibles, and fall to Eating. The Bayliff found them out, and came in among them, and said; Their Bread and Cheese should not cover them, but he would have their Speakers. They cried, What then would become of their Wives and Children? But he took their Speakers, and kept them a while. This the Bayliff told our Friend Peter Young, and said; They were the veriest Hypocrites, that ever made a Profession of Religion. The like Contrivance they had in other places. For there was one Pocock at London, that married Abigail Darcy, who was called a La∣dy: and she being Convinc'd of Truth, I went to his House to see her. This Pocock had been one of the Triers of the Priests: and being an high Presbyterian, and envious against us; he used to call our Friends House-Creepers. Now I going to visit his Wife, and he being present, she said to me; I have something to speak to thee against my Husband. 'Nay, said I, thou must not speak against thy Husband. Yes, said she, but I must in this Case. The last First-Day, said she, He and his Priests and People, the Presbyterians, met, and they had Candles and Tobacco-Pipes, and Bread and Cheese, and Cold Meat on the Table; and they agreed before-hand, that if the Officers should come in upon them, then they would leave their Preaching and Praying, and would fall to their Cold Meat. Oh, said I to him, is not this a Shame to you, who Persecuted and Imprisoned us, and spoiled our Goods, be∣cause we would not follow you, and be of your Religion, and called us House-Creepers; and now ye do not stand to your own Religion your selves! Did ye ever find our Meetings stufft with Bread and Cheese, and Tobacco-pipes? Or did ye ever read in the Scriptures of any such Practice among the Saints? Why, said the Old Man, We must be as wise, as Serpents. Then said I, This is the Serpent's Wis∣dom indeed. But who, said I, would ever have thought, that you Presbyterians and Independents, who persecuted and imprisoned others, and spoiled their Goods, and whipped such, as would not follow your Religion, should now flinch your selves, and not dare to stand to, and own your own Religion; but cover it with Tobacco-pipes, Flagons of Drink, Cold Meat and Bread and Cheese! But this, and such like deceitful Practices, I understood afterwards, were too Common amongst them in times of Persecution. Now after we had travelled through Herefordshire, and Meetings were well settled there,Monmouth∣shire. we passed into Monmouthshire, where I had several blessed Meetings; and at Walter Jenkins, who had been a Ju∣stice of the Peace, we had a large Meeting, where were some Convin∣ced: This Meeting was quiet. But at another Meeting that we had
before this, there came the Bayliff of the Hundred,1667. Monmouth∣shire. almost drunk; pretending, he was to take up the Speakers. There was a mighty Power of God in the Meeting; so that, although he raged, the Power of the Lord limited him, that he could not break up the Meeting. When the Meeting was over, I staid a while, and he staid also: but af∣ter some time I spake to him; and so passed quietly away. At Night some rude People came, and shot off a Musket against the House; but did not hurt any body. Thus the Lord's Power came over all, and chained down the unruly Spirits, so that we escaped them; and came to Ross that Night, and had a Meeting there at James Merricks.Ross. After this we came into Gloucestershire,Glouester∣shire. and had a General Mens-Meet∣ing at Nathaniel Crips's House, where all the Monthly Meetings were settled in the Lord's Everlasting Power; and the Heirs of Salvation were exhorted to take their Possessions of the Gospel, the Power of God, which was and is the Authority of their Meetings. Many blessed Meetings we had up and down in that Country, before we came to Bristol, whither also we went:Britol. And after we had had several powerful Meetings there, the Mens- and Womens-Meetings were settl'd there also. Now as I was lying in Bed at Bristol, the Word of the Lord came to me, that I must go back to London. Next Morning Alexander Parker, and several others came to me, and I asked them, What they felt? They in like manner asked me, What was upon me? I told them, I felt, I must return to London: and they said, the same was upon them. So we gave up to return to London: for which Way the Lord moved and led us, thither we went in his Power. Wherefore leav∣ing Bristol, we passed into Wiltshire,Wiltshire. and established the Mens-Month∣ly-Meetings in the Lord's Power there; and then passed through the Countries, visiting Friends, till we came to London.London. After we had visited Friends in the City, and had staid there a while, I was moved to exhort them, to bring all their Marriages to the Mens- and Womens-Meetings, that they might lay them before the Faithful there; that so Care might be taken to prevent those Disor∣ders, that had been committed by some. For many had gone together in Marriage contrary to their Relations minds; and some young, raw People, that came among us, had mixed with the World: and Widows had married, and had not made provision for their Children by their former Husbands, before their Second Marriage. And although I had given forth a Paper concerning Marriages about the Year 1653, when Truth was but little spread over the Nation; Advising Friends who might be concerned in that Case, That they might lay it before the Faithful in time, before any thing were Concluded; and afterward publish it in the end of a Meeting, or in a Market (as they were mo∣ved thereto.) And when all things were found clear, they being free from all others, and their Relations satisfied, then they might ap∣point a Meeting on purpose, for the taking of each other; in the Presence of at least Twelve Faithful Witnesses. Yet these Directions not being observed, and Truth being now more spread over the Nation, it was therefore Ordered by the same Power and Spirit of God, That Marriages should be laid before the Mens Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, or as the Meetings were then established; that Friends might see, that the Relations of those, that proceeded to Marriage, were satisfied, and
that the Parties were clear from all others,1667. London. and that Widows had made Provision for their First Husband's Children, before they Mar∣ried again: and what else was needful to be inquired into; that so all things might be kept clean and pure, and done in Righteousness to the Glory of God. And afterwards it was Ordered in the same Wisdom of God, That if either of the Parties, that intended to Mar∣ry, came out of another Nation, County, or Monthly-Meeting, they should bring a Certificate from the Monthly Meeting, to which they belong'd; for satisfaction of the Monthly-Meeting, before which they came to lay their Intentions of Marriage. Now after these things, with many other Services for God, were set in Order, and settled in the Churches in the City, I passed out of London, in the Leadings of the Lord's Power, into the Country again: and going into Hartfordshire,Hertford∣shire. after I had visited Friends there, and the Mens-Monthly-Meetings were settled there, I passed on as far as Baldock,Baldock. where I had a great Meeting of many sorts of People. Then returning towards London by Waltham,Waltham. I advised the setting up of a School there for Teaching Boys; and also a Womens-School to be set up at Shacklewel for instructing Girls and Young Maidens,Shackle∣well. in whatsoever things were Civil and Ʋseful in the Creation. Thus, after I had had several precious Meetings in the Country, I came to London again,London. where I staid a while in the Work and Service of the Lord;Bucking∣hamshire. Weston. and then went down into Buckinghamshire, where I had many precious Meetings. And at John Brown's of Weston near Aylsbury, some of the Men-Friends of each Meeting being gathered together, the Mens-Monthly-Meetings for that County were established amongst them also, in the Order of the Gospel, the Power of God; and the Power of the Lord confirmed it in all that felt it, and they came thereby to see and feel, that the Power of God was the Authority of their Meetings. Then after the Monthly-Meetings were settled there in the Order of the Go∣spel,Oxford∣shire. North-Newton near Ban∣bury. and upon the Foundation Christ Jesus, I passed on into Oxford∣shire, and went to Nathaniel Ball's at North-Newton near Banbury, who was a Friend in the Ministry. And there being a General Meet∣ing, where some of all the Meetings were present, the Monthly-Meet∣ings for that County were then settled in the Power of God; and Friends were very glad of them: for they came into their Services in the Church, and to take Care for God's Glory. After this Meeting we passed through the Country,Gloucester∣shire. visiting Friends, till we came into Glou∣cestershire: and visiting Friends through that County also, we travel∣led on,Monmouth∣shire. till we came into Monmouthshire, to one Richard Hambery's; where meeting with some of all the Meetings of that County, the Monthly Meetings were settled there also in the Lord's Power, that all in it might take Care of God's Glory, and Admonish and Exhort such, as did not walk, as became the Gospel. And indeed, these Meetings did make a great Reformation amongst People, insomuch as the very Justices took notice of the Ʋsefulness and Service thereof. When we went from Rich. Humbery's, he and his Wife accompanied us a Day's Journy through the Country, visiting Friends; till we came to a Widow-Woman's, where we lay that Night: and from thence pas∣sed over the Hills next day,Over the Hills. visiting Friends, and declaring the Truth to People, till we came to another Widow Woman's House; where
we had a Meeting.  The Woman of the House could not speak Eng∣lish; yet she praised the Lord for sending us over those Hills, to come and visit them. We travelled on through the Country, till we came to Swanzey;Swanzey. where on the First Day we had a large and precious Meeting, the Lord's Presence being eminently amongst us.—Beyond Swanzey. On a Week-Day after∣wards we had a General Meeting beyond Swanzey, of Men-Friends, that came from Swanzey, Tenby, Haverford-West and other Places; and there the Monthly-Meetings were settled in the Gospel-Order, and re∣ceived by Friends in the Power of the Lord: and the Lord's Truth was over all. From hence we endeavoured to have got over the Water into Corn∣wall; and in order thereunto went back to Swanzey,Swanzey. Mumbles. and so to Mum∣bles, thinking to have got Passage there; but the Master deceived us: For though he had promised to carry us; yet when we came, he would not. Thereupon we turned from thence, and went to another place, where there was a Passage-Boat, into which we got our Horses: but there being some Rude Men in the Boat (though called Gentlemen) that threatned to Pistol the Master, if he took us in; he being afraid of them, turned our Horses out again: which put us out of hopes of getting over that way. Wherefore turning back again into the Coun∣try, we stay'd up all Night; and about the Second Hour in the Morn∣ing took Horse, and travelled through the Country,—Near Cardiff. till we came near Cardiff; where we staid one Night. And the next Day came to a place called Newport: and it being Market-day there,Newport. several Friends came to us; with whom we sate together a while: and after we had had a fine refreshing Season together, we parted from them, and went on our way. When we were gone beyond this Market-Town, we overtook a Man, who lingred on the Way, as if he stay'd for some body: but when we came up to him, he rid along with us, and asked us many Questions. At length meeting with Two others, who seemed to be Pages to some great Persons, he took Acquaintance with them; and I heard him tell them, he would stop us, and take us up. We rid on, being in our way; and when he came to us, and would have stopped us, I told him: None ought to stop us on the King's High-way; for it was as free for us, as for them: and I was moved to exhort him to Fear the Lord. Then galloped he away before us: and I perceived, his Intent was to stop us at Shipton in Wales; which was a Garrison-Town, through which we were to pass in our way. When we were come to Shipton, John-ap-John being with me,Shipton. we walked down the Hill into the Town, leading our Horses: And it being the Market-day there, several Friends met us, and would have had us to have gone into an Inn. But we were not to go into any Inn: but walked di∣rectly through the Town over the Bridge; and then we were out of the Limits of that Town. Thus the Lord's Everlasting Arm and Power preserved us, and carried us over in his Work, Labour and Service. The next First Day we had a large Meeting in the Forrest of Dean;Forrest of Dean. and all was quiet. Next day we passed over the Water: and having staid a little at a Friend's House by the way, we came to Oldstone.Oldstone.
Where, after we had visited Friends, we passed over the Water again to William Yeoman's his House at Irb's Court in Somersetshire.1668. Oldstone. Somerset∣shire. Irb's Court. Posset. From thence we went down to a Meeting at Posset; whither several Friends of Bristol came to us. After this Meeting we went further up into the Country, and had several large Meetings; and the Lord's living Presence was with us, supporting and refreshing us in our Labour and Travel in his Service. —Near Mynhead,We came to a place near Mynhead, where we had a General Meet∣ing of the Men-Friends in Somersetshire: and there came also a Cheat, whom some Friendly People would have had me to have taken along with me. I saw, he was a Cheat; and therefore bid them bring him to me, and see, whether he could Look me in the Face. Some were ready to think, I was too hard towards him, because I would not let him go along with me: but when they brought him to me, he was not able to Look me in the Face; but looked hither and thither: for he was indeed a Cheat, and had Cheated a Priest, by pretending him∣self to be a Minister, and had got the Priest's Sute, and went away with it. Mynhead.After the Meeting we passed to Mynhead, where we tarried that Night. And in the Night I had an Exercise upon me, from a Sense I had of a Dark Spirit, that was working, and striving to get up, and to disturb the Church of Christ. Whereupon next Morning I was mo∣ved to write a few Lines to Friends, as a Warning thereof; as fol∣lows: Dear Friends, LIve in the Power of the Lord God, in his Seed, that is set over all; and is over all Trials, that you may have from the dark Spirit again, which would be owned in its Actings, and thrust it self amongst you; which is not come as yet: But in the Power of the Lord God, and his Seed keep over it, and bring it to Condemnation. For I felt a kind of dark Spirit thrusting it self up towards you, and heaving up last Night: But you may keep it down with the Power of God; that the Witness may arise to Condemn its Actings, so far as it hath spread its dark Works, before it have any Admittance. So no more, but my Love in the Seed of God, which changeth not. Mynhead in Somersetshire, the 22th of the 4th Month, 1668. G. F. Devonshire. Barnstable Appledon.The next day several Friends of Mynhead accompanied us as far as Barnstable and Appledon in Devonshire, where we had a Meeting. Barnstable had been a bloody, persecuting Town. For there were Two Men-Friends of that Town, that had been a great while at Sea: And coming home to visit their Relations, (one of them having a Wife and Children) the Mayor of the Town sent for them, under pretence to discourse with them; and put the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to them. And because they could not Swear, he sent them to Exe∣ter-Jail, where Judge Archer premunired them; and kept them, till one of them died in Prison. When I heard of this, I was moved to
write a Letter to Judge Archer,1668. Appledon. and another to that Mayor of Barn∣stable, laying their Wicked and Ʋnchristian Actions upon their Heads; and letting them know, that the Blood of that Man would be required at their hands. Now after we had had a precious Meeting at Appledon among some Faithful Friends there, we pass'd to Stratton;Cornwall. Stratton. and staid there at an Inn all Night. Next Day we rid through the Country to Humphrey Lower's; where we had a very precious Meeting: and the next Day we passed through to Truro; and so went on visiting Friends,Truro. till we came to the Lands-End.Lands-end Then coming up by the South-part of tha County, we visited Friends, till we came to Tregangeeves,Tregan∣geeves. where at Loveday Hambley's we had a General Meeting for all the County; in which the Monthly Meetings were settled in the Lord's Power, and in the blessed Order of the Gospel: That all, who were faithful, might Admonish and Exhort such, as walked not according to the Gospel; that so the House of God might be kept Clean, and Righteousness might run down, and all Ʋnrighteousness be swept away. And several, that had run out, were brought to Condemn, what they had done amiss; and through Repentance came in again. So after we had visited the Meetings in Cornwal, and were Clear of that County, we came into Devonshire,Devonshire, and had a Meeting amongst Friends at Plimouth. Whence passing to Richard Brown's,Plimouth. we came to the Widow Philips; where we had some of Men-Friends from all the Meetings together: And there the Mens-Monthly-Meetings were set∣tled in the Heavenly Order of the Gospel, the Power of God; which answered the Witness of God in all. There was a great Noise of a Troop of Horse coming to disturb our Meeting (for the Man-Servant of the House was a wicked, envious Man:) But the Lord's Power pre∣vented it, and preserved us in Peace and Safety. After things were well settled, and the Meeting done, we came to King's-bridge, and visited Friends there-aways.Kings-bridge. Then (leaving Friends in those parts well settled in the Power of God) we past from thence through the Country to Topsham, and so to Membury, visiting Friends,Topsham. Membury. Somerset∣shire. Ilchester. and having many Meetings in the way; till we came to Ilchester in Somersetshire. Here we had a General Mens-Meeting, and therein set∣tled the Mens-Monthly-Meetings for that County in the Lord's everlast∣ing Power, the Order of the Gospel, the Power of God, which was, before the Devil was. Then after the Meetings were settled, and Friends re∣freshed and comforted in the Lord's Power, and established upon Christ their Rock and Foundation, we passed to Puddimore;Puddi∣more. where at William Beaton's we had a blessed Meeting, and all was quiet: though the Con∣stables had threatned before. When we had visited most of the Meetings in Somersetshire, we passed into Dorsetshire to one George Harris his House;Dorsetshire where we had a large Mens-Meeting: and there all the Mens-Monthly-Meet∣ings for that County were settled in the Glorious Order of the Gospel; that all in the Power of God might seek that, which was lost, and bring again, that which was driven away: and might cherish the Good, and reprove the Evil.
1668. South∣hampton.Then, having visited the Meetings of Friends through the Coun∣tries, we came to South-hampton; where we had a large Meeting on the First-Day of the Week. And from thence we went to one Capt. Reeves, where the General Men's-Meeting for Hampshire was appointed; to which some of all the County came, and a blessed Meeting we had. There the Mens-Monthly-Meetings for that County were settled in the Order of the Gospel, which had brought Life and Immortality to Light in them. But there came a Rude Company, who were run into Ranterism; and had opposed and disturbed our Meetings much. One of them had lain with a Man; and the man, that had lain with her, declared it at the Market-Cross, and gloried in his Wickedness: These lewd Peo∣ple lived, a Company of them together, at a House hard by the place, where our Meeting was. Wherefore I went to the House, and told them of their Wickedness: but the Man of the House said, Why! Did I make so strange of that? Another of them said, It was to stumble me. I told them, Their Wickedness should not stumble me; for I was above it. And I was moved of the Lord God to tell them, That the Plagues and Judgments of God would overtake them, and come up∣on them. Afterward they went up and down the Country, till at last they were cast into Winchester-Jail; where the Man, that had lain with the Woman aforesaid, stabbed the Jailer, but not mortally. And after they were let out of Jail, this Fellow, that had stabb'd the Jailer, hang'd himself: The Woman also had like to have Cut a Child's Throat, (as we were Informed.) These People had formerly lived about Lon∣don: and when the City was fired, they Prophesied, That all the rest of London should be burnt within Fourteen Days; and hastned away out of Town. Now though they were Ranters, and were great Oppo∣sers of Friends, and Disturbers of our Meetings; yet in the Country, where they came, some of the People of the World, that did not know them, would be apt to say, They were Quakers. Wherefore I was moved of the Lord to write a Paper, to be dispersed amongst the Ma∣gistrates and People of Hampshire, to Clear Friends and Truth of these Lewd People, and their Wicked Actions. Now, after the Mens-Monthly Meetings in those parts were settled, and we had visited Friends, and the Lord's blessed Power was over all; we went to a Town, where we had a Meeting with Friends. And from thence we came to Farnham,Farnham. where we met many Friends, it being the Market-Day: and we had many precious Meetings up and down that Country. Friends in those Countries had formerly been plundered, and their Goods much spoiled, both for Tithes, and for going to Meet∣ings: but the Lord's Power at this time preserved both them and us, from falling into the Persecutors Hands. We passed from thence, and had a General Mens-Meeting at a Friends House in Surrey;Surry. who had been plundered so extreamly, that he had scarce a Cow, Horse or Swine left. The Constables threatned to come then, and break up our Meeting; but the Lord restrained them. At this Meeting the Mens-Monthly-Meetings were settled in the Authority of the Heavenly Power. And after we had visited Friends in that Country, and had many large and precious Meetings among them, we passed to a Friend's House in Sussex,Sussex. where the General Meeting
for the Men Friends of that County was appointed to be held;1668. Sussex. and thi∣ther came several Friends from London to visit us. There we had a blessed Meeting: and the Mens-Monthly-Meetings for that County were then settled in the Lord's Eternal Power, the Gospel of Salvation; that all in it might keep to the Order of the Gospel. There were at that time great Threatnings of Disturbance; but the Meeting was quiet. And afterward we passed from thence, and had several large Meetings in that County; though Friends were then in great Sufferings there, and many in Prison. I was sent for to visit a Friend, that was sick, and went to see Friends, that were Prisoners; and there was danger of my being apprehended: but I went in the Faith of God's Power, and there∣by the Lord preserved me in Safety. Having visited Friends through the Country, we passed on into Kent; where after we had been at several Meetings,Kent. we had a General Meeting for the Men-Friends of that County: There also the Mens-Monthly Meetings for that County were settled in the Power of God, and established in the Order of the Gospel, for all the Heirs of it to enter into their Services, and Care in the Church for the Glory of God. And Friends Rejoiced in the Order of the Gospel, and were glad of the Settlement thereof; which is not of man, nor by man. After this Meeting was over, I visited Friends in their Meetings up and down in Kent: And when I had cleared my self of the Lord's Ser∣vice in that County, I came up to London. Thus were the Mens-Monthly-Meetings settled through the Nation: For I had been in Berkshire before, where most of the Ancient Friends of that County were in Prison; and when I had informed them of the Service of these Monthly-Meetings, they were settled amongst them also. And the Quarterly Meetings were generally settled before. I writ also into Ire∣land by faithful Friends, and into Scotland, Holland, Barbados, and other parts of America, advising Friends, to settle their Mens-Monthly-Meetings in those Countries also. For they had their General Quar∣terly Meetings before: But now that Truth was Increased amongst them, they should settle those Mens-Monthly-Meetings in the Power and Spirit of God, that did at first Convince them. And since the time these Meetings have been settled, that all the Faithful in the Power of God, who be Heirs of the Gospel, have met together in the Power of God, which is the Authority of them, to perform Service to the Lord therein, many Mouths have been opened in Thanksgivings and Praise, and many have blest the Lord God, that ever he did send me forth in this Service: Yea, with Tears have many praised the Lord. For now all coming to have a Concern and Care for God's Honour and Glory, that his Name be not blasphemed, which they do profess; and to see, that all who profess the Truth, do walk in the Truth, in Righteousness and in Holiness, which becomes the House of God, and that all order their Conversations aright, that they may see the Salvation of God: All ha∣ving this Care upon them for God's Glory, and being exercised in his holy Power and Spirit, in the Order of the Heavenly Life and Gospel of Jesus; here they may all see and know, possess and partake of the Government of Christ, of the Increase of which there is to be no end. Thus the Lord's everlasting Renown and Praise is set up in every
one's Heart,1668. Kent. that is faithful; so that we can now say, that the Gospel-Order established amongst us, is not of Man, nor by Man, but of and by Jesus Christ, in and through the Holy Ghost. And this Order of the Gospel, which is not of Man, nor by Man, but from Christ, the Heavenly Man, is above all the Orders of Men in the Fall, whether Jews, Gentiles, or Apostatized Christians; and will be, when they are gone. For the Power of God, which is the Everlasting Gospel, was before the Devil was; and will be and remain for ever. And as the Everlasting Gospel was Preached, in the Apostles days to all Nations, that all Nations might come into the Order of it, through the Di∣vine Power, which brings Life and Immortality to Light; that they, who were Heirs of it, might inherit the Power and Authority of it: So now, since all Nations have drunk the Whore's Cup, and all the World hath Worshipped the Beast, (but they, whose Names are writ∣ten in the Book of Life from the Foundation of the World, who have worshipped God in Spirit and Truth, as Christ commanded) the Ever∣lasting Gospel is to be, and is preached again (as John the Divine fore∣saw it should) to all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People. And this Everlasting Gospel torments the Whore, and makes her and the Beast to rage, even the Beast, that hath Power over the Tongues, which are called the Original, to order them; by which they make Divines, as they call them. But all that receive the Gospel, the Power of God, which brings Life and Immortality to Light, they come to see over the Beast, Devil, Whore, and False Prophet, that hath darkned them, and all their Worships and Orders; and come to be Heirs of the Gospel, the Power of God, which was, before the Beast, Whore, False Prophet and Devil were, and will be, when they are all gone, and cast into the Lake of Fire. And they that be Heirs of this Power, and of this Gospel, they inherit the Power, which is the Authority of this Order, and of our Meetings. Every Man and Woman, that be Heirs of the Gospel, are Heirs of this Authority, and of the Power of God, which was before the Devil was; and which is not of Man, nor by Man. These come to inherit and possess the joyful Order of the joyful Gospel, the comfortable Order of the comfortable Gospel, the glorious Order of the glorious Gospel, and the everlasting Order of the everlasting Gospel, the Power of God, which will last for ever; and will out-last all the Orders of the Devil, and that which is of Men, or by Men. And these shall see the Government of Christ, who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him; and of the In∣crease of his glorious, righteous, holy, just Government there is no end; but his Government and his Order will remain: for he who is the Author of it, is the First and the Last, the Beginning and Ending, the Foundation of God, which over all stands sure, Christ Jesus, the Amen. After I had travelled amongst Friends through most parts of the Nation, and the Monthly-Meetings were settled; being returned to London,London. I stay'd some time there, visiting Friends Meetings in and about the City. While I was in London, I went one day to Visit him, that was called Esq Marsh, who had shewed much Kindness both to me, and to Friends; and I happened to go, when he was at Dinner. He no sooner heard my Name, but he sent for me up, and would
have had me sit down with him to Dinner;1668. London. but I had not freedom to do so. There were several Great Persons at Dinner with him; and he said to one of them, who was a great Papist: Here is a Quaker, which you have not seen before. The Papist askt me; Whether I did own the Christening of Children? I told him, There was no Scripture for any such Practice. What! said he, Not for Christening Children? I said, Nay. I told him, the one Baptism by the one Spirit into one Body we owned; but to throw a little Water on a Child's Face, and say, that was Baptizing and Christening it, there was no Scripture for that. Then he asked me, Whether I did own the Catholick Faith? I said, Yes: but added; That neither the Pope, nor the Papists were in that Catholick Faith: for the true Faith works by Love, and pu∣rifies the Heart; and if they were in that Faith that gives Victory, by which they might have Access to God, they would not tell the People of a Purgatory, after they were dead. So I undertook to prove, That neither Pope, nor Papists, that held a Purgatory here∣after, were in the true Faith: For the true, precious, Divine Faith, which Christ is the Author of, gives Victory over the Devil and Sin, that had separated Man and Woman from God. And if they (the Papists) were in the true Faith, they would never use Racks, Prisons, and Fines to persecute and force others to their Religion, that were not of their Faith: For this was not the Practice of the Apostles and Primitive Christians, who witnessed and enjoyed the true Faith of Christ; but it was the Practice of the Faithless Jews and Heathens so to do. But, said I to him, seeing thou art a great and leading Man among the Papists, and hast been taught and bred up under the Pope; and seeing thou say'st, There is no Salvation, but in your Church, I desire to know of thee, What it is, that doth bring Salvation in your Church? He answered, A Good Life. And nothing else, said I? Yes, said he, Good Works. And is this it, that brings Salvation in your Church, a good Life and good Works? Is this your Doctrine and Principle, said I? Yes, said he. Then, said I, neither Thou, nor the Pope, nor any of the Papists know, what it is, that brings Salvation. Then he askt me, What brought Salvation in our Church? I told him, That which brought Salvation to the Church in the Apostles Days, the same brought Salvation to us, and not another; Namely, The Grace of God, which, the Scripture says, brings Salvation, and hath appeared to all men, which taught the Saints then, and teaches us now: and this Grace, which brings Salvation, teaches To deny Ʋn∣godliness and worldly Lusts, and to live godly, righteously and soberly. So it is not the good Works, nor the good Life, that brings the Salva∣tion, but the Grace. What! said the Papist, Doth this Grace, that brings Salvation, appear unto all men? Yes, said I. Then, said he, I deny that. But I said, All that deny that, are Sect-makers, and are not in the Universal Faith, Grace and Truth, which the Apostles were in. Then he spake to me about the Mother-Church; and I told him: The several sorts of Sects in Christendom had accused us, and said, We forsook our Mother-Church. The Papists charged us with forsaking their Church, and they said; Rome was the only Mother-Church. The Episcopalians taxed us with forsaking the old Protestant Religion, and they said; Theirs was the Reformed Mother-Church. The Presbyte∣rians
and Independents blamed us for leaving them, and each of them said; Theirs was the right-Reformed-Church. But I said, if we could own any outward City or Place to be the Mother Church, we should own outward Jerusalem, where the Gospel was first preached by Christ himself, and the Apostles; where Christ suffered; where the great Conversion to Christianity by Peter was; where were the Types, Figures and Shadows, which Christ ended; and where Christ com∣manded his Disciples To wait, until they were endued with Power from high. So, if any outward place deserved to be called the Mo∣ther, that was the place, where the first great Conversion to Christia∣nity was. But the Apostle saith, Gal. 4.25, 26. Jerusalem — which now is in Bondage with her Children: But Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the Mother of us all. For it is written, Re∣joyce, thou barren, that bearest not; break forth, and cry, thou that travailest not: for the Desolate hath many more Children, than she that hath an Husband, ver. 27. Now this we do see, that Jerusalem below (which was the highest Place of Worship) and all that be like her in Profession without Possession, have more Children, than the Free Woman, that hath an Husband, which is Jerusalem that is above, the Mother of us all, that be true Christians: So, the Apostle doth not say, Outward Jerusalem was the Mother, though the first and great Conversion to Christianity was there. And therefore there is less Rea∣son for the Title [Mother] to be given to Rome, or to any other outward Place or City, by the Children of Jerusalem, that is above and free: and they are not Jerusalem's Children, that is above and free, who give he Title of Mother either to outward Jerusalem, or to Ro or to any other Place, or Sect of People. And though this Title [Mother] hath been given to Places and Sects amongst and by the degenerate Christians; yet we say still, as the Apostle said of Old, Jerusalem that is above, is the Mother of us all: and we can own no other, neither outward Jerusalem, nor Rome, nor any Sect of People for our Mother, but Jerusalem, which is above; which is free, the Mother of us all, that are born again, and become true Believers in the Light, and who are grafted into Christ, the Heavenly Vine. For all, who are born again of the Immortal Seed, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever, feed upon the Milk of the Word, the Breasts of Life, and grow by it in Life; and cannot acknowledge any other to be their Mother, but Jerusalem, which is above. Oh! said Esq Marsh to the Papist, You do not know this man: If he would but come to Church now and then, he would be a Brave Man. After some other Discourse together, I went aside with this Justice Marsh into another Room, to speak with him concerning Friends; for he was a Justice of Peace for Middlesex: and being a Courtier, the other Justices put much of the Management of matters upon him. Now when we Two were alone together, he told me, He was in a streight, how to Act between us, and some other Dissenters. For, said he, You cannot Swear; and the Independents, Baptists and Fifth-Mo∣narchy-People say also, They cannot Swear: and therefore, said he, how shall I know, how to distinguish betwixt you and them, seeing they and you all say, It is for Conscience sake, that you cannot Swear? Then said I, I will shew thee, how to distinguish: For they (or most of
them) thou speakest of, can and do Swear in some Cases:  but we cannot Swear in any Case. If a Man should steal their Cows or Horses, and thou should'st ask them, whether they would Swear, they were theirs? Many of them would readily do it: But if thou try our Friends, they cannot Swear for their own Goods. Therefore, when thou puttest the Oath of Allegiance to any of them, ask them, Whether they can Swear in any other case, as for their Cow or Horse? Which, if they be really of us, they cannot do; though they can bear Witness to the Truth. Hereupon I gave him a Relation of a Trial in Barkshire, which was thus: A Thief stole Two Beasts from a Friend of ours: the Thief was taken and cast into Prison; and the Friend appeared against him at the Assizes. But some body having Informed the Judge, that the Man, that Prosecuted, was a Quaker, and could not Swear; the Judge, before he heard, what the Friend could say, said, Is he a Quaker? And will he not Swear? Then tender him the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. So he cast the Friend into Prison, and Premunired him, and let the Thief go at Liberty, that had stolen his Goods. When I had related this Case, Justice Marsh said, That Judge was a wicked Man. But, said I, If we could Swear in any Case, we would take the Oath of Allegiance to the King, who is to preserve the Laws, that preserve every man in his Estate. Whereas others, that can Swear in some cases, to preserve a part of their Estates, if they be robbed, will not take this Oath to the King, who is to preserve them in their whole Estates and Bodies also. So that thou may'st easily distinguish, and put a difference betwixt us, and other People. This Justice Marsh was afterwards very servicea∣ble to Friends in this and other Cases; for he kept several, both Friends and others, from being premunired, in those parts where he was a Justice. And when Friends have been brought before him in the times of Persecution, he set many of them at Liberty: And when he could not avoid sending to Prison, he sent some for a few Hours, or for a Night. At length he went to the King, and told him: He had sent some of us to Prison contrary to his Conscience; and he could not do so any more. Wherefore he removed his Family from Lime-house, where he lived; and took Lodgings near James's Park. He told the King, That if he would be pleased to give Liberty of Conscience, that would quiet and settle all; for then none could have any pretence to be un∣easie. And indeed, he was a very serviceable man to Truth and Friends in his day. We had great Service at London this year, and the Lord's Truth came over all: and many that had been out from Truth, came in again this Year, Confessing and Condemning their former Outgoings. Now after I had stay'd some time in London, I went forth into the Countries again, visiting Friends in Surry and Sussex,Surry. Sussex. and in other places that way; and afterwards travelled Northward, having Leo∣nard Fell with me. We visited Friends, till we came to Warwick,Warwick. where many Friends were in Prison; and we had a Meeting in the Town. After that I passed from thence to Birmingham and to Badgely:Birming∣ham. Badgely. At Badgely I had a large Meeting. After which I passed through the Country, visiting Friends, till I came to Nottingham,Notting∣ham. where on the first day we had a precious Meeting, but not without danger of being
Apprehended;1669. Balby. York. the Constables having threatned to take up Friends about that time. I passed on from thence, visiting Friends through the Country, till I came to Balby, and so to York to the Quarterly-Meeting there; and a blessed Meeting we had. Friends had in Yorkshire Seven Monthly Meetings before; and they were so sensible of the Service of them, that they desired to have Seven more added to them: For Truth was much spread in that Country. Accordingly in that Quarterly Meeting they were settled and established: So that, whereas before they had but Seven, now they have Fourteen Monthly Meetings in that County. It being the Assize-time at York, there I met with Justice Hotham, a Well-wisher to Friends, and one that had been Tender, and very Kind to me at the first. After I had finished my Service for the Lord in York, I passed fur∣ther up into the Country: And as I went, a great Burden fell upon me; but I did not presently know the Reason of it. So I came to a Meet∣ing on the First-Day at one Shipton's,R. Shipton. which was very large: But there being a Meeting the same day at another place also, the Priest of that place, being mis-informed, that I was to be there, got a War∣rant, and made great Disturbance at that Meeting: of which Isaac Lindley, who was there, gave me an Account by the following Let∣ter, thus: G. F. WHen thou went'st from York, the First-Day after thou wast at Richard Shipton's: That Day I had appointed a Meeting Ten Miles from York, where there had not been a Meeting before. But the Priest and the Constable got a Warrant on the Seventh Day, and put thy Name only in the Warrant (for they had heard, that thou wast to be there) and they came with Weapons and Staves, and cried, Where is Mr. Fox? over and over; many Friends being there, they concluded, thou wast among them. But those Raveners being disap∣pointed, plucked me down, and abused me, and beat some Friends; and then had me before a Magistrate: but he set me at Liberty. Isaac Lindley. After the aforesaid Meeting was done, I passed through the Coun∣tries,Whitby. Scarbo∣rough. visiting Friends at Whitby and Scarborough. When I was at Scarborough, the Governour hearing, I was come to the Town, sent to invite me to his House, saying; Surely, I would not be so unkind, as not to come and see him and his Wife. Wherefore after the Meeting was over, I went up to Visit him; and he received me very Courte∣ously and Lovingly. The WoulsNow after I had visited most of the Meetings in Yorkshire, and up to the Wouls and Holderness;Holderness. H. Jackson. T. Tayler. Eldreth. I passed through the Country, till I came to Henry Jacksons, where I had a great Meeting: And from thence to Thomas Tayler's; and so to John Moor's at Eldreth, where we had a
very large Meeting:1669. Eldreth. And the Lord's Power and Presence was eminent∣ly amongst us. Not far off from this place lay Col. Kirby lame of the Gout, who had threatned, that, If ever I came near, he would send me to Prison again; and had bidden 40 l. to any man, that could take me: as I was credibly informed. After this Meeting I passed through the Countries, till I came into Staffordshire, and so into Cheshire;Stafford∣shire. Cheshire. Warring∣ton. where we had many large and precious Meetings. I had a very large Meeting at William Barns his House about two Miles from Warrington: and although Col. Kirby was now got abroad again, as violent in breaking up Meetings, as be∣fore, and was then at Warrington; yet the Lord did not suffer him to come to this Meeting: and so we were preserved out of his hands. Now was I moved of the Lord to pass over into IRELAND,IRELAND to visit the Seed of God in that Nation: and there went with me Ro∣bert Lodge, James Lancaster, Thomas Briggs and John Stubbs. We went near to Liverpool, and waited there for Shipping and Wind:Liverpool. and after we had waited some days, we sent James Lancaster to take Passage, which he did; and brought Word, the Ship was ready, and would take us in at Black-Rock. Whereupon we went thither on foot: and it being pretty far, and the Weather very hot, I was very much spent with Walking. Yet when we came there, the Ship was not there: so we were fain to go to the Town, and take Shipping there. When we were come on Board, I said to the rest of my Company; Come, ye will Triumph in the Lord; for we shall have fair Wind and Weather. There were many Passengers in the Ship, and many of them were Sick; but not one of our Company was Sick. The Master, and many of the Pas∣sengers were very loving; and we being at Sea on the First-Day of the Week, I was moved to declare Truth among them: Whereupon the Master said to the Passengers; Come, here are things, that you never heard in your Lives. When we came before Dublin, we took Boat,Dublin. and went ashore; and the Earth and Air smelt, methought, with the Corruption of the Nation, so that it yielded another Smell to me, than England did: which I imputed to the Corruption, and Popish Massacrees that had been Committed, and the Blood, that had been spilt in it; from which a Foulness ascended. We passed through, among the Offi∣cers of the Custom four times, yet they did not search us; for they perceived, what we were: and some of them were so Envious, they did not care to look at us. We did not presently find Friends; but went to an Inn, and sent out to inquire for some Friends: who when they came to us, were exceeding glad of our Coming, and received us with Great Joy. We stay'd there the Weekly Meeting, which was a great one; and the Power and Life of God appeared greatly in it. Af∣terwards we passed to a Province-Meeting, which lasted Two Days, there being both a Mens-Meeting about the Poor, and another Meeting more General; in which a mighty Power of the Lord appeared, and Truth was livingly declared, and Friends were much refreshed therein. Passing from thence about four and twenty miles, we came to ano∣ther place, where we had a very good, refreshing Meeting: But after the Meeting was over, some Papists, that were there, were Angry, and raged very much. When I heard of it, I sent for one of them, who
was a Schoolmaster;1669. Ireland. but he would not come at me. Whereupon I sent a Challenge to him, with all the Friers and Monks, Priests and Jesuits, to come forth, and Try their God and their Christ, which they had made of Bread and Wine: but no Answer could I get from them. Where∣fore I told them, They were Worse, than the Priests of Baal: for Baal's Priests tried their Woodden God; but these durst not try their God of Bread and Wine: and Baal's Priests and People did not Eat their God, as these did, and then make another. New-Gar∣den.We went on to a place called New Garden, where was a great Meet∣ing. And from thence we travelled on among Friends, till we came to Bandon-Bridge and the Lands-End,Bandon-Bridge. Lands-end having many Meetings, as we went; in which the mighty Power of the Lord was manifested, through which Friends were well refreshed: and many People were affected with the Truth.Bandon. At Bandon the Mayor's Wife, being her self Convinced, desired her Husband to come to the Meeting; but he bid her for her Life, she should not make known, that I was at a Meeting there. He that was then Mayor of Cork, was very envious against Truth and Friends, and had many Friends in Prison: And knowing, that I was in the Country, he had sent forth Four Warrants to take me; where∣fore Friends were desirous, that I might not ride through Cork. But being at Bandon, there appeared unto me, in a Vision, A very ugly-vi∣sag'd Man, of a black and dark Look. My Spirit struck at him in the Power of God: and it seemed to me, that I rid over him with my Horse, and my Horse set his Foot on the side of his Face. When I came down in the Morning, I told a Friend, that was with me, that the Command of the Lord was to me to ride through Cork; but bad him, Tell no Man. So we took Horse, many Friends being with me:Cork. And when we came near the Town, the Friends would have shewed me a way on the backside of the Town; but I told them, My way was through the Streets. Wherefore taking one of them along with me (whose Name was Paul Morrice) to guide me through the Town, I rode on: and as we rode through the Market-place, and by the Mayor's Door, the Mayor seeing me ride by, said, There goes George Fox: but he had not power to stop me. When we had passed through the Centinels, and were come over the Bridge, we went to a Friend's House, and alighted: And there the Friends told me, what a Rage was in the Town, and how many Warrants were granted forth to take me. While I was sitting there with Friends, I felt the Evil Spirit at Work in the Town, stirring up Mischief against me; and I felt the Power of the Lord strike at that Evil Spirit. By and by some other Friends coming in, told me, That it was over the Town, and amongst the Ma∣gistrates, that I was in the Town: I said, Let the Devil do his worst. So after a while, that Friends were refreshed one in another, and we who were Travellers, had refreshed our selves, I called for my Horse: and having a Friend to Guide me, we went on our way. But great was the Rage, that the Mayor, and others of Cork were in, that they had missed me, and great pains they afterwards took to have taken me; having their Scouts abroad upon the Roads (as I understood) to observe, which way I went. And afterwards there was scarce a Publick Meet∣ing I came to, but there came Spies to watch, if I were there. And the Envious Magistrates and Priests sent Informations one to another
concerning me, describing me by my Hair, Hat, Cloaths and Horse; so that when I was come near an Hundred Miles from Cork, they had an Account concerning me, and Description of me, before I came amongst them. There was one very Envious Magistrate, who was both a Priest and a Justice; and he got a Warrant from the Judge of Assize to apprehend me: which Warrant was to go over all his Circuit, which reached near an Hundred Miles. Yet the Lord disappointed all their Counsels, and defeated all their Designs against me, and by his good hand of Providence preserved me out of all their Snares; and gave us many sweet and blessed Opportunities to visit Friends, and spread Truth through that Nation. For Meetings were very large, Friends coming to them far and near; and the World's People flock∣ing in. And the powerful Presence of the Lord was preciously felt with and amongst us; whereby many of the World were reached, and Con∣vinced, and gathered to the Truth, and the Lord's Flock was increased: And Friends were greatly refreshed and comforted in feeling the Love of God. Oh, the Brokenness, that was amongst them in the flowings of Life! So that, in the Power and Spirit of the Lord, many toge∣ther have broken out into Singing, even with Audible Voices, making Melody in their Hearts. At which time I was moved to declare to Friends there in the Mi∣nistry, as followeth: SOund, Sound abroad, you faithful Servants of the Lord, and Wit∣nesses in his Name, and faithful Servants and Prophets of the Highest, and Angels of the Lord! Sound ye all abroad in the World, to the awakening and raising of the Dead, that they may be awake∣ned, and raised up out of the Grave, to hear the Voice, that is living. For the Dead have long heard the Dead, and the Blind have long wandered among the Blind, and the Deaf amongst the Deaf: There∣fore Sound, Sound, ye Servants and Prophets, and Angels of the Lord, ye Trumpets of the Lord, that you may awaken the Dead, and awaken them that be asleep in their Graves of Sin, Death and Hell, and Sepulchres, and Sea, and Earth, and who lie in the Tombs. Sound, Sound abroad, ye Trumpets, and raise up the Dead, that the Dead may hear the Voice of the Son of God, the Voice of the Se∣cond Adam, that never fell; the Voice of the Light, and the Voice of the Life; the Voice of the Power, and the Voice of the Truth; the Voice of the Righteous, and the Voice of the Just. Sound, Sound the pleasant and melodious Sound! Sound, Sound, ye the Trumpets, the melodious Sound abroad, that all the deaf Ears may be opened to hear the pleasant Sound of the Trumpet to Judgment and Life, to Condemnation and Light. Sound, Sound your Trumpets all abroad, you Angels of the Lord, Sons and Daughters, Prophets of the Highest, that all, that are dead and asleep in the Graves, and been long dream∣ing and slumbering, may be awakened, and hear the Voice of the Lamb, who have long heard the Voice of the Beast; that now they may hear the Voice of the Bridegroom, now they may hear the Voice of the Bride, now they may hear the Voice of the Great Prophet, now they may hear the Voice of the great King, now they may hear
the Voice of the great Shepherd, and the great Bishop of their Souls. Sound, Sound it all abroad, ye Trumpets, among the Dead in Adam; for Christ is come, the Second Adam, that they might have Life, yea, have it abundantly. Awaken the Dead, Awaken the Slumberers, Awa∣ken the Dreamers, Awaken them that be asleep, Awaken them out of their Graves, out of their Tombs, out of their Sepulchres, out of the Seas! Sound, Sound abroad, you Trumpets! you Trumpets, that awa∣ken the Dead, that they may all hear the Sound of it in the Graves; and they that hear, may live, and come to the Life, that is the Son of God: He is risen from the Dead, the Grave could not hold nor contain him; neither could all the Watchers of the Earth with all their Guards keep him therein. Sound, Sound, ye Trumpets of the Lord to all the Seekers of the Living among the Dead, that he is risen from the Dead; to all the Seekers of the Living among the Dead, and in the Graves, that the Watchers keeps; he is not in the Grave, but he is Risen: and there is that under the Grave of the Watchers of the outward Grave, which must be awakened, and come to hear his Voice, which is risen from the Dead, that they might come to live. Therefore Sound abroad, you Trumpets of the Lord, that the Grave might give up her Dead, and Hell, and the Sea might give up their Dead: and all might come forth to Judgment, to the Judgment of the Lord before his Throne; and to have their Sentence and Re∣ward according to their Works. G. F. And Sound, Sound, all ye Angels and Faithful Servants of the Most-High, you Trumpets of the Lord, amongst all the Night watchers and Watchers of the Graves, Sepulchres and Tombs, and Overseers of those Watchers of the Seas, Graves and Sepulchres; Sound the Trumpet amongst them, and over them all: Make the Sound to be heard, that the Dead may arise at the Sound of the Trumpet; that they may come out of their Graves, and live and praise the Lord; That all the Dead in the Seas, and all the Dead in the Tombs and Sepulchres may hear the Sound of the Trumpet, and come to Judgment, and come to hear the Voice of the Son of God, and live; in whom there is Life. Away with all the Chaff and the Husks, and Contentions and Strife, that the Swine feed upon in the Mire, and in the Fall; and the Keepers of them of Adam and Eve's House in the Fall, that lies in the Mire, out of Light and Life. G. F. At James Hutchinson's in Ireland there came many Great Persons, desiring to discourse with me about Election and Reprobation. I told them, Though they judged our Principle foolish; it was too High for them, and they could not with their Wisdom comprehend it: There∣fore I would discourse with them according to their Capacities. You say (said I) that God hath Ordained the greatest part of Men for Hell, and that they were Ordained so before the World began: For which your Proof is in Jude. And you say, Esau was Reprobated, and the Egyptians, and the Stock of Ham: But Christ saith to his
Disciples, Go, teach all Nations; and, Go into all Nations, and preach the Gospel of Life and Salvation. Now, if they were to go to all Nations, were they not to go to Ham's Stock, and Esau's Stock? Did not Christ die for all? then for the Stock of Ham, and of Esau, and the Egyptians. Doth not the Scripture say, God would have all men to be saved? Mark, All Men; then the Stock of Esau, and of Ham also. And doth not God say, Egypt my People? and that he would have an Altar in Egypt? Isa. 19. Were there not many Christians formerly in Egypt? And doth not History say, that the Bishop of Alexandria would formerly have been Pope? And had not God a Church in Babylon? I confess, The Word came to Jacob,☜ and the Statutes to Israel; the like was not to other Nations. For the Law of God was given to Israel; but the Gospel was to be preached to all Nations, and is to be preacht. The Gospel of Peace and glad Ti∣dings to all Nations; He that believes, is Saved; but he that doth not believe, is Condemned already: So the Condemnation comes through Ʋnbelief. And whereas Jude speaks of some, that were of Old Or∣dained (or written of before) to Condemnation, he doth not say, be∣fore the World began: but, Written of Old, may be referr'd to Moses his Writings, who writ of those, whom Jude mentions, namely, Cain, Corah, Balaam, and the Angels, that kept not their first Estate. And such Christians, as followed them in their way, and Apostatized from the first state of Christianity, such were and are Ordained for Condemnation by the Light and Truth, which they are gone from. And though the Apostle speaks of God's loving Jacob, and hating Esau; yet he tells the Believers: We all were by nature Children of Wrath, as well as others. This includes the Stock of Jacob (of which the Apo∣stle himself was, and all believing Jews were:) And thus both Jews and Gentiles were all concluded under Sin, and so under Condemna∣tion, that God might have Mercy upon all, through Jesus Christ. So the Election and Choice stands in Christ: and he that believes, is saved; and he that believes not, is condemned already. And Jacob is the Second Birth, which God loved; and both Jews and Gentiles must be born again, before they can enter the Kingdom of God. And when you are born again, ye will know Election and Reprobation: for the Election stands in Christ, the Seed, before the World began; but the Reprobation lies in the Evil Seed since the World began. Af∣ter this manner, but somewhat more largely, I discoursed with those Great Persons about this matter; and they confest, they had never heard so much before. Now after I had travelled over that Nation of Ireland, and had vi∣sited Friends in their Meetings, as well for Business as for Worship, and had Answered several Papers and Writings from Monks, Friers, and Protestant Priests (for they all were in a Rage against us, and endea∣voured to stop the Work of the Lord: and some Jesuits sware in some of our hearing, that we came to spread our Principles in that Nation; but we should not do it:) I returned to Dublin,Dublin. in order to take Pas∣sage there for England. And when I had staid the First-Day's Meeting there, (which was very large and precious) there being a Ship ready, and the Wind serving, we took our Leave of Friends; parting in much Tenderness and Brokenness, in the Sense of the Heavenly Life and Power,
that was manifested amongst us.1669. Dublin. So having put our Horses and Ne∣cessaries on Board in the Morning, we went our selves in the Afternoon; many Friends accompanying us to the Ship: and divers, both Friends and friendly People coming after us in Boats, when we were near a League at Sea,At Sea. their Love drawing them; though not without Danger. A good, weighty and true People there is in that Nation, sensible of the Power of the Lord God, and tender of his Truth; and very good Or∣der they have in their Meetings: for they stand up for Righteousness and Holiness, which dams up the way of Wickedness: A precious Vi∣sitation they had: and there is an Excellent Spirit in them, worthy to be visited. Many things more I could write of that Nation, and of my Travels in it, which would be large to mention particularly: but thus much I thought good to signifie, that the Righteous may Rejoice in the Prosperity of Truth. James Lancaster, Robert Lodge and Thomas Briggs came back with me; John Stubbs having further Service there, stayed behind. We were Two Nights at Sea: In one of which a mighty Storm arose, that put the Vessel in great Danger; it rained and blew so hard. But I saw, the Power of God went over the Winds and Storms; he had them in his hand, and his Power bound them. And the same Power of the Lord God, which carried us over, brought us back again; and in his Life gave us Dominion over all the Evil Spirits, that opposed us there. Liverpool.We landed at Liverpool; and went to the Mayor's House, it being an Inn. And after we had staid about a Quarter of an Hour in the House, we went to a Friend's House about a Mile out of the Town, where we staid a while; and then went to Richard Johnson's. Whence departing the next day,Lancashire. Cheshire. we passed to William Barnes his House, and so to William Gandy's, visiting Friends, and having many precious Meetings in Lancashire and Cheshire. We bore towards Bristol: and when we came into Gloucestershire,Gloucester∣shire. Nailsworth we met with a Report at Nailsworth, which was spread about that Country, That George Fox was turned Presbyterian: and that they had prepared a Pulpit for him, and set it in a Yard; and that there would be a Thousand People there the next day, to hear him. I thought it strange, that such a Report should be raised of me; yet as we went further on, from one Friend's House to another, we met with the same. We went by the Yard, where the Pulpit was set up, and saw it; and went on to the Place, where Friends Meeting was to be next day, and there we stay'd that Night. Next day, being the First-day of the Week, we had a very large Meeting, and the Lord's Power and Presence was amongst us. Now the occasion of this strange Report, (according as I was in∣formed) was this: There was one John Fox, a Presbyterian Priest, who used to go about Preaching; and some changing his Name (as was reported) from John to George, gave out, that George Fox had changed his Religion, and was turned from a Quaker to be a Presbyte∣rian, and would Preach at such a Place such a day. This begat so great a Curiosity in the People, that many went thither to hear this Quaker turned Presbyterian; who would not have gone to have heard John Fox himself. By this means it was Reported, they had got to∣gether above a Thousand People. But when they came there, and per∣ceived,
they had a Trick put upon them,1669. Gloucester∣shire. and that that was but a Counterfeit George Fox; and understood withal, that the real George Fox was hard by at Friends Meeting, there came several Hundreds of them to our Meeting, and were Sober and Attentive. I directed them to the Grace of God in themselves, which would Teach them, and bring them Salvation. And when the Meeting was done, some of the People said, They liked George Fox the Quaker's Preaching bet∣ter, than George Fox the Presbyterian's. Thus, by my providential Coming into those parts at that time, was this False Report discovered; and Shame come over them, that were the Contrivers of it. It was not long after this, that this same John Fox was complained of in the House of Commons, for having a Tumultuous Meeting, in which Treasonable words were spoken: Which (according to the best Informa∣tion I could get of it) was thus. This John Fox had formerly been Priest of Mansfield in Wiltshire: and being put out of that place, was afterward permitted by a Common-Prayer-Priest to preach sometimes in his Steeple-House. At length this Presbyterian-Priest, presuming too far upon the Parish Priest's former Grant, began to be more bold, than welcom; and would have preached there, whether the Parish-Priest would or no. This caused a great Bustle and Contest in the Stee∣ple-house between the Two Priests, and their Hearers on either side: in which Contest the Common-Prayer-Book was Cut to pieces, and (as it was said) some Treasonable Words were then spoken by some of the Followers of this John Fox, the Presbyterian-Priest. This was quickly put in the News-Book: and some malicious Presbyterians caused it to be so worded, as if it had proceeded from George Fox the Quaker, when∣as I was above Two hundred Miles from the place, when this Bustle happened. But when I heard it, I soon procured Certificates from some of the Members of the House of Commons; who knew this John Fox, and gave it under their Hands, that it was John Fox, who had formerly been Parson of Mansfield in Wiltshire, that was complained of to the House of Commons, to be the Chief Ring-leader in that Ʋn∣lawful Assembly. And indeed, this John Fox was an Ill Man: for when some, that had been Followers and Hearers of him, came to be Convinced of Truth, and received the Truth in their Inward Parts, and thereupon left following him; he coming to some of their Houses to talk with them about it, and they telling him, He was in the Steps of the False Prophets, preaching for Hire and Filthy Lucre, and was like them, whom Christ cried Wo against, and the Apostles declared against; such as ser∣ved not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies; and telling him, Christ said, Freely ye have received, freely give; and therefore he should not take Money of People for Preaching, especially, now times were so hard. He Replied, God bless Preaching: for that brings in Money, let times go how they will. And fill my Belly with good Victuals; and then call me false Prophet, or what you will, and kick me about the House, when ye have done, if ye will. This Relation I had from a Man and his Wife (who had been formerly his Hearers) whom this John Fox (with others) caused deeply to suffer. For he, and some other Presby∣terian Priests, using to resort to a Widow-Woman's House, who had the Impropriation, and took the Tithes of the Parish, she told them,
There was a Quaker in that Parish, that would not pay her Tithes; and asked Counsel of them, what she should do with him. They advi∣sed her To send Workmen, and cut down, and carry away his Corn: which (according to their Counsel) she did, and thereby Impoverished the Man. But to proceed. — After this Meeting in Gloucestershire was over, we travelled through that County,Bristol. till we came to Bristol; where I met with Margaret Fell, who was come to visit her Daughter Yeomans there. I had seen from the Lord a considerable time before, that I should take Margaret Fell to be my Wife. And when I first mentioned it to her, she felt the Answer of Life from God thereunto. But though the Lord had opened this thing unto me, yet I had not received a Command from the Lord, for the accomplishing of it then. Wherefore I let the thing rest, and went on in the Work and Service of the Lord, as before, according as the Lord led me; travelling up and down in this Nation, and through the Nation of Ireland. But now, after I was come back from Ireland, and was come to Bristol, and found Margaret Fell there, it opened in me from the Lord, that the thing should be now Accomplished. And after we had discoursed the thing together, I told her; 'If she also was satisfied with the Accomplishing of it now, she should first send for her Chil∣dren: 'which she did. And when the rest of her Daughters were come, I asked both them and her Sons in Law, If they had any thing against it, or for it? desiring them to speak: and they all severally expressed their Satisfaction therein. Then I asked Margaret, 'If she had fulfilled and performed her Husband's Will to her Children? She replied, The Children knew that. Whereupon I asked them, Whether, if their Mother Married, they should not lose by it? And I asked Margaret, Whether she had done any thing in lieu of it, which might Answer it to the Children? The Children said, She had an∣swered it to them; and desired me to speak no more of that. I told them, I was plain, and would have all things done plainly: for I sought not any outward Advantage to my self. So after I had Ac∣quainted the Children with it, our Intention of Marriage was laid before Friends, both privately and publickly, to the full Satisfaction of Friends; many of whom gave Testimony thereunto, that it was of God. After∣wards, a Meeting being appointed on purpose for the Accomplishing thereof, in the Publick Meeting-House at Broad-Mead in Bristol, we took each other in Marriage; the Lord Joining us together in the Honoura∣ble Marriage, in the Everlasting Covenant and Immortal Seed of Life. In the Sense whereof living and weighty Testimonies were born there∣unto by Friends, in the Movings of the Heavenly Power, which uni∣ted us together. Then was a Certificate, relating both the Proceedings and the Marriage, openly read, and Signed by the Relations, and by most of the Ancient Friends of that City; besides many other Friends from divers parts of the Nation. After we were Married, we stay'd about a Week in Bristol; and then went into the Country together to Oldstone:Oldstone. where taking our Leaves of each other in the Lord, we parted, betaking our selves each to our several Service; Margaret returning homewards to the North, and I passing on into the Countries, in the Work of the Lord,
as before. I travelled through Wiltshire, Berkshire,1669. Wiltshire. Berkshire. Oxfordshire Bucking∣hamshire. London. Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire, and so to London, visiting Friends: In all which Counties I had many large and precious Meetings. Being in London, it came upon me to write to Friends throughout the Nation, about Putting out poor Children to Trades. Wherefore I sent the following Epistle to the Quarterly Meetings of Friends in all Counties. My Dear Friends, LET every Quarterly Meeting make Inquiry through all the Monthly Meetings, and other Meetings, to know all Friends, that be poor, Widows, or others, that have Children fit to set forth to Ap∣prenticeships; so that once a Quarter you may set forth an Apprentice from your Quarterly Meeting: and so you may set forth four in a Year in each County, as need may be; or more, if there be occasion. And this Apprentice, when he comes out of his Time, may help his Mother or Father, and rear up the Family, that is decayed; and in so doing, all may come to live comfortably, as Men. For being done in your Quarterly Meetings, ye will have knowledge through all the County, in all the Monthly and particular Meetings, of Masters that be fit for them; and of such Trades, as their Parents desire, or you de∣sire, or the Children are most Inclinable too: and so, being placed forth, as you shall order from your Quarterly Meetings, to Friends, they may be trained up in Truth: and by this means in the Wisdom of God, you may preserve Friends Children in the Truth, and enable them to rear up their decayed Families, and be a Strength and Help to them, and Nursers and Preservers of their Relations in their anci∣ent days. And thus also, things being ordered in the Wisdom of God, you will take off a continual Maintenance, and free your selves from much Cumber. For in the Country, ye know, ye may set forth an Apprentice for a little, to several Trades, as Bricklayers or Masons, Carpenters, Wheel-rights, Plough-rights, Taylors, Tanners, Curriers, Black-smiths, Shoomakers, Naylers, Butchers, and several other Trades, that might be named, as Weavers of Linnen and Woollen, Stuffs and Serges. And you may do well, to have a Stock in your Quarterly-Meetings for that purpose: and all that is given by any Friends at their Decease (except it be given to some particular Ʋse, Person or Meeting,) may be brought to the Publick Stock for that same pur∣pose: This will be a way for the preserving of many, that are poor among you; and it will be a way of making up poor Families. In several Counties the same is practised already: and some Quar∣terly Meetings do set forth Two Apprentices; and sometimes they set forth Children of the World, that are laid on the Parish: You may bind them for fewer or more Years, according to their Capacities. In all which things the Wisdom of God will teach you; by which ye may come to help the Children of poor Friends, that they may come to rear up their Families, and preserve them in the Fear of God. So no more, but my Love in the everlasting Seed, by which ye will have Wisdom to order all things to the Glory of God. London, the first of the 11th Month, 1669. G. F.
1669. Essex. Hertford∣shire.I stay'd not long in London: but having visited Friends, and find∣ing things there quiet and well, the Lord's Power being over all, I passed down into Essex, and so into Hertfordshire; where I had many precious Meetings. But before I went out of London, intending to go down, as far as Leicestershire, I writ a Letter to my Wife, to acquaint her therewith; that, if she found it Convenient to her, she might meet me there.Cambridge∣shire. Hunting∣tonshire. Leicester∣shire. From Hertfordshire I turned into Cambridgeshire; thence into Huntingtonshire, and so into Leicestershire: where, instead of Meeting with my Wife, I heard, that she was Haled out of her House, and carried to Lancaster-Prison again, by an Order gotten from the King and Council, to fetch her back to Prison upon the Old Premu∣nire;1670. though she had been discharged from that Imprisonment, by an Order from the King and Council the Year before. Wherefore, having visited Friends,Derbyshire. Warwick∣shire. London. as far as Leicestershire, I returned by Derbyshire into Warwickshire, and so through the Countries that way to London again; having had many large and blessed Meetings in the several Counties I passed through, and had been sweetly refreshed with and amongst Friends in my Travels. As soon as I was got to London, I hast'ned Mary Lower and Sarah Fell (two of my Wife's Daughters) to the King, to acquaint him, how their Mother was dealt with, and see, if they could get a full Discharge for her, that she might enjoy her Estate and Liberty with∣out Molestation. This was somewhat difficult at first to get; but by diligent Attendance on it, they at length obtained it: the King giving Command to one called Sir John Otway, to signifie his Pleasure therein by Letter to the Sheriff, and others concerned therein in the Country. Which Letter Sarah Fell, going down with her Brother and Sister Rous, carried with her to Lancaster; and by them I writ to my Wife, as followeth. My Dear Heart in the Truth and Life, that changeth not. IT was upon me, that Mary Lower and Sarah should go to the King concerning thy Imprisonment; and to Kirby, that the Power of the Lord might appear over them all in thy Deliverance. They went; and then they thought to have come down: but it was upon me to stay them a little longer; that they might follow the Business, till it was Effected: which it now is, and is here sent down. The late Declaration of mine hath been very serviceable, People being gene∣rally satisfied with it. So no more, but my Love in the Holy Seed. G. F. The Declaration here mentioned, was a Printed Sheet, writ upon occasion of a New Persecution stirred up, For by that time I was got back out of Leicestershire to London, a fresh Storm was Risen; oc∣casioned (as it was thought) by that Tumultuous Meeting in a Steeple-house in Wiltshire, or Gloucestershire, mentioned a little before: where a Contest happening between a Presbyterian-Priest, and the Priest of the Parish, with their Hearers on either side, the Common-Prayer-Book
was Cut to pieces, and other great Disorders committed.1670. London. From which (it was said) some Members of Parliament took Advantage, to get that Act passed against Seditious Conventicles: which soon after came forth, and was turned against us; who of all People were free from Sedition and Tumult. Whereupon I writ the Declaration before mentioned; shewing from the Preamble and Terms of the said Act, That we were not such a People, nor our Meetings such Meetings, as were described in that Act. Beside that Declaration, I writ also ano∣ther short Paper, on the occasion of that Act against Meetings; open∣ing our Case to the Magistrates, as followeth: O Friends, Consider this Act, which limits us to Five, that but Five may Meet: Is this To do, as ye would be done by? Would ye be so served your selves? We own Christ Jesus, as well as you, both his Coming, Death and Resurrection; and if we be Con∣trary-minded to you in some things, is not this the Apostle's Exhor∣tation, to Wait, till God hath Revealed it? Doth not he say, What is not of Faith, is Sin? And seeing, we have not Faith in things, which ye would have us to do; would it not be Sin in us, if we should do contrary to our Faith? And why should any Man have Power ver any other Man's Faith, seeing Christ is the Author of it? When the Apostles did preach in the Name of Jesus, and great Mul∣titudes heard them, and the Rulers forbad them to speak any more in that Name; did not they bid them Judge, Whether it were better to obey God or Man? Would not this Act have taken hold of the Twelve Apostles, and Seventy Disciples; for they Met often together? And if there had been an Act or Law made then, That not above Five should have met with Christ; would not that have been an hindring him from Meeting with his Disciples? And do ye think, that he (who is the Wisdom of God) or his Disciples would have obeyed it? If such a Law had been made in the Apostles days, That not above Five might have met together, who had been different-minded from either the Jews, or the Gentiles; Do ye think, the Churches of Christ at Corinth, Philippi, Ephesus, Thessalonica, or the rest of the Gather∣ed Churches would have Obeyed it? O therefore consider! For we are Christians, and partake of the Nature and Life of Christ. And strive not to Limit the Holy One; for God's Power cannot be limited, and is not to be quenched: And do unto all men, as ye would have them do unto you: for that is the Law and the Prophets. This is from those, who wish you all well, and desire your Everlasting Good and Prosperity, who are called Quakers; who seek the Peace and Good of all People, though they do Afflict us, and cause us to suffer. G. F. Now as I had endeavoured to soften the Magistrates, and to take off the Sharpness of their Edge in the Execution of the Act; so it was up∣on me to write a few Lines to Friends, To strengthen and encourage
them to stand fast in their Testimony, and bear, with Christian Patience and Content, the Suffering, that was coming upon them. This I did in the following Epistle: ALL my Dear Friends: Keep in the Faith of God above all out∣ward things, and in his Power, that hath given you Domini∣on over all. The same Power of God is still with you to deliver you, as formerly: for God and his Power is the same, and his Seed is over all, and before all; and will be, when that which makes to suf∣fer, is gone. And so be of good Faith, in that which Changeth not: for whatsoever any doth against the Truth, it will come upon them∣selves, and fall as a Milstone on their Heads. And if so be, that the Lord do suffer you to be Tried, let all be given up: and look at the Lord, and his Power, which is over the whole World; and will be, when the World is gone. And in the Lord's Power and Truth Rejoice, Friends, over that, which makes to suffer, in the Seed, which was, before it was: for the Life, and Truth, and the Power of God is over all. And all keep in that; and if ye do suffer in that, it is to the Lord. Friends, the Lord hath blessed you in Outward Things; and now the Lord may Try you, Whether your Minds be in the Outward Things; or with the Lord, that gave you them? Therefore keep in the Seed, by which all Outward Things were made; and which is over them all. What! shall not I pray, and speak to God, with my Face towards Heavenly Jerusalem, according to my wonted Time? And let not any one's Dalilah shave his Head, lest such lose their Strength; neither Rest in its Lap, lest the Phili∣stines be upon you. For your Rest is in Christ Jesus; therefore Rest not in any thing else. London, the 12th of the 2d Month, 1670. G. F. On the First Day of the Week, next after the Act came in force, I went to the Meeting at Grace-Church-Street,Gracious-Street-Meeting. where I expected, the Storm was most likely to begin. When I came there, I found the Street full of People, and a Guard set to keep Friends out of their Meeting-house. I went thereupon to the other Passage, that goes out of Lombard-Street, and there also I found a Guard; but the Court was full of People, and a Friend was speaking amongst them: But spake not long. And when he had done, I stood up, and was moved to say; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick against that, that pricks thee. Then I shewed, that it is Saul's Na∣ture, that persecutes still; and that they, who persecute Christ in his Members now, where he is made manifest, kick against that which pricks them. That it was the Birth of the Flesh, that persecuted the Birth born of the Spirit: and that it was the Nature of Dogs to tear and devour the Sheep; but that we suffered as Sheep, that did not bite again: for we were a peaceable People, and did love them, that persecuted us. After I had spoken a while to this Effect, the Con∣stable
came, with an Informer and Souldiers;1670. London. Grac. Meet. and as they plucked me down, I said; Blessed are the Peace-makers. The Commander of the Souldiers put me among the Souldiers, and bid them secure me; saying to me, You are the Man I looked for. They took also John Burneyate and another Friend; and had us away first to the Exchange, and afterward towards More fields. As we went along the Streets, the People were very moderate; and some of them laught at the Constable, and told him, We would not run away. The Informer went with us Ʋnknown; till falling into Discourse with one of the Company, he said; It would never be a good World, till all People came to the good Old Religion, that was Two hundred Years ago. Whereupon I asked him, Art thou a Papist? What! a Papist-Informer? for Two hundred years ago there was no other Religion, but that of the Papists. He saw, he had ensna∣red himself; and was Vexed at it: for as he went along the Streets, I spake often to him; and manifested, what he was. When we were come to the Mayor's House, and were in the Court yard, several of the People, that stood about, asked me; How, and for what I was taken? I desired them to Ask the Informer; and also know, what his Name was: but he refused to tell his Name. Whereupon one of the Mayor's Officers, looking out at a Window, told him; He should tell his Name, before he went away: for the Lord Mayor (he said) would know, by what Authority he intruded himself with Souldiers into the Execution of those Laws, which belonged to the Civil Magistrate to Execute, and not to the Military. After this he was restless, and eager to be gone; and went to the Porter to be let out. One of the Officers called to him, say∣ing, Have you brought People here to Inform against, and now will you go away, before my Lord Mayor comes? Some called to the Porter, not to let him out: Whereupon he forcibly pulled open the Door, and slipt out. No sooner was he come out into the Street, but the People gave a Shout, that made the Street ring again; Crying out, A Papist-In∣former! A Papist-Informer! We desired the Constable and Souldiers to go forth, and Rescue him out of the Peoples Hands; fearing, lest they should have done him a Mischief. They went, and brought him into the Mayor's Entry; where we staid a while: But when he went out again, the People received him with such another Shout. Where∣upon the Souldiers were fain to go, and Rescue him once more: and then they had him into a House in an Alley; where they perswaded him to Change his Perriwig, and so he got away unknown. When the Mayor came home, we were brought into the Room, where he was: and some of his Officers would have taken off our Hats; which he perceiving, called to them, and bid them Let us alone, and not meddle with our Hats: for (said he) they are not yet brought before me in Judicature. So we stood by, while he Examined some Presby∣terian- and Baptist-Teachers; with whom he was somewhat sharp, and Convicted them. After he had done with them, I was brought up to the Table, where he sate; and then the Officers took off my Hat. And the Mayor said mildly to me: Mr. Fox, You are an Eminent Man amongst those of your Profession; pray, will you be Instrumental, to dis∣suade them from meeting in such great Numbers: for (said he) seeing Christ hath promised, that Where two or three are met in his Name, he will be in the midst of them; and the King and Parliament are graci∣ously
pleased to allow of Four to meet together to Worship God:1670. London. At Mayor's Why will not you be content to partake both of Christ's Promise to Two or Three, and the King's Indulgence to Four? I answered to this purpose: That Christ's Promise was not to discourage many from Meeting toge∣ther in his Name; but to encourage the Few, that the fewest might not forbear to Meet, because of their Fewness. But if Christ hath promised to manifest his Presence in the midst of so small an Assembly, where but Two or Three were gathered in his Name; how much more would his Presence abound, where Two or Three hundred are gathered in his Name. I wisht him to consider, Whether this Act would not have taken hold of Christ, with his Twelve Apostles and 70 Disciples (if it had been in their time) who used to Meet often together; and that with great Numbers? However I told him, this Act did not concern Ʋs; for it was made against Seditious Meetings, of such as Met, under Colour and Pretence of Religion, to contrive Insurrections, as (the Act says) late Experience had shewen; but we had been suffi∣ciently Tried and Proved, and always found peaceable: And therefore he should do well, to put a difference between the Innocent, and the Guilty. He said, The Act was made against Meetings, and a Worship not according to the Liturgy. I told him, [According to] was not the very same thing: and I askt him, 'Whether the Liturgy was ac∣cording to the Scriptures? And whether we might not read Scrip∣tures, and speak Scriptures? He said, Yes. I told him, 'This Act took hold only of such, as did Meet to plot and contrive Insurrections, as late Experience had shewen: but they had never Experienced that by us. Because Thieves are sometimes on the Road, must not Ho∣nest Men travel therefore? And because Plotters and Contrivers have Met to do Mischief, must not an honest, peaceable People Meet to do Good? If we had been a People, that did Meet to Plot and Contrive In∣surrections, &c. we might have drawn our selves into Fours; for Four might do more Mischief in Plotting, than if there were Four Hundred; because Four might speak out their Minds more freely one to another, than Four Hundred could. Therefore we being Inno∣cent, and not the People this Act concerns; we keep our Meetings, as we used to do: and, I said, I believed, that he knew in his Consci∣ence, we were Innocent. After this, and some more Discourse, he took our Names, and the places, where we lodged; and at length, inasmuch as the Informer was gone, set us at Liberty. Being set at Liberty, the Friends, that were with me, asked me,Grac. Meet. Whether I would go? I told them, To Gracious-Street-Meet∣ing again, if it were not over. When we came there, the People were generally gone; only some few stood at the Gate. We went into Gerrard Roberts his House; and from thence I sent out to know, how the other Meetings in the City were? And I understood, that at some of the Meeting-places Friends were kept out; and at others they were taken, but set at Liberty again a few days after. A glorious time it was; for the Lord's Power came over all, and his Everlasting Truth got Renown. For as fast as some, that were speaking, were taken down, others were moved of the Lord to stand up and speak; to the admira∣tion of the People: and the more, because many Baptists and other Sectaries left their Publick Meetings, and came to see, how the Quakers
would stand? As for the Informer aforesaid, he was so frighted,1670. London. that there durst hardly any Informer appear publickly again in London for some time after. But the Mayor, whose Name was Samuel Starling, though he carried himself smoothly towards us, proved afterwards a very great Persecutor of our Friends; many of whom he cast into Prison, as may be seen in the Books of the Trials of W. Penn, W. Mead, and others at the Old Baily this Year. After some time, the Heat of Persecution in the City began to abate, and Meetings were quieter there: and I being then clear of the City, went to visit Friends in the Country; having several Meet∣ings, as I went, in Middlesex, Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire,Middlesez. Bucking∣hamshire. Oxfordshire Reading. which were quiet: though in some places there was much Threatning. At Reading most of the Friends were in Prison; and I went thither to Visit them: And when I had been a while with them, the Friends that were Prisoners, gathered together, and several other Persons came in; so that I had a fine Opportunity amongst them, and declared the Word of Life, encouraging them in the Truth: and they were Re∣freshed in feeling the Presence and Power of the Lord amongst them. When the Meeting was ended, the Jailer understanding, that I was there, the Friends were troubled, and concerned how to get me out safe again: for they feared, lest he should stop me. But after I had staid a while, and Eaten with them, I went down the Stairs: and the Jailer being at the Door, I put my hand in my Pocket, which he had such an Eye to, hoping to get something of me; that he asked me no Question. So I gave him something, and bad him, Be kind and civil to my Friends in Prison, whom I came to Visit: And he let me pass out without Interruption. But soon after Isaac Pennington coming to Visit them, he stopt him; and caused him to be made a Prisoner. Next Morning I rid about Fourteen Miles to a Meeting,Hampshire. Baghurst. at a place called Baghurst in Hampshire; Thomas Brigges being with me. When we came into the Parish, some sober People came to us, and told us, That the Priest of the Town was an Envious Man, and did Threaten us. We went on to the Meeting, which was large: and after some time Thomas Brigges stood up and spake. Now it seems, the Priest had got a Warrant, and sent the Constables and other Officers with it: And they came to the House, and stay'd a while, and then went away again; but did not come into the Meeting: So we in the Meeting did not know of their being there. But after Thomas Brigges had done speaking. I was moved of the Lord to stand up, and declared the Word of Life to the People; and a precious Meeting we had. When I had done speaking, and the Meeting was ended and risen, I heard a great Clutter in the Yard: and when we came forth, the Man of the House told us, That the Officers had been in the House before, but did not come into the Meeting; but went away without doing any thing. And that now the Priest in a great Rage had sent them again, and his own Ser∣vant with them. But the Meeting being ended before they came, they could do nothing now: And thus the good Providence of the Lord preserved us from the Wicked Design of the Envious Priest, and out of his Snare; but the Priest was in a great Rage.
1670. Barkshire. Surrey. Guilford.From thence We went to a Friend's House on the Edge of Bark∣shire, where several Friends came to visit us. And afterwards we passed into Surrey, visiting Friends, and had many precious Meetings: till we came to Stephen Smiths near Guilford, where great Persecution had been; and very much Goods had been taken away from Friends thereabouts for their Meetings, and under great Threatnings they were at that time: yet we had several blessed Meetings there, and therea∣bouts; and the Lord's Power was over all, in and by which we were preserved. Sussex.We went out of Surrey into Sussex, by Richard Baxe's, where we had a large, precious Meeting, and quiet; though the Constables had given out Threatnings before. Afterwards I had many more Meetings up and down in that County: and though there were some Threatnings, yet Meetings were peaceable; and Friends were refreshed, and established upon the Foundation of God, that stands sure. When I had throughly visited Sussex,Kent. I went into Kent; and had many glorious and precious Meetings in several parts of that County. I went up into East-Kent to a Meeting near Deal,Deal. which was very large: and returning from thence to Canterbury,Canterbu∣ry. Isle of Sheppy. visited Friends there: and then passed into the Isle of Sheppy, where I staid Two or Three Days; and thither came Alexander Parker, George Whitehead and John Rouse to me. The next day after they came, finding my Service for the Lord fi∣nished there, we passed away towards Rochester. And on the way, as I was walking down an Hill, a great Weight and Oppression fell upon my Spirit: I got on my Horse again; but the Weight remained so hea∣vy on me, that I was hardly able to Ride. At length we came to Rochester,Rochester. but I was much spent; being so extreamly loaden and bur∣dened with the World's Spirits, that my Life was oppressed under them. I got with difficulty to Graves-End,Gravesend and lay at an Inn there; but could hardly either Eat or Sleep. The next day John Rouse and Alexander Parker went for London; and John Stubbs being come to me, he and I went over the Ferry into Essex.Essex. We came to a place called Horne-Church,Horne-Church. Stratford. where was a Meeting on the First-Day: And after the Meet∣ing I rode with great Ʋneasiness to Stratford, Three Miles from London, to a Friend's House there, whose Name was Williams; and who had formerly been a Captain. Here I lay exceeding Weak, and at last lost both my Hearing and my Sight; so that I could neither hear nor see. Several Friends came thither to me from London: and I told them; That I should be as a Sign, to such as would not see, and such as would not hear the Truth. In this Condition I continued a pretty while, and several People came about me; and though I could not see their Persons, yet I felt and discerned their Spirits, who of them was honest-hearted, and who was not. Divers Friends that practised Phy∣sick, came to see me, and would have given me Physick; but I was not to meddle with any of their Medicines: For I was sensible, I had a Travel to go through; and therefore spake to Friends, to let none but solid, weighty Friends be about me. And under great Sufferings and Groanings, and Travels, and Sorrows, and Oppressions I lay for se∣veral Weeks; whereby I was brought so Low and Weak in Body, that few thought, I could have lived: and some, that were with me, went away, saying, They would not see me die; and it was reported both in London,
and in the Country, that I was deceased:1670. Stratford. But I felt the Lord's Power inwardly supporting me. And when they, that were about me, had given me up to die, I spake to them, to get a Coach to carry me to Gerrard Roberts's, about Twelve Miles off: For I found, it was my place, to go thither. I had now Recovered a little Glimmering Sight, so that I could discern the People and Fields, as I went; and that was all. When I came to Gerrard's, he was very Weak; and I was moved to speak to him, and encourage him. And after I had staid about Three Weeks there, it was with me to go to Enfield: Friends were afraid of my Removing: but I told them, I might safely go. And when I had taken my leave of Gerrard, and was come to Enfield,Enfield. I went first to visit Amor Stoddart; who lay there very Weak, and almost Speechless. I was moved to tell him, He had been faithful as a Man, and faithful to God; and that the Immortal Seed of Life was his Crown. And with many more Words I was moved to speak to him; though I my self was then so Weak, I was hardly able to stand: and within a few days after Amor died. I went to the Widow Dry's at Enfield, and there I lay all that Winter; warring in Spirit with the Evil Spirits of the World, that Warred against Truth and Friends. For there were great Persecutions at this time: some Meeting-houses were pluck'd down, and many were broken up by Souldiers; who would come, sometimes a Troop of Horse, or a Company of Foot, and they would break their Swords, Carbines, Muskets and Pikes with beating Friends: and many Friends they wounded, so that their Blood lay in the Streets. Amongst others, that were Active in this Cruel Persecution at London, my Old Adver∣sary Col. Kirby was one; who with a Company of Foot went to break up several Meetings: and he would often Inquire for me at the Meet∣ings, he brake up. But one time, as he went over the Water to Horsly-Down, there happening some Scuffle between some of his Souldiers, and some of the Watermen, he bid his Men, Fire at them; and they did so, and Killed some. But I was under great Sufferings at this time, beyond what I have words to declare. For I was brought into the Deep, and saw all the Religions of the World, and People that lived in them, and the Priests that held them up; who were as a Company of Men-Eaters, eating up the People like Bread, and gnawing the Flesh from off their Bones. But as for True Religion and Worship, and Ministers of God, Alack! I saw, there was none amongst those of the World, that pretended to it. For they, that pretended to be the Church, were but a Company of Men-Eaters, Men of Cruel Visages, and of long Teeth; who, though they had cried against the Men-Eaters in America, yet I saw, they were in the same Nature. And as the great professing Jews did eat up God's People, like Bread, and the False Prophets and Priests then preached Peace to People, so long as they put into their Mouths and fed them; but if they fed them not, they prepared War against them: they ate their Flesh off their Bones, and chopped them for the Caldron; so these, that profess themselves Christians now, (both Priests and Professors) and were not in the same Power and Spirit, that Christ and the Holy Prophets and Apostles were in, were in the same Nature, that the old, professing Jews were in, and were Men-Eaters, as well as they. These stirred up Persecution, and set the wicked Informers on work; so that a
Friend could hardly speak a few Words in a private Family,1670. Enfield. before they sate down to eat Meat, but some were ready to Inform against them. A particular Instance of which I have heard, as followeth. At Droitwich Jo. Cartwright came to a Friend's House: and being moved of the Lord to speak a few Words, before he sate down to Sup∣per; there came an Informer, and stood heark'ning under the Window. And when he had heard the Friend speak, hoping to get some Gain to himself, he went and Informed; and got a Warrant to Distrain the Friend's Goods, under pretence, that there was a Meeting at his House: Whereas there was none in the House at that time, when the Friend spake before Supper, but himself, the Man of the House, and his Wife, and their Maid-Servant. But this Evil-minded man, as he came back with his Warrant in the Night,Example. fell off of his Horse, and brake his Neck. So there was a Wretched End of a Wicked Informer; who hoped to have enriched himself by spoiling Friends: but the Lord prevented him, and Cut him off in his Wickedness, and spoiled him. Now, though it was a Cruel, Bloody, Persecuting Time, yet the Lord's Power went over all, and his Everlasting Seed prevailed; and Friends were made to stand firm and faithful in the Lord's Power: And some of the Sober People of the World would say, If Friends did not stand, the Nation would run into Debauchery. And though by reason of my Weakness, I could not travel about amongst Friends, as I used to do; yet in the Motion of Life I sent the following Lines, as an Encouraging Testimony, amongst them. My Dear Friends, THE Seed is above all, in it Walk; in which ye all have Life. Be not amazed at the Weather: for always the Just suffered by the Ʋnjust; but the Just had the Dominion. And all along ye may see, by Faith the Mountains were subdued; and the Rage of the Wicked, and his Fiery Darts were quenched. And though the Waves and Storms be high, yet your Faith will keep you to Swim above them: for they are but for a Time; and the Truth is with∣out Time. Therefore keep on the Mountain of Holiness, ye who are led to it by the Light; where nothing shall hurt. And do not think, that any thing will outlast the Truth, which standeth sure; and is over that, which is out of the Truth: for the Good will Overcome the Evil, and the Light Darkness, and the Life Death, and Vertue Vice, and Righteousness Ʋnrighteousness. The False Prophet cannot overcome the True: but the True Prophet, Christ, will overcome all the False. So be Faithful, and live in that, which doth not think the time long. G. F.
But after some time it pleased the Lord to allay the Heat of this Violent Persecution: and I felt in Spirit an overcoming of the Spirits of those Men-Eaters, that had stirred it up, and carried it on to that Height of Cruelty; though I was outwardly very Weak. And I plainly felt, and those Friends that were with me, and that came to Visit me, saw and took notice, that as the Persecution Ceased, I came from under the Travels and Sufferings, that had lain with such Weight upon me: So that towards the Spring I began to Recover, and to walk up and down, beyond the Expectation of many; who did not think, I could ever have gone abroad again, I had been so exceeding Weak through the Travel and Exercise, that was upon my Spirit. Whilst I was under this Spiritual Travel and Suffering, the State of the City New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven, was open∣ed to me; which some Carnal-minded People had looked upon to be like an outward City or Town, that had dropt out of the Elements: But I saw the Beauty and Glory of it, the Length, the Breadth, and the Height thereof, all in Compleat Proportion. And I saw, that all, who are within the Light of Christ, and in his Faith, which he is the Author of, and in the Spirit, the Holy Ghost, which Christ, and the Holy Prophets and Apostles were in, and within the Grace and Truth, and within the Power of God (that was before the Devil was) which was the Walls of the City; such are within the City, such are Members of this City, and have right to Eat of the Tree of Life, which yields her Fruit every Month, and whose Leaves are for the healing of the Na∣tions. But they that are out of the Grace, out of the Truth, out of the Light, Spirit and Power of God; such as Resist the Holy Ghost, quench, vex and grieve the Spirit of God, and hate the Light, and turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, and do Despight to the Spirit of Grace; such as have erred from the Faith, and made Ship-wrack of it, and of a Good Conscience, and abuse the Power of God, and despise Prophesying, Revelation and Inspiration; these are the Dogs and Ʋn∣believers, that are without the City: And these make up the great City Babylon, Confusion, and her Cage, the Power of Darkness; and the Evil Spirit of Error surround and cover them over. And in this great City Babylon are the False Prophets, in the false Power and false Spirit, and the Beast in the Dragon's Power, and the Whore, that is gone a Whoring from the Spirit of God, and from Christ, her Husband: But the Lord's Power is over all this Power of Darkness, Cage, Whore, Beast, Dragon, False Prophets and their Worshippers, who are for the Lake, which burns with Fire. Many things more did I see concern∣ing the Heavenly City, the New Jerusalem, which are hard to be uttered; and would be hard to be received. But in short, This Holy City is within the Light: and all that are within the Light, are within the City; the Gates whereof stand open all the Day, (for there is no Night there) that all may come in: and Christ's Blood being shed for every Man, and he tasted Death for every Man, and enlightneth eve∣ry Man that cometh into the World, and his Grace, that brings Salva∣tion, having appeared to all Men, there is no Place or Language, but there his Voice may be heard. The Christians in the Primitive Times were called by Christ A City set upon an Hill; and they were also
called The Light of the World, and The Salt of the Earth: But when the Christians lost the Light, and Salt, and Power of God, then they came to be trodden under foot, like unsavoury Salt. Even as the Jews, who while they kept the Law of God, were kept above all Nations; but when they turned their Backs on God and his Law, then were they trodden under foot of other Nations. So Adam and Eve, while they obeyed God, were kept in his Image, and in the Paradise of God, in Dominion over all the Works of God's Hands: but when they disobeyed God, they lost the Image of God, the Righteousness and the Holiness, in which they were made; they lost their Dominion, and were driven out of Paradise: and so fell under the dark Power of Satan, and came under the Chains of Darkness. But the Promise of God was, That the Seed of the Woman, Christ Jesus, should bruise the Serpents Head, should break his Power and Authority, which had led into Captivity, and had held Man in it. So Christ, who is the First and Last, sets Man free, and is the Resurrection of the Just and Ʋnjust, the Judge of the Quick and Dead; and they that are in him, are invested with everlasting Rest and Peace, out of all the Labours, and Travels, and Miseries of Adam in the Fall. So he is sufficient, and of Ability to Restore Man up into the State, that Man was in before he fell; and not into that State only, but up into that State also, that never fell, even to him∣self. I had also in this time a great Exercise and Travel of Spirit upon me, concerning the Powers and Rulers of these Nations, from the sense I had of the many tender Visitations and faithful Warnings, that had been given them; and of their great Abuse thereof: who had re∣fused to hear, and had rejected the Counsel of the Lord. And though I knew, Friends would be Clear of their Blood; yet I could not but Mourn over them, and gave forth these few Lines following concern∣ing them: WE have given them a Visitation, and have faithfully Warned them; and have declared to them our Innocency and Ʋp∣rightness, and that we never did any Hurt to the King, nor to any of his People. We have nothing in our Hearts, but Love and Good∣will to him and his People; and desire their Eternal Welfare. But if they will not hear, then the Day of Judgment and of Sorrow, of Torment and Misery, and sudden Destruction will come from the Lord upon them. that have been the Cause of the Sufferings of many Thousands simple, innocent, harmless People, that have done them no hurt, nor have had any Ill Will towards him or them; but have de∣sired their Eternal Good, for the Eternal Truth's sake: Destruction will come upon them, that turn the Sword backward. Therefore do not blind your Eyes; the Lord will bring swift Destruction and Misery upon you: Surely, he will do it, and will relieve his Innocent People; who have groaned for Deliverance from under your Oppres∣sion, and have also groaned for your Deliverance out of Wickedness, Blessed be the Lord God, that he hath a People in this Nation, that seeks the Good of all Men upon the Face of the Earth: For we have the Mind of the Lord Jesus Christ, that desires not the Death of a
Sinner; but the Salvation and Good of all: Blessed be the Name of the Lord our God for ever. G. F. While I continued at Enfield, a sense came upon me of an Hurt, that sometimes hap'ned, by Persons coming under the Profession of Truth out of one Country into another, to take an Husband or Wife amongst Friends, where they were Strangers; and it was not known, whether they were Clear and Orderly, or no. And it Opened in me to recommend the following Method unto Friends, for preventing such Inconveniences: Whereupon I writ the following Lines. ALL Friends, that do Marry, whether they be Men or Women, if they come out of another Nation, Island, Plantation or Coun∣ty, let them bring a Certificate from the Men's-Meeting of that Coun∣ty, Nation, Island or Plantation, from which they come, to the Men's Meeting, where they do propound their Intention of Marriage: for the Men's-Meeting being made up of the Faithful, this will stop all bad and raw Spirits from Roving up and down. And then when any come with a Certificate, or Letter of Recommendation from one Men's-Meeting to another, one is refreshed by another; and can set their Hands and Hearts to the thing: and this will take away a great deal of Trouble. And then, what ye have to say to them in the Power of God, in Admonishing and Instructing them, ye are left to the Power and Spirit of God to do it; and to let them know the Duty of Marriage, and what it is: that there may be an Ʋnity and a Concord in the Spirit, and Power, and Light and Wisdom of God, throughout all the Men's-Meetings in the whole World, in One, in the Life. Let Copies of this be sent to every County, and Nation, and Island, where Friends are; that so all things may be kept holy and pure, and righteous in Ʋnity and Peace; and God over all may be glorified among you, his Lot, his People and Inheritance, who are his Adopted Sons and Daughters, and Heirs of his Life. So no more, but my Love in that which changeth not. The 14th of the First Month, 1670/1. G. F. When I had recovered so much Strength, that I could Walk a little up and down, I went from Enfield to Gerrard Roberts's again; and from thence to the Womens School at Shacklewell, and so to London,Shackle∣well. London. Grac. Meet. to the Meeting at Gracious-Street: where though I was yet but Weak, yet the Lord's Power upheld and enabled me, to Declare his Eternal Word of Life. And about this time I was moved to pray to the Lord, as fol∣loweth:
O Lord God Almighty!1670. London. Prosper Truth, and Preserve Justice and Equity in the Land, and bring down all Injustice and Iniquity, Oppression and Falshood, and Cruelty, and Ʋnmerci∣fulness in the Land; and that Mercy and Righ∣teousness may flourish! And, O Lord God! Establish and set up Verity, and Preserve it in the Land: And bring down in the Land all Debauchery, and Vice, and Whoredoms, and Fornication, and this Raping Spi∣rit, which causeth and leadeth People to have no Esteem of Thee, O God! nor their own Souls or Bodies, nor of Christianity, Modesty, or Hu∣manity. And, O Lord! Put it in the Magistrates Hearts, to bring down all this Ʋngodliness, and Violence, and Cruelty, Prophaness, Cursing and Swearing; and to put down all these Whore-houses and Play-houses, which do Corrupt Youth and Peo∣ple, and lead them from the Kingdom of God, where no Ʋnclean Thing can Enter, neither shall come: but such Works lead People to Hell. And the Lord in Mercy bring down all these things in the Nation, to stop thy Wrath, O God! from coming on the Land. This Prayer was writ the 17th Day at Night, of the 2d Month, 1671. G. F. I mentioned before, that upon the Notice I received of my Wife's being had to Prison again, I sent two of her Daughters to the King; and they procured his Order to the Sheriff of Lancashire for her Dis∣charge. But though I expected, she would have been set at Liberty
thereby;1671. London. yet this Violent Storm of Persecution coming suddenly on upon it, the Persecutors there did not Release her, but found means to hold her still in Prison. But now the Persecution a little ceasing, I was moved to speak to Martha Fisher, and another Woman-Friend, to go to the King about her Liberty. They went in the Faith, and in the Lord's Power; and the Lord gave them Favour with the King, so that he granted a Discharge under the Broad-Seal, to Clear both her and her Estate, after she had been Ten Years a Prisoner, and Premuni∣red: The like whereof was scarce to be heard in England. I sent down the Discharge forthwith by a Friend: by whom also I writ to her, both to Inform her, how to get it delivered to the Justices; and also to Ac∣quaint her, that it was upon me from the Lord, to go beyond the Seas, to visit the Plantations in America: and therefore desired her to ha∣sten up to London, as soon as she could conveniently, after she had ob∣tained her Liberty; because the Ship was then fitting for the Voyage. In the mean time I got down to Kingston,Kingston. and staid at John Rous his House, till my Wife came up: and then I began to prepare for the Voyage. But the Yearly Meeting being near at hand,London-Yea. Meet. I tarried till that was over. A very large Meeting it was; for many Friends came up to it from all parts of the Nation, and a very precious Meeting it was; for the Lord's Power was over all, and his glorious, everlastingly-re∣nowned Seed of Life was exalted above all. Now after this Meeting was over, and I had finished my Services for the Lord here in England, the Ship also, and the Friends that intended to go with me, being ready, I went down to Graves-end on the 12th day of the Sixth Month; my Wife, and several Friends, accompanying me to the Downs. We went from Wapping in a Barge to the Ship,Wapping. which lay a little below Graves-end; and there we found the Friends,Gravesend. that were bound for the Voyage with me, who went down to the Ship the Night before. Their Names were, Thomas Brigges, William Edmundson, John Rouse, John Stubbs, Solomon Eccles, James Lancaster, John Cartwright, Robert Widders, George Pattison, John Hull, Eliza∣beth Hooton, and Eliz. Miers. The Vessel we were to go in, was a Yatch; and it was called The Industry: the Master's Name was Tho∣mas Forster; and the number of Passengers about Fifty. I lay that Night on Board; but most of the Friends lay at Graves end. Early next morning the Passengers, and those Friends, that intended to ac∣company us to the Downs, being come on Board, we took our Leave in great Tenderness of those Friends, that came with us to Graves-End only, and were to return from thence; and set Sail about the Sixth Hour in the Morning, for the Downs: and having a Fair Wind, we Out-sailed all the Ships, that were outward bound;The Downs and got thither by the Evening. Some of us went a-shore that Night, and lodged at Deal; where we understood,Deal. that an Officer had Order from the Governour, to take our Names in Writing: which he did the next Morning; though we told him, they had been taken at Graves-End. In the Afternoon, the Wind serving, I took my leave of my Wife, and the other Friends, (both that came down from London with us, and that came from Dover, and other parts of the Country to visit us;) and went on Board. But before we could set Sail,The Downs there being two of the King's Frigats riding in the Downs, the Captain of one of them sent his Press-master on Board us, who took off Three of our Sea-men. This had
certainly delayed,1671. The Downs if not wholly lost our Voyage, had not the Captain of the other Frigat, being Informed of the Leakiness of our Vessel, and Length of our Voyage, in Compassion and much Civility spared us Two of his own Men. And before this was over, an Officer of the Custom-house came on Board us, to peruse Pacquets, and get Fees: So that what with the one and the other, we were kept from Sailing, till about Sun-set; during which Stop a very considerable number of Merchant-Men outward bound, were got several Leagues before us. But being now Clear,At Sea. we set Sail in the Evening; and by next Morning overtook part of that Fleet about the height of Dover. We soon reach'd the rest; and in a little time left them all behind us; for our Yatch was counted a very swift Sailer. But she was very Leaky; so that the Sea-men, and some of the Passengers did for the most part Pump Day and Night. One day they observed, that in Two Hours time she suck't in Sixteen Inches of Water in the Well. When we had been about Three Weeks at Sea, one Afternoon we espied a Vessel about four Leagues a-stern of us. Our Master said, It was a Sally-man of War; and he seemed to give us Chase. Our Master said, Come, let us go to Supper; and when it grows dark, we shall lose him: But this he spake to please and pacifie the Passengers, some of whom began to be very apprehensive of the Danger. But Friends were well satisfied in themselves, having Faith in God, and no Fear upon their Spirits. When the Sun was gone down, I saw the Ship out of my Cabbin; and I saw, she made towards us. When it grew dark, we altered our Course to miss her: but she altered also, and gained upon us. At Night the Master and others came into my Cabbin, and asked me, What they should do? I told them, 'I was no Mariner: and I asked them, 'What they thought was best to do? They said, There were but two Ways, either to Outrun him; or Tack about, and hold the same Course we were going before. I told them, If he were a Thief, they might be sure, he would Tack about too: And as for Outrunning him, it was to no purpose to talk of that; for they saw, he Sailed faster than we. Then they asked me again, What they should do? for (they said) if the Mariners had taken Paul's Counsel, they had not come to the Damage they did. I told them, It was a Trial of Faith; and therefore the Lord was to be Waited on for Counsel. So retiring in Spirit, the Lord shewed me, That his Life and Power was placed be∣tween us, and the Ship, that pursued us. I told this to the Master and the rest; and that the best way was to Tack about, and steer our Right Course. I wished them also to put out all their Candles, but that they steered by; and to speak to all the Passengers to be still and quiet. About the 11th hour in the Night the Watch called, and said; They were just upon us. That disquieted some of the Passengers: whereupon I sate up in my Cabbin; and looking through the Port∣hole, the Moon being not quite down, I saw them very near us. I was getting up to go out of the Cabbin: but remembring the Word of the Lord, That his Life and Power was placed between us, and them; I lay down again. The Master, and some of the Sea-men came again, and asked me; If they might not steer such a Point? I told them, They might do as they would. By this time the Moon was gone quite down; and a fresh Gale arose, and the Lord hid us from them: and we sailed briskly on, and saw them no more. The next day, being
the First-Day of the Week,1671. At Sea. we had a publick Meeting in the Ship (as we usually had on that Day throughout the Voyage;) and the Lord's Presence was greatly among us. And I desired the People To mind the Mercies of the Lord, who had delivered them: for they might have been all in the Turks Hands by that time, had not the Lord's Hand saved them. About a Week after, the Master and some of the Sea∣men endeavoured to persuade the Passengers, That it was not a Turkish Pirate, that chased us; but a Merchant-man going to the Canaries. But when I heard of it, I asked them, Why then did they speak so to me? and why did they trouble the Passengers? And why did they Tack about from him, and alter their Course? And I told them, They should take heed of slighting the Mercies of God. Afterwards, while we were at Barbados, there came in a Merchant from Sally, and told the People;☜ That one of the Sally-men of War saw a Monstrous Yatch at Sea, the greatest that ever he saw, and had her in Chase, and was just upon her; but that there was a Spirit in her, that he could not take. This did Confirm us in the Belief, that it was a Sally-Man we saw make after us; and that it was the Lord, that de∣livered us out of his Hands. I was not Sea-sick during the Voyage, as many of the Friends and other Passengers were: But the many Hurts and Bruises I had for∣merly received, and the Griefs and Infirmities I had contracted in England by extream Cold and Hardships, that I had under∣gone in many long and sore Imprisonments, returned upon me, now that I came to Sea; so that I was very Ill in my Stomach, and full of Violent Pains in my Bones and Limbs. This was, after I had been at Sea about a Month: for during the space of about Three Weeks, after I came first to Sea, I sweat abundantly, chiefly my Head; and my Body brake out into Pimples, and my Legs and Feet swelled extreamly, so that my Stockings and Slippers could not be drawn on without Diffi∣culty and great Pain. Then on a sudden the Sweating ceased. So that when I came into the hot Climate, where others Sweat most freely, I could not Sweat at all; but my Flesh was hot, dry and burning: And that which before brake out on my Body into Pimples, struck in again, and struck to my Stomach and Heart; so that I was very Ill and Weak beyond Expression. Thus I continued during the rest of the Voyage, which was about a Month: for we were Seven Weeks and some odd Days at Sea. On the Third of the Eighth Month, early in the Morning,BARBA∣DOS. we dis∣covered the Island of Barbados; but it was between Nine and Ten at Night, e're we came to Anchor in Carlisle-Bay. We got on Shore,Carlisle-Bay. as soon as we could; and I with some others walked to a Friend's House, a Merchant, whose Name was Richard Forstall,R. Forstall. above a Quarter of a Mile from the Bridge. But being very Ill and Weak, I was so tired with that little Walk, that I was in a manner quite spent, by that time I got thither. There I abode very Ill for several days; and was so far from Sweating, though in that hot Climate, that although they several times gave me things to make me Sweat, yet they could not bring me to Sweat: but what they gave me, did rather parch and dry up my Body; and made me probably worse, than otherwise I might have been. Thus I continued for about Three Weeks, after I Landed,
having very much Pain in my Bones,1671. Barbados. Joints and whole Body; so that I could hardly get any Rest: yet notwithstanding I was pretty Cheary, and my Spirit kept above it all. Neither did my Ilness take me off from the Service of Truth; but both while I was at Sea, and after I came to Barbados, before I was able to Travel about, I gave forth se∣veral Papers, (having a Friend to write for me;) some of which I sent by the first Conveyance for England, to be Printed. After I had rested three or four Days at Richard Forstall's, where many Friends came to visit me, John Rous, having borrowed a Coach of one of his Acquaintance there (called Colonel Chamberlain) came to fetch me in it to his Father Thomas Rous's House:Tho. Rous. But it was late, e're we could get thither; and little or no Rest could I take that Night. A few days after that, Colonel Chamberlain, who had so kindly lent his Coach, came thither to give me a Visit; and carried himself very courteously towards me. Soon after I came into the Island, I was Informed of a remarkable Passage, wherein the Justice of God did eminently appear: It was thus.Example. There was a Young-Man of Barbados, whose Name was John Drakes (a Person of some Note in the World's Account, but a Com∣mon Swearer, and a bad Man;) who having been in England, and at London, had a mind to Marry a Young Maid, that was a Friend's Daughter, left by her Mother very Young, and with a Considerable Portion, to the Care and Government of several Friends, whereof I was one. He made his Application to me, that he might have my Consent to Marry this Young Maid. I told him, I was one of her Overseers Appointed by her Mother, (who was a Widow) to take Care of her; that if her Mother had intended her for a Match to any Man of the World, she would have disposed her accordingly: but she Committed her to Ʋs, that she might be Trained up in the Fear of the Lord; and therefore I should betray the Trust reposed in me, if I should consent, that he, who was out of the Fear of God, should Marry her: which I would not do. When he saw, that he could not obtain, he returned to Barbados with great Offence of Mind against me; but without just Cause. Afterwards, when he heard, I was coming to Barbados, he swore desperately, and threatned, That, if he could possibly procure it, he would have me burned to Death, when I came there. Which a Friend hearing, asked him; What I had done to him, that he was so violent against me? He would not Answer, but said again; I'll have him burnt. Whereupon the Friend replied, Do not march on too furiously, lest thou come too soon to thy Journey's End. About ten days after this, he was struck with a Violent Burning Fe∣ver, of which he died; and by which his Body was so scorched, that the People took notice of it, and said: It was as black, as a Coal. And three days before I landed, his Body was laid in the Dust; and it was taken notice of, as a sad Example. While I continued thus Weak, that I could not go abroad to Meet∣ings; the other Friends, that came over with me, bestirred themselves in the Lord's Work: for the next day but one, after we came on Shore, they had a great Meeting at the Bridge,Bridge. and after that several Meetings in several parts of the Island: which alarmed the People of all sorts, so that many came to our Meetings; and some of the Chiefest Rank.
For they had got my Name, understanding I was come upon the Island, and expected to have seen me at those Meetings; not knowing, that I was Weak, and unable to go abroad. And indeed, my Weakness continued the longer on me, by reason, that my Spirit was much pres∣sed down at the first, with the Filth and Dirt, and Ʋnrighteousness of the People, which lay as an heavy Weight and Load upon me. But after I had been above a Month upon the Island, my Spirit became somewhat Easier, and I began to recover in some measure my Health and Strength, and to get abroad among Friends. In the mean time, having opportunity to send for England, I writ to Friends there, to let them know, how it was with me; as followeth Dear Friends, I have been very Weak these Seven Weeks past, and so not able to Write my self. My Desire is to you, and for you all, that ye may live in the Fear of God, and in Love one unto another; and be Subject one to another in the Fear of God. I have been Weaker in my Body, than ever I was in my Life, that I remember; yea, my Pains have been such, as I cannot express: But yet my Heart and Spirit is strong. I have hardly Sweat these Seven Weeks past, though I am come into a very hot Climate; where hardly any, but are well nigh continually Sweating: But as for me, my old Bruises, Colds, Numness and Pains struck inwardly, even to my very Heart. So that little Rest I have taken; and the chiefest things, that were comfortable to my Stomach, were a little Water and pow∣dered Ginger: But now I begin to drink a little Beer, as well as Wa∣ter; and sometimes a little Wine and Water mixed. Great Pains and Travels I have felt, and in measure am under: But it is well; my Life is over all. This Island was to me as all of a Fire, e're I came to it; but now it is somewhat quenched and abated. I came in Weakness amongst those, that are Strong, and have so continued; but now am got a little Cheary, and over it: Many Friends (and some considerable Persons of the World) have been with me. I tired out my Body much, when amongst you in England; it is the Lord's Power, that helps me: Therefore I desire you all to prize the Power of the Lord, and his Truth. I was but a Weak Man in Body, when I came away from you, after I had been in my great Travel amongst you; but after that, it struck all back again into my Body, which was not well settled after so sore Travels in England. And then was I so tired at Sea, that I could not rest; and have had little or no Stomach a long time. Since I came into this Island, my Life hath been very much burdened: But I hope, if the Lord give me Strength to manage his Work, I shall work throughly; and bring things, that have been out of Course, into better Order. So Dear Friends, live all in the peaceable Truth, and in the Love of it; serving the Lord in Newness of Life: For glorious Things, and precious Truths have been manifested among you plentifully, and to you the Riches of the Kingdom have been reached. I have been almost a Month in this Island, but have not been able to go abroad or ride out: only very lately I rid out twice, a Quarter of a Mile at a time; which wearied
me much, and almost tired me. My Love in the Truth is to you all. G. F. Now, because I was not yet well able to Travel, the Friends of the Island concluded, to have their Men's-Meeting, and their Womens-Meet∣ing for the Service of the Church at Thomas Rous's, where I lay; by which means I was present amongst them at each of their Meetings, and had very good Service for the Lord in both. For they had need of Information in many things; and divers Disorders were crept in for want of Care and Watchfulness. Wherefore I exhorted them, (more especially at the Mens-Meeting) to be watchful and careful with respect to Marriages, to prevent Friends Marrying in near Kindreds; and also to prevent over-hasty proceedings toward Second Marriages, after the Death of a former Husband or Wife: advising, that a decent Regard were had in such Cases, to the Memory of the Deceased Husband or Wife. And as to Friends Children marrying too young, as at Thirteen or Fourteen Years of Age, I shewed them the Unfitness thereof, and the Inconveniences and Hurts that attend such Childish Marriages. And I admonished them all to purge the Floor throughly, and to sweep their Houses very clean; that nothing might remain, that would de∣file: And that all should take care, that nothing be spoken out of their Meetings to the blemishing, or defaming one of another. Like∣wise concerning Registring of Marriages, Births and Burials, I advised them to keep Exact Records of each in distinct Books for that only use: and also to Record in a Book for that purpose, the Condemnations of such, as went out from Truth into Disorderly Practices; and the Repentance and Restoration of such of them, as returned again. Also I recommended to their Care the providing of convenient Bury∣ing Places for Friends; which in some parts were yet wanting. Some Directions also I gave them concerning Wills, and the Ordering of Legacies left by Friends for publick Ʋses; and other things relating to the Affairs of the Church. Then as to their Blacks or Negro's, I de∣sired them to endeavour to train them up in the Fear of God, as well them that were bought with their Money, as them that were born in their Families; that all might come to the Knowledge of the Lord: that so with Joshua they might (every Master of a Family) say, As for me and my House, we will serve the Lord. I desired them also, that they would cause their Overseers to deal mildly and gently with their Negro's, and not use Cruelty towards them; as the manner of some hath been, and is: And that after certain Years of Servitude they would make them free. Many sweet and precious things were opened in these Meetings, by the Spirit and in the Power of the Lord, to the edifying, confirming and building up of Friends, both in the Faith, and holy Order of the Gospel. After these Meetings were over, the Vessel, that was bound for Eng∣land, not being yet gone, I was moved to write another Epistle to Friends there; the Copy whereof here follows:
DEar Friends and Brethren, to whom is my Love in that which never changeth, but remains in Glory; which is over all, the Top- and Corner-stone: In this all have Peace and Life, as ye dwell in the blessed Seed, wherein all is blest, over that which brought the Curse; where all Shortness and Narrowness of Spirit is, and Brittle∣ness and Peevishness is. Therefore keep the Holy Order of the Go∣spel: and keep in this blessed Seed, where all may be kept in Tem∣perance, in Patience, in Love, in Meekness, in Righteousness and Ho∣liness, and in Peace; in which the Lord may be seen amongst you, and no ways dishonoured, but glorified by you all. And so in all your Meetings, in Cities, Towns and Countries, Mens-Meetings, Wo∣mens-Meetings and others, let Righteousness slow among you, and the Holy Truth be uppermost; and the pure Spirit your Guide and Leader, and the holy Wisdom your Orderer, that is pure and gentle, and from above, and easie to be entreated. So keep in the Religion, that keeps from the Spots of the World, which is pure and undefi∣led in God's Sight: And keep in the pure and holy Worship, in which the pure and holy God is worshipped, to wit, in the Spirit, and in the Truth, which the Devil is out of; who is the Author of all Ʋnholi∣ness, and of dishonouring of God: So be all tender of God's Glory, and tender of his Honour, and of his blessed and holy Name, in which ye are gathered. And all who do profess the Truth, see that ye Walk in it, and in Righteousness, and Godliness and Holiness: For Holiness becomes the House of God, the Houshold of Faith. And that which becomes God's House, God loves: for he loves Righteous∣ness; and that is the Ornament, which becomes his House and all his Family. Therefore see, that Righteousness do run down in all your Assemblies, and that it flow, to drive away all the Ʋnrighteousness: This preserves your Peace with God; for in Righteousness ye have all Peace with the righteous God of Peace, and one with another. And so every one, that bears the Name of the Anointed, that high Title of being a Christian, named after the Heavenly Man; see, that ye be in the Divine Nature, and made conformable unto his Image, even the Image of the Heavenly, Divine Man, who was before that Image, which Adam and Eve got in the Fall from the Devil: So that in none of you that fallen Image may appear or be seen; but his Image, and you made Conformable unto him. Here Translation is shewed forth in Life and Conversation, not in Words only; yea, and Conversion and Repentance (which is a Change of the Nature, of the Mind, and of the Heart, and of the Spirit and Affections, which have been below; which come to be set above:) and so receive the things that are from Above, and have the Conversation in Heaven above; not that Conversation, which is according to the Power of the Prince of the Air, that now rules in the Disobedient. So all be faith∣ful; This is the Word of the Lord God unto you all: See, that God∣liness do flow, and Holiness, and Righteousness, and Truth, and Vertue, and the Fruits of the Good Spirit over the Bad and its Fruits; that ye may answer that which is of God in all: for your Heavenly Fa∣ther is glorified, in that you bear and bring forth much Fruit to God. Therefore ye, who are Plants of his planting, and his Trees of Righ∣teousness,
see, that every Tree be full of Fruit. And all keep in the true Humility, and in the true Love of God, which doth edify his Body; that the true Nourishment from the Head, the Refreshings, and Springs, and Rivers of Water, and Bread of Life may be plenteously known, and felt amongst you: that so Praises may ascend to God. So all be faithful to the Lord God, and just and true in all your Dealings and Doings with end towards Men. And be not negligent in your Men's Meetings to admonish, and to exhort, and to reprove in the Spirit of Love and of Meekness; and to seek that which is lost, and to bring back again, that which hath been driven away. So let all Minds, and Spirits, and Souls, and Hearts be bended down under the Yoke of Christ Jesus, the Power of God. Much I could write, but am Weak; and have been very Weak mostly, since I left you: and Burdens and Travels I have been under, and gone through many ways; but it is well. And the Lord Almighty knows my Work, which he hath sent me forth to do by his everlasting Arm and Power: which is from Everlasting to Everlasting, blessed be his Holy Name, which I am in, and in which my Love is to you all. G. F. After I had recovered so much Strength. that I was able to go abroad, and had been a little amongst Friends, I went to visit the Governour at his House; Lewis Morice, Thomas Rouse, and some other Friends being with me. And indeed he received us very Civilly, and treated us very kindly; making us Dine with him: and keeping us most part of the Day, before he let us go away. Bridge-Town.The same Week I went down to the Bridge-Town, (where I had not been before, save as I passed through it, when I first came into the Island.) There was to be a General Meeting of Friends that Week: and the Visit I had newly made to the Governour, and kind Reception I had with him, being generally known to the Officers, both Civil and Military, there came many of them to this Meeting from most parts of the Island, and those not of the meanest Rank; divers of them be∣ing Judges or Justices, Colonels or Captains: so that a very great Meet∣ing we had, both of Friends and others. The Lord's Blessed Power was plentifully with us in this Meeting: And although I was some∣what straitned for Time, three other Friends having spoken before me; yet the Lord opened things through me, to the general and great Sa∣tisfaction of them that were present. Col. Lewis Morice came to this Meeting, and with him a Neighbour of his, a Judge in the Country, whose Name was Ralph Fretwell; who was very well satisfied with the Meeting, and received the Truth. After the Meeting I went home with Lewis Morice to his House that Night, being about Nine or Ten Miles; going part of the way by Boat, the rest on Horse-back: This place, where Lewis Morice his Plantation was, I thought to be the finest Air of the Island. The next day Thomas Briggs and William Edmundson came thither to see me, they intending to leave the Island the day following; and to go upon the Lord's Service to Antego and Mevis. Lewis Morice went
with them: and at Antego they had several good Meetings, to which there was a great Resort of People; and many were Convinced there at that time. But when they had finished their Service there, and went thence to Mevis; the Governour of Mevis, who was an old Per∣secutor, sent Souldiers on Board the Vessel, to stop them from coming on Shore: and would not suffer them to Land. Wherefore, after Friends of the Place had been on Board the Vessel, and with them, and they had been sweetly Refreshed together, in feeling the Lord's Power and Presence amongst them; they returned to Antego again: Where having staid a while longer, they came back again to Barbados; Tho∣mas Brigges being very Weak and Ill. Of the other Friends, that came over with me from England, James Lancaster, John Cartwright and Geo. Pattison were gone some time before to Jamaica, and others to other places; so that few re∣mained in Barbados with me: Yet we had many great and precious Meetings, both for Worship, and for the Affairs of the Church: to the former of which many of the World came. At one of these Meetings there came (amongst others) one Col. Lyne, a sober Person; who was so very well satisfied, with what I declared, that he afterward said: Now I can gainsay such, as I have heard speak evil of you; who say, you do not own Christ, nor that he died: whereas I perceive, you exalt Christ in all his Offices, beyond what I have ever heard before. This Man observing one to take in Writing the Heads, of what I delivered, desired him to let him have a Copy of it; and afterward staid another day with us, before he went away: so great a Love was raised in him to the Truth. And indeed, a very great Convincement there was in most parts of the Island: which made the Priests and some Professors fret and rage. Our Meetings were very large and full, and free from disturbance from the Government; though the envious Priests and Professors endeavoured to stir up the Magistrates against us. And when they found, they could not prevail that way, some of them, that were Baptists, came to the Meeting at the Town; which was very large, and full of People of several Ranks and Qualities. A great Company came also with them: and they brought with them a malici∣ous, slanderous Paper written by John Pennyman; with which they made a great Noise. But the Lord gave me Wisdom and Ʋtterance to Answer their Cavils: So that the Auditory generally received Satis∣faction; and those quarrelsome Professors lost ground by their coming. When they had wearied themselves with Clamour, they went away: but the People staying, the Meeting was continued; and the things they cavilled about, were further opened and cleared: and the Life and Power of God came over all. But the Rage and Envy in our Ad∣versaries did not cease; but they endavoured to defame Friends with many false and scandalous Reports, which they spread abroad through the Island. Whereupon I with some other Friends drew up a Paper, to go forth in the Name of the People called Quakers, for the clear∣ing Truth and Friends from those false Reports. It was directed thus:
For the Governour of Barbados, with his Council and As∣sembly, and all others in Power, both Civil and Military, in this Island; from the People called Quakers. WHereas many scandalous Lies and Slanders have been cast upon us, to render us odious; as that We do deny God and Christ Jesus, and the Scriptures of Truth, &c. This is to Inform you, that all our Books and Declarations, which, for these many Years, have been published to the World, do clearly testifie the con∣trary. Yet notwithstanding, for your Satisfaction, we do now plainly and sincerely declare, That we do Own and Believe in God, the only-Wise, Omnipotent and Everlasting God, who is the Creator of all things both in Heaven and in the Earth, and the Preserver of all that he hath made; who is God over all, blessed for ever: To whom be all Honour and Glory, Dominion, Praise and Thanksgiving both now and for evermore! And we do Own and Believe in Jesus Christ, his beloved and only begotten Son, in whom he is well-pleased: Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary: in whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins: Who is the Express Image of the Invisible God, the First-born of every Creature, by whom were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; All things were created by him. And we do Own and Believe, that he was made a Sacrifice for Sin; who knew no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth. And that he was Crucified for us in the Flesh, without the Gates of Jerusalem; and that he was Buried, and Rose again the Third Day by the Power of his Father, for our Justification: And we do Believe, that he Ascended up into Heaven, and now sitteth at the Right Hand of God. This Jesus, who was the Foundation of the Holy Prophets and Apostles, is our Foundation: and we do believe, that there is no other Foundation to be laid, but that which is laid, even Christ Jesus; who, we believe, tasted Death for every Man, and shed his Blood for all Men, and is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the whole World: Ac∣cording as John the Baptist testified of him, when he said; Behold, the Lamb of God, that taketh away the Sins of the World, Joh. 1.29. We believe, that he alone is our Redeemer and Saviour, even the Captain of our Salvation, (who saves us from Sin, as well as from Hell and the Wrath to come, and destroys the Devil and his Works;) who is the Seed of the Woman, that bruises the Serpent's Head, to wit, Christ Jesus, the Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last. That he is (as the Scriptures of Truth say of him) our Wisdom and Righ∣teousness, Justification and Redemption; neither is there Salvation in any other: for there is no other Name under Heaven given among Men, whereby we may be saved. It is he alone, who is the Shep∣herd and Bishop of our Souls: He it is, who is our Prophet, whom Moses long since testified of, saying; A Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up unto you of your Brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you: And it shall come to pass. that every Soul, that will not hear that Prophet, shall be de∣stroyed from among the People, Acts 2.22, 23. He it is, that is now Come, and hath given us an Ʋnderstanding, that we may know him that is true; and he rules in our Hearts by his Law of Love and of Life, and makes us free from the Law of Sin and Death, and we have no Life, but by him: for he is the quickning Spirit, the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven; by whose Blood we are cleansed, and our Consciences sprinkled from Dead Works, to serve the Living God. And he is our Mediator, that makes Peace and Reconciliation between God offended, and us offending; he being the Oath of God, the New Covenant of Light, Life, Grace and Peace, the Author and Finisher of our Faith. Now this Lord Jesus Christ, the Heavenly Man, the Emanuel, God with us, we all own and believe in; him whom the High-Priest raged against, and said, he had spoken Blasphemy; whom the Priests and the Elders of the Jews took Counsel together against, and put to Death; the same, whom Judas betrayed for Thirty Pieces of Silver, which the Priests gave him, as a Reward for his Treason; who also gave large Money to the Souldiers to broach an Horrible Lie, namely, That his Disciples came and stole him away by Night, whilst they slept. And after he was Risen from the Dead, the History of the Acts of the Apostles sets forth, how the Chief-Priests and El∣ders persecuted the Disciples of this Jesus, for Preaching Christ and his Resurrection. This, we say, is that Lord Jesus Christ, whom we own to be our Life and Salvation. And as concerning the Holy Scriptures, we do believe, That they were given forth by the Holy Spirit of God, through the Holy Men of God, who (as the Scripture it self declares, 2 Pet. 1.21.) spake, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. We believe, they are to be Read, Believed and Fulfilled (He that fulfils them, is Christ:) and they are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction and for In∣struction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Tim. 3.16. and are able to make wise unto Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus. And we do believe, that the Holy Scriptures are the Words of God; for its said in Exod. 20.1. God spake all these Words, saying, &c. meaning the Ten Com∣mandments given forth upon Mount Sinai: And in Rev. 22.18. saith John, I testifie to every man that heareth the Words of the Prophecy of this Book; If any man addeth unto these, and if any Man shall take away from the Words of the Book of this Prophecy (not the Word) &c. So in Luke 1.20. Because thou believest not my Words. And so in John 5.47. and John 15.7. John 14.23. John 12.47. So that we call the Holy Scriptures, as Christ and the Apostles called them, and Holy Men of God called them, viz. the Words of God. Another Slander and Lye they have cast upon us, namely; That we should teach the Negroes to Rebell: A thing we utterly abhor, and detest in our Hearts, the Lord knows it! who is the Searcher of all Hearts, and knows all things; and so can witness and testifie for us, that this is a most Abominable Ʋntruth. For that which we have spoken and declared to them, is, To exhort and admonish them to be
sober, and to fear God, and to love their Masters and Mistresses, and to be faithful and diligent in their Master's Service and Business; and then their Masters and Overseers would love them, and deal kindly and gently with them. And that they should not beat their Wives, nor the Wives their Husbands; neither should the Men have many Wives. And that they should not Steal, nor be Drunk, nor commit Adultery, nor Fornication, nor Curse, nor Swear, nor Lie, nor give bad Words to one another, nor to any one else: For there is some∣thing in them, that tells them, they should not practise those, nor any other Evils. But if they notwithstanding should do them, then we let them know, There are but Two Ways, the one, that leads to Heaven, where the Righteous go; and the other, that leads to Hell, where the Wicked and Debauched, Whoremongers and Adulterers, Murderers and Liars go. To the one the Lord will say, Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World; but to the other he will say, Depart ye Cur∣sed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: So the Wicked go into everlasting Punishment, but the Righteous into Life Eternal, Matth. 25. Now consider, Friends, It is no Transgression for a Master of a Family to instruct his Family himself, or for some others to do it in his behalf; but rather it is a very great Duty in∣cumbent upon them. Abraham and Joshua did so: of the first we read, the Lord said, (Gen. 18.19.) I know, that Abraham will command his Children and his Houshold after him; and they shall keep the Way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham the things, that he hath spoken of him. And the latter, we read, said (Josh. 24.15.) — Chuse ye this day, whom ye will serve,—But as for me, and my House, we will serve the Lord. We do declare, that we do esteem it a Duty incumbent on us to Pray with and for, to Teach, Instruct and Admonish those in and belong∣ing to our Families, this being a Command of the Lord; the Diso∣bedience whereunto will provoke the Lord's Displeasure: as may be seen in Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen, that know thee not, and upon the Families, that call not upon thy Name. Now Negroes, Tawnies, Indians make up a very great part of the Fami∣lies in this Island; for whom an Account will be required by him, who comes to Judge both Quick and Dead, at the great Day of Judg∣ment, when every one shall be Rewarded according to the Deeds done in the Body, whether they be good, or whether they be evil: At that Day, I say, of the Resurrection both of the Good, and of the Bad, of the Just and the Ʋnjust, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Pre∣sence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe in that day, 2 Thess. 1.8. &c. See also, 2 Pet. 3.3. &c. This wicked Slander (of our endeavouring to make the Negroes Rebell) our Adversaries took occasion to raise, from our having had some Meetings with and amongst the Negroes: For both I and other Friends had several Meetings with them in several Plantations,
wherein we exhorted them to Justice, Sobriety, Temperance, Chastity and Piety, and to be subject to their Masters and Governours: Which was altogether contrary, to what our envious Adversaries maliciously suggested against us. As I had been to visit the Governour, as soon as I was well able, after I came thither; so sometime after, when I was at Thomas Rouse's, the Governour came thither to see me, carrying himself very courte∣ously. Having now been Three Months or more in Barbados, and in that time having visited Friends, throughly settled Meetings, and dispatched that Service, for which the Lord brought me thither; I felt my Spirit clear of that Island, and Drawings to Jamaica. Which when I had communicated to Friends, I acquainted the Governour also, and divers of his Council; That I intended shortly to leave the Island, and go to Jamaica: which I did, that as my Coming thither was open and pub∣lick, so my Departure also might be. But before I left the Island, I writ the following Letter to my Wife; that she might understand, both how it was with me, and how I proceeded in my Travels. My Dear Heart, TO whom is my Love, and to all the Children, in the Seed of Life, that changeth not, but is over all; blessed be the Lord for ever! I have gone under great Sufferings in my Body and Spirit, beyond Words: but the God of Heaven be praised, his Truth is over all. I am now well: and if the Lord permit, within a few days I pass from Barbados towards Jamaica; and I do think to stay but little there. I desire, that ye may be all kept free in the Seed of Life, out of all Cumbrances. Friends are generally well. Remember me to Friends, that enquire after me. So no more, but my Love in the Seed and Life, that changeth not. Barbados, the 6th of the 11th Month, 1671. G. F. I set Sail from Barbados to Jamaica on the Eighth Day of the Ele∣venth Month, 1671. Robert Widders, William Edmundson,At Sea. Solomon Ec∣cles and Elizabeth Hooton going with me. James Lancaster, John Cartwright and George Pattison were gone thither some time before: and Thomas Briggs and John Stubbs remained yet longer in Barbados; with whom were John Rouse and William Baily. We had a quick and easie Passage to Jamaica:JAMAICA where we met with our Friends James Lancaster, John Cartwright and George Pattison again, who had been labouring there in the Service of Truth; into which we forthwith entred with them, travelling up and down through the Island, which is large: And a brave Country it is; though the People are many of them debauched and wicked. We had much Service there, for there
was a great Convincement,1671. Jamaica. and many received the Truth; some of which were People of Account in the World. We had many Meetings there, which were large, and very quiet: For indeed, the People were Civil to us; so that not a Mouth was opened against us. I was twice with the Governour, and some other of the Magistrates; who all car∣ried themselves lovingly towards me. About a Week, after we landed in Jamaica, Elizabeth Hooton, who went with us from England to Barbados, and from Barbados thither, being a Woman of a great Age, and who had travelled much in Truth's Service, and suffered much for it, departed this Life. She was well the Day before she died; and departed in Peace, like a Lamb, bearing Testimony to Truth at her Departure. When we had been about Seven Weeks in Jamaica, and had brought Friends into pretty good Order, and settled several Meetings amongst them, we left Solomon Eccles there; the rest of us embarked for Ma∣ryland: leaving Friends, and Truth prosperous in Jamaica, the Lord's Power being over all, and his blessed Seed reigning. But before I left Jamaica, I writ another Letter to my Wife, as followeth: My Dear Heart, TO whom is my Love, and to the Children, in that which chan∣geth not, but is over all; and to all Friends in those parts. I have been at Jamaica about Five Weeks, and Friends here are ge∣nerally well; and here is a Convincement: but things would be too large to write of. Sufferings in every place attend me; but the blessed Seed is over all: the great Lord be praised, who is Lord of Sea and Land, and of all things therein. We intend to pass away from hence about the beginning of the nexth Month; and we shall pass towards Maryland, if the Lord please. Dwell all of you in the Seed of God: In his Truth I rest in Love to you all. Jamaica, 23d of the 12th Month, 1671. G. F. At Sea.We went on Board on the 8th of the First Month, 1671/2: and ha∣ving Contrary Winds, were a full Week sailing forwards and back∣wards, before we could get out of sight of Jamaica. A difficult Voyage this proved, and pretty dangerous, especially, in our passing through the Gulf of Florida; where we met with many Trials by Winds and Storms. But the great God, who is Lord of the Seas and of the Land, and who rideth upon the Wings of the Wind, did by his Power preserve us through many and great Dangers, when by extream Stress of Weather our Vessel was divers times like to be Over-set; and much of her Tackling broken. And indeed we were sensible, that the Lord was a God at hand; and that his Ear was open to the Supplications of his People. For when the Winds were so strong and boisterous, and the Storms and Tempests so great, that the Sailers knew not what to do, but were fain to let the Ship go, which way she would; then
did we pray unto the Lord:1672. Jamaica. And the Lord did graciously hear and accept us, and did Calm the Winds and the Seas, and gave us season∣able Weather, and made us to Rejoice in his Salvation; blessed and praised be the holy Name of the Lord, whose Power hath Dominion over all, and whom the Winds and the Seas obey! We were at Sea betwixt Six and Seven Weeks in this Passage from Jamaica to Maryland. But some days, before we came to Land,At Sea. after we had entred the Bay of Potuxan-River, a great Storm arose,Potuxan-River. which cast a Boat upon us for Shelter; in which were divers Persons, both Men and Women, People of Account outwardly in the World. We took them in; but the Boat was lost, with Five Hundred Pounds worth of Goods in it, as they said. They continued on Board us several days, not having any means to get off; and we had a very good Meeting with them in the Ship. But Provision grew short, for they brought none in with them; and ours, by reason of the length of our Voy∣age, was well nigh spent, when they came to us: So that with their living upon it too, we had now little or none left. Whereupon George Pattison took a Boat, and ventured his Life to get to Shore; the Hazard whereof was so great, that all, but Friends, concluded, he would be Cast away. Yet it pleased the Lord to bring him safe to Land:MARY∣LAND. and in a short time after the Friends of the Place came to fetch us to Land also, in a seasonable time, for our Provisions were quite spent. We partook also of another great Deliverance in this Voyage, through the good Providence of the Lord; which we came to understand af∣terwards. For when we were determined to come from Jamaica, we had our Choice of two Vessels, that were both bound for the same Coast. One of these was a Frigot; the other was called a Yacht. The Master of the Frigot, we thought, asked unreasonably for our Passage; which made us Agree with the Master of the Yacht, who offered to carry us Ten Shillings a-piece cheaper, than the other. We went on Board the Yacht, and the Frigot came out together with us, intending to be Consorts during the Voyage; and for several Days we sailed together: But what with Calms and Contrary Winds we were in a while separa∣ted. And after that the Frigot, losing her way, fell among the Spa∣niards; by whom she was taken and robbed, and the Master and Mate made Prisoners: Afterwards being retaken by the English, she was sent home to her Owners in Virginia. Which when we came to un∣derstand, we saw and admired the Providence of God, who preserved us out of our Enemies Hands; and he that was Covetous, fell among the Covetous. Some Friends at Jamaica would have had us gone in the Frigot, that was taken; but the Lord in his Wisdom ordered it otherwise. Here we found John Burneyate, intending shortly to Sail for Old England: but upon our Arrival he altered his purpose; and joined with us in the Lord's Service, which we were upon. He had ap∣pointed a General Meeting for all the Friends in the Province of Mary∣land, that he might see them together, and take his Leave of them, before he departed out of the Country: And it was so ordered by the good Providence of God, that we landed just time enough, to reach that Meeting; by which means we had a very seasonable Opportunity
of taking the Friends of the Province together.1672. Maryland. A very large Meet∣ing this was, and held Four Days; to which (besides Friends) came many of the World's People, divers of which were of considerable Quality in the World's Account: For there were amongst them five or six Justices of the Peace, a Speaker of their Parliament or Assembly, One of the Council, and divers others of Note; who seemed well satis∣fied with the Meeting. After the Publick Meetings were over, the Mens and Womens Meetings began; wherein I opened to Friends the Service thereof, to their great Satisfaction. After this we went to another Place,Cliffs. called the Cliffs, where another General Meeting was appointed: We went some part of the way by Land, and the rest by Water; and a Storm arising, our Boat was run on ground, in danger to be beaten to pieces: and the Water came in upon us. I was in a great Sweat, having come very hot out of a Meeting before; and now was Wet with the Water beside: yet having Faith in the Power of the Lord, I was preserved from taking hurt, blessed be the Lord. To this Meeting also many of the World's People came, and did receive the Truth with Reverence. We had also a Mens-Meeting, and a Womens-Meeting, at which most of the Back-sliders came in again; and seve∣ral of those Meetings were established for taking Care of the Affairs of the Church. After these Two General Meetings were over, we parted Company, dividing our selves into several Coasts, for the Service of Truth. James Lancaster and John Cartwright went by Sea for New-England; William Edmundson, and three Friends more with him, sailed for Virginia, where things were much out of Order: John Burneyate, Robert Wid∣ders, George Pattison and I, with several Friends of the Province, went over by Boat to the Eastern Shore,Eastern-Shore. and had a Meeting there on the First Day; where many People received the Truth with Gladness, and Friends were greatly refreshed. A very large and Heavenly Meeting it was, and several Persons of Quality in that Country were at it; two of which were Justices of the Peace. And it was upon me from the Lord, to send to the Indian-Emperor and his Kings, to come to that Meeting: The Emperor came, and was at the Meeting; but his Kings, lying further off, could not reach thither time enough: Yet they came after with their Cockarooses. I had in the Evening (for they staid all Night) two good Opportunities with them; and they heard the Word of the Lord willingly, and did confess to it. What I spake to them, I desired them to speak to their People; and let them know, That God was setting up his Tabernacle of Witness in their Wilder∣ness-Country, and was setting up his Standard, and glorious Ensign of Righteousness. They carried themselves very courteously and lovingly, and inquired, Where the next Meeting would be, and they would come to it: Yet they said, They had had a great Debate with their Council about their Coming, before they came now. Tredaven-Creek. Miles-River. Wye-Ri∣ver. Chester-River.The next Day we began our Journey by Land to New-England, a tedious Journey through the Woods and Wilderness, over Boggs and great Rivers. We took Horse at the Head of Tredaven-Creek, and travelled through the Woods, till we came a little above the Head of Miles-River; by which we passed, and rode on to the Head of Wye-River: and so got to the Head of Chester-River; where making a Fire,
we took up our Lodging in the Woods.1672. Saxifrax-River. Bohemia-River. Next Morning setting for∣ward again, we travelled through the Woods, till we came to Saxi∣frax-River, which we went over in Canoos (which are Indian-Boats;) causing our Horses to swim by. Then we rode on to Bohemia-River; where in like manner swimming our Horses, we our selves went over in Canoos. We rested a little at a Plantation by the Way, but could not stay long, for we had Thirty Miles to ride that Afternoon, if we would reach a Town; which we were willing to do, and therefore rid hard for it. And I with some others, whose Horses were stron∣ger, got to the Town that Night, exceedingly tired; and withal wet to the Skin: But George Pattison and Robert Widders, being weaker-horsed, were fain to fall short, and lie in the Woods that Night also; making themselves a Fire. The Town we went to, was a Dutch Town, called New-Castle;New-Ca∣stle. whither Robert Widders and George Pattison came to us next Morning. We departed from thence, and got over the River Delaware, not without great Danger of some of our Lives:Delaware-River. and when we were over, we were troubled to get new Guides; which were hard to get, and very chargeable. Then had we that Wilder∣ness-Country to pass through, which is since called West-Jersey,WEST-JERSEY. which was not then inhabited by English; so that we have travelled a whole Day together, without seeing Man or Woman House or Dwelling-place: and sometimes we lay in the Woods by a Fire, nd sometimes in the In∣dians Wigwams or Houses. In this Journey we came one Night to an Indian Town, and lay at their King's House, who was a very pretty Man; and both he and his Wife received us very lovingly, and his Attendants (such as they were) were very respectful to us: they laid us Mars to lie on; but Provision was very short with them, having caught but little that day. At another Indian Town, where we staid, their King came to us, and he could speak some English; wherefore I spake to him much, and also to his People: and they were very Lov∣ing to us. At length we came to a Town called Middle-Town,East-Jersey Middle-Town. which is an English Plantation in East-Jersey; and there were some Friends: but we could not stay to have a Meeting there at that time, being earnestly pressed in our Spirits, to get to the Half-Years-Meeting of F  Oister-Bay in Long-Island; which was very near at hand. Wherefore we went down with a Friend (whose Name was Richard Hartshorn, Brother to Hugh Hartshorn, the Upholster in London) who received us gladly to his House, where we refreshed our selves (for we were wear) and then he carried us and our Horses in his own Boat, over a great Water (which held us most part of the day in getting over;) and set us upon Long-Island.LONG-ISLAND. So we got that Evening to Friends at Gravesand, with whom we tarried that Night:Gravesand Flushing. Oister-bay-half-years-Meeting. and the next Day we got to Flushing, and the day following we reached to Oister-Bay; se∣veral Friends both of Gravesand and Flushing accompanying us. The Half-Years-Meeting began next Day, which was the first day of the Week, and lasted four Days. The first and second Days we had Pub∣lick Meetings for Worship, to which the People of the World of all sorts might and did come: On the third Day of the Week were the Mens and Womens-Meetings, wherein the Affairs of the Church were taken Care of. Here we met with some of the Bad Spirits, who were run out from Truth into Prejudice, Contention and Opposition to the
Order of Truth,1672. Oister-bay-half-years-Meeting. and to Friends therein. These had been very trou∣blesom to Friends in their Meetings there and thereabouts formerly; and 'tis like, would have been so now: But I would not suffer the Service of our Mens and Womens-Meetings to be interrupted and hin∣dred by their Cavils. Wherefore I let them know, That if they had any thing to Object against the Order of Truth, which we were in, we would give them a Meeting another Day on purpose. And indeed, I laboured the more, and travelled the harder, to get to this Meeting, where it was expected, many of these contentious People would be; because I understood, they had reflected much upon me, when I was far from them. So the Mens and Womens Meetings being over, on the fourth Day we had a Meeting with those discontented People, to which as many of them as would, did come; and as many Friends, as had a desire, were present also: And the Lord's Power brake forth glori∣ously, to the Confounding of the Gain sayers. And then some of those, that had been Chief in the mischievous Work of Contention and Opposi∣tion against the Truth, began to fawn upon me, and to cast the mat∣ter upon others: but the deceitful Spirit was judged down, and con∣demned, and the glorious Truth of God was exalted, and set over all; and they were all brought down and bowed under: which was of great Service to Truth, and great Satisfaction and Comfort to Friends; Glory to the Lord for ever! After this Meeting were over, and Friends were gone to their se∣veral Habitations, we staid some Days upon the Island, and had seve∣ral Meetings in several parts thereof; and had good Service for the Lord.Oister-bay And when we were clear of the Island, we returned to Oister-Bay, waiting for a Wind to carry us to Road-Island; which was com∣puted to be about two hundred Miles. As soon as the Wind served, we set Sail;ROAD-ISLAND. and arrived in Road-Island on the thirtieth Day of the Third Month: where we were gladly received by Friends. We went to Nicholas Easton's House, who at that time was Governour of the Island; and there we lay, being very weary with travelling by Land and Sea. On the First-Day of the Week following we had a large Meeting; to which the Deputy-Governour and several Justices came, and were mightily affected with the Truth. The Week following, the Yearly Meeting for all the Friends of New-England,Yearly Meeting. and the other Co∣lonies adjacent, was held in this Island; to which, besides very many Friends, who lived in those parts, came John Stubbs from Barbados, and James Lancaster and John Cartwright from another way. This Meeting lasted Six Days: of which the first four Days were general publick Meetings for Worship; to which abundance of the World's People came. For they having no Priests in the Island, and so no Restriction to any particular Way of Worship; and both the Governour and Deputy-Governour, with several Justices of the Peace daily fre∣quenting the Meetings, this did so encourage the People, that they flocked in from all parts of the Island. Very good Service we had amongst them; and Truth had a good Reception with them: And indeed, to give them their due, I have rarely observed a People, in the State wherein they stood, to hear with more Attention, Dili∣gence and Affection, than generally they did, during the four Days to∣gether; which also was taken notice of by other Friends. After these
publick Meetings were over, the Mens-Meeting began, which was large,1672. Road-Island-Yearly-Meeting. precious and weighty; and the day following was the Womens-Meet∣ing. which also was large and very solemn: and these two Meetings being for the Ordering the Affairs of the Church, many weighty things were opened, and communicated to them, by Way of Advice, In∣formation and Instruction in the Services relating thereunto; that all might be kept clean, sweet and savoury amongst them. In these two Meetings several Mens and Womens Meetings for other parts were agreed and settled, to take Care of the Poor, and other Affairs of the Church; and to see, that all, who profess Truth, walk according to the glorious Gospel of God. Now when this great and General Meeting in Road-Island was ended, it was somewhat hard for Friends to part: For the glorious Power of the Lord, which was over all, and his blessed Truth and Life flowing amongst them, had so knit and united them together, that they spent two Days in taking leave one of another, and of the Friends of the Island: and then being mightily filled with the Presence and Power of the Lord, they went away with joyful Hearts to their several Habitations, in the several Colonies where they lived. When this General Meeting was fully over, and Friends had taken their Leaves one of another to depart home; we, who travelled amongst them, dispersed our selves into our several Services, accord∣ing as the Lord ordered us. John Burneyate, with John Cartwright and George Pattison went into the Eastern parts of New-England, in Company with the Friends, that came from thence, to visit the par∣ticular Meetings there; whom John Stubbs and James Lancaster in∣tended to follow a while after, in the same Service of Truth: but they were not yet Clear of this Island. Robert Widders and I staid some time longer also upon this Island; finding Service still here for the Lord, through the great Openness of the People, and the daily Coming in of Fresh People in Sloops from other Colonies, for some time, after the General Meeting was over: So that we had many large and serviceable Meetings among them for several Days after. During the time, that we abode here, there was a Marriage cele∣brated amongst Friends in this Island; and we were at it. It was at a Friend's House, who had formerly been Governour of the Island; and three Justices of the Peace, and many others of the World's People were there: and both they and Friends said, They never saw such a Solemn Assembly on such an Occasion, and so weighty a Marriage, and so comely an Order. Thus Truth was set over all: and this might serve for an Example to others; for there were some present from many other places. After this I had a great Travel in Spirit concerning the Ranters (for there were many of them in those parts, and they had been rude at a Meeting, which I was not at.) Wherefore I appointed a Meeting amongst them; and I believed, the Lord would give me Power over them: and he did so to his Praise and Glory; blessed be his Name for ever. There were at this Meeting many Friends, and divers of the World's People; some of whom were Justices of the Peace, and other Officers: and they were generally well affected with the Truth. But one of the Justices, who had been a Justice twenty Years, was
Convinced,1672. Providence and spake highly of the Truth; and more highly of me, than is fit for me to mention, or take notice of. Then we had a Meeting at a place called Providence, which was very large; as consisting of many Sorts and Sects of People: and I had a great Travel upon my Spirit concerning the Meeting, that it might be preserved quiet; and that Truth might be brought over the People, and might gain an Entrance, and have a Place in them: For they were generally above the Priests, in high Notions; and some of them came on purpose to dispute. But the Lord, whom we waited upon, was with us, and his Power went over them all; and his blessed Seed was exalted, and set above all: and the Disputers were silent, and the Meeting was quiet, and ended well; praised be the Lord! And the People went away mightily satisfied; much desiring another Meeting. This place (called Providence) was about Thirty Miles from Road-Island; and we went to it by Water. The Governour of Road-Island, and many others, went with me thither; and we had the Meeting in a great Barn, which was throng'd with People, so that I was exceeding hot, and in a great Sweat: but all was well; the glorious Power of the Lord shined over all, Glory to the great God for ever! Narragan∣set.After this we went to another place called Narraganset, about Twenty Miles from Road-Island; and the Governour went with us. There we had a Meeting at a Justice's House, where Friends had never had any Meeting before: And the Meeting was very large, for the Country ge∣nerally came in; and People came also from Connecticut, and other parts round about. There were amongst them four Justices of the Peace; and most of these People were such, as had never heard Friends before: but they were mightily affected with the Meeting; and a great Desire there is after the Truth amongst that People: So that our Meeting was of very good Service; blessed be the Lord for ever! The Justice, at whose House the Meeting was, and another Justice of that Country, invited me to come again; but I was then clear of those parts, and was going off towards Shelter-Island. But John Burn∣yeate and John Cartwright, being come back out of New-England in∣to Road-Island, before I was gone, I laid this place before them; and they felt Drawings thither, and went to visit them. At another place, I heard, some of the Magistrates should say among themselves; If they had Money enough, they would hire me to be their Minister. This was, where they did not well understand Ʋs, and our Princi∣ples: But when I heard of it, I said, It was time for me to be gone: for if their Eye was so much to Me, or any of Ʋs, they would not come to their own Teacher. For this thing (of hiring Mini∣sters) had spoiled many, by hindring them from improving their own Talents; whereas our Labour is, to bring every one to their own Teacher in themselves. Now, after we had had very good Service for the Lord in Road-Island, and the Parts adjacent, and that John Burneyate, with the other Friends, that went from the General Meeting here into New-England, were returned hither again, I went off from hence to Shelter-Island; having with me Robert Widders, James Lancaster, George Pattison and one John Jay, a Planter in Barbados: and leaving John Stubbs
and John Burneyate in Road-Island, to Water,1672. Road-Island. what had been Planted by the Lord there, and there-aways; who expected John Cartwright (whom they had left at Piscataway) to come and join shortly with them in the same Service. We that were for Shelter-Island, went off in a Sloop: and passing by Point-Juda, and Block-Island,Point Juda Block-Island. Fisher's-Island. came to Fishers Island. where at Night we went on Shore; but were not able to stay for the Muschetos (a sort of Gnats, or little Flies) which abound there, and are very troublesom. Wherefore we went into our Sloop again, and put off from the Shore, and cast Anchor; and so lay in our Sloop that Night. Next day we went into the Sound;The Sound. but find∣ing, our Sloop was not able to live in that Water, we turned in again, (for we could not pass that way;) and so came to Anchor again before Fisher's-Island, where we lay in our Sloop that Night also. There fell abundance of Rain that Night, and our Sloop being open, we were ex∣ceeding wet.The Two Horse-Ra∣ces. Garner's-Island. Gull's-Island. Shelter-Island. Next day we passed over the Waters called the two Horse Races, and then by Garner's-Island: after which we passed by the Gull's-Island, and so got at length to Shelter-Island; which, though it was but about Twenty seven Leagues from Road-Island, yet through the Difficulty of Passage, we were three Days in getting thither. The Day after we came thither, being the First Day of the Week, we had a Meeting there. Afterwards, in the same Week, I had a Meeting among the Indians there; at which were their King, with his Council, and about an hundred Indians more: They sate down, like Friends, and heard very attentively, while I spake to them by an Interpreter, an Indian, that could speak English well. After the Meeting they appeared very loving; and confessed, that what was said to them, was Truth. On the next First-Day we had a great Meeting on the Island; to which came many of the World's People, that had never heard Friends before. They were very well satisfied with the Meet∣ing; and would not go away, when the Meeting was done, till they had spoken with me: Wherefore I went amongst them, and found, they were much taken with the Truth; and good Desires were raised in them, and a great Love. Blessed be the Lord, his Name spreads, and will be great among the Nations, and Dreadful among the Heathen. While we were in Shelter-Island, William Edmundson came to us, who had been labouring in the Work of the Lord in Virginia. From whence he travelled through the Desert-Country, through Difficulties and many Trials, till he came to Roan-Oak; where he met with a ten∣der People: And after Seven Weeks Service in those parts, sailing over to Mary-land, and so to New-York, he came from thence to Long-Island; and so to Shelter-Island: where we met with him, and were very glad to hear from him the good Service, he had had for the Lord, in the several Countries and Places, wherein he had travelled, since he parted from us. We staid not long in Shelter-Island, but entring our Sloop again,At Sea. put forth to Sea for Long-Island. We had a very rough Passage: for the Tide did run so strong for several Hours, that I have not seen the like; and being against us, we could hardly get for∣wards, though we had a Gale. We were upon the Water all that Day and the Night following; but found our selves next Day dri∣ven back near unto Fisher's-Island. For there was a great Fog,
and towards Day it was very dark,1672. New-Eng∣land. so that we could not see, what way we made: and besides it rained much in the Night, which in our open Sloop made us very wet. Next day a great Storm arose; so that we were fain to go over the Sound: and did get over with much ado. When we had gotten from Fisher's-Island,Faulcon-Island. we passed by Faulcon-Island, and came to the Main; where we cast Anchor, till the Storm was over:Sound. and then we came over the Sound, being all very wet; and much difficulty we had to get to Land, the Wind being strong against us. But blessed be the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, and of the Seas and Waters,Long Island Oister-bay. all was well; and we got safe to Oister-Bay in Long-Island, on the Seventh Day of the Sixth Month very early in the Morning, which (they say) is about two hundred Miles from Road-Island. At Oister-Bay we had a very large Meeting: and the same day James Lancaster and Christopher Holder went over the Bay to Rye on the Continent, in Governour Winthrop's Government, and had a Meet∣ing there.Flushing From Oister-Bay we passed about Thirty Miles to Flushing, where we had a very large Meeting, many Hundreds of the People of the World being there; some or whom came about Thirty Miles to it. A glorious and heavenly Meeting it was, (praised be the Lord God!) and the People were much satisfied. Mean while Christopher Holder and some other Friends went to a Town in Long-Island, called Jamaica, and had a Meeting there. We passed from Flushing to Grave∣sands,Gravesands about Twenty Miles, and there had three precious Meetings; to which many would have come from New-York, but that the Wea∣ther hindred them. Then being clear of this Place, we hired a Sloop, and the Wind serving, we set forth for the New-Country, now called Jersey. And passing down the Bay,JERSEY. Conny-Island. Natton-Island. Stratton-Island. Middle∣town-Har∣bour. by Conny-Island, and Natton-Island, and Strat∣ton-Island, we came to Rich. Hartshorn's at Middletown-Harbour, about Break of Day in the Morning, on the 27th of the Sixth Month. Next day we rode about Thirty Miles in that Country, through the Woods, and over very bad Boggs, one worse than all the rest; the Descent into which was so sleep, that we were fain to slide down with our Horses, and then let them lie and breath themselves, before they could go on: This place the People of the Country called PƲRGATORY. We got at length to Shrewsbury in East-Jersey,East-Jersey Srewsbu∣ry. and on the First-Day of the Week had a precious Meeting there; to which Friends, and other People came far: and the blessed Presence of the Lord was with us. The same Week we had a Mens and Womens Meeting out of most parts of New-Jersey. They are building a Meeting-Place in the Midst of them; and there is a Monthly and General Meeting set up, which will be of great Service in those parts, in keeping up the Gospel-Order, and Government of Christ Jesus, (of the Increase of which there is no End) that they who are faithful, may see, that all who profess the holy Truth, do live in the pure Religion, and walk, as becometh the Gospel. While we were here at Shrewsbury, an Accident befell; which for the time was a great Exercise to us. There was one John Jay, a Friend of Barbados, who came with us from Road-Island, and intended to accompany us through the Woods to Mary-land. He being to Trie an Horse, got upon his Back: and the Horse fell a running, and cast him down upon his Head, and brake his Neck; as the People said.
They that were near him, took him up Dead,1672. Jersey-Shrewsbu∣ry. and carried him a good Way, and laid him on a Tree. I got to him, as soon as I could; and feeling on him, concluded he was Dead. And as I stood by him, pitying him and his Family, I took hold of his Hair; and his Head turned any way, his Neck was so limber. Whereupon,☜ throwing away my Stick and my Gloves, I took his Head in both my Hands: and setting my Knees against the Tree, I raied his Head; and per∣ceived, there was nothing out or broken that Way. Then I put one Hand under his Chin, and the other behind his Head, and raised his Head two or three times with all my Strength; and brought it in. I soon perceived, his Neck began to grow stiff again; and then he began to rattle in the Throat, and quickly after to breath. The People were amazed: but I bid them Have a good Heart, and be of good Faith, and carry him into the House. They did so; and set him by the Fire: but I bid them, Get him some warm thing to drink, and put him to Bed. After he had been in the House a while, he be∣gan to speak; but did not know, where he had been. The next day we passed away (and he with us, pretty well) about Sixteen Miles,Middle town. to a Meeting at Middletown, through Woods and Boggs, and over a River; where we swam our Horses, and got over our selves upon a hollow Tree: and many hundred of Miles did he travel with us after this. To this Meeting came most of the People of the Town, and a glo∣rious Meeting we had; and the Truth was over all, blessed be the great Lord God for ever!Middle∣town-Har∣bour. After the Meeting we went to Middletown-Harbour, about five Miles, in order to take our long Journey next Morning, through the Woods towards Mary-land; having hired In∣dians for our Guides: for I determined to pass through the Woods, on the other side of Delaware-Bay, that so we might head the Creeks and Rivers, as much as was possible. So on the Ninth Day of the Seventh Month we set forwards,Indian Towns. and passed through many Indian Towns, and over some Rivers and Boggs: And when we had ridden about Forty Miles, we made us a Fire at Night, and lay by it. As we came among the Indians, we declared the Day of the Lord to them. Next Day we travelled fifty Miles, (as we computed:) And at Night finding an Old House, which the Indians had forced the People to leave, we made a Fire, and lay there, at the Head of Delaware-Bay.DELA∣WARE-Bay. Upper-Diuidock. The next Day we swam our Horses over a River about a Mile, at twice, first to an Island called Ʋpper Dinidock, and then to the Main Land; having hired Indians to help us over in their Canoos. This day we could reach but about Thirty Miles, and came at Night to a Swede's House; where we got a little Straw, and lay there that Night. Next day, having hired another Guide, we travelled about Forty Miles through the Woods, and made us a Fire at Night, by which we lay, and dried our selves; for we were often wet in our Travels in the day∣time. The next day we passed over a desperate River, which had in it many Rocks and broad Stones, very hazardous to us and our Horses. From thence we came to Christian-River;Christian-River. where we swam over our Horses, and went over our selves in Canoos: but the sides of this River were so bad and miery, that some of the Horses had like to have been laid up. From thence we came to a Town called
Newcastle,1672. N wcastle, alias New-Amster∣dam. heretofore called New-Amsterdam: and being very wea∣ry, and inquiring in the Town, where we might buy some Corn for our Horses; the Governour came into the Street, and invited me to his House: and afterwards desired me to lodge there; telling me, he had a Bed for me, and I should be welcom. So I staid there; the other Friends being taken care of also. This was on the Seventh Day of the Week: and he offering his House for a Meeting, we had a Meeting there the next Day, a pretty large one; for the Chief of the Town, and indeed most of the Town were at it. Here had never been a Meeting before, nor any within a great Way of it: but this was a very precious One, and many of the People, both Men and Women were tender, and confessed to the Truth, and some received it; blessed be the Lord for ever! On the Sixteenth of the Seventh Month we set forward again from hence, and travelled (as near as we could compute) about Fifty Miles that Day,Bohemia-River. Saxisrax-River. through the Woods, and over the Boggs, heading Bohemia-River and Saxifrax River. At Night we made us a Fire (as we used to do) in the Woods, and lay there all Night: and it being rainy Wea∣ther, we got under some thick Trees for Shelter; and afterwards dried our selves again by the Fire.Chester-River. Next Day we waded through Chester-River, a very broad Water, and afterwards passing through many bad Boggs, lay that Night also in the Woods by a Fire; not having gone (by reason of Hindrances in the River and Boggs) above Thirty Miles that day. But on the day following we travelled hard: and though we had some troublesom Boggs in our way, we rode about Fifty Miles; and got safe that Night, but very weary, to a Friend's House,MARY-LAND. M les-Ri∣ver. one Robert Harwood, at Miles-River in Mary-land. This was the Eighteenth Day of the Seventh Month: and though we were ve∣ry weary, and much dirtied with getting through the Boggs in our Journey; yet hearing of a Meeting next day, we went to it, and from it to John Edmundson's: from whence we went three or four Miles by Water to a Meeting on the First-Day following. At this Meeting there was a Judge's Wife, who had never been at any of our Meetings before; and she was reached, and said after the Meeting: She had rather hear us once, than the Priests a thousand times. Many others also of the World's People, that were there, were very well satisfied; For the Power of the Lord was eminently with and amongst us: blessed for ever be his holy Name! We passed from thence about twenty two Miles,Kentish-Shore. and had a Meeting upon the Kentish Shore, to which one of the Judges came; and a good Meeting it was. Then, after we had had another good Meeting hard by there, at one Henry Wil∣cock's House, where also we had good Service for the Lord; we went by Water about twenty Miles, to a very large Meeting, where were some Hundreds of the World's People, and divers of the Chief Rank, both English and Indians: For there were four Justices of the Peace, and the High Sheriff of Delaware, and some others from thence: and there was an Indian Emperor, or Governour, and two others of the Chief Men among the Indians. With these Indians I had a good Op∣portunity the Night before the Meeting; and I spake to them by an Interpreter: and they heard the Truth attentively, and were very loving. A blessed Meeting this was, and of great Service, both for
Convincing,1672. Mary-land. and Establishing in the Truth them, that were convinced of it; blessed be the Lord, who causeth his blessed Truth to spread. Af∣ter the Meeting a Woman came to me, (whose Husband was one of the Judges of that part of the Country, and a Member of the Parliament or Assembly there) and told me, Her Husband was sick, not like to live; and desired me to go home with her to see him. It was three Miles to her House; and I being just come hot out of the Meeting, it was hard for me then to go: Yet considering the Service, I got an Horse, and went with her, and visited her Husband; and spake, what the Lord gave me to him: And the Man was much refreshed, and finely raised up by the Power of the Lord; and he afterwards came to our Meetings. I went back again to the Friends that Night; and next day we departed thence, and went about nineteen or twenty Miles to Tredhaven-Creek, to John Edmundson's again: from whence,Tredha∣ven-Creek. on the Third of the Eighth Month, we went to the General Meeting for all Maryland-Friends. This Meeting held five Days together:General Meeting. the first three Days we had Meetings for Publick Worship, to which People of all sorts came; the other two days were spent in the Mens and Womens Meetings. To those Publick Meetings came many of the World, both Protestants of divers sorts, and some Papists; and amongst these were several Ma∣gistrates, and their Wives, and other Persons of chief Account in the Country: and of the common People there were so many, besides Friends, that they thought, there were sometimes a Thousand People at one of those Meetings. So that, although they had not long be∣fore enlarged their Meeting-place, and made it as big again, as it was before; yet it could not contain the People. I went by Boat every Day four or five Miles to the Meeting, and there were so many Boats at that time passing upon the River, that it was almost like the Thames; and People said, There were never so many Boats seen there together before. And as the Concourse of People was very great (so that one of the Justices, who was there, said, He never saw so many People to∣gether in that Country before;) so it was a very Heavenly Meeting, wherein the Presence of the Lord was gloriously manifested, and Friends were thereby sweetly refreshed, and the People generally sa∣tisfied, and many convinced: for the blessed Power of the Lord was over all; everlasting Praises to his Holy Name for ever. After the Publick Meetings were over, the Mens and Womens-Meetings be∣gan, and were held the other two Days: for I had something to im∣part to them, which concerned the Glory of God, and the Order of the Gospel, and the Government of Christ Jesus. So when these Meetings were all over, we took our Leaves of Friends in those parts; whom we left well established in the Truth (which is of good Report amongst the People there, and great Enquirings there are after it, amongst all sorts of People.) And upon the Tenth Day of the Eighth Month we went from thence about Thirty Miles by Water, pas∣sing by Cranes-Island, and Swan-Island,Cranes-Island. Swan-Island. Kent-Island. and Kent-Island in very foul Weather and much Rain; whereby (our Boat being open) we were not only very much wetted, but in great danger of being overset: Insomuch that some of the World thought, we could not have escaped casting away, till they saw us come to Shore next morning. But blessed
be God, we were very well. And having got a little House, and dried our Cloths by the Fire, and refreshed our selves a little, we be∣took us to our Boat again; and put off from Land, sometimes Sailing, and sometimes Rowing: but having very foul Weather that day too, we could not get above twelve Miles forward that Day. At Night we got to Land, and made us a Fire, and some lay by that; and some lay by a Fire at an House a little way off. Then, next Morning pur∣suing our Journey,Great-Bay. we passed over the great Bay, and sailed about Forty Miles that day; and making to Shore at Night, we lay there, some in the Boat, and some at an Ale-house by. Next morning (it be∣ing the First-Day of the Week) we went Six or Seven Miles to a Friend's House, who was a Justice of the Peace; where we had a Meeting that Day: and this was a little above the Head of the Great Bay. So we were almost four Days upon the Water, weary with Rowing; yet all was very well, blessed and praised be the Lord. We went next Day to another Friend's House, near the Head of Hatton's-Island,Hatton's-Island. where we had good Service amongst Friends and others: as we had also the Day following at Geo. Wilson's, a Friend, that lived about three Miles further; where we had a very precious Meeting, there being a great Tenderness amongst the People. After this Meeting we sailed thence about Ten Miles to James Friz∣by's (who was a Justice of the Peace) and there, on the Sixteenth of the Eighth Month, we had a very large Meeting; at which, besides Friends, were some Hundreds of People, as it was supposed, and amongst them were several Justices of the Peace, and Captains, and the Sheriff, with other Persons of Note in the World's Account. A bles∣sed, heavenly Meeting this was, and a powerful, thundering Testimony for Truth was born therein; and a great Sense there was upon the People, and a great Brokenness and Tenderness was amongst them. We stay'd after Meeting, till about the Eleventh Hour in the Night, that the Tide turned, and was with us: and then taking Boat again, we passed that Night and the next Day about Fifty Miles, to another Friend's House. The two next days we made short Journies, visiting Friends: and on the Twentieth we had a great Meeting at a place called Severn,Severn. where there was a Meeting-Place, but not large enough to hold the People by many; for the People of those parts came ge∣nerally to it. Divers of the Chief Magistrates were at it, and ma∣ny other considerable People; and it gave them generally great Sa∣tisfaction, Two days after we had a Meeting with some, that walked disorderly; and we had good Service in it. Then spending a day or two in visiting Friends thereabouts,Western-Shore. we passed to the Western-Shore; and on the Twenty fifth Day had a large and precious Meeting at William Coale's, where the Speaker of their Assembly, with his Wife, and a Justice of Peace, and several other People of Quality were present. Next Day we had a Meeting, six or seven Miles further, at Abraham Birkhead's, where many of the Magistrates and upper sort of People were; and the Speaker of the Parliament or Assembly for that Country was Convinced: A blessed Meeting it was, praised be the Lord. We travelled on next Day; and on the Day following (which was the Twenty eighth of the Eighth Month) had a large and very precious Meeting at Peter Sharp's,Clifts. on the Clifts, between Thirty and Forty
Miles distant from the former. Many of the Magistrates, and upper Rank of People were at this Meeting, and a heavenly Meeting it was. One of the Governour's Council's Wives was Convinced; and her Hus∣band very loving to Friends: and one, that came from Virginia (be∣ing a Justice of the Peace there) was Convinced; and hath a Meeting since at his House. There was some Papists at this Meeting; and one of them threatned, before he came, that he would Dispute with me: but when he came, he was reached, and could not oppose. Blessed be the Lord, the Truth hath reached into the Hearts of People beyond Words, and it is of a good Savour amongst them. After the Meeting we went about Eighteen Miles to James Preston's, a Friend that liveth on Pottuxon-River; and thither came to us an Indian King,Pottuxon-River. with his Brother, to whom I spake; and I found, they understood the thing I spake of. Now having finished our Service in Mary-land, and intend∣ing forthwith to set forward for Virginia,Pottuxon. we had a Meeting at Pot∣tuxon on the Fourth Day of the Ninth Month, to take our Leaves of Friends. The Meeting was in the Meeting-Place; and many of the World's People of all sorts were at it; and a powerful Meeting it was. Upon the Fifth Day of the Ninth Month we set Sail for Virginia,VIRGINIA and in three days came to a Place called Nancemum;Nance∣mum. it being (as they there computed) about Two hundred Miles from Mary-land. In this Voyage we met with nothing, but what had been usual with us, namely, foul Weather, Storms and Rain; and to lie in the Woods by a Fire in the Night. At this Nancemum lived a Friend, called the Widow Wright. Next Day we had a great Meeting at Nancemum, of Friends and People: There came to this Meeting one Col. Dewes, with seve∣ral other Officers and Magistrates, and were much taken with the Truth declared. After this Meeting was over, we hast'ned towards Ca∣rolina; yet had several Meetings by the Way, wherein we had good Service for the Lord: One about four Miles from Nancemum-Water, which was a very precious Meeting; and there was a Mens- and a Womens-Meeting settled, for taking Care of the Affairs of the Church. Another very good Meeting also we had at William Yarrow's, at a place called Pagan-Creek; where the Meeting was so large,Pagan-Creek. that we were fain to be abroad, the House not being big enough to contain the Peo∣ple. A great Openness there was in the People; and the Sound of Truth did spread abroad, and had a good Savor in the Hearts of People: the Lord have the Glory for ever! After this our way to Carolina grew worse, being much of it plashy and wet, and pretty full of great Bogs and Swamps; so that we were commonly wet to the Knees most of us, and lay abroad a-Nights in the Woods by a Fire: saving that one of the Nights we got to a poor House, at a place called Sommertown,Sommer∣ton. and lay by the Fire in the House. The Woman of the House had a Sense of God upon her: and the Report of our Travel had reached thither, and drawn some People, that lived beyond Sommertown, to that House, in Expectation to have seen and heard us (so acceptable was the Sound of Truth in that Wilderness-Country:) but they missed us. The next Day, which was the Twenty first of the Ninth Month, having travelled hard through the Woods, and over many Bogs and Swamps, we reached at Night
to Bonner's Creek;1672. CAROLI∣NA. and there we lay that Night by the Fire-side, the Woman lending us a Mat to lie on. This was the first House we came to in Carolina: And here we left our Horses, which were over-wearied with Travel. From hence we went down the Creek in a Canooe to Macocomocock-River,Bonner's Crk. and came to a Man's House,Macoco∣mocock-River. whose Name was Hugh Smith; where the People of the World came in to see us (for there were no Friends in that part of the Country:) and many of them did receive us gladly. Amongst others that came to us, there was one Nathaniel Batts, who (we heard) had been Governour of Ronoack: He went by the Name of Captain Batts, and had been a Rude, Desperate Man. He asked me about a Woman in Cumberland, who, he said he was told, had been healed by our Prayers, and Laying on of Hands, after she had been long sick, and given over by the Physicians; and he desired to know the certainty of it. I told him, We did not glory in such things; but many such things had been done by the Power of Christ. Not far from hence we had a Meeting among the World's People, and they were taken with the Truth; blessed be the Lord. Then pas∣sing down the River Maratick in a Canooe,Maratick-River. Cunny∣oke-Bay. we went down the Bay Connie-oak; and came to a Captain's House, who was loving to us, and lent us his Boat (for we were much wetted in the Canooe; the Water flashing in upon us.) With this Boat we went on to the Go∣vernour's House: but the Water in some places was so shallow, that the Boat being loaden, could not Swim; so that we were fain to put off our Shooes and Stockings, and wade through the Water a pretty way. The Governour, with his Wife, received us lovingly: but there was at his House a Doctor, who would needs Dispute with us. And truly, his Opposing us was of good Service, giving Occasion for the Opening of many things to the People, concerning the Light and Spirit of God, which he denied to be in Every one; and affirmed, that it was not in the Indians. Whereupon I called an Indian to us, and asked him. Whether or no, when he did lie, or do wrong to any one, there was not something in him, that did reprove him for it? And he said, There was such a thing in him, that did so reprove him; and he was ashamed, when he had done wrong, or spoken wrong. So we shamed the Doctor before the Governour and the People; insomuch, that the poor Man run out so far, that at length he would not own the Scrip∣tures. We tarried at the Governour's that Night: and next Morning he very courteously walked with us himself about two Miles through the Woods, to a place, whither he had sent our Boat about to meet us. Where taking our Leave of him, we entred our Boat again, and went that Day about Thirty Miles to one Joseph Scot's, who was one of the Representatives of the Country. And there we had a Meeting, and many People were at it: a sound, precious Meeting it was, and the People were tender; and much desired after Meetings. Wherefore we went to another House about four miles further, and there we had another Meeting; to which the Governour's Secretary came, who was Chief Secretary of the Province, and had (it seems) been for∣merly Convinced.
I went from this place among the Indians,1672. Carolina. Indians. and spake unto them by an Interpreter, shewing them; That God made all things in Six Days, and made but one Woman for one Man: and that God did drown the Old World, because of their Wickedness. Afterwards I spake to them concerning Christ, shewing them, That he did die for all men, for their Sins as well as for others; and had enlightned them, as well as others: and that if they did that which was Evil, he would burn them; but if they did well, they should not be burned. There was among them their young King, and others of their Chief Men; and they seemed to receive kindly, what I said unto them. Now having visited the North-Part of Carolina, and made a little Entrance for Truth upon the People there; we began to return again towards Virginia, having several Meetings in our way, wherein we had very good Service for the Lord, the People being generally tender and open, blessed be the Lord. We lay one Night at the Secretary's House, to which we had much ado to get: for the Water being shal∣low, we could not bring our Boat to Shore. But the Secretary's Wife, seeing our Strait, came her self in a Canooe. (her Husband be∣ing from home) and brought us to Land. By next Morning our Boat was sunk, and full of Water: But we got her up, and mended her; and went away in her that Day about Twenty four Miles, the Wa∣ter being rough and troubled, and the Winds high: but the great Power of God was seen, in carrying us safe in that rotten Boat. In our Return we had a very precious Meeting at Hugh Smith's; praised be the Lord for ever: the People were very tender, and very good Service we had amongst them. There was at this Meeting an Indian Captain, who was very loving; and did acknowledge it to be Truth, that was spoken. There was also one of the Indian Priests, whom they call a Pauwaw; and he sate soberly among the People. On the Ninth of the Tenth Month we got back to Bonners-Creek,Bonner's-Creek. where we had left our Horses; having spent a matter of Eighteen Days in the North of Carolina. Our Horses having rested, and being now fresh, we set forward forthwith for Virginia again; travelling through the Woods and Bogs,VIRGINIA as far as we could well reach that Day; and at Night lay by a Fire in the Woods, as we often used to do. Next Day we had a tedious Jour∣ney through the Bogs and Swamps, and were exceeding wet and dirty all the Day; but dried our selves at Night by a Fire. We got that Night to Sommerton. And when we came near the House,Sommer∣ton. the Woman of the House seeing us, spake to her Son to keep up their Dogs (for both in Virginia and Carolina they generally keep great Dogs to guard their Houses, living lonely in the Woods:) But the Son said, He need not; for their Dogs did not use to meddle with these People. Where∣upon, when we were come into the House, the Woman told us; We were like the Children of Israel, whom the Dogs did not move their Tongues against. Here we lay, but in our Cloths, and by the Fire; as we had done many a Night before. And the next Day, before we went away, we had a Meeting here: for the People having heard of us, had a great Desire to hear us; and a very good Meeting we had among them, where we never had Meeting before: praised be the Lord for ever! After the Meeting we hasted away. And when we
had ridden about Twenty Miles,1672. Virginia. calling at a House to enquire the Way, the People of the House desired us to tarry all Night with them: which we did. Next Day we came among Friends, after we had travelled about an Hundred Miles from Carolina into Virginia: In which time we observed a great Variety of Climates; having passed in a few Days from a very Cold, to a warm and spring-like Country. But the Power of the Lord is the same in all, and is over all, and doth reach the good in all; praised be the Lord for ever! We spent about three Weeks this time in travelling through Virgi∣nia, sometimes amongst the World's People only, but mostly amongst Friends; having many large and precious Meetings in several parts of the Country: As at the Widow Wright's, where a great many of the Magistrates, and Officers, and other high People came. And a most Heavenly Meeting we had; wherein the Power of the Lord was so great, that it struck a Dread upon the Assembly, and chained all down, and brought a Reverence upon the Peoples Minds. Among the Officers that were there, there was a Major, that was Kinsman to the Priest; and he told me, The Priest threatned to come, and Oppose us. But the Lord's Power was too strong for him, and stopt him; and we were quiet and peaceable: and the People were wonderfully affected with the Testimony of Truth; blessed be the Lord for ever! Another very good Meeting we had at a place called Crickatrough,Cricka∣trough. at which many Considerable People were; many of whom had never heard a Friend before: and they were greatly satisfied with the Meeting, prai∣sed be the Lord! We had also a very good and serviceable Meeting at John Porter's, which consisted mostly of the World's People; in which the Power of the Lord was gloriously seen and felt, and it brought the Truth over all the bad Walkers and Talkers: blessed be the Lord! Divers other Meetings we had, and many Opportunities of doing Ser∣vice for the Lord amongst the People, where we came. And the last Week, that we stay'd, we spent some Time and Pains among Friends, sweeping away, that which was to be swept out, and working down a bad Spirit, that was got up in some: And blessed for ever be the Name of the Lord, he it is, that gives Victory over all. Now having finished, what Service lay upon us at Virginia; on the Thirtieth Day of the Tenth Month we set Sail in an open Sloop for Mary∣land.MARY∣LAND. But having a very great Storm that day, and being much wet∣ted, we were glad to get to Shore before Night: And walking to an House at Willoughby-Point,Willough∣by-Point. we got Lodging there that Night. The Woman of the House was a Widow, and a very tender Woman: She had never received Friends before; but she received us very kindly, and with Tears in her Eyes. We returned to our Boat in the Morn∣ing, and hoised up our Sail; getting forward as fast and as far as we could: but towards Evening a Storm rising, and the Wind being high, we had much ado to get to the Shore; and our Boat being open, the Water slashed often in, and sometimes over us, so that we were suffi∣ciently wetted. Being got to Land, we made us a Fire in the Woods, to warm and dry us; and there we lay all that Night, the Wolves howling about us. On the First of the Eleventh Month we sailed again: but the Wind being against us, and sometimes driving us backwards, we made but little Way; and were fain to get to Shore
at Point-Comfort; where yet we found but small Comfort:1672. Mary-land for the Weather was so Cold, that though we made us a good Fire in the Woods to lie by; yet our Water, that we had got for our Use, was frozen near the Fire-side. We made to Sea again next Day:Point-Comfort. but the Wind being strong, and against us, we advanced but little; but were glad to get to Land again, and travel about to find some House, where we might buy some Provisions: for our Store was spent. That Night also we lay in the Woods: and so extream Cold was the Weather, the Wind blowing high, and the Frost and Snow being great, that it was hard for some to abide it. On the Third of the Eleventh Month, the Wind sitting pretty fair, we fetched it up by Sailing and Rowing, and got that Night to Milford-Haven,Milford-Haven. Raphahan∣nock-Ri∣ver. where we lay at Richard Long's near Quinces-Island. Next Day we passed by Raphahannock-River, where dwell much People; and Friends had a Meeting there-aways at a Justice's House, that had formerly been at a Meeting, where I was. We passed over Potomack-River also; the Winds being high,Potomack-River. the Water very rough, our Sloop open, and the Weather extream Cold: and ha∣ving a Meeting there-aways also, some People of the World, that came to it, were Convinced: and when we parted thence, some of our Company went amongst them.Potuxon-River. We steered our Course for Pottuxon-River; and I sate at Helm most part of the Day, and some of the Night. About the First Hour in the Morning we reached James Pre∣ston's House in Pottuxon-River; which is accounted about Two hundred Miles from Nancemum in Virginia. We were very weary; yet the next Day (being the First of the Week, and Fifth of the Month) we went to the Meeting not far from thence: and the same Week we went to an Indian-King's-Cabbin, where several of the Indians were;Indian-King's-Cabbin. with whom we had a pretty Opportunity to discourse: and they car∣ried themselves very lovingly. We went also that Week to a General Meeting: from which we went about Eighteen Miles further to John Gearies, where we had a very precious Meeting; praised be the Lord God for ever! But after this the Cold grew so exceeding sharp, such extream Frost and snowy Weather, beyond what was usual in that Country; so that we could hardly endure to be in it. Neither was it easie or safe to stir abroad: yet we got (with some Difficulty) six Miles through the Snow to John Mayer's, where we met with some Friends, that were come from New-England; whom we had left there, when we came away: and glad we were to see each other, after so long and tedious Travels. By these Friends we understood, that Wil∣liam Edmundson, having been at Road-Island and New-England, was gone from thence for Ireland; that Solomon Eccles coming from Ja∣maica, and landing at Boston in New-England, was taken at a Meeting there, and banished to Barbados; that John Stubbs and another Friend were gone into New-Jersey, and several other Friends to Barbados, Ja∣maica, and the Leeward-Islands. It was Matter of Joy to us to un∣derstand, that the Work of the Lord went on and prospered, and that Friends were unwearied, and diligent in the Service. On the Twenty Seventh of the Eleventh Month, we had a very precious Meeting in a Tobacco-House: and on the next Day we return∣ed to James Preston's, about Eighteen Miles distant.J. Preston's. But when we came there we found, his House was burnt down to the Ground the
Night before,1672. Mary-land J. Preston's. through the Carelesness of a Maid-servant: So we lay three Nights on the Ground by the Fire, the Weather being very Cold. We made an Observation, which was somewhat strange, but certainly true; that one Day in the midst of this Cold Weather, the Wind turning into the South, it grew so hot, that we could hardly bear the Heat; and the next Day and Night, the Wind chopping back into the North, we could hardly endure the Cold. Pottuxon.On the Second of the Twelfth Month, we had a glorious Meeting at Pottuxon: and after it went to John Gearie's again, where we waited for a Boat,Clifts. to carry us to the Monthly-Meeting at the Clifts; to which we went, and a living Meeting it was, praised be the Lord: This was on the Sixth of the Twelfth Month. And another Meeting we had on the Ninth, wherein the Glory of the Lord shined over all; blessed and magnified be his Holy Name for ever. From hence we intended to go to Anamessy; and on the Twelfth Day of the Twelfth Month we set forward in our Boat: And travelling by Night, as well as by Day, in the Night we run our Boat on Ground in a Creek near Manaco-River.Manaco-River. There we were fain to stay, till Morning, that the Tide came, and lifted her off again: And in the mean time, sitting in an open Boat, and the Weather being bitter-cold, some had like to have lost the Ʋse of their Hands, they were so frozen and benummed with Cold. But in the Morning, when the Tide had set our Boat a-float again, we got to Land, and made us a good Fire; at which we warmed our selves well: and then went to our Boat again, and passed on about ten miles further to a Friend's House; where next day we had a very precious Meeting, at which some of the Chief of the Place were. I went after the Meeting to a Friend's House, about four miles off,Anamessy-River. at the Head of Anamessy-River; where on the Day following, the Judge of the Country, and a Justice with him came to me, and were very loving, and much satisfied with Friend's Order. The next Day we had a large Meeting at the Justice's House, but it was in his Barn; for his House could not hold the Company. There were several of the Great Folks of that Country; and among the rest there was an Opposer: but all was preserved quiet and well, and a precious Meeting it was; and the People were much taken and affected with the Truth, blessed be the Lord. We went next Day to see one Capt. Col∣burn, who was also a Justice of the Peace; and there we had some Ser∣vice: Then returning again, we had a very glorious Meeting at the same Justice's, where we met before; and there were many People of Account in the World, Magistrates, Officers, and others at it. It was a large Meeting, and the Power of the Lord was much felt; so that the People were generally well satisfied, and taken with the Truth: and there being several, both Merchants, and Masters of Ships from New-England, the Truth was spread abroad; blessed be the Lord! A Day or two after, departing from this place, we travelled about sixteen miles through the Woods and Bogs, heading Anamessy-River, and Amoroca-River;Amoroca-River. Manaoke. part of which last we went over in a Canooe, and came to Manaoke, to a Friendly Woman's House: where on the Twenty fourth of the Twelfth Month, we had a large Meeting in a Barn; and the Lord's living Presence was with us, and among the People: blessed be his Holy Name for ever-more! Friends had never had a Meeting
in those Parts before.1673. Mary-land Wicoco∣maco-Ri∣ver. After this Meeting we passed over the River Wicocomaco, and through many bad and watry Swamps and Marish Way; and came to James Jones, a Friend, who was a Justice of the Peace: where we had a large and very glorious Meeting, praised be the Lord God. Then passing over the Water in a Boat, we took Horse, and travelled about Twenty four Miles through Woods and troublesom Swamps, and came to another Justice's House; where we had a very large Meeting, much People of the World being at it, and many of Considerable Account amongst them: and the living Presence of the Lord was amongst us, praised for ever be his holy Name! This was on the Third Day of the First Month, 1672/3. And on the Fifth Day of the same we had another living and heavenly Meeting, at which divers of the Justices, with their Wives, and many others of the World's People were; amongst whom we had very good Service for the Lord, blessed be his Holy Name. At this Meeting was a Woman, that lived at Anamessy, who had been many Years in Trouble of Mind; and sometimes would sit moping near two Months together, and hardly speak or mind any thing. When I heard of her, I was moved of the Lord to go to her, and tell her, 'That Salvation was come to her House. And after I had spoken the Word of Life to her, and intreat∣ed the Lord for her, she mended; and went up and down with us to Meetings, and is since well: blessed be the Lord! Being now clear of these parts, we left Anamessy on the Seventh Day of the First Month: and passing by Water about Fifty Miles, came to a Friendly Woman's House at Hunger-River.Hunger-River. We had very rough Weather in our Passage to this Place, and were in great Danger, for the Boat had like to have been turned over; and I lost both my Hat and Cap: yet we recovered them again with much ado; and through the good Providence of God got safe thither, praised be his Name. At this place we had a Meeting, where we had never any before; and amongst the People that were at it, there were two Papists, a Man and a Woman: the Man was very tender; and the Woman con∣fessed to the Truth. This Meeting was not so large, as it would have been, if many, who intended to have been at it, could have got to it: but the Weather was so foul, and the Water by reason of high Winds, so rough, that it was not safe to pass upon it. I had no Friend now with me, but Robert Widders; the rest having dispersed themselves into several parts of the Country in the Service of Truth. So soon as the Wind would permit, we passed from hence about Forty Miles by Water, rowing most part of the way; and came to the Head of little Choptanck-River, to Dr. Winsmore's,Chop∣tanck-River. who was a Justice of Peace, and lately convinced. Here we met with some Friends, with whom we staid a while: and then went on by Land and Water, and had a large Meeting abroad; for the House we were at, could not receive the People. There were divers of the Magistrates, and their Wives at this Meeting; and a good Meeting it was, blessed be the Lord, who is making his Name known in that Wilderness-Country. We went back from thence to a Friend's House, whose Name is William Stephen's, where we met with those other Friends, that had been tra∣velling in other parts; and were much refreshed in the Lord together, when we imparted to each other the good Success, we had had in the
Lord's Work,1673. Mary-land and the Prosperity and spreading of Truth in the places, where we travelled. John Cartwright and another Friend had been at Virginia, where were great Desires in People after the Truth: and be∣ing now returned, they staid but a little with us here; and then set forward for Barbados. But before we left this place, we had a very glorious Meeting here, at which were very many of the World's People, and some of the Chief of them. For there was the Judge of that Country, and three Justices of the Peace, and the High-Sheriff, with their Wives, and several others: And of Indians there was he, who was called their Emperor, and one of the Indian Kings, and their Speaker; who all sate very attentive, and carried themselves very lo∣vingly: and an establishing, settling Meeting it was. This was on the Twenty third of the First Month. And on the Twenty fourth we went by Water ten Miles to the Indian Town, where this same Emperor dwelt; whom I had acquainted before with my Coming, and desired him to get their Kings and Councils to∣gether. In the Morning the Emperor came himself, and had me to the Town; and they were generally come together, and had their Speaker, and other Officers with them, and the Old Empress sate among them: And to give them their due, they sate very grave and sober, and were all very Attentive, beyond many that are called Christians. I had some with me, that could interpret to them; and we had a very good Meeting with them, and of very good Service it was: for it gave them a good Esteem of Truth and Friends; blessed be the Lord! After this, we had many Meetings in several parts of that Coun∣try; one at William Stephens's, which was a general Meeting once a Month: another at Tredhaven-Creek; another at Wye; another at Reconow-Creek; and another at Thomas Taylor's in the Island of Kent. Most of these Meetings were large, there being many of the World's People at them, and divers of them of the most Considerable in the World's Account: And the Lord's Power and living Presence was with us, and plenteously manifested amongst the People, by which their Hearts were tendred, and opened to receive the Truth, which had a good Savour amongst them; blessed be the Lord God over all for ever. Then being clear of that side, we passed over the Bay about Fourteen Miles to a Friend's House, where we met with several Friends; and I sent for Thomas Thurston thither, and had a Meeting with him, to bring the Truth over his bad Actions. Now having travelled through most parts of that Country, and vi∣sited most of the Plantations thereabouts, and had very good Service for the Lord in America, having alarm'd the People of all sorts, where we came, and proclaimed the Day of God's Salvation amongst them; we found, our Spirits began to be clear of those parts of the World, and to draw towards Old England again. Yet we were desirous, and felt Freedom from the Lord to stay, till the General Meeting for that Province of Mary-land was over (which drew nigh;) that we might see Friends generally together, before we departed. Wherefore spend∣ing our time in the interim, partly in visiting Friends and Friendly People,Clifts. Pottuxon. and in having Meetings about the Clifts and Pottuxon; and partly in writing Answers to some Cavilling Objections, which some of Truth's Adversaries had raised and spread abroad, to hinder People
from receiving the Truth: we were not idle, but laboured in the Work of the Lord, until that General Provincial Meeting came on; which began on the Seventeenth Day of the Third Month,The Gene∣ral Provin∣cial Meet∣ing. and lasted four Days. On the First of these days the Men and Women had their Meetings for Business, wherein the Affairs of the Church of God were taken Care of; and many things, relating thereunto, were opened unto them to their Edification and Comfort. The other Three Days were spent in Publick Meetings for the Worship of God, at which divers of considerable Account in the Government, and many others of the World's People were present; who were generally satisfied, and many of them reached: for it was a wonderful, glorious Meeting, and the mighty Presence of the Lord was seen and felt over all; blessed and praed be his Holy Name for ever, who over all giveth Dominion! After this Meeting we took our Leave of Friends, parting in great Tenderness, in the sense of the Heavenly Life, and vertuous Power of the Lord, that was livingly felt amongst us: and went by Water to the place, where we were to take Shipping; many Friends accompanying us thither, and tarrying with us that Night. Next Day, which was the Twenty first of the Third Month, 1673, and the Day following we set Sail for England:At Sea. The same Day Richard Covell came on Board our Ship, having had his own taken from him by the Dutch. We had foul Weather, and contrary Winds, which caused us to cast Anchor often; so that we were till the Thirty first of the Third Month, e'er we could get past the Capes of Virginia, and come out into the main Sea. But after this we made good Speed,ENG∣LAND. King's-Road. and on the Twenty eighth of the Fourth Month, cast Anchor at Kings-road, which is the Har∣bour for Bristol. We had in our Passage very high Winds and Tempe∣stuous Weather, which made the Sea exceeding rough, the Waves rising like Mountains; so that the Masters and Sailers wondred at it, and said, They never saw the like before. But though the Wind was strong, it sate for the most part with us; so that we sailed away be∣fore it: and the Great God, who commands the Winds, who is Lord of Heaven, of Earth and the Seas, and whose Wonders are seen in the Deep, he steered our Course, and preserved us from many imminent Dangers. The same good Hand of Providence, that went with us, and carried us safely over, watched over us in our Return, and brought us safely back again; Thanksgivings and Praises be to his holy Name for ever! Many sweet and precious Meetings we had on Board the Ship during this Voyage, (commonly two a Week;) wherein the blessed Presence of the Lord did greatly refresh us, and did often break in up∣on, and tender the Company.Bristol-Harbour. And when we came into Bristol Har∣bour, there lay a Man of War; and the Press-master came on Board us to press our men. We had a Meeting at that time in the Ship with the Sea-men, before we went to Shore; and the Press-master sate down with us, and staid the Meeting, and was very well satisfied with it. After the Meeting I spake to him to leave two of the Men he had Pres∣sed, in our Ship (for he had pressed four,) one of which was a lame Man; and he said, At my Request he would. We went on Shore that Afternoon, and got to Shear-hampton,Shear-hampton. where we got Horses, and rode to Bristol that Night; where Friends
received us with great Joy.1673. Bristol. In the Evening I writ a Letter to my Wife, to give her Notice of my Landing, as followeth: Dear Heart, THis Day we came into Bristol near Night, from the Seas; Glory to the Lord God over all for ever, who was our Con∣voy, and steered our Course: who is the God of the whole Earth, and of the Seas and Winds, and made the Clouds his Chariots, be∣yond all Words, blessed be his Name for ever! Who is over all in his great Power and Wisdom, Amen. Robert Widders and James Lancaster are with me, and we are well: Glory to the Lord for ever, who hath carried us through many Perils, Perils by Water, and in Storms, Perils by Pirates and Robbers, Perils in the Wilder∣ness, and amongst false Professors; Praises to him, whose Glory is over all for ever, Amen. Therefore mind the fresh Life, and live all to God in it. I do intend (if the Lord will) to stay a while this-away; it may be till the Fair. So no more, but my Love to all Friends. Bristol, the 28th Day of the 4th Month, 1673. G. F. Between this and the Fair, my Wife came out of the North to Bri∣stol to me; and her Son-in-Law Thomas Lower, with two of her Daughters came with her. And her other Son-in-Law John Rouse, and W. Penn and his Wife, and Gerrard Roberts came down from Lon∣don, and many Friends from several parts of the Nation came to the Fair; and glorious, powerful Meetings we had there at that time, for the Lord's Infinite Power and Life was over all. In the fresh Openings whereof I was moved to declare of Three Estates, and Three Teachers, viz. That God was the first Teacher of Man and Woman in Paradise: And as long as they kept to, and under God's Teaching, they kept in the Image of God, and in his Likeness, in Righteousness and Holiness, and in Dominion over all, that God had made; in the blessed State, in the Paradise of God. But when they heark'ned to the Serpent's false Teaching (who was out of Truth) and disobeyed God, and obeyed the Serpent, in feeding upon that, which God forbad them; then they lost the Image of God, the Righteousness and Holiness, and came under the Power of Satan, and were turned out of Paradise, out of the Blessed into the Cursed State. And then the Promise of God was, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's Head, and break his Power that Man and Woman were under, and destroy his Works. So here were Three States, and Three Teachers. God was the first Teacher in Paradise: and whilst Man kept under his Teaching, he was happy. The Serpent was the Second Teacher: and when Man followed his Teaching, he came into Misery, and into the Fall, from the Image of God, and Righteousness and Holiness, and from the Power, that he had over all, that God had made; and came under the Serpent, whom he had Power over before. Christ Jesus was
the Third Teacher; of whom God saith, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him: and who himself saith, Learn of me. This is the true Gospel-Teacher, who bruises the Head of the Serpent, that is the False Teacher, and the Head of all False Teachers, and of all False Religions, False Ways, False Worships and False Churches. Now Christ, who said, Learn of me; and of whom the Father said, Hear ye him, he said; I am the Way to God, I am the Truth, I am the Life, and the true Light. So as Man and Woman come up again to God, and are renewed up into his Image, Righte∣ousness and Holiness by Christ, thereby they come up into the Pa∣radise of God, the State, which Man was in, before he fell; and in∣to an higher State than that, to sit down in Christ, that never fell. Therefore the Son of God is to be heard in all things, who is the Sa∣viour, and the Redeemer; and hath laid down his Life, and bought his Sheep with his precious Blood. And we can challenge all the World, Who hath any thing to say against our Way? our Saviour? our Redeemer? who is our Prophet, whom God hath raised up, that we may hear, and whom we must hear in all things: Who hath any thing against our Shepherd, Christ Jesus, who leads and feeds us, and we know his Heavenly Voice? And who hath any thing against our Bishop, in whose Mouth was never Guile found, who doth Over∣see us in his Pasture of Life, that we do not go astray from God, and out of his Fold? And who hath any thing against our Priest, Christ Jesus, made higher than the Heavens; who gives us freely, and commands us to give freely? And who hath any thing to say against our Leader and Counsellor, Christ Jesus, who never sinned; but is holy and harmless, and separate from Sinners? God hath com∣manded us to hear him, and he saith, Learn of me; and if we should disobey God's and Christ's Command, we should be like our Father Adam and Mother Eve, who disobeyed God's Command, and heark∣ned to the Serpent's Teaching. Now, Man commands, and would force us to hear the Hirelings, who plead for Sin and the Body of Death to the Grave; which Doctrine savours of the Devil's Teach∣ing, not of Christ's: But we resolve to hear the Son, as both he and the Father command; and in hearing the Son, we hear the Father also, as the Scripture testifies. For the Author to the Hebrews says, God, who at sundry times, and in divers manners spake in time past, unto the Fathers by the Prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son: Mark that, God hath spoken unto us (his Apostles, Dis∣ciples, Church) by his Son. And whereas some have objected, That although Christ did speak both to his Disciples and to the Jews, in the days of his Flesh; yet since his Resurrection and Ascension he doth not speak now. The Answer is; That as God did then speak by his Son, in the Days of his Flesh; so the Son, Christ Jesus, doth now speak by his Spirit. Wherefore John saith in the Revelations; He that hath an Ear, let him hear, what the Spirit saith to the Churches, Rev. 2. And Christ is said to speak from Heaven, Heb. 12.25. See, that ye refuse not him, that speaketh: for if they escaped not, who refused him, that spake on Earth; much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him, that speaketh from Heaven. They that resisted Moses his Law (who spake on Earth) died for it without Mercy; which was a
Natural Death: but they that refuse him, that speaks from Heaven, neglect and slight their own Salvation; and so die a Spiritual Death, through Unbelief and Hardness of Heart. Therefore was the Ex∣hortation given of old; To day, if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, as in the Provocation, &c. Heb. 3.15. &c. So that they, who neglect or refuse to hear the Voice of Christ, now speak∣ing from Heaven in this his Gospel-Day, harden their Hearts. There∣fore let all mark well thse three States and Teachers: The God of Truth was the first Teacher, we Man was in Paradise, and in Inno∣cency. The Serpent was the second Teacher, the false Teacher, who by his false Teaching came to be the God of the World, which lies in Wickednes. Christ Jesus, that bruises the Serpent's Head, is the third Teacher, who saith, Learn of me; and of whom God saith, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Hear ye him: and of whom the Testimony of the Saints of Old was, That God hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. Thus they, that come to be re∣newed up again into the Divine, Heavenly Image, in which Man was at first made, will know the same God, that was the First Teacher of Adam and Eve in Paradise, to speak to them now by his Son, who changes not; Glory be to his Name for ever! Many deep and precious Things were opened in those Meetings, by the Eternal Spirit, which searcheth and revealeth the deep Things of God: And after I had finished my Service for the Lord in that City, I departed thence into Glocestershire,Glocester∣shire. where we had many large and pre∣cious Meetings; and the Lord's Everlasting Power flowed over all. From Glocestershire I passed into Wiltshire,Wiltshire. where also we had many blessed Meetings.Slatten∣ford. At Slattenford in Wiltshire we had a very good Meeting, though we met there with much Opposition from some, who had set themselves against Womens-Meetings; which I was moved of the Lord to recommend to Friends, for the Benefit and Advantage of the Church of Christ. That the faithful Women, who were called to the Belief of the Truth,The Ser∣vice of Womens-Meetings. being made Partakers of the same precious Faith, and Heirs of the same everlasting Gospel of Life and Salva∣tion, as the Men are; might in like manner come into the Possession and Practice of the Gospel-Order, and therein be Meet-helps unto the Men in the Restoration, in the Service of Truth, in the Affairs of the Church, as they are outwardly in outward and civil, or temporal things. That so all the Family of God, Women as well as Men, might know, possess, perform and discharge their Offices and Services in the House of God, whereby the Poor might be the better looked after, and taken care of; the Younger sort instructed, informed and taught in the Way of God; the loose and disorderly reproved and admonish∣ed in the Fear of the Lord; the Clearness of Persons propounding Marriage, more closely and strictly enquired into in the Wisdom of God: and all the Members of the Spiritual Body, the Church, might watch over, and be helpful to each other in Love. But after these Opposers had run into much Contention and Wrangling, the Power of the Lord struck down one of the Chief of them, so that his Spirit sunk; and he came to be sensible of the Evil he had done, in opposing God's Heavenly Power; and confessed his Error before Friends: and after∣wards
gave forth a Paper of Condemnation; wherein he declared,1673. Slatten∣ford. That he did wilfully oppose (although I often warned him to take heed;) until the Fire of the Lord did burn within him: and he saw the Angel of the Lord with his Sword drawn in his Hand, ready to cut him off, &c. Notwithstanding the Opposition was made at the Meeting, yet a very good and serviceable Meeting it was; for occasion was thereby administred to Answer their Objections and Cavils, and to open the Services of Women in and for the Church. And at this Meeting the Womens-Meetings for that County were established in the blessed Power of God. After this I went to Marlborough, and had a Meeting there;Marlbo∣rough. to which some of the Magistrates came, and were civil and moderate. Then passing on to Bartholomew Maylin's, I had a very precious Meet∣ing there: and from thence went a little beyond Ore,Ore. where we had a blessed Meeting, and very large; as we had also soon after upon the Border of Hampshire. Then turning into Oxfordshire,Hampshire. Oxfordshire Reading. Bucking∣hamshire. we visited Friends there; and then went to Reading, where we had a large Meeting: and from thence passing into Buckinghamshire, had many precious Meetings in that County. After which we went upwards, visiting Friends, till we came to Kingston upon Thames,Kingston upon Thames. where my Wife, and her Daughter Rachel met me. I made no long stay at Kingston, but went to London, where I found,London. the Baptists and Socinians, with some Old Apostates, were grown ve∣ry Rude, having printed many Books against us: So that I had a great Travel, in the Lord's Power, before I could get clear of that City. But blessed be the Lord, his Power came over them all; and all their lying, wicked, scandalous Books were answered. Then after a while,Essex. Middlesex. I made a short Journey into some parts of Essex and Middle∣sex, visiting Friends at their Meetings, and their Children at their Schools; and returned soon again to London.London. And after I had had some Service there among Friends, I went down to Kingston,Kingston. and from thence to Stephen Smith's in Surrey;Surrey. where was a very large Meeting, many Hundreds of People being at it. I staid in those parts, till I had cleared my self of the Service, the Lord had given me to do there, and then returned by Kingston to London,Kingston. London. whither I felt my Spirit drawn; having heard, that many Friends were had before the Magistrates, and divers Imprisoned, both at London, and in other Ci∣ties and Towns in the Nation, for opening their Shop-windows upon Holy-days, and Fast-days, (as they were called) and for bearing Te∣stimony against all such Observations of Days. Which Friends could not but do, knowing, that the true Christians did not observe the Jews Holy-days in the Apostles times; neither could we observe the Heathens and Papists Holy days (so called) which have been set up amongst those that are called Christians, since the Apostles days. For we were redeemed out of Days by Christ Jesus, and brought into the Day, which hath sprung from on high; and are come into him, who is Lord of the Jewish Sabbath, and the Substance of the Jews Signs. Now after I had staid some time in London, labouring for some Re∣lief and Ease to Friends in this Case, I took Leave of Friends there, and went into the Country, with my Wife, and her Daughter Rachel,
to Hendon in Middlesex,1673. Middlesex. Hendon. Hertford∣shire. Rickmans∣worth. Aylesbury. Oxfordshire Adder∣bury. and from thence to William Penn's at Rick∣mansworth in Hertfordshire, whither Thomas Lower (who married ano∣ther of my Wife's Daughters) came to us the next Day, to accom∣pany us in our Journey Northward. After we had visited Friends thereabouts, we passed to a Friend's House near Aylesbury; and from thence to Bray Doily's at Adderbury in Oxfordshire, where on the First Day we had a large and precious Meeting: and Truth being well spread, and Friends in those parts much increased in number, two or three new Meetings were then set up thereabouts. Now at Night, as I was sitting at Supper, I felt, I was Taken; yet I said nothing to any body of it then. But getting out next Morning, we travelled through the Country into Worcestershire,Worcester∣shire. Treding∣ton-Parish. Armscot. and went to John Halford's House at Armscot in Tredington-Parish; where we had a very large and precious Meeting in his Barn, the Lord's Powerful Pre∣sence being eminently with us, and amongst us. After the Meeting was done, and Friends (most of them) gone away, as I was sitting in the Parlour, discoursing with some Friends, that staid, there came to the House one Henry Parker, called a Justice, and with him one Rowland Hains, a Priest of Hunniton in Warwickshire. This Justice came to know of the Meeting by means of a Woman-Friend; who be∣ing Nurse to a Child of his, asked Leave of her Mistress, to go to the Meeting to see me: and she speaking of it to her Husband, he and the Priest plotted together to come and break up the Meeting, and appre∣hend me. But by means of their sitting long at Dinner (it being the Day, on which his Child was sprinkled) they came not, till the Meet∣ing was over, and Friends mostly gone. But though there was no Meeting, when they came; yet I being there in the House, who was the Person they aimed at; the said Henry Parker took me, and Thomas Lower for Company with me: and though he had nothing to lay to our Charge, sent us both to Worcester-Jail, by a strange sort of Mittimus, a Copy of which here followeth: Worce∣ster ss.To the Constables of Tredington in the said County of Worcester, and to all Constables and Tithing-men of the several Townships and Villages within the said Parish of Tredington, and to the Keeper of the Goal for the County of Worcester. COmplaint being made to me, being one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County of Worcester, that within the said Parish of Tredington in the said County, there has of late been several Meetings of divers Persons, to the number of Four hundred Persons and upwards at a time, upon Pretence of Exercise of Religion, otherwise than what is established by the Laws of England. And many of the said Persons, some of them were Teachers, and came from the North, and others from the remote parts of the Kingdom, which tends to the Prejudice of the Reformed and Established Religion, and may prove pre∣judicial to the Publick Peace. And it appearing to me, that there was this present Day such a Meeting as aforesaid, to the number of Two hun∣dred
or thereabouts, at Armscot in the said Parish of Tredington;1670. Armscot. and that George Fox of London, and Thomas Lower of the Parish of Creed in the County of Cornwal, were present at the said Meeting, and the said George Fox was Teacher or Speaker of the said Meeting; and no satisfactory Account of their Settlement, or place of Habitation appearing to me, and forasmuch as the said George Fox and Thomas Lower refused to give Sureties to Appear at the next Sessions of the Peace, to be holden for the said County, to answer the Breach of the Common-Laws of England, and what other Matters should be Ob∣jected against them: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require you, or either of you, forthwith to Convey the Bodies of the said George Fox and Thomas Lower to the County-Goal of Worcester aforesaid, and there safely to be kept, until they shall be from thence delivered by due Course of Law: For which this shall be your sufficient Warrant in that behalf. Dated the 17th Day of December, in the 25th Year of his Majesty's Reign over England, &c. HENRY PARKER. Being thus made Prisoners, without any probable Appearance of being Released before the Quarter-Sessions at Soonest, we got some Friends to accompany my Wife and her Daughter into the North; and we were conveyed to Worcester-Jail: from whence,Worcester-Jail. by that time I thought, my Wife could be got home, I writ her the following Letter. Dear Heart, THou seemedst to be a little grieved, when I was speaking of Prisons, and when I was taken: Be content with the Will of the Lord God. For when I was at John Rous's at Kingston, I had a sight of my being taken Prisoner; and when I was at Bray Doily's in Oxfordshire, as I sate at Supper, I saw, I was taken: and I saw, I had a Suffering to undergo. But the Lord's Power is over all, bles∣sed be his Holy Name for ever! G. F. When we had beeen some time in the Jail, we thought fit to lay our Case before him, who was called the Lord Windsore, who was the Lord Lieutenant of Worcestershire; and before the Deputy Lieutenants, and other Magistrates: Which we did by the following Letter. THese are to inform you, the Lord Lieutenant (so called) and the Deputy-Lieutenants, and the Justices of the County of Worcestershire, how Unchristianly and Inhumanly we have been dealt withal by Henry Parker, a Justice (so called) in our Journey or Travel towards the North. We coming to our Friend John Hal∣ford's House on the Seventeenth Day of the Tenth Month 1673. and some Friends bringing us on the Way, and others coming to Visit us there; towards Night there came the aforesaid Justice, and a Priest, called Rowland Hains of Hunniton in Warwickshire, and de∣manded our Names and Places of Abode. And though we were
not in any Meeting,1673. Wor∣cester-Jail. but were discoursing together, when they came in; yet he made a Mittimus to send us to Worcester-Jail. Now, whereas he says in his Mittimus, That Complaint had been made to him of several by-past Meetings of many Hundreds at a time, we know nothing of that; nor do we think, that concerns us. And where∣as he says further, That no satisfactory Account of our Settlement, or place of Habitation appeared unto him. This he contradicts in his own Mittimus, mentioning therein the Places of our Abode and Ha∣bitation; the Account of which we satisfactorily and fully gave him. And one of us (Tho. Lower) told him, That I was going down with my Mother-in-Law (who is George Fox his Wife) and with my Si∣ster, to fetch up my own Wife and Child out of the North into my own Country: And the other of us (George Fox) told him, That I was bringing forward my Wife on her Journey towards the North (who had been at London to visit one of her Daughters, that had lately Lain in.) And having received a Message from my Mother, an ancient Woman in Leicestershire, that she earnestly desired to see me, before she died; I intended, as soon as I had brought my Wife on her Journey as far as Causal in Warwickshire, to turn over into Leicestershire, to have seen my Mother and Relations there, and then to have returned to London again. But by his interrupting of us in our Journey, and taking the Husband from his Wife, and the Son from his Mother and Sister, and stopping him from visiting his Wife and Child so remote off; we were forced to get Strangers, or whom we could, to help them on their Journey, to our great Dam∣mage, and their Hindrance. We askt the Priest. Whether this was his Gospel, and their Way of Entertaining Strangers? And we de∣sired the Justice to consider, Whether this was doing, as he would be done by? But he said, He had said it, and he would do it. And whereas he says, We refused to give Sureties: He asked only George Fox for Sureties; who replied, He was an Innocent Man, and knew no Law, he had broken: But he did not ask Tho. Lower for any; as if it had been Crime and Cause enough for his Commitment, that he came out of Cornwall. And if we were at a Meeting, as he says in his Mittimus, he might have proceeded otherwise, than by sending us to Jail, to answer the Breach of the Common Laws; though yet he shewed us no Breach of any: as may be seen in the Mittimus. So we thought fit to lay before you the Substance of his Proceedings against us; hoping, there will more Moderation and Justice appear in you towards us, that so we may prosecute our intended Journey. George Fox. Thomas Lower. But no Enlargement did we receive by our Application to the Lord Windsor (so called.) And although Thomas Lower received several Letters from his Brother Dr. Lower (who was one of the King's Physi∣cians) concerning his Liberty, and one, by his Procurement, from Henry Savil (who was one of the King's Bed-Chamber) to his Brother, called the Lord Windsor, to the same Effect; yet seeing, it related on∣ly to his Enlargement, not mine, so great was his Love and Regard to me, that he would not seek his own Liberty singly, but kept the Letter
by him unsent. So we were continued Prisoners,1673. Worce∣ster-Gene∣ral-Quar∣ter-Sessions till the next General Quarter-Sessions of the Peace: At which time divers Friends from se∣veral places being in Town, did speak to the Justices concerning us; who spake fair to Friends, and said, we should be discharged. For many of the Justices seemed to dislike the Severity of Parker's Pro∣ceedings against us; and did declare an Averseness to ensnare us by the Tender of the Oaths. Some Friends also had spoken with him, that was called the Lord Windsor, who likewise spake them fair: so that it was the general Discourse, that we should be discharged. We heard also, that Dr. Lower had procured a Letter, from one Col. Sands at London, to some of the Justices in Favour of us. Some of the Justices also spake to some Friends, to acquaint us, that they would have us speak but little in the Court, lest we should provoke any of the Bench; and they would warrant, we should be discharged. We were not called, till the last Day of the Sessions, which was the Twenty First of the Eleventh Month, 1673. And when we came in, they were stricken with Paleness in their Faces; and it was some time, before any thing was spoken: insomuch that a Butcher in the Hall said, What! are they afraid? Dare not the Justices speak to them? At length, before they spake to us, Justice Parker made a long Speech on the Bench, much to the same Effect, as was contained in the Mit∣timus; often mentioning the Common Laws, but not Instancing any, that we had broken: adding, That he thought it a milder Course, to send us Two to Jail, than to put his Neighbours to the loss of two hundred Pounds, which they must have suffered, if he had put the Law in Exe∣cution against Conventicles. But in this he was either very Ignorant, or very Deceitful: for there being no Meeting, when he came, nor any to Inform; he had no Evidence to Convict us, or his Neighbours by. When Parker had ended his Speech, the Justices spake to us, and be∣gan with Thomas Lower, whom they examined of the Cause of his Coming into that Country; of which he gave them a full and plain Account. Sometimes I put in a Word, while they were Examining him; and then they told me, They were upon his Examination: but that when it came to my turn, I should have free Liberty to speak, for they would not hinder me; but I should have full time, and they would not ensnare us. When they had done with him, they asked me an Account of my Travel; which I gave them, according as is mention∣ed before, but more largely. And whereas Justice Parker, to aggra∣vate the Case, had made a great Noise of There being some from Lon∣don, some from the North, some from Cornwal, and some from Bristol at the House, when I was taken: I told them, That this was in a manner all but one Family. For there was none from London but my self; none from the North, but my Wife and her Daughter; none from Cornwall, but my Son-in-Law Thomas Lower; nor any from Bri∣stol, but one Friend, a Merchant there, who met us, as it were, pro∣videntially, to assist my Wife and her Daughter in their Journey home∣wards, when by our Imprisonment they were deprived of our Com∣pany and Help. When I had spoken, the Chair-man (whose Name was Simpson, an Old Presbyterian) said; Your Relation, or Account is very Innocent. Then he and Parker whispered a while together; and
after that the Chair-man stood up, and said: You, Mr. Fox, are a Fa∣mous Man; and all this may be true, which you have said: but that we may be the better satisfied, will you take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? I told them, They had said, They would not ensnare us; but this was a plain Snare: for they knew, we could not take any Oath. However, they caused the Oath to be read: and when they had done, I told them, I never took Oath in my Life; but I had always been true to the Government. That I was cast into the Dungeon at Darby, and kept a Prisoner Six Months there, because I would not take up Arms against King Charles at Worcester-Fight; and for going to Meetings, was carried up out of Leicestershire, and brought before Oliver Cromwel, as a Plotter to bring in King Charles. And ye know, said I, in your own Consciences, that we, the People cal∣led Quakers, cannot take an Oath, or Swear in any Case, because Christ hath forbidden it. But as to the Matter, or Substance con∣tained in the Oaths, this I can and do say, that I do own and ac∣knowledge the King of England to be lawful Heir and Successor to the Realm of England; and do abhor all Plots and Plotters, and Con∣trivances against him: and I have nothing in my Heart, but Love and Good-will to him and all Men, and desire his and their Prosperity, the Lord knows it, before whom I stand an Innocent Man. And as to the Oath of Supremacy, I deny the Pope, and his Power, and his Religion; and abhor it with my Heart. While I was speaking to them, they cried, Give him the Book: And I said, The Book saith, Swear not at all. Then they cried, Take him away Jailer; and I still speaking on, they were Ʋrgent upon the Jailer, crying, Take him away; we shall have a Meeting here: Why do you not take him away? That Fellow (meaning the Jailer) loves to hear him preach. Then the Jailer drew me away: and as I was turning from them, I stretch∣ed out my Arm, and said, The Lord forgive you, who cast me into Prison for Obeying the Doctrine of Christ. Thus they apparently brake their Promise in the face of the Country: for they promised, I should have free Liberty to speak; but now they would not give it me: and they promised, they would not ensnare us; yet now they tendred me the Oaths, on purpose to ensnare me. Worce∣ster-Jail.After I was had away, Thomas Lower was stayed behind in the Court; and they told him, He was at Liberty. Then he would have reasoned with them, asking them, Why I might not be set at Liberty, as well as he, seeing we were both taken together, and our Case was alike▪ But they told him, They would not hear him; saying, You may be gone about your business, for we have nothing more to say to you, seeing you are discharged: And this was all he could get from them. Where∣fore after the Court was risen, he went to speak with them at their Chamber, desiring to know, What Cause they had to detain his Father, seeing they had discharged him; and wishing them to consider, whether this was not Partiality, and would be a Blemish to them. Whereup∣on Simpson threatned him, saying, If you be not Content, we will tender you the Oaths also, and send you to your Father. To which he replied, They might do that, if they thought fit: But whether they sent him or no, he intended to go, and wait upon his Father in Prison; for that was now his business in that Country. Then said Justice Parker to him, Do
you think, Mr. Lower,1673. Worce∣ster-Jail. that I had not Cause to send your Father and you to Prison, when you had such a great Meeting, insomuch that the Parson of the Parish Complained to me, that he hath lost the greatest part of his Parishioners; so that when he comes amongst them, he hath scarce any Auditors left. I have heard, replied Thomas Lower, that the Priest of that Parish comes so seldom to visit his Flock, (but once, it may be, or twice in a Year, to gather up his Tithes) that it was but Charity in my Father, to visit such a forlorn and forsaken Flock: And therefore thou had'st no Cause to send my Father to Prison for visiting them, or for Teaching, Instructing and Directing them to Christ their true Teacher, who had so little Comfort or Benefit from their pretended Pastor, who comes amongst them only to seek for his Gain from his Quarter. Upon this the Justices fell a laughing; for it seems Dr. Crow∣der (who was the Priest they spake of) was then in the Room sitting among them; though Thomas Lower did not know him: and he had the Wit to hold his Tongue, and not undertake to Vindicate himself, in a matter so notoriously known to be true. But when Thomas Lower was come from them, the Justices did so play upon Dr. Crowder, that he was pitifully ashamed; and so nettled with it, that he threatned to Sue Thomas Lower in the Bishop's Court, upon an Action of Defama∣tion. Which when Thomas Lower heard of, he sent him Word, that he would Answer his Sute, let him begin it when he would; and would bring his whole Parish in Evidence against him: And this cool'd the Doctor. Yet some time after he came to the Prison, pretending, that he had a mind to Dispute with me, and to talk with Tho. Lower about that business; and he brought another with him, he himself being then a Prebend at Worcester. When he came in, he asked me, What I was in Prison for? 'Dost not thou know that, said I? Wast not thou upon the Bench, when Justice Simpson and Parker tendred the Oath to me? And had'st not thou an hand in it? Then he said, It is lawful to Swear: and Christ did not forbid Swearing before a Magistrate; but Swearing by the Sun, and the like. I bid him 'Prove that by the Scriptures: but he could not. Then he brought that Saying of Paul's; All things are lawful unto me, 1 Cor. 6.12. And if, said he, all things were lawful unto him, then Swearing was lawful unto him. By this Argument, said I, thou may'st also affirm, that Drunkenness, Adultery, and all manner of Sin and Wickedness is lawful also, as well as Swearing. Why, said Dr. Crowder, Do you hold, that Adultery is unlawful? Yes, said I, that I do. Why, Then (said he) this Contradicts the Saying of St. Paul. Thereupon I called to the Prisoners and the Jailer, to hear, what Doctrine Dr. Crowder had laid down for Orthodox, viz. That Drunkenness, Swearing, Adultery, and such like things, were lawful. Then he said, He would give it under his Hand: and took a Pen, but writ another thing, than he had spoken. Then turning to Thomas Lower, he asked him, Whether he would Answer, what he had there written? Who undertook it. Whereupon, when he had threatned Tho. Lower to Sue him in the Bishop's Court, for speaking so Abusively (as he called it) of him before the Justices; and Thomas had bid him Begin, when he pleased, for he would Answer him, and bring his Parishioners in Evidence against him; he went away in a great
Fret, grumbling to himself, as he went. A few days after Tho. Lower sent him an Answer to the Paper he had writ, and left with him: which Answer a Friend of Worcester carried to him, and he read it, and said, He would Reply to it; but never did, though he often sent him word, He would do it. Soon after the Sessions were over, the Term coming on, an Habeas Corpus was sent down to Worcester, for the Sheriff to bring me up to the King's-Bench-Bar. Whereupon, the Ʋnder-Sheriff, having made Tho. Lower his Deputy, to Convey me to London, we set forth out of Worcester on the Twenty Ninth of the Eleventh Month 1673, and came to London,London. the Second Day of the Twelfth Month; the Ways being ve∣ry deep, and the Waters out. Next day Notice being given, that I was brought up, the Sheriff was Ordered to bring me into Court. I went accordingly,King's-Bench-Bar. and did Appear in Court before Judge Wild; and both he and the Lawyers were pretty fair, so that I had time to speak, to clear my Innocency, and shew my wrong Imprisonment. Af∣ter the Return of the Writ was entred, I was Ordered to be brought into Court again next Day; the Order of Court being as follow∣eth. Worcester. The King against George Fox.Thursday, next after the Morrow of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary, in the 26th Year of King Charles the Second. THe Defendant being brought here into Court, upon a Writ of Habeas Corpus ad Subjiciend' &c. under the Custody of the Sheriff of the County aforesaid; it is Ordered, That the Return unto the Habeas Corpus he Filed, and the Defendant is Committed unto the Marshal of this Court, to be safely kept, until, &c. By Motion of Mr. G. Stroude. By the Court. Accordingly I went in the Morning, and walked in the Hall, till the Sheriff came to me (for he trusted me to go, whither I would:) and it being Early, we went into the Court of the King's-Bench, and sate there among the Lawyers almost an Hour, till the Judges came in. When the Judges came in, the Sheriff took off my Hat; and after a while I was called: and the Lord's Presence was with me, and his Power I felt was over all. I stood and heard the King's Attorney, whose Name was Jnes, who indeed spake notably on my behalf, as did also another Counsellor after him; and the Judges, who were Three, were all very moderate, not casting any reflecting Words at me. So I stood still in the Power and Spirit of the Lord, seeing, how the
Lord was at Work, and the Earth was helping the Woman.1673. London. King's-Bench-Bar. But when they had done, I applied my self to the Chief Justice, desiring. That I might speak: and he said, I might. Then I related the Cause of our Journey, the Manner of our being Taken and Committed, and the Time of our Imprisonment, until the Sessions; with a brief Account of our Trial at the Sessions, and what I had offered to the Justices then, as a Declaration, that I could make or sign, instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. When I had done, the Chief Justice said, I was to be turned over to the King's-Bench, and the Sheriff of Wor∣cester to be discharged of me. He said also, That they would consider farther of it; and if they found any Errour in the Record, or in the Ju∣stices Proceedings, I should be set at Liberty. So a Tipstaff was called to take me into Custody, and he delivered me to the Keeper of the King's Bench, who let me go to a Friend's House, where I lodged; and apponted to meet me at Edward Man's in Bishopsgate-Street next Day. But after this, Justice Parker, or some other of my Adversa∣ries moved the Court, That I might be sent back to Worcester. Where∣upon another Day was appointed for another Hearing; and they had Four Counsels, that pleaded against me: and there was one George Stroud, a Counsellor, that pleaded for me; and was pleading, before I was brought into the Court: but they bore him down,King's-Bench-Bar. and prevailed with the Judges to give Judgment, That I should be sent down to Wor∣cester-Sessions. Only they told me, I might put in Bail to Appear at the Sessions, and to be of the good Behaviour in the mean time. But I told them, I was never in Ill Behaviour in my Life; and that they, the Four Judges might as well put the Oath to me there, as send me to Worcester to be ensnared by the Justices, in their putting the Oath to me, and then premuniring me, who never took Oath in my Life. But, I told them, if I brake my Yea or Nay, I was content to suf∣fer the same Penalty, which they should, that break their Oaths. This Alteration of the Judges Minds in my Case proceeded (as was thought) from some false Informations, that my Adversary Justice Parker had given against me: For between the times of my former Appearance and this, he had spread abroad a very false and malicious Story, viz. That there were many substantial men with me, out of seve∣ral parts of the Nation, when he took me, and that we had a Design or Plot in hand; and that Thomas Lower stayed with me in Prison, long after he was set at Liberty, to carry on our Design. This was spoken in the Parliament-House; insomuch, that if I had not been brought up to London, when I was, I had been stopped at Worcester, and Thomas had been Recommitted with me. But although these Lies were easily disproved, and laid open to Parker's Shame, yet would not the Judges alter their last Sentence; but remanded me to Worcester-Jail: only this Favour was granted, that I might go down my own Way, and at my own Leisure; provided, I would be without fail there by the Assize, which was to begin on the Second Day of the Second Month next following. So I stayed in and about London, till toward the latter End of the First Month 1674, and then went down leisurely (for I was not able to abide hasty and hard Travel;Worcester) and came into Worcester on the last Day of the First Month 1674, being the Day before the Judges came
to Town.1674. Worce∣ster-Jail. On the Second Day of the Second Month I was brought from the Jail to an Inn near the Hall, that I might be in Readiness, if I should be called. But not being called that Day, the Jailer came to me at Night, and told me, I might go home, (meaning to the Jail:) Whereupon, Gerrard Roberts of London being with me, he and I walk∣ed down together to the Jail without any Keeper. Next Day being brought up again, they set a little Boy, of about eleven Years old, to be my Keeper. I came to understand, that Justice Parker, and the Clark of the Peace had gived Order, that I should not be put into the Calendar, that so I might not be brought before the Judge; Where∣fore I got the Judge's Son to move in Court, That I might be called: And thereupon I was called,Worce∣ster-Assizes and brought up to the Bar before Judge Turner, my old Adversary; who had tendered me the Oaths, and Premunired me once before at Lancaster. After Silence made, he ask∣ed me, What I did desire? I answered, My Liberty, according to Justice. He said, I lay upon the Oath; and asked, If I would take it? I desired, he would hear the Manner of my being Taken and Committed; and he being silent, I gave him an Account thereof at large, as is before set down: letting him also know, 'That since my Im∣prisonment I had understood, that my Mother, who was an Ancient, Tender Woman, and had desired to see me, before she died; hearing, that I was stopped and imprisoned in my Journey, so that I was not likely to come to see her, it struck her so, that she died soon after: which was a very hard thing to me. When I had done speaking, he again asked me, To take the Oaths. I told him, I could not take any Oath, for Conscience-sake; and I did believe, he and they all knew in their Consciences, that it was for Conscience-sake, I could not Swear at all: But I did declare amongst them, what I could say, and what I could sign, in owning of the King's Right to the Govern∣ment, and in denying the Pope, and his pretended Power; and all Plotters, Plots and Conspiracies against the Government. Some thought, the Judge had a mind to have set me at Liberty, for he saw, they had nothing Justly against me; but Parker, who Commit∣ted me, endeavoured to incense him against me, telling him, That I was a Ring-leader: that many of the Nation followed me, and he knew not, what it might come to; with many more envious Words, which some that stood near, took notice of: who also observed, that the Judge gave him never a Word in Answer to it. However, the Judge willing to ease himself, referred me and my Case to the Sessions again; bidding the Justices make an End of it there, and not trouble the As∣sizes any more with me. So I was continued Prisoner, chiefly (as it seemed) through the means of Justice Parker, who in this Case, was as false, as envious: for he had promised Richard Cannon of London (who had, it seems, Acquaintance with him) That he would endea∣vour to have me set at Liberty; and yet he was the worst Enemy I had in Court, as some of the Court observed and reported. Other of the Justices were very loving, and promised, That I should have the Liberty of the Town, and to lodge at a Friend's House, till the Sessi∣ons: Which accordingly I had; and the People were very civil and respectful to me.
Between this time and the Sessions (having the Liberty of the Town for my Health's sake) I had some Service for the Lord,1674. Worce∣ster-Pri∣soner. with se∣veral People, that came to Visit me. For at one time there came Three Non conformist Priests, and two Lawyers to discourse with me; and one of the Priests undertook to prove, That the Scriptures are the only Rule of Life. Whereupon, after I had plunged him about his Proof, I had a fit Opportunity to open unto them The right and proper Ʋse, Service and Excellency of the Scriptures; and also to shew, that the Spirit of God, which was given to every one to profit withall, and the Grace of God, which bringeth Salvation, and which hath appeared to all men, and teacheth them that obey it, to deny Ʋngodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World; that this, I say, is the most fit, proper and universal Rule, which God hath given to all Mankind to rule, direct, govern and order their Lives by. Another time there came a Common-Prayer-Priest, and some People with him; and he asked me, If I was grown up to Perfection? I told him; 'What I was, I was by the Grace of God. He replied, It was a modest and civil Answer. Then he urged the Words of John; If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us: And he asked, What did I say to that? I said with the same Apostle, If we say, that we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and his Word is not in us; who came to destroy Sin, and to take away Sin. So there is a Time for People to see, that they have sinned, and there is a Time for them to see, that they have Sin; and there is a Time for them to Confess their Sin, and to forsake it, and to know the Blood of Christ to cleanse from all Sin. Then the Priest was asked, 'Whe∣ther Adam was not perfect, before he fell? and whether all God's Works were not perfect? The Priest said, There might be a Per∣fection, as Adam had, and a falling from it. But I told him, There is a Perfection in Christ above Adam, and beyond falling; and that it was the Work of the Ministers of Christ, to present every man per∣fect in Christ, and for the Perfecting of them, they had their Gifts from Christ: And therefore they, that denied Perfection, denied the Work of the Ministry, and the Gifts, which Christ gave for the Per∣fecting of the Saints. The Priest said, We must always be striving. But I told him, It was a sad and comfortless sort of striving, to strive with a Belief, that we should never Overcome. I told him also, that Paul, who cried out of the Body of Death, did also Thank God, who gave him the Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ: So there was a time of Crying out for Want of Victory; and a time of Prai∣sing God for the Victory. And Paul said, There is no Condemnation to them, that are in Christ Jesus. The Priest said, Job was not per∣fect. I told him, God said, Job was a perfect Man, and that he did shun Evil: and the Devil was forced to confess, that God had set an Hedge about him; which was not an outward Hedge, but the invi∣sible, heavenly Power. The Priest said, Job said, He chargeth his Angels with Folly, and the Heavens are not clean in his sight. I told him, That was his Mistake: for it was not Job said so; but Eliphaz, who contended against Job. Well but, said the Priest, What say you to that Scripture; The justest Man that is, sinneth seven times a Day. Why truly (said I) I say, there is no such Scripture: and with
that the Priest's Mouth was stopped.1674. Worce∣ster-Quar∣ter-Sessions Many other Services I had with several sorts of People between the Assizes and the Sessions. The next Quarter-Sessions began on the Twenty Ninth Day of the Second Month; and there I was called before the Justices. The Chair-man's Name was — Street, who was a Judge in the Welsh Circuit, and he mis-represented me and my Case to the Country, tel∣ling them; That we had a Meeting at Tredington from all parts of the Nation, to the terrifying of the King's Subjects, for which we had been committed to Prison: That for the Trial of my Fidelity the Oaths were put to me; and having had time to consider of it, he aked me, If I would now take the Oaths? I desired Liberty to speak for my self: and having obtained that, began first to clear my self from those Falshoods, he had charged on me and Friends; declaring, That we had not any such Meeting from all parts of the Nation, as he had re∣presented it; but that (except the Friend, from whose House we came, and who came with us to guide us thither, and one Friend of Bristol, who came accidentally, or rather providentially, to assist my Wife homewards, after we were taken) they that were with me, were in a sense part of my own Family, being my Wife and her Daughter, and her Son-in-Law. And we did not Meet in any way or manner, that would occasion Terror to any of the King's Sub∣jects; for we met peaceably and quietly, without Arms: and I did not believe, there could any one be produced, that could truly say, he was terrified with our Meeting. Besides, I told them, we were but in our Journey; the Occasion whereof I now again related, as be∣fore. Then as to the Oaths, I shewed, why I could not take them, (seeing, Christ hath forbidden all Swearing;) and what I could say or sign in lieu of them, as I had done before. Yet they caused the Oaths to be read to me again, and afterwards read an Indictment also, which they had drawn up in Readiness; having a Jury ready also. Now when the Indictment was read, the Judge asked me, If I was Guilty? I said, Nay; for it was a great Bundle of Lies: which I shewed and proved to the Judge in several particulars, which I instanced; asking him, if he did not know in his Conscience, that they were Lies? He said, It was their Form. I said, 'It was not a true Form. He asked me again, Whether I was Guilty? I told him, Nay, I was not Guilty of the Matter, nor of the Form: for I was against the Pope and Popery, and did acknowledge, and should set my Hand to that. Then the Judge told the Jury, what they should say, and what they should do, and what they should write on the Back-side of the In∣dictment; and as he said, they did. But before the Jury gave in their Verdict, I spake to them, and told them, That it was for Christ's sake, and in Obedience to his and his Apostle's Command, that I could not swear: and therefore (said I) take heed, what ye do; for before his Judgment-Seat ye shall all be brought. The Judge said, This is Canting, (a base Word!) I said, If to Confess Christ our Lord and Saviour, and to obey his Command, be called Canting by a Judge of a Court, it is to little purpose for me to say more among you: Yet ye shall see, that I am a Christian, and shall shew forth Christianity; and my Innocency shall be manifest. So the Jailer led me out of the Court; and the People were generally Tender, like as if they had been
in a Meeting. Soon after I was brought in again, and the Jury found the Bill against me, which I Traversed; and then I was asked to put in Bail, till the next Sessions, and the Jailer's Son offered to be bound for me. But I stopped him, and warned Friends not to meddle, for I told them, 'There was a Snare in that: Yet I told the Justices, that I could promise to Appear, if the Lord gave Health and Strength, and I were at Liberty. Some of the Justices were loving, and would have stopped the rest from Indicting me, or putting the Oath to me: but Judge Street, who was the Chair-man, said; He must go according to Law. So I was sent back to Prison again;Worce∣ster-Prison yet within two Hours after, through the Moderation of some of the Justices, I had Liberty given me to go at large, till next Quarter-Sessions. These moderate Justices (it was said) desired Justice Parker to write to the King for my Liberty, or for a Noli prosequi (as they called it;) because they were satisfied, I was not such a dangerous Person, as I had been repre∣sented: and this (it was said) he promised them to do, but did it not. After I had gotten a Copy of the Indictment against me, I went up to London, visiting Friends as I went. And when I came there,London. some that were Earnest to get me out of the Hands of those Envious Ju∣stices, that sought to Premunire me at Worcester, would needs be tam∣pering again, to bring me before the Judges of the King's-Bench: Whereupon I was brought again by an Habeas Corpus before them.King's-Bench-Bar. And I tendred them a Paper, in which was contained, what I could say instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, as followeth: THis I do in the Truth, and in the Presence of God declare, that King Charles the Second is lawful King of this Realm, and of all other his Dominions; and that he was brought in, and set up King over this Realm by the Power of God: and I have nothing, but Love and Good Will to him and all his Subjects, and desire his Prospe∣rity and Eternal Good. And I do utterly abhor and deny the Pope's Power and Supremacy, and all his Superstitions and Idolatrous Inven∣tions; and do affirm, that he hath no Power to Absolve Sin: And I do abhor and detest his Murthering of Princes, or other People, by Plots or Contrivances. And likewise I do deny all Plots and Contri∣vances, and Plotters and Contrivers against the King and his Sub∣jects; knowing them to be the Works of Darkness, and the Fruits of an Evil Spirit, and against the Peace of the Kingdom, and not from the Spirit of God, the Fruit of which is Love. I dare not take an Oath, because it is forbidden by Christ and the Apostle; but if I break my Yea or Nay, then let me suffer the same Penalty, as they that break their Oaths. George Fox. But the Business being so far proceeded in at Worcester, they would not meddle in it; but left me, as I was, to Appear again before the Justices, at the next General Quarter-Sessions at Worcester.
1674. London. Yearly-Meeting.Mean while the Yearly Meeting of Friends came on, at which, (through the Liberty granted me till the Sessions) I was present; and exceeding glorious the Meetings were, beyond Expression, blessed be the Lord. After the Yearly Meeting was over, and Friends out of the Countries were pretty generally returned home,Worcester I set forward again for Wor∣cester, the Sessions drawing on; which were held in the Fifth Month. And when I was called to the Bar,Worce∣ster-Sessi∣ons. and the Indictment read, some Scruple arising among the Jury concerning it, the Judge of the Court, who was Justice Street, caused the Oaths to be read, and tendred to me again. I told him, I came now to Trie the Traverse of my In∣dictment; and that his tendring me the Oaths a-new, was a new Snare. Then I desired him to Answer me a Question or two: and I asked him, Whether the Oaths were to be tendred to the King's Subjects, or to the Subjects of Foreign Princes? He said, To the Subjects of this Realm. Then said I, You have not named me a Subject in the Indictment, and there∣fore have not brought me within the Statute. The Judge cried, Read the Oath to him: I said, I require Justice. Again, I asked him, Whether the Sessions ought not to have been holden for the King, and the Body of the County? He said, Yes. Then said I, You have there left the King out of the Indictment; how then can you proceed upon this Indictment to a Trial between the King and me, seeing the King is left out? He said, The King was in before. But I told him, 'The King's (Name) being left out, here was a great Error in the Indict∣ment, and sufficient (as I was informed) to quash it. Besides, I told him, that I was Committed by the Name of George Fox of London; but now I was Indicted by the Name of George Fox of Tredington in the County of Worcester: And I wished the Jury to consider, how they could find me Guilty upon that Indictment, seeing, I was not of the Place in the Indictment mentioned? The Judge did not deny, but there were Errors in the Indictment; but said, I might take my Remedy in their proper place. I answered, Ye know, we are a Peo∣ple that suffer all things, and bear all things; and therefore ye thus use us, because we cannot revenge our selves: but we leave our Cause to the Lord. The Judge said, The Oath hath been tendered to you several times; and we will have some Satisfaction from you concerning the Oath. I offered them the same Declaration instead of the Oath, which I had offered to the Judges above; but it would not be ac∣cepted. Then I desired to know, Seeing they put the Oath a-new to me, whether the Indictment was quashed, or no? Instead of answer∣ing me, the Judge told the Jury, They might go out. Some of the Jury were not satisfied; whereupon the Judge told them, They had heard a Man Swear, that the Oath was tendered to me the last Sessions: and then he told them, what they should do. I told him, He should leave the Jury to their own Consciences. However, the Jury, being put on by him, went forth; and soon after came in again, and found me Guilty. I spake to the Jury, and asked them, How they could satisfie themselves to find me Guilty upon that Indictment, which was laid so false, and had so many Errors in it? They could make but little Answer; yet one, who seemed to be the Worst of them, would have taken me by the Hand: But I put him by, saying, How now
Judas, hast thou betrayed me, and dost thou now come with a Kiss?1674. Worce∣ster-Sessions. So I bid him and them Repent. Then the Judge began to tell me, How favourable the Court had been to me. I asked him, How he could say so? Was ever any man worse dealt with, than I had been in this Case, who was stopped in my Journey, being travelling upon my lawful Occasions, and then Imprisoned without Cause; and now had the Oaths put to me only for a Snare? And I desired him to Answer me in the Presence of the Lord, in whose Presence we all are,, Whether this Oath was not tendered me in Envy? He would not answer that, but said; Would you had never come here, to trouble us and the Country! I told him, I came not thither of my self, but was brought, being stopped in my Travel on my Journey; and I did not trouble them, but they had brought Trouble upon them∣selves. Then the Judge told me, What a sad Sentence he had to tell me. I asked him, Whether what he was going to speak, was by way of passing Sentence, or by way of Information? For, I told him, I had many things to say, and more Errors to Assign in the Indictment (besides those I had already mentioned) to stop him from giving Sentence against me upon that Indictment. He said, He was going to shew me the danger of a Premunire, which was the Loss of my Liberty, and of all my Goods and Chattels; and to endure Imprison∣ment during Life. But he said, He did not deliver this, as the Sen∣tence of the Court upon me; but as an Admonition to me: and then he bid the Jailer, Take me away. I expected to have been called again, to hear the Sentence; but when I was gone, the Clerk of the Peace, (whose Name was Twittey) asked him, (as I was informed) Whether that, which he had spoken to me, should stand for Sentence? And he, consulting with some of the Justices, told him, Yes; that was the Sentence, and should stand. This was done behind my Back, to save himself from Shame in the Face of the Country. Many of the Ju∣stices, and the generality of the People were moderate and civil; and there was one John Ashley, a Lawyer, was very friendly both the time before, and now, speaking on my behalf, and pleading the Errors of the Indictment for me: But Justice Street, who was Judge of the Court, would not regard, but over-ruled all. This Justice Street said to some Friends in the Morning before my Trial, That if he had been upon the Bench the first Sessions, he would not have tendered me the Oath: but if I had been Convicted of being at a Conventicle, he would have proceeded against me according to that Law; and that he was sorry, that ever I came before him: And yet he maliciously tendered the Oath to me in the Court again, when I was to have Tried my Tra∣verse upon the Indictment. But the Lord pleaded my Cause, and met with both him and Justice Simpson, who first ensnared me with the Oath at the first Sessions: For Simpson's Son was Arraigned not long after, at the same Bar for Murder. And Street, who, as he came down from London, (after the Judges had returned me back from the King's-Bench to Worcester, said; Now I was returned to them, I should lie in Prison, and rot: had his Daughter, (whom he so doted on, that she was called his Idol) brought down dead from London in an Hearse, to the same Inn, where he spake those Words; and brought to Wor∣cester to be buried within a few days after. And People took notice
of the Hand of God,1674. Worce∣ster-Prison how sudden it was upon him: but it rather hardned, than tendered him, as his Carriage afterwards shewed. After I was carried back to Prison, several came to see me, and amongst others, the Earl of Salisbury's Son; who was very loving, and troubled, that they had dealt so badly by me. He stayed about two Hours with me, and took a Copy of the Errors in the Indictment himself in Writing. The Sessions being now over, and I fixt in Prison by a Premunire, my Wife came up to me out of the North, to be with me: And the Assizes coming on soon after, in the Sixth Month, the State of my Case being drawn up in Writing, She and Thomas Lower delivered it to Judge Wild. In it was set forth the Occasion of my Journey; the Manner of my being Taken and Imprisoned; the Proceedings of the several Sessions against me; and the Errors in the Indictment by which I was Premunired: which having had Occasion to mention often be∣fore, I forbear to repeat here. When the Judge had read it, he shook his Head, and said; We might Trie the Validity or Invalidity of the Errors, if we would: And that was all they could get from him. While thus I lay in Prison, it came upon me to state our Principle to the King; not with particular Relation to my own Sufferings, but for his better Information concerning our Principle, and us as a People. It was thus, and thus Directed: To the KING. THe Principle of the Quakers is the Spirit of Christ, who Died for us, and is Risen for our Justification; by which we know, we are his, and he dwelleth in us by his Spirit: and by the Spirit of Christ we are led out of Ʋnrighteousness and Ʋngodliness. It brings us to deny all Plottings and Contrivings against the King, or any Man: And the Spirit of Christ brings us to deny all manner of Ungodli∣ness, as Lying, Theft, Murder, Adultery, Fornication and all Ʋnclean∣ness and Debauchery, Malice and Hatred, Deceit, Cousening and Cheating whatsoever, and the Devil and his Works. And the Spirit of Christ brings us to seek the Peace and Good of all Men, and to live peaceably; and leads us from such Evil Works and Actions, as the Magistrate's Sword takes hold upon. And our Desire and Labour is, that all, who profess themselves Christians, may walk in the Spirit of Christ; that they, through the Spirit, may mortifie the Deeds of the Flesh, and by the Sword of the Spirit may cut down Sin and Evil in themselves. Then the Judges and other Magistrates would not have so much Work in punishing Sin in the Kingdom; neither then need Kings or Princes fear any of their Subjects, if they all walked in the Spirit of Christ: For the Fruits of the Spirit are Love, Righteousness, Goodness, Temperance, &c. And if all, that pro∣fess themselves Christians, did walk in the Spirit of Christ, and by it did mortifie Sin and Evil, it would be a great Ease to the Magistrates and Rulers, and would free them from a great deal of Trouble: For it would lead all Men and Women To do unto all others, as they
would have others do unto them; and so the Royal Law of Liberty would be fulfilled. For if all, that are called Christians, did walk in the Spirit of Christ, by it to have the Evil Spirit and its Fruits mor∣tified, and cut down in them; then, not being led by the Evil Spirit, but by the good Spirit of Christ, the Fruits of the good Spirit would appear in all Men and Women: for as People are led by the good Spirit of Christ, it leads them out of Sin and Evil, which the Magistrate's Sword takes hold upon; and so would be an Ease to the Magistrates. But as People err from this good Spirit of Christ, and follow the Evil Spirit, which leads them into Sin and Evil; that Spirit brings the Magistrate into a great deal of Trouble, to Execute the Law upon the Sinners and Transgressors of the good Spirit. That Spirit, that leads People from all manner of Sin and Evil, is one with the Magistrate's Power, and with the righteous Law: for the Law being added because of Transgression; that Spirit, that leads out of Transgression, must needs be One with that Law, that is against Transgressors. So that Spirit, that leads out of Trans∣gression, is the good Spirit of Christ, and is One with the Magistrates in the Higher Power, and owns it and them: But that Spirit, that leads into Transgression, is the bad Spirit, and is against the Law, and against the Magistrates; and makes them a great deal of Troublesome Work. Now the Manifestation of the good Spirit is given to every Man to profit withall; and no Man can profit in the Things of God, but by the Spirit of God, which brings to deny all Sin and Evil. It is said of Israel, Nehem. 9. The Lord gave them his good Spirit to in∣struct them, yet they rebelled against it: But if all People did mind this Manifestation of the Spirit, which God hath given to instruct them, it would lead them to forsake all manner of Sin and Evil; Enmity, Hatred, Malice, and all manner of Ʋnrighteousness and Ʋngodliness, and to mortifie it. And then in the Spirit of Christ they would have Fellowship and Ʋnity, which is the Bond of Peace; and then would Love and Peace, which are the Fruits of the good Spirit, flow among all them, that are called Christians. Now we are a People, who in Tenderness of Conscience to the Command of Christ and of his Apostle, cannot Swear: for we are commanded in Matth. 5. and James 5. to keep to Yea and Nay, and not to Swear at all: not by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath lest we go into Evil, and fall into Condemnation. The Words of Christ are these; Ye have heard, that it hath been said by (or to) them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thy self, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine Oaths: These were true and solemn Oaths; which they who made, ought to perform in Old Time: But these Christ and his Apostle forbids in the Gospel-times, as well as false and vain Oaths. Now if we could take any Oath at all, we could take the Oath of Allegiance, as knowing, that King Charles was by the Power of God brought into England, and set up King of England, &c. over the Heads of our Old Persecutors: And as for the Pope's Supremacy, we do utterly deny it. But Christ and the Apostle having com∣manded us Not to Swear, but to keep to Yea and Nay, we dare not break their Commands: and therefore many have put the Oaths to us, as a Snare, that they might make a Prey of us. So our deny∣ing
to Swear, is not in Wilfulness, Stubbornness, or Contempt; but only in Obedience to the Command of Christ and his Apostle And we are content, if we break our Yea and Nay, to suffer the same Penalty, as they should, that break their Oaths. We desire therefore, that the King would take this into his Consideration, and how long we have Suffered in this Case. This is from one, who desires the Eternal Good and Prosperity of the King, and of all his Subjects in the Lord Jesus Christ. G. F. About this time I had a fit of Sickness, which brought me very low and weak in my Body; and I continued so a pretty while, inso∣much that some Friends began to doubt of my Recovery: and I seemed to my self to be amongst the Graves and dead Corpses. Yet the In∣visible Power did secretly support me, and conveyed refreshing Strength into me; even when I was so Weak, that I was almost Speechless. And one Night, as I was lying awake upon my Bed in the Glory of the Lord, which was over all, it was said unto me; That the Lord had a great Deal more Work for me to do for him, before he took me to himself. Endeavours were used to get me Released, at least for a Time, till I was grown stronger; but the Way of Effecting it proving difficult and tedious (for the King was not willing to Release me by any other way, than a Pardon, being told, he could not Legally do it: and I was not willing  be Released by a Pardon, which he would readily have given me; because I did not look upon that way, as agreeable with the Innocency of my Cause) a Friend, one Edward Pitway, having Occa∣sion to speak with Justice Parker upon some other Business, desired him to give Order to the Jailer, That, in regard of my Weakness, I might have Liberty to go out of the Jail into the City. Whereupon Justice Parker wrote the following Letter to the Jailer, and sent it to the Friend to deliver. Mr. Harris, I Have beeen much importuned by some Friends to George Fox, to write to you. I am informed by them, that he is in a very weak Condition, and very much Indisposed: What lawful Favour you can do, for the Benefit of the Air for his Health, pray shew him. I suppose, the next Term they will make Application to the King. I am, Sir, Your loving Friend HENRY PARKER. Evesham, the 8th of Octob. 1674. After this my Wife went to London, and spake with the King; laying before him my long and unjust Imprisonment, with the Man∣ner of my being taken, and the Justices Proceedings against me, in tendring me the Oath, as a Snare, whereby they had Premunired me: so that I being now his Prisoner, it was in his. Power, and at his Pleasure to Release; which she desired. The King spake kindly to her, and referr'd her to the Lord-Keeper: to whom she went, but
could not obtain, what she desired; for he said, The King could not Release me otherwise, than by a Pardon: And I was not free to receive a Pardon, knowing, I had not done Evil. And if I would have been freed by a Pardon, I needed not have lain so long; for the King was willing to have given me a Pardon long before, and told Thomas Moore, that I need not scruple being Released by a Pardon; for many a Man, that was as Innocent as a Child, had had a Pardon granted him: Yet I could not Consent to have one. For I had rather have lain in Prison all my Days, than have come out in any way dishonourable to Truth: Wherefore I chose to have the Validity of my Indictment Tried before the Judges. And thereupon, having first had the Opini∣on of a Counsellor upon it (one Thomas Corbet of London, whom Rich∣ard Davis of Welchpool was well acquainted with, and recommended to me) an Habeas Corpus was sent down to Worcester to bring me up once more to the King's-Bench-Bar, for the Trial of the Errors in my Indictment. The Ʋnder-Sheriff set forward with me on the Fourth Day of the Twelfth Month, there being with us in the Coach the Clerk of the Peace, and some others. The Clerk had been my Enemy all along; and now sought to Ensnare me in Discourse: but I saw, and shunned him. He asked me, What I would do with the Errors in the Indictment? I told him, They should be Tried, and every Action should Crown it self. He quarrelled with me for calling their Mini∣sters Priests: I asked him, 'If the Law did not call them so? Then he asked me, What I thought of the Church of England? Was there no Christians among them? I said, They are all called so; and there are many tender People amongst them.London. We came to London on the Eighth of the Twelfth Month, and on the Eleventh I was brought be∣fore the Four Judges at the King's-Bench,King's-Bench-Bar. where Counsellor Corbet pleaded my Cause. He started a New Plea: for he told the Judges, That they could not Imprison any Man upon a Premunire. Whereupon the Chief Justice Hales said, Mr. Corbet, You should have come sooner, at the beginning of the Term with this Plea: He Answered, We could not get a Copy of the Return, and of the Indictment. The Judge re∣plied; You should have told us, and we would have forced them to have made a Return sooner. Then said Judge Wild, Mr. Corbet, you go upon General Terms; and if it be so, as you say, we have Committed many Errors at the Old Baily, and in other Courts. Corbet was posi∣tive, that by Law they could not Imprison upon a Premunire. The Judge said, There is Summons in the Statute. Yes, said Corbet, but Summons is not Imprisonment: for Summons is in Order to a Trial. Well, said the Judge, We must have time to look in our Books, and consult the Statutes: So the Hearing was put off till the next Day. The next Day they chose rather to let this Plea fall, and begin with the Errors of the Indictment; and when they came to be opened, they were so many and gross, that the Judges were all of Opinion, That the Indictment was quash'd and void, and that I ought to have my Liberty. There were that Day several Great Men, Lords and others, who had the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy tendered unto them in open Court, just before my Trial came on: and some of my Adversaries moved the Judges, that the Oaths might be Tendered again to me, telling them; I was a dan∣gerous Man to be at Liberty. But Judge Hales, who was then Chief-Justice
of England,1674. King's-Bench-Bar. said: He had indeed heard some such Reports of me; but he had also heard many more good Reports of me: and so he and the rest of the Judges ordered me to be freed by Proclamation. Thus after I had suffered Imprisonment a Year, and almost Two Months for nothing, I was fairly set at Liberty upon a Trial of the Errors in my Indictment, without receiving any Pardon, or coming under any Obligation or Engagement at all: and the Lord's Everlasting Power went over all, to his Glory and Praise, and to the magnifying of his Name for ever! Amen. Counsellor Corbet, who pleaded for me, got great Fame by it; for many of the Lawyers came to him, and told him, He had brought that to Light, which had not been known be∣fore; as to the not Imprisoning upon a Premunire: And after the Trial a Judge said to them, You have attained a great deal of Honour by Pleading George Fox's Cause so in Court. During the time of my Imprisonment in Worcester, (notwithstand∣ing my Ilness and Want of Health, and my being so often hurried to and fro to London, and back again) I writ several Books for the Press; one whereof was called, A Warning to England. Another was, To the Jews, proving by the Prophets, that the Messiah is come. Ano∣ther, Concerning Inspiration, Revelation and Prophecy. Another, Against all vain Disputes. Another, For all Bishops and Ministers, to trie themselves by the Scriptures. Another, To such as say, We love none but our selves. Another Entituled, Our Testimony concerning Christ. And another little Book concerning Swearing; being the first of those Two, that were given to the Parliament. Besides these I writ many Papers and Epistles to Friends, to Encourage and strengthen them in their Services for God, which some (who had made Professi∣on of Truth, but had given way to a Seducing Spirit, and were de∣parted from the Ʋnity and Fellowship of the Gospel, in which Friends stand) endeavoured to Discourage them from; especially in their di∣ligent and watchful Care for the well-ordering and managing the Af∣fairs of the Church of Christ: Which may be read amongst the rest of my Epistles. London.Now after I was set at Liberty, I visited the Friends in London; and having for some time been very Weak, and not yet well recovered, I went down to Kingston for a little Season.Kingston. But I did not stay long there;London. but having visited the Friends there, I returned to London again, and writ a Paper to the Parliament, and sent several Books to them. And a great Book against Swearing had been delivered to them a little before; the Reasonableness whereof had so much Influence upon many of them,  that it was thought, they would have done something towards our Relief therein, if they had sate longer. I staid in and near London,London-Yearly-Meeting. until the Yearly Meeting came on; to which Friends came up from most Parts of the Nation, and some from beyond the Seas: and a glorious Meeting we had, in the Everlasting Power of God. After this Meeting was over, the Parliament being also risen (who had done nothing for nor against Friends) I was Clear of my Service for the Lord at London. And having taken my Leave of Friends there, and had a Glorious Meeting with some of them at John Elson's in the Morning, before I came away, I set forward from thence, with
my Wife and her Daughter Susan by Coach (for I was not able to tra∣vel on Horse-back) towards the North;1675. Highgate. Dunstable. Newport-Pagnel. Northam∣pton. Cossel. many Friends accompanying us as far as High-Gate, and some to Dunstable, where we lodged that Night. Afterwards travelling on, we visited Friends, and were visi∣ted by them at Newport-Pagnell, Northampton and Cossel, where (amongst other Friends, that came to see us) there came a Woman, and brought her Daughter for me to see, how Well she was; putting me in mind, That when I was there before, she had brought her to me much troubled with the Disease, called the King's Evil, and had then de∣sired me to Pray for her: Which I did, and she grew Well upon it; praised be the Lord! From Cossel we went on by John Simcock's and William Gandy's, to Warrington and Preston, and so to Lancaster;Warring∣ton. Preston. Friends visiting us, and we them, as we went. I had not been at Lancaster,Lancaster. since I was carried Prisoner from thence by the Ʋnder-Sheriff and Jailer, towards Scarborough-Castle in York∣shire; and now I found the Town full of People: for it was both the Fair-time there, and the Trained-Bands were met there also, upon a General Muster. There were also many Friends in Town, from seve∣ral parts of the County; because the Quarterly Meeting for the County was to be there the next Day. I staid Two Nights and a Day at Lan∣caster, and visited Friends both at their Mens- and Womens-Meetings, which were very full, large and peaceable; for the Lord's Power was over all, and none meddled with us. Here met us Thomas Lower and his Wife, with Sarah Fell, James Lancaster and Leonard Fell; and the next Day after the Meeting, being the Twenty Fifth of the Fourth Month, we went over the Sands, with several other Friend,Over the Sands. and came safe to Swarthmore. After I had been a while at Swarthmore,Swarth∣more. several Friends from divers places and parts of the Nation came to visit me; and some out of Scotland: by whom I understood, that there were Four young Students of Aberdeen Convinced there this Year, at a Dispute held there by Robert Barclay and George Keith, with some of the Scholars of that Ʋniversity. Among others of the Neighbourhood, that came to Visit me, Col. Kirby was one, who had been one of my great Persecutors; but now he said, he came to bid me Welcome into the Country: and carried himself at this time in Appearance very lovingly. Yet before I went from Swarthmore, he sent for the Constables of Ʋlverstone, and ordered them to come up to me, and to tell me, That we must have no more Meetings at Swarthmore; for if we had, they were commanded by him to break them up: and they were to come the next First-Day after. That Day we had a very precious Meeting there, and the Lord's Presence was wonderful amongst us; and the Constables did not come to disturb us: but the Meetings have been quiet since, and have encreased. The Ilness I got in my Imprisonment at Worcester, had so much weakned me, that it was long, before I recovered my Natural Strength again. For which Reason, and for that I had many things lay upon me to Write, both for publick and private Service, I did not stir much abroad, during the Time, that I now staid in the North; but when Friends were not with me, spent pretty much time in writing Books and Papers for Truth's Service. For while I was at Swarthmore, I gave forth several Books to be Printed, viz.
1675. Swarth∣more.One, Concerning Swearing. Another, shewing; That none are Successors to the Prophets and Apostles, but who succeed them in the same Power and Holy Ghost, that they were in. Another, shewing; That Possession is above Profession; and how the Professors now do persecute Christ in Spirit, as the professing Jews did persecute him outwardly in the Days of his Flesh. Another little Book, To the Magistrates of Dantzick. Another, called Cain against Abel, or, An Answer to the New-Eng∣land-mens Laws. Another, To Friends at Mevis concerning Watching. Another, A General Epistle to all Friends in Amrica. Another, Concerning Caesar's Due, and God's Due, &c. Another, Concerning Ordering of Families. Another, Entituled; The Spiritual Man judgeth all things. Another, Concerning the Higher Power. Besides these, I writ several Epistles to Friends, both here in Eng∣land and beyond the Seas; and Answers to divers Papers concerning the Running out of some, who opposed the Order of the Gospel, and had stirred up a great deal of Strife and Contention in Westmorland. Wherefore I was moved to write a few Lines particularly to Friends there, directed thus: This is for Friends in Westmorland. ALL live in the Power of God, and in his Light and Spirit, which did first Convince you; that in it ye may keep in the ancient Ʋnity, and in the Humility, and in the Fear of the Lord, and his gentle and peaceable Wisdom, which is Easie to be intreated: That in the same Power, Light and Spirit of God ye may all be serviceable in your Mens and Womens-Meetings, in the Possession of the Gospel-Order, which Gospel, the Power of God, hath brought Life and Im∣mortality to light; that in this ye may see over him, that hath dark∣ned you. And in this Power, the Glorious Gospel, no Apostates can come: for the Power of God was before the Apostates were, or the Fall of Man and Woman was, or the Devil either; and will be, when he is gone. Therefore praise God, in his Glorious Gospel, in which you have an Eternal Fellowship, in the Everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ, which is not of Man, nor by Man. And therefore all Friends in Westmorland, keep in the Power of God, which will and must preserve and cover you, if ye be preserved. Therefore let your Faith stand in the Power of God, and not in the Wisdom of Mens Words, lest ye fall: for in God's Power ye have Peace, Life and Ʋni∣ty; and for want of keeping in God's Power, and in his Righteous∣ness and Holy Ghost, is all this Strife come among you. G, F.
I also writ the following General Epistle to Friends at the Yearly Meeting in London.1676. Swarth∣more. My Dear Friends and Brethren, WHom the Lord hath preserved by his Eternal Power to this Day, over and through many Troubles, Storms, and Tempests, and Prisons; and therefore let every one's Faith stand in the Power of God, which is over the Devil, and before he was. So your Faith standing in the Invisible Power of God, it stands in that, which does not change; and the Faith, that Christ Jesus, the Power of God, is the Author of, it must stand in the Power of God: So then it stands in that, which is over all; in which they are established. And this the Apostle brought the Church and the true Christians to: And so ought all the true Christians Faith now, which Christ is the Author of, it must stand in the Power of God; in which Power of God the Ever∣lasting Kingdom stands: and so as every one's Faith stands in the Power of God, this keeps all in the Power of Godliness. For as it was in the Days of the Apostles, when some was crying up Paul and Apollos (and so forth) he judged them as Carnal; and exhorted them, and admonished them, that their Faith should stand in the Power of God. So it was not to stand in Men, nor in the Words of Man's Wisdom; but in the Power of God: And he said, He would not know the Speech of them, but the Power amongst them; for the Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power. And so it is to be now: Every one's Faith must stand in the Power of God, and not in Men, nor their Speeches of the good Words. For we have seen by Experience, when they begin to cry up Men, and their Faith to stand in them; such Men, as would have Peoples Faith stand in them, loves Popularity, and brings not People's Faith to stand in the Power of God; and such cannot exalt Christ: And when such fall, they draw a great Company after them. And therefore the Apostle would not know such after the Flesh, but would know them, that were in the Power and Spirit; and struck down every one's Faith, that stood in the Words of Man's Wisdom, that they might stand in the Power of God: And so it must be now. And all, whose Faith doth not stand in the Power of God, they cannot Exalt his Kingdom, that stands in Power; and therefore every one's Faith must stand in the Power of God. And the Apostle denied Popularity, when he Judged the Corinthi∣ans, for looking at Paul and Apollos, to be Carnal; and such are Car∣nal still: And therefore all should know one another in the Spirit, Life and Power, and look at Christ; and this keeps all low and down in the Humility. And they, whose Faith stands in Men, will make Sects: as in the Days of J. N. and J. P. and since in others: And such their Faith Christ is not the Author of; and if he be, they have erred from it, and made Shipwrack of it. And all those, that are in the True Faith, that stands in the Power of God, they will Judge them as Carnal, and Judge down that Carnal Part in them, that cries up Paul or Apollos; that their Faith may stand in the Power of God,
and that they may Exalt Christ, the Author of it. For every one's Eye ought to be to Jesus, the Author and Finisher of their Faith; and every Just Man and Woman may live by their Faith, which Je∣sus Christ is the Author and Finisher of: And by this Faith every Man and Woman may see God, who is Invisible; which Faith gives the Victory, by which he hath Access to God. And so every one's Faith and Hope standing in the Power of God, in it they all have Ʋnity and Victory, and Access to God's Throne of Grace; in which Faith they do please God, which Christ is the Author of. And so by that Faith they are Saved: and by this Faith they obtain the good Report, and subdue all the Mountains, that have been betwixt them and God. So that Power hath kept and preserved Friends over their Persecutors, and over the Wrath of Men, and above the Spoilings of their Goods, and Imprisonments; as seeing God, that hath created all, and gives the Encrease of all; and upholds all by his Word and Power. There∣fore let every one's Faith be in his Power: And here in this no Schism or Sect can come, for it is over them, and before they were; and will be, when they are gone. But perfect Ʋnity is in the Truth and in the Spirit, that does Circumcise the Body of Death, and that puts off the Sins of the Flesh, and plunges it down with the Spirit: And in the Spirit of God there is a perfect Fellowship; and Christ is the Minister of this Circumcision and Baptism. So this is upon me from the Lord, to write unto you all, that every one of your Faith, that Jesus is the Author of, may stand in the Power of God: and from the Lord I do warn you, and all every where to the same. For if a Star should fall, which has been a Light, either the Earth or the Sea does receive it; that is, the Earthly Mind, or the foaming, raging People: Though neither the Seed, nor Light, nor Power, nor Truth ever fell, nor the Faith it self, the Gift of God; but Men going from it, then they become Ʋnsavoury. For Adam, whilst he kept in Truth, and obeyed the Command of God, he was happy: but when he disobeyed the Lord, he fell under the Power of Satan, and became unhappy, though he might talk af∣ter of his Experiences in Paradice; but he had lost his Image, and his Power and Dominion, that God Created him in. And the Jews, after they received the Law of God, as long as they kept the Law of God, which was just, holy, good and perfect, it kept them good, just, and holy, and savoury; but when they turned their Backs off the Lord, and forsook his Law, then they came under the Power of Darkness, and under the Powers of the Earth, and were trod∣den under, as unsavoury. And so the Christians, they were called a City set on a Hill, The Light of the World, and the Salt of the Earth: but when they for∣sook the Power of God, and their Faith stood in Words and Men, and not in the Power; then their Walls fell down, though the Power in it self stood: and they lost their Hill, and their Saltness, and their Shining. And so as Christendom now does confess, they are not in the same Power and Spirit, as the Apostles were in; so not in the same Salt, nor upon the same Hill. So they came to be trod∣den
under, and the Beast, and the Whore, and the false Prophet are uppermost; the unsavoury. So their Dead Faith is in Men, and in Words; and therefore they are full of Sects, and one against ano∣ther. And now the Everlasting Gospel, the Power of God is preacht again, which was before the Devil was, that had darkned Man; and by this Power of God, the Gospel, Life and Immortality is come to light again. And therefore every one's Faith is to stand in this Power, the Gospel, that hath brought Life and Immortality to Light in them; and so to be Heirs of the Power of God, the Gospel. And here have all Men and Women a Right to the Power of God, before the Devil was: and the Power of God is the Authority of the Mens- and the Womens-Meetings, and of all the other Meetings set up thereby. But now as the Gospel is preacht again, if your Faith doth not stand in the Power, but in Men, and in the Wisdom of Words, you will grow Carnal; and such are for Judgment, who cry up, as they did, Paul and Apollos, and not Christ, the Author of your Faith. And them that loves to be Popular, would have People's Faith to stand in them; and such do not preach Christ, but themselves. But such as preach Christ and his Gospel, would have every Man and Woman to be in the Possession of it; and so to have every Man and Woman's Faith to stand in Christ, the Author of it, and in the Power of God, which was before the Devil was; and it will be, when he is gone. And their Faith standing in the Power of God, then nothing can get betwixt them and God: For if any should fall amongst us, as too many have done; then that leads its Followers either into the Waters, or into the Earth. And if any should go from the Spirit of Prophecy, that did open to them, and from the Power; they may speak their Experiences, which the Power hath opened to them formerly. And so might Adam and Eve speak, of what they saw and enjoyed in Paradise; and so might Cain and Balaam, of what they saw; and also the Jews, and Corah, and Dathan, who praised God on the Banks, and saw the Vi∣ctory over Pharaoh, and they ate of the Manna, and drank of the Rock, and came to Mount Sinai, and saw the Glory of the Lord. And so also might the false Apostles speak of their Experiences; and all those false Christians, that turned from the Apostles and Christ. And so may such do now, that err from the Spirit, that are come out of Egypt (in Spirit) and Sodom, and have known the Raging of the Sodomites, as Lot did the outward; and the Pursuit of the Spiritual Egyptians, as the outward Jew did of the outward Egyptians: yet if they do not Walk in the Spirit of God, and in the Light, and in the Grace, which keeps their Hearts stablished, and their Words seasoned, and also their Faith to stand in the Power of God, in which the Kingdom stands; they may go forth like the false Christians, and like the Jews, and like Adam and Eve, and Cain, and Corah, and Balaam, and be wandring Stars, Trees without Fruit, and Wells without Wa∣ter, and Clouds without Rain: and so come to be Ʋnsavoury, and trodden down. And as Adam who lost Paradise; and the Jews, who lost the Holy Land, not walking in the Law, and keeping the Command of God; and as the Christians, who lost the City, and the
Hill, and the Salt, and the Light since the Apostle's Days, and came to be unsavoury, and to be trodden under foot of Men. And therefore let every one's Faith stand, as I said before, in the Lord's Power, which is over all, through which they may be built upon the Rock, and the Foundation of God, the Seed Christ Jesus, that bruises the Head of the Serpent; who was before he was, and will be, when he is gone: who is the Head of his Church. So that all in Christ may be always fresh and green; for he is the green Tree that never withers: and all are fresh and green, that are grafted into him: and abide in him fresh and green, and bring forth hea∣venly, fresh Fruits to the Praise of God. And though Adam and Eve fell from Paradise, and the Jews fell from the Law of God, and many of the Christians fell from their Prophecies, and erred from the Faith, and the Spirit, and the Grace; and the Stars have fallen, as was spoken of in the Revelations: yet the Spirit, Grace, Faith and Power of God remains. And many such States have I seen within this Twenty Eight Years; though there is a State, that shall never fall, nor be deceived in the Elect, before the World began: who are come to the End of the Prophecies, and are in him, where they end, and renewed up into the Image of God (by Christ) which Man was in, before he fell; in that Power, where he had Dominion over all, that God made: and not only so, but Attain to a perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fulness of Christ, who never fell. And in him is the Sitting down in Life Eternal, where their Feet stand sure and fast in the Gospel, his Power: and here their Bread is sure; and he that ears this Bread, lives for ever. And all Friends and Brethren, that do Declare God's Eternal Truth, and Word of Life, live in it; and be seasoned with Grace, and salted with the Heavenly Salt, that your Lives and Conversations may preach, where-ever you come: That there be no Rawness, nor no Quenching of the Spirit, nor despising Prophecy neither in Men nor Women. For all must Meet in the Faith, that Jesus is the Author of; and in the Light, that comes from Jesus; and so grafted into the Life, that your Knowledge may be there one of another, in Christ. And that there may be none Slothful, nor sitting down in Earthly Things, and minding them, like Demas of old; lest you Cloath your selves with another Clothing, than you had at first: but all to keep Chaste; for the Chaste do follow the Lamb. And Friends, that are settled in Places, that be Ministers, possess, as if ye did not; married, as if ye were not: and be loose to the World in the Lord's Power; for God's Oil will be a-top of all Visible things, which makes his Lamps to burn, and to give Light afar off. And none strive nor covet to be Rich in this World in these Changea∣ble things, that will pass away: but your Faith, to stand in the Lord God, who changes not; that Created all, and gives the Increase of all. And now Friends, Concerning Faithful Men and Womens-Meetings, which were set up in God's Counsel, whoever should oppose them, and the Authority and Tenure of them, I say; They oppose the Power of God, which is the Authority of them; and they are no Ministers
of the Gospel, nor of Christ, that opposes his Power, which all are to possess. For the true Ministers of Christ, that preach Christ and his Gospel (which is to be preacht to all Nations, as Deceit is gone over all Nations, and all Nations have drunk the Whore's Cup, and she hath them in her Cage, her unclean Power from the Beast and Dragon, out of the Power of God, and out of Truth and the Spirit of God, the Apostles were in; the Power of God must come over all this again, and all the true Ministers, that preach the Gospel, (the Power of God) must bring all People into the Possession of it again. I say, whosoever preaches the Gospel of Christ and him to People or Nations, and those People and Nations receiving the Gospel, they receive the Power of God, that brings Life and Immortality to Light in them; and they see over the Devil, that hath darkned them, and the Beast, and the Whore and her Cage. And so by the Power of God Life and Immortality is brought to Light in them: then all these Men and Women being Heirs of this Power, the Gospel; they are Heirs of Authority and Power over the Devil, Beast, Whore and Dragon. So all Men and Women, that be Heirs of this Power of God, it is their Possession and Portion; and they are to labour in their Possession and Portion, and to do God Almighty's business and Service in the Pos∣session of the Power of God, the Gospel, which is a Joyful, Glorious, Everlasting Order. And here is the Authority of our Men and Wo∣men's Meetings, and other Meetings in the Name of Jesus, the Go∣spel of Christ, the Power of God; which is not of Man, nor by Man: and in this they are all to Meet, and to Worship God; and by this they are all to act, and in this Power they have all Fellowship, a Joyful Fellowship, a Joyful and Comfortable Assembly. And so this is the Day in the Eternal Light, that all are to take their Possessions of the Gospel and its Order, that Power of God, which they are Heirs of. And all the Faithful Men and Women in every Country, City and Nation, whose Faith stands in the Power of God, the Gospel of Christ, and have received this Gospel, and are in the Possession of this Gospel, the Power of God, they have all Right to the Power in these Meetings; for they be Heirs of the Power, which is the Autho∣rity of the Mens- and Womens-Meetings. So here is God's Choice (and not Man's) by his Power of his Heirs, and they have all Freedom in this Gospel, the Power of God, to go to the Meetings, the Men to the Mens, and the Women to the Wo∣mens; for they are Heirs of the Power, which Power is the Gospel not of Man, nor by Man, but from Heaven, sent by the Holy Ghost, and received in the Holy Ghost; which hath brought Life and Immortality to Light in them, and they see over Enmity, and before it was, by the Light, and the Life, and Immortality, which is brought to Light in them. So the Devil, the Author of Enmity, cannot get into this Autho∣rity and Power, nor Order, nor Fellowship of the Gospel, nor Life, nor Light, nor the Fellowship in the Holy Spirit, nor into the Ʋnity of the Faith, which gives Victory over him, that hath separated Man from God, by which Faith they have Access to God; and into the Ʋnity of this Faith the Serpent cannot come, nor into the Worship of God in Spirit and Truth: into this Worship the Devil can∣not
come, nor any Enmity. So I say, that the Serpent, the Devil, is out of the Fellowship of the Gospel, out of the Ʋnity of the Faith, and out of the Order of the Gospel, and out of the Worship in Spirit and Truth: And they that be in this, be in Ʋnity over him. And therefore, as I said before, let every one's Faith stand in the Power of God, the Glorious Gospel; and all to walk, as becomes the Gospel and the Order of it: and as every one hath received Christ Jesus, the Lord, so walk in him, and let him be their Lord and Or∣derer. For they that do preach the Gospel of Christ Jesus, it is to the Intent, that all might come to be Heirs of the Gospel, and into the Possession of it; and to be Heirs of Christ and of his Government, the Encrease of which there is no end; who is over all in his Righteous∣ness, and over all in his Light, Life, Power and Dominion. And therefore know one another in his Power, his Gospel, which is the Authority of your Meetings: And know one another in Christ Je∣sus, who is able to restore Man out of the State of the Fall, into the Image of God, as he was in before he fell, and into that Power and Dominion, that Man had, before he fell, and into himself, that never fell; where they shall go no more forth. And here is the Rock and Foundation of God, that stands sure. And Friends, be Tender to the Tender Principle of God in all, and shun the Occasion of Vain Disputes and Janglings, both amongst your selves and others; for that many times is like a blustering Wind, that hurts and bruises the tender Buds and Plants. For the World, though they have the Words, yet they be out of the Life: and the Apostle's Disputing with them, were to bring them to the Life. And those Disputes, that were amongst the Christians about Genealo∣gies, and Circumcision, and the Law, and Meats and Drinks, and Days, those came to be the worst sort of Disputers, whom the Apo∣stles Judged; for such destroyed People from the Faith. And there∣fore did the Apostles exhort the Churches, That every ones Faith should stand in the Power of God, and to Look at Jesus, which was the Au∣thor of it; and there every Graft stands in Christ, the Vine, quiet, where no blustring Storms could hurt them: and there is the Safety. And there all are of one Mind, one Faith, one Soul, one Spirit, Bap∣tized into one Body with the one Spirit, and made all to drink into one Spirit, one Church, one Head, that is Heavenly and Spiritual; one Faith in this Head, Christ, who is the Author of it, and hath the Glory of it; one Lord to order all, who is the Baptizer into this one Body. So Christ hath the Glory of this Faith out of every Man and Woman; and God through him hath his Glory, the Creator of all in his Power, the Gospel, that hath brought Life and Immortality to Light in them: and their Faith standing in it, they know the Immortal God, and Serve and Worship him, in his Spirit and in his Truth; by which they are made God's free Men and Women, from him, that is out of the Truth. And now Friends, all you, that have been Ancient Labourers, and have known the Dealings of the Lord these Twenty Years (more or less) as I have often said to you, to draw up what you can, of that which the Lord hath carried you through by his Power, the Passages and
Sufferings; and how by the Lord ye have been supported from the first: So that the Lord may be Exalted by his Power now, and in the Ages to come, who hath been the only Support, Defence and Stay or his People all along, over all to himself; to whom be all Glory and Praise for ever and ever, Amen: Who deserves it in his Church throughout all Ages, from his living Members, who return the Praise to the living God, who lives and reigns over all, blessed for ever; who is the Life, and Strength, and Health, and Length of the Days of all his People. And therefore let there be no Boasting, but in the Lord, and in his Power and Kingdom; and that keeps all in the Humility. And Friends, In the Lord's Power and Truth, what Good you can do for Friends, that be in Prison or Sufferers, as to the Informing of them, or helping of them, Every one bend your selves to the Lord's Power and Spirit, to do his Will and his Business; and in that all will have a fellow-Feeling of one anothers Conditions, in Bonds, or in what Trials and Tribulations soever: you will have a fellow-Feeling one of another, having one Head, and one Lord, and being one Body in him. For God's Heavenly Flail hath brought out his Seed, and his Heavenly Plow hath turned up the fallow Ground, and his Heavenly Seed is sown by the Heavenly Man, which brings forth Fruits to the Heavenly Sower in some Fifty, Sixty, and an Hundred fold in this Life: And such in the World without End will have Life Eter∣nal. Oh, therefore all keep within, and let your Lights shine, and your Lamps burn; and that you all may be the Wells full of the Living Water, and the Trees full of the Living Fruit of God's Planting, whose Fruit is unto Holiness, and End is Everlasting Life. And so the Lord God of Power preserve you all in his Power, and let all your Faith stand therein, that you may have both Ʋnity in the Faith, and in the Power; and by this Faith and Belief you may be all grafted into Christ, the sure Root and Rock of Ages, where the Eternal Sun of Righteousness shines, in the Heavenly and Eternal Day, upon his Plants and Grafts. And this Sun never sets nor goes down: And the Heavenly Springs of Life, and Showers are known to Water and nourish the Grafts, and Plants, and Buds, that they may always be kept fresh and green, and never wither; bringing forth fresh and green, and living Fruit, which is offered up to the Living God; and he is glorified, in that you bear much Fruit. And so, as I said before, The Lord God Almighty keep you, and preserve you all in his Power, Light and Life, over Death and Darkness; that in the Light, Life and Power of God you may spread his Truth abroad, and be valiant for it upon the Earth, answering that of God in all: That with it, the Minds of People may be turned to God and Christ, so that with it they may come to know the Lord, Christ Jesus in the New Covenant, in which the Knowledge of the Lord shall cover the Earth, as the Waters do the Sea; and his Life must go over Death, and his Light must go over Darkness, and the Power of God must go over the Power of Sa tan.
And so all ye, that be in the Light, Life and Power, Keep the Hea∣venly Fellowship in the Heavenly Power; and the Heavenly Ʋnity in the Heavenly, Divine Faith, and the Ʋnity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of the Heavenly Prince of Princes Peace; who bruises the Head of the Enmity and of the Adversary, and reconciles Man to God, and all things in Heaven, and in the Earth: a blessed Recon∣ciliation. And let every one's Faith stand in the Power of God, which Jesus Christ is the Author of; that all may know their Crown of Life. For all outward things without the Substance, the Life, the Power, is as the Husk without the Kernel, and doth not nourish the Immortal Soul, nor the new-born Babe; but that which it is nourished by, is the Milk of the Word, by which it is born again, and grow∣eth by it in the Heavenly Life, Strength and Wisdom. And the Gospel, which is not of Man, nor by Man, but is the Power of God, and answers the Truth in all, all the Possessors of it are to see, that all Walk ac∣cording to it; which Everlasting Order is ordained of God already, and all the Possessors of him, possess their Joy, their Comfort and Sal∣vation. So with my Love unto you all, with him that Reigns, and is over all, from Everlasting to Everlasting. So dwell in the Love of God, which passeth Knowledge, which Love of God doth Edifie the Living Members of the Body of Christ; which Love of God you come to be built up in, and in the Holy Faith, which Christ is the Author of, that stands in his Power. And this Love of God it brings you to bear all things, and endure all things, and hope all things. From this Love of God, which you have in Christ Jesus, nothing will be able to separate you, neither Pow∣ers, nor Principalities, Heights nor Depths, things present, nor things to come, Prisons, nor Spoiling of Goods, neither Death, nor Life. So the Love of God keeps above all that, which would separate from God; and makes you more than Conquerors in Christ Jesus: And therefore in this Love of God dwell, which you have in Christ Je∣sus. And that with the same Love you may Love one another, and all the Workmanship of God; so that you may Glorifie God wih your Bodies, Souls and Spirits, which are the Lord's. Amen. G. F. All Friends, sit low in the Life and the Lord's Power, and keep your Place in it, till the Lord and Master of the Heavenly Feast bid you, Sit higher; lest you take the Highest Place, and be put down with Shame. He that hath an Ear, let him hear. G. F.
And Friends, take heed of speaking the things of God in the Words, that Men's Wisdom hath taught; for those Words will lift up the foolish, that be erred from the Spirit of God: which Words and Wisdom is for Condemnation, and that which is lifted up by them, and they, that thereby speak the things of God in them. So that Old House with it's Things must be thrown under the Foot of the New Birth. And Friends, I desire, that you may all keep the Holy Order, which is in the Gospel, the Glorious Order in the Power of God, which the Devil is out of; which was, before all his Orders were, and be∣fore they made any in the World. In this Gospel, the Power of God, is the Glorious Order, this Joy∣ful Order keeps all Hearts pure to God, an everlasting Peace, Ʋnity and Order; feel it, and keep the Order of it, both Men and Women, and come to be Heirs of the Gospel, which brings Life and Immortality to Light, and to see over that Power of Darkness, by him, who was before the Power of Death was: In this is the Holy Order in Love and Peace. And so keep in this, that keeps you always pure; and what Men and Women act in this, they act in that which will stand, when the World is gone. This is not received of Man, nor by Man: every Man and Woman must feel this Power, that brings Life and Immortality to Light through the Gospel; in that feel this, then Heirs of this Gospel. This is their Inheritance and Portion, which they have Right to, and to Membership: Every Man and Woman inherit it, possess it; every one take your Possessions of this Gospel of Salva∣tion, and of it's Holy Orders. There hath been some Scruple about Men- and Womens-Meetings: Men and Women in the Gospel are Heirs of the Power, which was, be∣fore the Devil was; Heirs of this, then enter into the Possession of it, and do the Lord's Business therein: And every one take the Care of God's Honour, and to keep all things in Righteousness and Holiness, which becomes God's House. And in that, which Honours the Lord God, it eased me, when those Meetings were set up for Men and Wo∣men: That are Heirs of the Gospel, have Right to the Gospel-Order, and it belongs to them. Then take your Possessions, and Practise in it: and be not Talkers only, but Live and Walk in the Gospel, the Power of God; which is the Authority of your Meetings. Swarthmore, the 28th of the Third Month, 1676. G. F. Read at the Yearly Meeting in London, the 17th of the Third Month, 1676.
During this time also, I Collected together as many as I could, of the Epistles I had written in former Years to Friends. I made a Collection too of the several Papers, that I had written to O. Cromwel, and his Son Richard, in the time of their Protectorships; and to the Parliaments and Magistrates, that were in their times. And after I had gathered them together, I Collected also the Papers I had written to King Charles the Second, since his Return, and to his Council and Par∣liaments, and the Justices, or other Magistrates under him. I made also another Collection of Certificates, which I had received from divers Governours of Places, Judges, Justices, Parliament-Men and others, for the Clearing of me from many Slanders, which the Envious Priests and Professors, both here and beyond the Seas, had cast upon me: And this I did for the Truth's-sake, as knowing, that their Design in Slandering me was, to defame the Truth published by me, and hinder thereby (if they could) the Spreading thereof amongst the People. Besides these I made Two Books of Collections; the one was, A List or Catalogue of the Names of those Friends, who went first forth out of the North of England, when Truth first brake forth there, to proclaim the Day of the Lord through this Nation. The other was of the Names of those Friends, that went first forth to Preach the Gospel in other Nations, Countries and Places, and in what Years, and to what Parts they went. I made also another Collection, in Two Books; one of Epistles and Letters, from Friends and others, on several Occasions to me: The other of Letters of mine to Friends and others. I writ also a Book of the Types and Figures of Christ, with their Significations; and many other things, which will be of Service to Truth and Friends in times to come. I took notice also of those, who had run out from Truth, and drawn others out after them, and turned against Truth and Friends at several times, since the First Breaking forth of Truth in this latter Age, and what became of them; noting particularly the Repentance and Return of such of them, as came back to Truth again. But some ran quite out, and never returned again; but were Cut off in their Gainsaying and Rebellion: for the Word and Power of God hath blasted, and is blasting them, and the Holy Seed hath ground, and is grinding them to pieces. And this I have observed, that they, who have been Con∣vinced, and have not lived and walked in the Truth, have been the Worst Enemies to the Truth, and done most Hurt amongst Friends in the Truth, and to others: And in these I have seen fulfilled, what the Lord did long since shew me, That such should be greater Deceivers, than all the Priests and Professors. For such as came as far as Cain, and Balaam, and Corah, and Dathan, and could preach Christ, and say, They had preached in his Name; and such as came to be Apostles, and had tasted of the Power of Christ, and then turned from it; such could yet speak their Old Experiences, and have the good Words, like Corah and Balaam: but not keeping in the Life and Truth, such Deceived the Hearts of the Simple both then and now, and such come to be of the Devil, who abode not in the Truth; as Cain, and and all the Jews, that abode not in the Truth, were. For though
Cain did Sacrifice to God, and did talk with God; and the Jews could talk of Abraham, Moses and the Prophets: yet Christ told them, They were of their Father, the Devil. In like manner, though they, who are called Christians, can talk of Christ, and use his, and his Apo∣stles and Disciples Words: yet not abiding in the Truth, and Power, and Spirit, that the Apostles were in, they are of the Devil, out of Truth, and do his Work. And so are all these, that have been Con∣vinced of God's Eternal Truth, since it sprang up in this Nation, that have not abode in the Light, and in the Spirit and Power of Christ Jesus; but have turned against the Power, and have opposed the Work thereof: though they may retain their former Experiences, and be able to speak many good Words; yet not living in the Life and Power, that gave them those Experiences, they live in the Power of Darkness, which is of the Devil: and by the Light and Truth both he and they are Condemned; and must own their Condemnations, if ever they come to Truth again. For to Resist the Heavenly Power, and to oppose the Workings and Divine Manifestations thereof through any, is not a light Matter. And as I had been moved of the Lord, to travel in his Power round about this Nation, and in other Parts, to preach the Everlasting Gospel, and to declare the Word of Life, which was in the Beginning, through many Imprisonments, Hardships, Suf∣ferings and Trials; so I was afterwards moved to Travel in the same Heavenly Power about the Nation again (and to write to such Places, where I came not) to recommend unto Friends the setting up of the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings in all Counties, for the looking after the Poor, and taking Care for Orderly Proceedings in Marriages. and other matters relating to the Church of Christ: Though some Meet∣ings for this end were settled in the North of England in the Year 1653. And after this also, Truth still spreading further over the Nation, and Friends encreasing in number, I was moved by the same Eternal Power to recommend the setting up the Womens-Meetings also; that all, both Male and Female, that had received the Gospel the Word of Eternal Life, might come into the Order of the Gospel, brought forth by the Power of God, and might act for God in the Power, and there∣in do Business and Service for him in his Church. All the Faithful must labour in God's Vineyard; they being his Hired Servants, and he having given them the Earnest of his Spirit. For a Master, that hires a Servant, and gives him the Earnest of his Hire, expects, he should do his Work, after he knows his Will, in the outward Creation: So all God's Prople, that be of the new Creation, and have received the Earnest of his Spirit, ought to labour with, by and in his Spirit, Power and Grace, and Faith in the Light, in God's Vineyard, that they may have their Wages every one, Male and Female, when they have done God's Work and Business in his Day, which is Eternal Life. But none can labour in his Vineyard, and do his Work and Will, but as they walk in the Heavenly Divine Light, Grace and Spirit of Christ; which is, hath been and is my Travel and Labour in the Lord to turn all to.
But some that professed Truth, and had made a great Shew therein, being gone from the Simplicity of the Gospel into Jangling, Division, and a Spirit of Separation, endeavoured to discourage Friends, (especi∣ally the Women) from their Godly Care and Watchfulness in the Church over one another in the Truth; opposing their Meetings, which in the Power of the Lord were set up for that End and Service. Wherefore I was moved of the Lord to write the following Epistle, and send it forth among Friends, for the discovering of that Spirit, by which those Opposers were acted, and its Work and Way, in and by which it wrought; and to warn Friends of it, that they might not be betrayed by it. ALL my Dear Friends, Live in the Seed of Peace, Christ Jesus, in whom ye have all Life. And that Spirit, that comes amongst you to raise up Strife, is out of Christ; for it is the Spirit, that is not easie to be intreated, nor gentle, so not of the Wisdom of God, which is justified of her Children: And so they, that follow that Spirit, are none of Wisdom's Children. Now there is a Spirit, that hath made a Separation, and has been against Men and Womens-Meetings; yet has set up one of their own, whom they have given Power to: and that none shall sit amongst them, but whom they give Power to, but shall be looked upon as Ʋsurpers of Authority. Now this Spirit and its Work is not of God, though it has made some Jumble amongst some; and the Path it may travel in, is through the earth∣ly Affections, or the Ʋnestablished, or Apostates. But all that are in the Life, and Spirit, and Light, and Grace, and Truth, and the Power of God, bar it out; and such as sit under their own Vine, Christ Jesus, and are grafted into him, have no need of their Ex∣hortation or Counsel: for the true Believers are entred into their Rest. And therefore all keep in the Gospel of Peace; and they that be Heirs of the Kingdom, and of it, keep in your Possession of it. Now some that are of this Spirit, have said to me, They see no Ser∣vice in Womens-Meetings. My Answer is, and hath been to them and such, If they be blind, and without Sight, they should not op∣pose others; for there is none Imposes any thing upon them: for God never received the Blind for a Sacrifice, neither can his People. But Christ has enlightned all; and to as many, as receive him, he gives Power to become the Sons of God: And such as be Heirs of his Power, and of his Gospel, which brings Life and Immortality to Light, they can see over him, that has darkned them: and all such do keep the Order of the Gospel, the Power of God, and their Meet∣ings in it; which preserves them in Life and in Immortality. And all these do see the great Service of the Mens- and of the Womens-Meet∣ings, in the Order of the Gospel, which is the Power of God: For they are Meet-helps in this Power, which is the Authority of their Meetings. And now I say to all you, that be against Womens-Meet∣ings, or the Mens, and say, You see no Service for the Womens-Meet∣ings, and oppose them; you are therein out of the Power of God, and his Spirit you live not in. For God saw a Service for the Assemblies of the Women in the Time of the Law, about those things, that
appertained to his Worship and Service, and to the holy things of his Tabernacle; and so do they in the same Spirit see now their Service in the Gospel: many things in those Meetings being more proper for the Women to see into, than the Men; and they in the Power and Wis∣dom of God may inform the Men of such things, as are not proper for them: and the Men may inform the Women of such things, as are not proper for them, as Meet helps each unto another. For in the Time of the Law, by the Law of God the Women were to Offer, as well as the Men; and so in the Time of the Gospel much more, are they to Offer their Spiritual Sacrifices: for they are all called, both Men and Women, a Royal Priesthood; and they are of the Houshold of Faith, and they are the Living Stones, that make up the Spiritual Building, which Christ is the Head of; and are to be encouraged in their Labour in the Gospel: For all things that they do, both Men and Women, are to be done in the Power of God. And all such, as see no Service for these Womens-Meetings, or the Mens, but do oppose them, and make Strife amongst Friends, are in the same Spirit of the World, that is against, and forbids our other Meetings; and are in the same Spirit of the World, that hath been and is against Wo∣mens Speaking in Meetings, and says, They must be silent, &c. though the same Apostle commands, That Men should keep Silence as well as the Women, if there were not an Interpreter. And therefore all Friends, you may see, that the Spirit of the World hath entred such Opposers, though they come under another Colour: for They would not have us to Meet at all. And These are against the Womens-Meet∣ings, and some of them against the Men's also; and say, They see no Service for them: Then they may hold their Tongues, and not oppose them, that do see their Service for God in these Meetings. Therefore all you, that feel the Power of God, and your Service for God, as aforesaid, in them, you Men and Women, keep your Meet∣ings in the Power of God, the Authority of them, as they were settled in it; and then ye will be preserved both over this Spirit, that op∣poses them, and over the Spirit of the World, that opposes your other Meetings: For it is all one in the Ground, and would bring you in∣to Bondage. For such are out of the Peaceable Gospel, who oppose its Order; and out of the Faith, that Works by Love; and out of the Wisdom, that is gentle, and easie, and peaceable, &c. and out of the Kingdom, that stands in Peace and Joy. Therefore keep over that Spirit, that sows Discord or Dissension, and would draw you from your Habitation and Possession in the Order of the Gospel: For it is the same Spirit, that deceived Adam and Eve, by which they lost their Habitation in the Righteousness and Holiness, and their Domi∣nion: and so that Spirit got over them, and so it would get over you. One while it will tell you, It sees no Service for your Meetings; and another time Oppose you: But I say, This is the blind Spirit, which is out of the Power of God, and which the Power of God is over. And therefore keep in the Power, that ye may stand up for your Liberty in Christ Jesus, Males and Females, Heirs of him and of his Gospel, and his Order: and so stand up for your Liberty in the Gospel, and in the Faith, which Christ Jesus hath been the Author of; for if ye lose it, and let another Spirit get over you, ye will not so soon regain it
again. For I knew, the Devil would bestir himself in his Instruments, when Mens- and Womens-Meetings came to be set up, and all in the Power, Light and Truth, and Heirs of the Gospel to take their Pos∣session of it in every County and City, in it to walk, and to watch one over another, and in it to take Care of God's Glory and Honour, and his precious Truth, and to see, that all did walk in the Truth, and as becomes the Gospel, and to see, that nothing was lacking: and so whatsoever was decent, modest, virtuous, lovely, comely, righteous, and of good Report, to follow after; and to admonish and exhort all, that was not faithful, and to rebuke all that did Evil: I knew, that this would give such a Check to all loose Speakers, Talkers and Walk∣ers; I did not expect, but that there would be an Opposition against such Meetings. But never heed, Truth will come over them all, and is over them all; and Faith must have the Victory: for the Go∣spel, and its Order is Everlasting, and the Seed (Christ) is the Be∣ginning and the Ending, and will out-last all; the Amen, in whom ye have Peace. I say, all that do oppose the Mens- and Womens-Meetings, or that Marriages should be laid before them, or of Re∣cording of Condemnations of Sin and Evil; or, Admonishing or Ex∣horting such, as walk not in the Truth; they are of a loose Spirit, and their Spirits tend to Looseness: and let them take them, that will; for Truth will not have them, nor will have none of their Sacrifice: For nothing is accepted of God, but what is done in Truth, and in his Spirit, which is peaceable. And the Authority of our Mens- and Womens-Meetings is the Power of God; and all the Heirs of the Go∣spel are Heirs of that Authority and Dignity: and this is of God, and shall Answer the Witness of God in all. And the greatest Opposers of this Practice and Work will be, and are such, as have been Con∣vinced of God's Truth, but have not lived in it; and such were the greatest Troublers of the Church in Moses's Day, and in the Days of the Apostles: But mark their End, and read, what became of them all. And therefore all keep your Habitation in Truth, and therein ye may see, what became of all the Opposers of it for Twenty Years past: They are all gone, and the Truth lives and reigns, and the Seed is over all, and all is One in it, in Rest, Peace, and Life Everlasting; and therein they sit down together in the Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, the Amen. Swarthmore, the 5th of the 8th Month, 1676. G. F. In this Year, while I was at Swarthmore, died William Lampit, the old Priest of Ʋlverstone (which is the Parish, that Swarthmore is in.) He was an Old Deceiver, and Perverter of the Right Way of the Lord, and a Persecutor of the People of God; and much Contest I had with him, when I first came into those parts. He had been an old false Prophet: for in the Year 1652. he Prophesied (and said, he would Wage his Life upon it) That the Quakers would all vanish, and come to nought within half a year: But he came to nought himself. For he continued in his Lying and false Accusing of God's People, till a little before he died; and then he cried for a little Rest: And to one of his Hearers, that came to
visit him before he died, he said: I have been a Preacher a long time,1677. Swarth∣more. and thought, I had lived well; but I did not think, it had been so hard a Thing to die. Now after I had finished those Services, which lay upon me then to do, feeling my Spirit drawn again towards the South, (though I was yet but weakly, and not able to Travel far in a Day) I left Swarthmore on the Twenty Sixth Day of the First Month 1677.Westmor∣land. Powbank. Camsgill. and went to Tho∣mas Pearson's at Powbank in Westmorland, where I had a Meeting the next Day: and went from thence to Thomas Cam's at Cam's-Gill, whi∣ther Robert Widders, with his Wife, and several other Friends came to see me, before I left the Country, and to be at the Meeting there the next Day, which was very large; and in which I was largely drawn forth in Testimony to the Truth. After the Meeting I had much Discourse with some of that Meeting, who at that time were not in Ʋnity with Friends of the Quarterly Meeting they belonged to: but afterwards se∣veral of them, that were somewhat Tender, came to see their Error, and gave forth Condemnations against themselves. Next day John Blayk∣ling came to Tho. Cam's,Yorkshire. Sedberg. Drawell. to bring me to his House at Drawell in Sed∣berg in Yorkshire; whither I went with him, visiting Friends in the way. I staid at Drawel two or three Nights, having Meetings there and thereabouts: For while I was there, the Men- and Womens-Meet∣ings were held there, which were very large and precious. And on the First Day following I had a Meeting at Brigflats, not far off,Brigflats. where were most part of the Friends from the several Meetings round about, and a great Concourse of other People also, so that it was thought, there were Five or Six Hundred People; and a very good Meeting it was, wherein Truth was largely declared, and preciously opened, to the com∣forting and refreshing the Faithful, and the drawing near them, that were afar off. After this I had another Meeting at John Blaykling's,Drawell. where were many Friends, that were going to the Quarterly Meeting at Kendal: With them my Wife went back (who, with her Daughter Rachel, had accompanied me thus far;) and I, having Leonard Fell with me, passed on through Sedberg and Garsdale, and into Wensydale,Sedberg. Garsdale. Wensydale Counter∣side. visiting Friends, as we went. And at Night I reached to Richard Ro∣binson's at Counterside, where several Friends came to me that Even∣ing; and some of them went with me next Day over the Hills, to the Widow Tenant's at Scarhouse in Langstroth-dale,Lang∣strothdale. Scarhouse. whither we had much ado to get, the Snow lay so deep, though it was a Week in the Second Month. Here on the next Day (which was the First Day of the Week) we had a large Meeting, Friends coming to it from several parts round about; and the Lord gave me a very seasonable Testimony to bear amongst them, which I did for several Hours, to their great Sa∣tisfaction and Comfort. Thence passing on through Bishopsdale,Bishops∣dale. Mildum. Barton. Bedal. Northal∣lerton. Burrowby. Mil∣dum, Barton, and so through the Country by Bedal and North-aller∣ton, I came to George Robinson's at Burrowby; where also Friends co∣ming out of several parts, we had a very large and good Meeting▪ and very Peaceable. But not long after, an envious Justice, who lived not far off, hearing, that I had a great Meeting there, troubled Friends about it, and made them appear at the Sessions, where he asked them many ensnaring Questions; for he knew not, how to Convict them, be∣cause he had no Proof against them. When he saw, his Questions did
not Catch them;1677. urrowby. he told them, He had heard, that George Fox was at a large Meeting with them, and they all sate Silent, and none spake in the Meeting. This false Story he cunningly feigned, thinking thereby to have drawn out some of the Friends to have contradicted him, and have said, That I had spoken in the Meeting; that so he mght have Convicted them upon their own Confession, and have Fined them. But Friends standing in the Wisdom of God, did not Answer him according to his Desire; and so escaped his Snare. But two other Friends, that came out of Ireland, and were at this Meeting, having a Meeting that Evening about three Miles off; this Evil-minded Justice got Information thereof, and Fined Friends, and plundered them very sorely for it. I went from Burrowby to Isaac Lindley's, calling upon Friends on the Way, as I went. And having Robert Lodge and some other Friends with me,York. from thence next Day we passed to York; and the Day following (being the First Day of the Week) I was at Friends Meeting in York, which was large and peaceable. The Second day also I staid in York, and had two Meetings with Friends at John Taylor's; from whence I writ unto my Wife, to let her know, how it was with me, as followeth: Dear Heart, TO whom is my Love, and to thy Daughters, and to all Friends, that enquire after me. My Desires are, that ye all may be preserved in the Lord's Everlasting Seed, in whom ye all will have Life and Peace, and Dominion, and Settlement in the Everlasting Home or Dwelling, in the House built upon the Foundation of God. In the Power of the Lord I am brought to York, having had many Meetings in the Way. The Way was many times deep and bad with Snow, that our Horses sometimes were down, and we were not able to ride; and sometimes we had great Storms and Rain: but by the Power of the Lord I went through all. At Scarhouse there was a very large Meeting, and another at Burrowby, to which Friends came out of Cleaveland and Bishoprick: and many other Meetings we have had. At York Yesterday we had a very large Meeting, exceeding thronged, Friends being at it from many parts, and all quiet, and Friends well satisfied: Oh! the Glory of the Lord shined over all. And this Day we had a large Mens- and Womens-Meeting, many Friends, both Men and Women, being come out of the Country, and all was quiet: And this Evening we are to have the Mens- and Womens-Meeting of the Friends of the City. John Whitehead is here, with Robert Lodge and others: Friends are mighty glad, above Measure: So I am in my Holy Element, and holy Work in the Lord, Glory to his Name for ever! To Morrow I intend to go out of the City towards Todcaster, though I cannot Ride, as in days past; yet praised be the Lord, that I can Travel so well as I do. So with my Love in the Fountain of Life, in which as ye all abide, ye will have Refreshment of Life; that by it ye may grow, and gather Eternal Strength to serve the Lord, and be sa∣tisfied. So to the God of all Power, who is All-sufficient to preserve you, I commit you all, to his Ordering. York, the 16th of the Second Month, 1677. G. F.
Leaving York, I travelled on through Yorkshire,1677. Yorkshire. Todcaster. Nottingly. Doncaster. Balby. Ballow∣field. visiting Friends at Todcaster, Nottingly, Doncaster, and so on to Balby, having Meetings, as I went. At Balby I stayed the First-day-Meeting, and went next day to Thomas Stacy's at Ballowfield, where in the Evening I had a Meeting, to compose some dif∣ference, that had happened between some, that professed Truth, and they were Reconciled. From thence next day I came to Stainsby in Derbyshire,Darbyshire. Stainsby. in which County I had formerly lived some time, about the first breaking forth of Truth. Here I had a good Meeting with Friends, and afterward passed to Skegby in Nottinghamshire, and from thence to Nottingham,Notting∣hamshire. Skegby. Notting∣ham. to John Reck∣less his house; who, being one of the Sheriffs of Nottingham, (when I first declared Truth in that Town, and was Imprison¦ed for it) took me out of Prison into his own house, and kept me there, till the Mayor, and the rest of the Magistrates of the Town, took me away from him, and sent me to the Prison a∣gain: At which time this John Reckless was Convinced, and a∣bode in the Truth ever after. Now I had a Meeting with Friends at his house that Evening, after I came thither, and another the next day in Friends publick Meeting-house, which was peaceable and well. I went from thence the day following to John Fox's at Wymes∣would in Leicestershire, where I had a Meeting that Evening;Leicester∣shire. Wymes. would. Sileby. and went next day to William Smith's at Sileby, where (it being the First-day of the Week) we had a very large Meeting: for besides Friends, that came from several places, the Town's People, hear∣ing that I was there, came many of them to the Meeting,Leicester. and heard the Truth declared gladly. Next day I went to Leicester, where finding many Friends come out of the Country, to be at the Horse-fair there next day, I had a very good Meeting with them that Night, and had another Meeting next Evening (after the Fair was over) at William Wells his house at Knighton,Knighton. Swaning∣ton. about a Mile from Leicester: from whence next day I passed to Swan∣ington (where I had formerly been taken Prisoner) and had a Meeting there: from thence went to Samuel Fretwell's at Hartshorn in Derbyshire, where I had a Meeting also:Derbyshire. Hartshorn. Warwick∣shire. Badgely. And then went through the Country to Henry Sidon's at Badgely in Warwick∣shire, and stayed the Meeting there, which (it being the First-day of the Week) was very large, and peaceable; notwithstand∣ing that a Justice, who lived not far off, had threatned, that he would come, and break it up. After Meeting (having stay'd a while with Friends) I went in the Evening to Richard Baal's of Whittington, where several Friends came to visit me.Whitting∣ton Hartshill. Next day I went to Nathaniel Newton's at Hartshill, where several Friends met me, with whom I had good Service. After this I passed on, visiting Friends in divers places, till I came to Dingley,Dingley. where a Meeting was appointed before, which was very large, and Truth was largely opened to the People: The Meeting was peaceable and quiet, and the People generally Sober; saving that while I was declaring, and shewing, how that Christendom (so called) was gone from the pure Religion, that is undefiled,
&c. One Man rushed out in a furious manner, and said, I de∣ny that.1677. Warwick∣shire. Ading∣worth. Northamp¦ton. Olney in Bucking∣hamshire. Bedford∣shire. Turry. After this Meeting, I went with Thomas Charles to his house at Adingworth, and from thence next day to Northampton, where I stayed the First-day-Meeting, which was very large and peaceable, and had much Service among Friends besides. Next day Edward Cooper of Northampton accompanied me to Olney in Buckinghamshire, where I stay'd at James Brierlie's, several Friends coming thither to see me in the Evening. Next day I went to a Meeting at Turry in Bedfordshire, to which Friends came from several Parts; so that it was a very large Meeting. Here I met with William Dewsberry, who after the Meeting took me along with him to his Son-in-law John Rush's of Kempston,Kempston. where I stayed with William that night, and most part of the next day; passing thence towards Evening through Ampthill,Ampthill. Bullocks-hill. to Thomas Gambolls of Bullocks-hill. William Dewsberry went along with me thither, and there also several Friends came to visit us. Next day,Luton. Market-street Kensworth. passing through Luton, I went to Market-street (William Dewsberry accompanying me part of the way) and the day fol∣lowing Leonard Fell and I had a Meeting at Kensworth, which was pretty large and peaceable. After the Meeting we went to Albans,Albans. South-Mims. Barnet Middlesex. Gutters∣hedge in Henden. where we visited Friends, and next day passing through South-Mims and Barnet, where also we visited Friends, we came that night to the Widow Haylye's at Guttershedge in Hendon in Middlesex. Next day, being the First-day of the Week, we had a very large Meeting there, several Friends coming from London. I stayed there on the Second-day, and on the Third went to Wil∣liam Mead's house at High-gate,Highgate. with whom next day I went to London:London. and it being the Fourth-day of the Week, I went to the Meeting at Gracious-street; where Friends and I were greatly re∣freshed in each other in the Lord, and the Lord's Power and Seed was set over all, blessed be his Name for ever. Thus it pleased the Lord to bring me safe to London, though much wearied with Travel: for though I rode not very far in a day, yet having had much weakness of Body, continual Tra∣vel was hard to me. Besides, I had not much rest a-nights to refresh Nature: for I often sate late up with Friends, where I lodg∣ed, to Inform and Advise them in things, wherein they were wanting; and when I was in bed, I was often hindred of sleep by great pains, which I felt in my Head and Teeth, occasioned (as I thought) by Cold I had taken, by riding often in the Rain. But the Lord's Power was over all, and carried me through all, to his praise. In my Journey I observed a slackness, and shortness in some that professed Truth, in keeping up the antient Testimony of Truth against Tithes: for where-ever that Spirit got Entrance, which wrought Division in the Church, and opposed the Mens and Womens Meetings, it weakned those that received it, in their Testimony against Tithes. Wherefore I was moved of the Lord to give forth a short Paper, by way of an Epistle to Friends, to stir up the pure Mind in them, and to encourage and strengthen them in their Christian Testimony against that Antichristian Yoke and Oppression.
My dear Friends, BE faithful to the Lord in your Testimony for Jesus,1677. London. who hath ended the Levitical Priesthood of Aaron, that took Tithes, and sent his Ministers forth freely, to give freely, that which they had received of him freely, without a Bag or a Staff. So Christ's Disciples could not join with those, that made a Trade of Preaching. And as there was a Testimony to be born against those Tithes, which were commanded in the Law for Levi and Aaron: So there is a Testimony to be born against these Tithes, which have been set up by Man, in the dark time of Popery, and not set up by God nor Christ. Now for any to cry against the Priests in words, and yet to give them Means, and put into their Mouths, that they may not prepare War against you, this is a Contradiction. And therefore take heed: for if the Lord God do bless you with outward Crea∣tures, and you do bestow them upon Baal's Priests, the Lord may justly require the Outward things from you again, which he hath given you; who saith, That his Christian Ministers should freely give, as they have freely received of Christ Jesus. So all the Preachers for Tithes and Money, and the Takers and Payers of Tithe must be testified against in the Lord's Power and Spirit; so that all Men and Women may stand up in their Testimony for Jesus Christ, in his Power and Spirit, against the Tithe-mongers. Consider, how many faithful Servants and Valiants of the Lord have laid down their Lives against them, in this day of the Lord: and in the days of the Martyrs they did then witness against them. Consider also, what Judgments have come upon them, that have spoiled Friends Goods, and have cast them into Prison for Tithes and Maintenance. And therefore in the Power of the Lord maintain the War a∣gainst the Beast, and do not put into his Mouth, lest he cry Peace to you; which Peace you must not receive; but it must be broken, and thrown out by the Spirit of God: And then in the same Spirit, ye will receive the Peace from the Son of Peace, which the Beast, and the Whore, and the World with all their earthly Teachers for the Earth, which are made by Man, cannot receive, nor bereave you of. And therefore keep your Authority and Dominion in the Power, and Spirit, and Name of Jesus; in whom my love is to you. 3d Month, 1677. G. F. I came to London on the 23th of the Third Month, some Ten or Twelve days before the Yearly Meeting; in which time I fell in with Friends there in the Service of Truth, visiting them at the Meetings: And the Parliament then sitting, we prepared something to lay before them, concerning the seizing of the Third part of Friends Estates, as Popish Recusants; which was a great Suffering, and a Grievance we Complained of; but no Redress we got.
To the Yearly Meeting many Friends came from most parts of the Nation,1677. London. Yearly Meeting. and some out of Scotland, Holland, &c. and very glorious Meetings we had, wherein the Lord's powerful Presence was very largely felt, and the Affairs of Truth were sweetly car∣ried on in the Unity of the Spirit, to the Satisfaction and Com∣fort of the upright-hearted; blessed be the Lord for ever! Then after the Yearly Meeting was over, and I had stay'd a Week or Two with Friends in London, I went down with William Penn to his house in Sussex:Sussex. John Burnyeat, and some other Friends went with us:Surrey. and as we passed through Surrey, hearing, that the Quarterly Meeting for that County was that day, William Penn, John Burnyeat and I went from the Road to it; and after the Meeting returning to our other Company on the Road, went on with them to William Penn's that Night, which is Forty Miles from London.Worming∣hurst. I stay'd at Worminghurst about Three Weeks, in which time John Burnyeat and I (at such times as we were not amongst Friends in Meetings) Answered a very envious and wicked Book, which one Roger Williams a Priest of New-Eng∣land (or some Colony thereabouts) had written against Truth and Friends. When we had finished that Service, we went with Stephen Smith (who was there with us) to his house at War∣pledon in Surrey,Surrey. Warple∣don. where we had a large Meeting. Friends there∣away had been exceedingly plundered about Two Months before on the Priest's account; for they took from Stephen Smith Five Kine (being all he had) for about Fifty shillings Tithes. From thence we went to Kingston,Kingston. London. and so to London; where I stay'd not long: for it was upon me from the Lord to go into Hol∣land, to Visit Friends there, and to preach the Gospel there, and in some parts of Germany. Wherefore setting things in Or∣der for my Journey, as fast as I could, I took leave of Friends at London,Essex. Colchester. and with several other Friends went down to Col∣chester in Essex, in order to my Passage for Holland. Next day, being the First day of the Week, I was at the publick Meeting of Friends there, which was very large and peaceable; and in the Evening I had another large Meeting, but not so publick, at John Furly's house, where I lodged. The day following was the Womens-Meeting there, which also was very large; and I was at that too.Harwich. From thence next day we passed to Harwich, where Robert Duncon, and several other Friends out of the Country, came to see us; and some from London came to us there, that intended to go over with me. The Packet-Boat, in which we were to go, not being ready, we went to the Meeting in the Town, and a precious Opportunity we had together: for the Lord, according to his wonted goodness, by his over-coming, refreshing Power, opened many Mouths to declare his Everlast∣ing Truth, and to praise and glorifie him. After the Meeting we returned to John Vandewall's, where I had lodged, and when the Boat was ready (taking Leave of those Friends, that had accompanied us thither, and that met us there) we that were bound for Holland, went on Board about the 9th hour in the Evening, on the 25th day of the 5th Month 1677.
The Friends that then went over with me,1677. Harwich. were William Penn, Robert Barclay, George Keith and his Wife, John Furly and his Brother, William Tailcoat, George Watts, and Isabel Yeomans, who is one of my Wife's Daughters. About the First hour in the Morning we weighed Anchor, having a fair, brisk Wind, which by the next Morning brought us within sight of Holland.Holland. But that day proving very clear and calm, we got forward but little, till about the Fourth hour in the Afternoon, when a fresh Gale arose, which carried us within a League of Land. Then being becalmed again, we cast Anchor for that Night, it being between the hours of Nine and Ten in the Evening. But William Penn and Robert Barclay (understanding, that Benjamin Furly was come from Rotterdam to the Briel to meet us) got two of the Boat-men to let down a small Boat, that belonged to the Packet-Boat, and Row them to shore: but before they could get to shore, the Gates were shut; and there being no house without the Gate, they were fain to lie in a Fisher's Boat all Night. As soon as the Gates were opened in the Morning, they went in, and found Benjamin Furly, with other Friends of Rot∣terdam, that were come thither to receive us; and they sent a Boat, with three Young-men in it, that lived with Benjamin Furly, who brought us to the Briel,Briel. where the Friends received us with great Gladness. We stay'd about Two hours at the Briel, to refresh our selves; and then took Boat, with the Holland-Friends, for Rotterdam;Rotterdam where we arrived about the Eleventh hour that day, which was the 28th of the Fifth Month 1677. I was very well this Voyage; but some of the Friends were Sea-sick: Yet a fine Passage we had, and all came safe and well to Land, blessed and praised be the Name of the Lord for ever. The next day, being the First day of the Week, we had Two Meetings at Benjamin Furly's, where many of the Towns People, and some Officers came in; and all were civil. Benjamin Furly, or John Claus, (a Friend of Amsterdam) interpreted, when any Friend declared. I spent the next day in Visiting Friends there, and the day following William Penn and I, and some other of the Friends, went towards Amsterdam,Amster∣dam. with some Friends of that City, who came to Rotterdam to Conduct us thither. We took Boat in the Afternoon,Ouerkirk. Delft. and passing by a Town called Ouer∣kirk, we came to Delft, through which we walked on foot; and then took Boat again to Leyden,Leyden. where we lodged that Night at an Inn. This is counted six Dutch Miles from Rotter∣dam, which are eighteen English Miles, and five hours sail, or Travel: for our Boat was drawn by an Horse that went on the shore. Next day taking Boat again, we went to Harlem,Harlem. fourteen Miles from Leyden, where we had appointed a Meet∣ing, which proved very large: for many of the Town's People came in, and Two of their Preachers; and the Lord gave us a blessed Opportunity, not only with respect to Friends, but to other sober People (Baptists and other Professors) that were there, and the Meeting ended peaceably and well. After Meet∣ing
we passed to Amsterdam,1677. Amster∣dam. accompanied by several Friends of that City and of Alkmaer, some by Wagon, some by Boat. Next day was the Quarterly Meeting at Amsterdam, to which came Friends from Harlem and Rotterdam, and with them those Friends of our Company, whom we had left behind at Rotter∣dam, viz. Robert Barclay, George Keith and his Wife, &c. The Meeting was at Gertrude Dirick Nieson's house, and a very large and serviceable Meeting it was: for both William Penn and I were drawn forth to open many things concerning the Order of the Gospel, and to shew the benefit and service of Yearly, Quar∣terly, and Monthly Meetings of Men and Women. We had ano∣ther Meeting at Gertrude's the next day, more publick, and very large, at which were Professors of several sorts, unto whom the Way of Life and Salvation was largely and livingly opened; which they hearkned very attentively to, none making any Ob∣jection, to what was declared. In the Afternoon we had ano∣ther Meeting in the same place, but less, and more private. The day following we had a Meeting of Friends only, wherein by Joint Agreement of Friends were settled several Meetings, to wit, Monthly, Quarterly, and a Yearly Meeting, to be held at Amster∣dam for Friends in all the United Provinces of Holland, and in Embden, the Palatinat, Hamborough, Frederick-stadt, Dantzick and other places in and about Germany; which Friends were very glad of, and it hath been of great service to Truth. Next day an Exercise came upon me concerning that deceitful Spirit, which wrought in some amongst Friends, to make Divi∣sions in the Church: and the Care of the Churches being upon me, I was moved to Write a few Lines to warn Friends of it, as fol∣loweth: ALL Friends, keep over that Spirit of Separation and Divi∣sion, in the peaceable Truth, and in the Seed of Life, which will wear it all out, and out-last it. For the Lamb will have the Victory over all the Spirits of Strife, as it hath had since the beginning; and they will Wither, as others have done: but all that do keep in the Seed, which is always green, shall never Wither; as Friends have been to this day kept. And if any have gone out, and backslidden, and thrown off the Cross, and are grown loose and full, and are gone into Strife and Contention with their Earthly Spirits, and therein plead for a liberty; this Spirit taketh with loose, earthly Spirits, and cries Imposition to such, as do admonish them to come to the Life, Light, and Spirit and Power of God, that they may be alive, and may live again with the Living. And then upon this Admonishment, their Spirits do arise into Contention and Strife, and a Separation, turning against the Living, in their loose earthly Spirits, which would have the Name of Truth, but is not in the Nature of it, but is for Eternal Judgment of the living Seed. And this is it, which doth deceive; but it is judged by that, which doth undeceive and save. Amsterdam in Holland, the 5th of the 6th Month, 1677. G. F.
This being the First-day of the Week, we had a very large Meeting again, there coming to it a great Concourse of People of several Opinions, as Baptists, Seekers, Socinians, Brownists, and some of the Collegians. Robert Barclay, George Keith, Wil∣liam Pen and I, did all severally declare the Everlasting Truth among them; opening the Estate of Man in the Fall, and shew∣ing, by what way Man and Woman may come into the Restora∣tion by Christ Jesus: And indeed, the Mystery of Iniquity, and the Mystery of Godliness were very plainly laid open; and the Meeting ended quietly and well. The day following, George Keith, Robert Barclay, and Willi∣am Penn, leaving me and some other Friends at Amsterdam, set forward on their Journey towards Germany, where they Tra∣velled many hundred Miles, and had good Service for the Lord, Benjamin Furly going with them, and Interpreting. That day, and the next, I stayed at Amsterdam, visiting the Friends, and assisting them in some businesses concerning their Meetings: And there came Three Baptists to discourse with me, unto whom I opened things to their satisfaction; and they part∣ed from me in kindness. I writ a Letter also to the Princess Elizabeth, which Isabel Yeomans delivered to her, when George Keith's Wife and she went to visit her. Princess Elizabeth; I Have heard of thy Tenderness towards the Lord and his ho∣ly Truth, by some Friends, that have visited thee, and also by some of thy Letters, which I have seen: which indeed is a great thing, for a Person of thy quality to have such a tender mind after the Lord and his precious Truth; seeing, so many are swallowed up with Voluptuousness, and the Pleasures of this World, and yet all make an outward Profession of God and Christ one way or other; but without any deep Inward sense and feeling of him. For it is not many mighty, nor wise of the World, that can become fools for Christ's sake, or can be∣come low in the humility of Christ Jesus from their mighty state, through which they might Receive a mightier Estate, and a mightier Kingdom through the Inward holy Spirit, and the Di∣vine Light and Power of God; and a mightier Wisdom, which is from above, pure and peaceable; which Wisdom is above that, which is below, that is earthly, sensual and devillish, by which men destroy one another, yea, about their Religions, Ways and Worships, and Churches: but this they have not from God nor Christ. But the Wisdom, which is from above, by which all things was made and created, which the holy fear of God in the heart, is the beginning of, that keeps the heart clean. And by and with this Wisdom are all God's Children to be or∣dered; and with it come to order all things to God's glory. So this is the Wisdom that is Justified of her Children: And in this fear of God and Wisdom, my desire is, that thou may be preserved to God's glory. For the Lord is come to teach his
People himself, and to set up his Ensign, that the Nations may flow unto it. And there hath been an Apostacy, since the Apo∣stles days, from the Divine Light of Christ, which should have given them the Light of the Knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus; and likewise from the holy Spirit; which would have Lead them into all Truth: and therefore have Peo∣ple set up so many Leaders without them, to give them Know∣ledge: and also from the holy and precious Faith, which Jesus Christ is the Author and Finisher of: which Faith purifies the heart, and gives victory over that which separates from God; through which Faith they have access to God, and in which Faith they please God; the Mystery of which Faith is held in a pure Conscience. And also from the Gospel, which was preached in the Apostle's days, (which Gospel is the Power of God) which brings Life and Immortality to Light in Man and Wo∣man, by which People should have seen over the Devil, that has darkned them; and before he was: which Gospel will preserve all them that receive it, in Life and in Immortality. For the Eyes of People have been after Men, and not after the Lord, who doth write his Law in the hearts, and puts it into the minds of all the Children of the New Covenant of Light, Life and Grace; through which they all come to know the Lord from the Least to the Greatest: So that the Knowledge of the Lord may cover the Earth, as the Waters doth the Sea. And this Work of the Lord is a beginning again, as it was in the Apostles days, that People shall come to receive an Ʋnction in them again from the holy One, by which they shall know all things, and shall not need any man to teach them; but as the Anointing doth teach them: and also to know, what the Righteousness of faith speaks; the Word nigh in the heart and mouth to obey it, and to do it: which was the Word of Faith, the Apostles preached: Which is now received and preached again; which is the duty of all true Christians to re∣ceive. And so now People are coming out of the Apostacy to the Light of Christ and his Spirit, and to receive Faith from him, and not from men; and to receive the Gospel from him, and their Ʋnction from him the Word; and as they receive him, they declare him freely, as his Command was to his Dis∣ciples, and is so still to the Learners and Receivers of him. For he Lord God and his Son Jesus Christ is come to teach his People, and to bring them from all the Worlds Ways to Christ the Way, the Truth, and the Life, who is the Way to the Fa∣ther; and from all the Worlds Teachers and Speakers, to him the Speaker and Teacher, as Hebr. 1.1. and from all the Worlds Worshippers, to worship God in the Spirit, and in the Truth, (which the Devil, the Destroyer, is out of:) which Worship Christ set up above Sixteen hundred years ago, when he put down the Jews Worship at the Temple at Jerusalem, and the Worship at the Mountain, where Jacob's Well was: and to bring People from all the World's Religions, which they have made since the Apostles days, to the Religion, that was set up by Christ and
his Apostles, which is Pure and Undefiled before God, and keeps from the Spots of the World: And to bring them out of all the Worlds Churches and Fellowships, that they have made and set up since the Apostles days; to the Church, that is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Thess. 1.1. and to bring to the Unity and Fellowship in the holy Spirit, that doth mortifie, and circumcise, and baptise, to plunge down Sin and Corrupti∣on, that has got up in Man and Woman by Transgression: and in this holy Spirit there is a holy Fellowship and Unity: yea, it is the Bond of the Prince of Princes, and King of Kings, and Lord of Lords Peace: which heavenly Peace all the true Christi∣ans are to maintain with Spiritual Weapons, not with Car∣nal. And now my Friend, the holy Men of God did speak forth the Scriptures, as they were moved by the holy Ghost; and all Christendom are on heaps about those Scriptures, because they are not led by the same holy Ghost, as they were, that gave forth the Scriptures; which holy Ghost they must come to in themselves, and be led by, if they come into All the Truth of them, and to have the Comfort of God, and Christ, and Them. For none can call Jesus Lord, but by the holy Ghost; and all they, that do call Christ Lord without the holy Ghost, take his Name in vain. And likewise all that name his Name, are to depart from Iniquity; then they name his Name with Reverence in Truth and Righteousness. And O therefore feel the Grace and Truth in thy heart, that is come by Jesus Christ, which is a Teacher, that will teach thee, how to live, and what to deny; and it will establish thy heart, and season thy words, and bring thy Salvation, and will be a Teacher unto thee at all times; and by it thou may'st Receive Christ, from whence it comes: and as many as Receive him, to them he gives power, not only to stand against sin and evil, but to become the Sons of God: if Sons, then Heirs of a Life, and a World and Kingdom, that is Everlasting, without end, and of the Eternal Riches and Treasures thereof. So in haste, with my Love in the Lord Jesus Christ, that has tasted death for every man, and bruises the Serpents head, that has been betwixt Man and God, that through Christ, Man may come to God again, and so can praise God through Jesus Christ, the Amen; who is the spiritual and heavenly Rock and Foundation for all God's People to build up∣on, to the praise and glory of God, who is over all, blessed for Evermore. Amsterdam, the 7th of 6th Month, 1677. George Fox. POSTSCRIPT. THE Bearer hereof is a Daughter-in-law of mine, that comes with Gertrude Dirick Nieson and George Keith's Wife, to give thee a Visit. G. F.
The Princess Elizabeth her Answer to the aforesaid LETTER. Dear Friend; I Cannot but have a tender Love to those that love the Lord Jesus Christ, and to whom it is given not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him: Therefore your Letter, and your Friends Visit, have been both very welcome to me. I shall follow their and your Counsel, as far as God will afford me Light and Unction: Remaining still Hertfort the 30th of August, 1677. Your loving Friend, ELIZABETH. Buyckslote. Purmerent.Next day John Claus and I took Boat, and passed to Buyckslote, and thence to Purmerent; where having stayed awhile, and re∣freshed our selves at an Inn, we went by Wagon through the Country to Alcmaer,Alcmaer. about Thirty Miles from Amsterdam. We went to a Friend's house there, whose name was Willem Wil∣lems, where I had a Meeting that night. I had also another Meeting there next day, which was larger: for several Professors came to the Meeting; and all was quiet and well. When the Meeting was done, I went and visited some Friends, and then, taking Boat,Hoorn. North-Holland. passed-by several places to Hoorn, which is count∣ed the chief City in North-Holland. We lodged at an Inn there that night: and taking Wagon again early next Morning, we passed through the Country to Enckhuysen,Enckhuy∣sen. Friezland. Workum where we took Ship for Friezland; and landing in the Afternoon at Workum, took Wagon there again, and rode along upon the high Bank of the Friezen Seas, till we met Two Friends coming with a Wagon to meet us:Mackum. with whom (discharging our Wagon at Mackum, a Village hard by) we went,Harlingen. in their Wagon, to Harlingen, the chief Sea-port-Town in Friezland. We went to a Friend's house, whose Name was Hessel Jacobs, whither several Friends came to Visit us that night. Next day we went among the Friends of the place, and Visited them; and I wrote a Paper, directed, To all them, that persecute Friends for not observing their Fast∣day. The day following was the First-day of the Week, and Friends had a Meeting there, to which we went; and many Professors came to it. I declared the Everlasting Gospel amongst them, John Claus interpreting, and they were all very Civil, and heard attentively: and when the Meeting was done, departed peace∣ably, without making any Opposition. After Meeting I went to Hessel Jacobs his house again, whither after a while came a Cal∣vinist, to ask me some Questions, which I answered to his sa∣tisfaction; and he departed friendly. Soon after he was gone,
a Preacher of the Collegians came to discourse with me,1677. Harlingen. and he seemed well satisfied also, and we parted lovingly. That Even∣ing I had another Meeting with the Friends there, and next Morning, when we had taken our Leave of them, we passed to Leuwarden, the chief City in Friezland,Leuwar∣den. and lodged that night at a Friend's house there, whose Name was Sybrand Dowes. Next Morning early, taking Boat, we passed to Dockum,Dockum. Strobus. and walking through the City, took Boat again to Strobus, which is the utmost part of Friezland. There we baited, at a Commissa∣ry's house: and then taking Boat again, we passed to Groningen,Groningen. the chief City of the Province of Groningland. One of the Ma∣gistrates of that City came with us from Leuwarden, with whom I had some discourse on the way; and he was very loving. We walked near Two Miles through the City; and then took Boat for Delfziel; and passing, in the Evening,Delfziel. Apping∣dalen. through a Town called Appingdalem, where had been a great Horse-Fair that day, there came many Officers rushing into the Boat, and being some∣what in drink, they were very Rude. I spake to them, exhort∣ing them to fear the Lord, and beware of Solomon's vanities. They were a sort of boisterous Fellows; yet they were some∣what more Civil afterwards. We landed at Delfziel about the Tenth hour at night, having travelled much about Fifty English Miles that day. We went to an Inn to Lodge; and as we pas∣sed through the Guards, they Examined John Claus, whether I was not a Militia Souldier? and when he had told them, that I was not, they let us pass peaceably on. This City Delfziel stands on the River Eems, over which we passed next day to the City Embden, a Place,Embden. where Friends had been cruelly persecuted, and from which they had been often banished. I went to an Inn, where I stay'd and dined with some men, that understood English, with whom I had a fine time, and they were loving. Mean while John Claus went with his Wife to her Fathers, who lived in Embden; whither, after I had dined, I went also; understanding, the old Man was desirous to see me. In the Afternoon John Claus and I walked through the City, to the place where the Wagon, which he had hired, was to meet us: and while we tarried for it, the Friends, that were in the City, came to the house, where we were, and there we had a little Meeting. When the Meeting was over, and the Wagon came not, we sent to know the Reason: and the Ma∣ster of the Wagon sent us word, that he durst not let his Wagon go; for the Bishop of Munster's Souldiers were up in the Coun∣try, and he was afraid, they would take away his Horses. So being disappointed of our passage, we returned to John Claus his Father-in-law's house, where I left him, and went my self to my Inn at night. We took Shipping next day, and passed about Fifteen Miles upon the River Eems, to a Market-Town in East-Friezland,River Eems. East-Friez∣land. Leer. Strike∣huysen. cal∣led Leer, where lived a Friend, that had been banished from Embden: and when we had visited him, we hired a Wagon in that Town, and passed to a Garrison-Town, called Strikehuysen,
where the Guards Examined us:1677. Deteren. and then we went on to De∣teren, where hiring another Wagon, we passed through the Country to another Garrison'd Town, where we were very strict∣ly Examined.Apre. From thence we passed unto Apre, in the King of Denmark's Country, where we lodged that night. In our Travel this day, we met the Earl of Oldenburgh, going to the Treaty of Peace at Lembachie. Next day, hiring another Wagon, we passed through the Coun∣try to the City Oldenburgh,Olden∣burgh. lately a great and famous Place, but then burnt down; and but few houses left standing in it. At this place we hired another Wagon, and went through the Coun∣try to Delmenhurst:Delmen∣hurst. where, after we had been Examined by the Guards, we went to a Burger-Master's to lodge, whose house was an Inn. And there being many People, I declared the Way of Truth to him and them, Warning them all of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon all Evil-doers. Germany. Bremen.From hence we passed next day by Wagon to Bremen, which is a stately City in Germany; and from thence, after a double Examination,Overde∣lend. Fisher∣holder. we went by Wagon to a Water called Overdelend, and there took Boat to Fisher-holder: Where finding pretty ma∣ny People together, I declared the Way of God to them, and exhorted them to fear the Lord. There we took Wagon again, and travelled in the Bishop of Munster's Country,Munster∣land. Closter∣seven. to a place cal∣led Closterseven: and having no Inclination to stay there, we got fresh Horses there, intending to travel all night. Accordingly we went out a little way; but it quickly grew so dark, and rain∣ed so hard, that we thought it best to turn back again thither: for our Wagon being open, we had no defence against the Rain; and our Cloaths were already wet with the Rain, that had fal∣len for several days before. So we went back to an Inn, and got a little fresh Straw; upon which we lay, till about break of day: and then set out in our Wagon again, and travelled through the Country to the City of Buxtehude.Buxtehude The People in the Bishop of Munster's Country were very dark: and as we passed amongst them, I preached Truth to them, warning them of the Great and Notable Day of the Lord; and exhorting them to soberness, and to mind the good Spirit of God in themselves. It was on the First-day of the Week, that we went through this City Buxtehude; and without the Walls was a great Fair of Sheep and Geese that day. We stayed but a little, to refresh our selves,Hambo∣rough. and went on as fast as we could to Hamborough, partly by Wagon, and partly by Water. We got to Hamborough time enough to get a Meeting there that Evening; and a good and glorious Meeting it was. There were at it, amongst others, a Baptist-Teacher and his Wife, and a Great Man of Sweden and his Wife; and all was quiet, blessed be the Lord, whose Power was Exalted over all: Yet a dark, hard place this is; and the People are much shut up from Truth.
At Hamborough there was a Woman,1677. Hambo∣rough. that had spoken against me, in John Perrot's time (though she had never seen me, till now) and she had been troubled for it ever since; and now was glad of an Opportunity to acknowledge her Fault: which she very readily did; and I did as readily and freely forgive her. We stayed that night at Hamborough, encouraging and strengthen∣ing the Friends there in the Testimony to the Truth; and betimes next Morning we set forward towards Frederick stadt, which is Two long days Journey from Hamborough. We went the First-day to a Town called Elmshoorn, where we baited;Elms∣hoorn. and then rode on through a Garrison-Town of the King of Denmark's: and passing by the Monument of the Earl of Ransenny,Rantzow. Itzeho. we came to the City of Itzeho, where we lodged that night; and I had some Service in the Evening, among the People in the Inn, whom I exhorted to soberness, and to live in the Fear of the Lord. Next Morning setting out again, we travelled to a Town called Hoghenhorn,Hoghen∣horn. where we dined at an Inn with one of the Council of Frederick-stadt; to whom, and to the rest of the People present, I declared the Truth, with which they seemed to be affected. Then travelling on, we came to a River called Eyder, where we took Boat, and so went to Frederick-stadt.The River Eyder. Frederick-stadt. We went to a Friend's house there, whose name is William Pauls, where several Friends came to us (for there is a pretty many Friends in that City) and we had a fine, refreshing Meeting to∣gether that Evening; which made us forget our Weariness: for we were indeed very weary, having travelled hard those Two days; and being Wet through our Cloaths, having had much Rain in our Open Wagons. But the Lord made all easie and good to us: and we were well, and glad to see Friends; blessed be his holy name for ever! This City is in the Duke of Holsteyn's Country,Holstein. who would have banished Friends out of the City and Country, and did send to the Magistrates of the City to do it: But they said, they would lay down their Offices rather, than they would do it, in∣asmuch as Friends came to that City to enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences. And not long after, the Duke himself was banished out of that City, by the King of Denmark: but Friends do still enjoy their Liberty there, and Truth and they are of good Report amongst the People, both in City and Country. On the First-day of the Week I had a Meeting here, to which many People came, and some rough Spirits: but the Power of the Lord bound them down, and the Seed of Life was set over all. While I was here, I had a Discourse with a Jew, that was a Levite, concerning the Coming of the Messiah; and he was much confounded, in what he said: Yet he carried himself lo∣vingly, and Invited me to his house: I went thither, and there I discoursed with another Jew, who shewed me their Talmud, and many other Jewish Books: but they are very dark, and do not understand their own Prophets.
There was at this City a Baptist-Teacher, who had reproached and belied Friends:1677. Frederick∣stadt. wherefore John Claus went, with Two Friends of the Town, to the house, where he lodged, and cleared Truth and Friends from his Reproaches, and laid his Lies and Slanders upon his own head, to his shame. Before we left this Place, I had another Meeting with the Friends only, wherein I laid before them the Usefulness and Be∣nefit of a Monthly-Meeting, for the looking after the Poor, and taking care, that Marriages, and all other things relating to the Church, were done and performed in an orderly Manner: and the thing Answered the Witness of God in their Consciences, so that they readily Consented, and Agreed to have Monthly Meetings thence-forward amongst themselves, that both Men and Women might look after, and take care of the outward Concerns of the Church. After this Meeting, feeling my spirit clear of that place, we took leave of Friends there (whom we left in good Order) and not intending to go further that way, we turned back again for Hamborough. When we had travelled one days Journey, and came to an Inn at night to Lodge, I inquired there, whether there were any tender People in the Town, that feared God, or that had a mind to discourse of the things of God? but the Inn keeper told me, there were few such in that Town. Next night we got to Hamborough;Hambo∣rough. and having passed the Guards, we went to a Friend's house, being very Weary: for we had been up those Two Mornings before the third hour, and had travelled each day hard and late. Here we met with John Hill, an English Friend, who had been travelling in Germany; and being in a Ship bound for Amsterdam, that waited for a Wind, he had lain sick on board her about two weeks; and now hearing, that I was in the Coun∣try, got off from the Ship, and came hither to meet me, and to go along with me. The next day after we came to Hamborough, we had a very good Meeting there, and very peaceable. After the Meeting I had Discourse with a Swede, an Eminent man in his own Coun∣try; who having been banished from thence upon the Account of his Religion, was come to Hamborough, and was at the Meet∣ing I had there before. And when I had done with him, I had another Discourse wirh a Baptist, concerning the Sacraments (so called:) In both which I had good service, having opportunity thereby to open Truth unto them. Being clear of Hamborough, we took our Leave of Friends there, whom we left well: And taking John Hill along with us, we passed by Boat to a City in the Duke of Lunenbergh's Country;Lunen∣burghs Country. where after we were Examined by the Guards, we were had to the Main-Guard, and there Examined more strictly: but after they found, that we were not Souldiers, they were Civil to us, and let us pass. In the Afternnoon we travelled by Wagon, and the Waters being much out, by reason of the great Rains that had fallen, when it drew towards night, we hired a Boy upon the Way to guide us through a great Water, that we had
to pass. When we came to it, the Water was so deep,1677. Lunen∣burghs Country. before we could come at the Bridge, that the Wagoner was fain to wade, and I drove the Wagon. But when we were come upon the Bridge, the Horses brake part of it down, and one of them fell into the Water; the Wagon standing upon that part of the Bridge, which remained unbroken: and it was the Lord's mercy to us, that the Wagon did not run into the Brook. When they had got the Horse out, he lay a while, as if he had been dead: but at length they got him up, and put him to the Wagon a∣gain, and laid the Planks right; and then (through the goodness of the Lord to us) we got safe over. After this we came to another Water, which finding to be very deep, and it being in the night, we hired Two Men to help us through. These men put Cords to the Wagon, to hold it by, that the force of the Water might not drive it beside the way. But when we came into it, the Stream was so strong, that it took up one of the Horses off his legs, and was carrying him down the Stream; which I seeing, called to the Wagoner, to pluck him to him by his Reins, which he did, and the Horse recovered his Legs, and so with much difficulty we got over the Bridge, and went to Bormer-haven,Bormer-haven. the Town where the Wa∣goner lived. It was the last day of the sixth Month, that we esca∣ped these dangers; and it being about the eleventh hour in the night, when we came in here, we got some fresh straw, and lay upon it, till about the fourth hour in the Morning: and then get∣ting up, we set forward again towards Bremen, going part of the way by Wagon, and part by Boat. In the way I had good Opportunities to publish Truth among the People, especially at a Market-Town, where we stay'd to Change our Passage; where I declared the Truth to the People, warning them of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon all Flesh; and Exhorting them to Righteousness, and telling them, that God was come to Teach his People himself, and that they should turn to the Lord, and hearken to the Teachings of his Spirit in their own hearts. At Bremen we were Examined (as we usually were in Cities and Garrison-Towns) and after that we went to an Inn,Bremen. and stay'd a while, till another Wagon was provided to carry us fur∣ther. And here, though I felt the Lord's Power was over the City, and kept the wicked and unruly Spirits down, yet my Spirit suffered much in this place, for the Peoples sake. When our Wagon was ready, we left Bremen, and travelled through the Country to Keby, where we lodged at an Inn that night,Keby. and early next Morning set forth for Oldenburgh;Olden∣burgh. which was a la∣mentable sight, to see so great and brave a City burnt down. We went to an Inn, and though it was the First-day of the Week, there were the Souldiers drinking, and playing at Shovel-board; and at those few Houses, that were left, the Shops were open, and the People Trading one with another. I was moved to speak to the People, and declare the Truth among them, and warn them of the Judgments of God: And though they heard me quietly, and were civil towards me; yet I was burdened with
their Wickedness.1677. Olden∣burgh. And many times in Mornings, Noons and Nights, at the Inns, and on the Ways, as I travelled, I spake to the People, preaching the Truth to them, and warning them of the Day of the Lord, and Exhorting them to turn to the Light and Spirit of God in themselves, that thereby they might be led out of Evil. Next day, passing through many great Waters, we came at night to Leer,Leer. Embden. and the day following to Embden, where John Claus his Wife's Father lived: at whose house, when we went up into Germany, we left a Young-man sick, who travelled with me, and used to write for me; whom now, at our Return, we found pretty well recovered. John Claus went to his Father-in-law's; John Hill and I to an Inn, where we dined: and after dinner we went also to John Claus his Father's, and had a good Meeting there in the Evening. The day following we took shipping at Embden, and passed to Delfziel,Delfziel. and went to an Inn, where a Friend came to us, that then lived in Delfziel, having been often Banisht from Emb∣den: He was a Goldsmith by Trade, and had an House and Shop in Embden; and still, as they banished him, he went again. Then they Imprisoned him, and fed him with bread and water; and at length took his Goods from him, and Banished him, his Wife and Children; leaving them neither place to come to, nor any thing to subsist on. We Comforted and Encouraged him in the Lord, Exhorting him to be faithful, and stand stedfast in the Testimo∣ny committed to him. And when we had taken our Leave of him,Groningen. we took Boat, and passed the same day to Groningen, where we met with Cornelius Andries, a Friend, that had also suffered much by Imprisonment and Banishment at Embden. We went with him to his house; and the next day we had a good Meeting in that City, to which several Professors came, and were very peaceable and attentive. After Meeting we passed by Boat to Strobus,Strobus Dockum. Friezland. Leuwar∣den. and so to Dockum, where we lodged that night at an Inn. And taking Boat again next morning, we passed to Leuwarden, the chief City of Friezland, where I found my daugh∣ter Yeomans, who was come from Amsterdam thither to meet me. That day we had a precious Meeting there, at Sybrand Dowe's house; and after the Meeting I had some Discourse with some, that were at the Meeting, who had been formerly Convinced of Truth; but were not come into Obedience to it. We stayed there that night; but John Hill left us, and went that day to Har∣lingen, and so to Amsterdam. Next day we passed away by Boat down the River to the Lake of Hempen-Sarmer,Hempen-Sarmer. Lugmer Anderigo. Whispool. Gardick. and thence by the Lake Lugmer, and so to a Town called Anderigo: from whence sailing through the Lake Whispool, we came to a Town called Gardick. It was within night, when we came thither, and we went, and lodged at an Inn: and the next day, being the First-day of the Week, we were at Friends-Meeting there, which was very large, many of the Towns-People coming in: Amongst whom I declared the Truth, in the Power of the Lord, that was upon me; which tendered
the People, and they were very sober.1677. Gardick. After the Meeting we stayed but a little while to refresh our selves; and then went to take Boat again: but the People observing us, gathered toge∣ther at a Bridge, where we were to pass; and there I spake un∣to them again, declaring the Way of Life and Salvation unto them: and they were very Attentive and Civil. We took Boat, and went back that Evening to Leuwarden,Leuwarden being 27 Miles: but before we could get thither, the Gates were shut, and the Bridges drawn up, so that we could not get into the Ci∣ty; but were fain to lye in the Boat all night. And the next Morning, there having been a Man killed in the City that night, it was late, before the Gates were opened. When we could get in, we went to a Friend's house, where we stay'd a while; and then, taking Boat again, we passed through Franeker to Harlingen,Franeker. Harlingen. to Hessel Jacobs, where we found several Dutch Friends, who were come to be at the Meeting there next day. In the Even∣ing William Penn came to us from Amsterdam, who returning two or three days before out of Germany, had been at a large Meeting at Amsterdam on the First-day; and after Meeting, un∣derstanding I was at Harlingen, came thither to me. The next day was the Monthly Meeting for the Men and Wo∣men, to which we went; and it was large and good. And there it was Agreed upon amongst Friends, That there should be a Meet∣ing held there once a Month, both for the Men and for the Women, to take care of the outward Concerns of the Church. In the Afternoon we had a publick Meeting, to which came People of several sorts, as Socinians, Baptists, Lutherans, &c. a∣mongst which was a Doctor of Physick, and a Priest. And after I had declared the Truth a pretty large time to the People, open∣ing unto them the happy Estate, that Man and Woman were in, whilst they kept under God's Teaching, and abode in the Para∣dise of God; and on the other hand, the Wo and Misery that came upon them, when they went from God's Teaching, and hearkning to the Serpent's Teaching, transgressed God's Command, and were driven out of the Paradise of God: And then came to set forth the Way, whereby Man and Woman might come into that happy Estate again. The Priest, an ancient, grave Man, stood up, just as I had done speaking, and putting off his Hat, said, I pray God to prosper and confirm that Doctrine, for it is Truth, and I have nothing against it. He would willingly have stay'd longer, until the Meeting had been ended; but being a Parish-Priest, and to preach that Evening, he could not stay longer, (the time for his own Worship being come:) Wherefore, when he had made Confession to the Truth, he hastned away, that he might come to the Meeting again; and did come, it seems to the Meeting-place, but the Meeting was ended first. After Meet∣ing we went to Hessel Jacobs, where I had a Meeting with Friends; and the Doctor of Physick came thither to discourse with Willi∣am Penn, who had a good opportunity to open Truth to him. By this Doctor the Priest sent his Love to me, wishing him to tell me, that he had left Preaching that Evening half an hour sooner, than he used to do, that he might have come to our
Meeting again,1677. Harlingen. to have heard more of that good Doctrine. I heard afterwards, that his Hearers questioned him, for what he had said in our Meeting; and that, he standing by his words, they had Complained of him for it to the other Priests of the City, who called him to Account about it: but the Result I could not learn. Early next Morning William Penn, taking John Claus with him, passed from Harlingen for Leuwarden, where he had appoint∣ed a Meeting; intending, after that, to Travel into some other parts of Germany, to visit a tender People there. I, with those Friends that were with me,Amster∣dam. took Ship the same day for Amster∣dam, where we arrived a little after Midnight; but the Gates being shut, we lay on Board till Morning: then went to Ger∣trude Dirick Nieson's, where many Friends came to see us, be∣ing glad of our safe Return. Next day, feeling a Concern up∣on my mind, with relation to those seducing Spirits, that made Division among Friends; and being sensible, that they endea∣voured to insinuate themselves into the affectionate part, I was moved to write a few Lines to Friends concerning them, as fol∣loweth: ALL these, that do set up themselves in the Affections of the People, set up themselves, and the Affections of the People, and not Christ. But Friends, your peaceable Habitati∣on in the Truth, which is Everlasting, and changes not, will out-last all the Habitations of those that be out of the Truth, although they be never so full of words. And so, they that be so keen for J. S. and J. W. let them take them, and the Sepa∣ration. And you, that have given your Testimony against that Spirit, stand in your Testimony, till they Answer by Condem∣nation: And do not strive, nor make Bargains with that which is out of the Truth; nor save that alive, to be a Sacrifice for God, which should be slain, lest you lose your Kingdom. Amsterdam the 14th day of the 7th Month, 1677. G. F. On the First-day of the Week following, I was at Friends Meeting at Amsterdam, to which many People came, and were very civil and attentive, hearing Truth declared several hours; and John Roeloffs Interpreted for me. Before this time, several of the Friends, that came over with me, were returned to England again, as Robert Barclay, George Keith's Wife, and others; and now my Daughter Yeomans went back also: so that I was now left alone at Amsterdam. And while I was here, it came upon me to visit my suffering Friends at Dantzick with a few Lines, to encourage and strengthen them in their Sufferings, as followeth:
Dear Friends, TO whom is my Love in the Lord's Truth, that is over all,1677. Amster∣dam. and by which all God's People are made free Men and Women, being thereby set free from him that is out of the Truth; that walking in the Truth, they may Answer the Wit∣ness of God in all People: which Truth all must come to, if they be made free. Therefore be faithful, unto what the Lord manifests, and makes known unto you. I am glad, that the Lord hath Witnesses in that City, to stand for his Glory and Name, and to stand up for Christ Jesus, the great Prophet, whom God hath raised up, who is to be heard in all things; so that ye need none of the Prophets, which men have raised up. Therefore stand faithful to Christ Jesus, your Shepherd, that he may feed you; and hear his voice, and follow him, who has laid down his Life for you: but follow none of the Shepherds and Hirelings, that are made by men, though they be angry, because ye will not follow them to their dry and barren Moun∣tains; who have been, and are the Thieves, Persecutors and Robbers, that Clime up another way, than by Christ. So set up Christ to be your Counsellor and Leader, and then, ye will have no need of any of the Counsellors and Leaders of the World: for Christ is sufficient, whom God has given you. And also set up Christ Jesus to be your Bishop, and Overseer, who is sufficient to Oversee you, that ye go not astray from God; by which ye may see over all the Hireling-Overseers made by men, which do keep the People, that they do not go astray from the Rudiments and Formalities, Fashions and Customs of the World, which hath been and is their Work. And I am glad, that ye are come to own Christ Jesus, your High-Priest, who is holy and harmless, and separate from Sinners, and made higher than the Heavens, as the Church and the Apostle did own him in their days, Hebr. 7. who is the High-Priest over the houshold of Faith; which Faith Jesus Christ is the Author and Finisher of: and this do all the Children of the New Covenant witness, who walk in the new and living Way. And therefore my de∣sire is, that ye all may be stedfast, whether in Bonds, or out, in the Faith of Christ Jesus, which is the Gift of God; by which Faith all the Valiants overcame the Devil, and all their Enemies; in which Faith they had Victory and Access to God; and in that was their Unity: which Mystery of Faith is held in a pure Conscience, hidden from the World. And I do be∣lieve, that your Imprisonments and Sufferings in that Place, will be for Good in the end (as it hath been in other Places) ye standing faithful to the Lord, who is All-sufficient. For your Sufferings and Trials will Try their Teachers and Religions, Churches and Worships, and make manifest, what Birth they are of; even that which persecutes him, that is born of the Spirit: for ye know, that there is no Salvation by any other Name under the whole Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus; and there∣fore it is time to leave them, when there is no Salvation by or
in any of them. Now Friends, I desire, that you would take a List of the Names of all those Persons, that belong to the King of Poland, and where they do live, and how ye may send Books or Epistles to them, and keep a Correspondence with them; and also the Name of the Bishop or Cardinal, that I heard was with you: And if ye can get any of them, that belong to the King, that are his Attendants, to come and visit the Prisoners, that they may Inform the King of their Cruel Sufferings. Also I desire you to get as many Books of mine, as you can dispose of, that set forth your Sufferings, and the Cruelty of the Magi∣strates of Dantzick; and give them to the King, and his Coun∣cil, and Attendants, and his Bishops. And some of the Women may speak to the Queen, if they can, that she may signifie to the King their Cruel Sufferings; and especially some of the Suf∣ferers Wives, if there be any of a Capacity to do it: You may likewise give his Attendants any other Friends Books; and what Books ye lack, send for them to Amsterdam, where ye may be furnished with them, to Answer every tender Desirer, and In∣quiring mind after the Lord. So let all your Minds be bended with the Lord's Power, to spread his Truth abroad; and where ye hear of any, or have any Correspondence in outward Tra∣ding with any sober People, far or near, send them Books, that their Understandings may be opened after the Lord. So the Lord God Almighty preserve you; and to his Protection, in his Eternal Power, do I Commend you all, in Bonds or at Liberty, with my Love to you in the Everlasting Seed of God, Christ Jesus, who bruises the Head of the Serpent, that make you to suffer. But Christ is over him, and will be, when he is gone; who is First and Last, over all, from Everlasting to Everlast∣ing, in whom ye have both Life, Knowledge, Wisdom and Sal∣vation, and through him live to the Praise and Glory of God, who is blessed for evermore, Amen. Amsterdam the 18th of the 7th Month 1677. English stile. G. F. The next day (being the Fourth day of the Week, and 19th of the Month) I had a large Meeting at Amsterdam, many Profes∣sors being at it; and Truth was largely opened to them, in the demonstration of the heavenly Power. The day following I went by Boat from Amsterdam,Waterland. Landsmeer many Friends going with me, to Lands∣meer in Waterland (a Town, in which, they say, there are above an hundred Bridges) where I had a very good Meeting, to which several Professors came. And after the Meeting I returned, with Friends to Amsterdam again,Amster∣dam. where I stay'd with Friends, till the First-day following; and went to their Meeting, which was large: for many Professors of several sorts were at it, and heard the Truth declared with great Attention. I tarried amongst Friends there next day, and in the night following had a great Exercise upon my Spirit concerning that loose Spirit, that was run out into Strife and Contention among
Friends, and had drawn some after it into Division and Separati∣on; the way, work and end whereof the Lord opened to me: wherefore feeling the Motion of Life upon me, I got up in the Morning, and wrote the following Epistle to Friends. My Dear Friends, KEep your First Love in the Truth, and Power and Seed of Life in Christ Jesus: for this last night, as I was lying in my Bed at Amsterdam, I had a great Travel in the holy Seed of Life and Peace, and my Spirit was troubled with that Spirit of Strife and Separation. I saw, it was a Destroying Spirit, and did seek not only to get over the Seed, but to destroy it, and to Eat out the minds of People from it by Strife and Conten∣tion: and under pretence of standing for the Antient Truth, its work is to root it out; and destroy the Appearance of it, to set up it self. And it is a Creeping Spirit, seeking, whom it can get into; and what it cannot do it self, it stirreth up others to do, and setteth up their Spirits on float, with the dark Wisdom, to destroy the Simple. And this Spirit is managed by the Prince of the Air, and leadeth some to do such things, which they would have been ashamed to have done, as men, which doth Unman them: and they would not have suffered them, if they had kept to the tender Principle of God, which leadeth to Peace. And it is a despising, backbiting, and a secret-whispering Spirit, and a Sower of Dissension, and a taker of ad∣vantage of all prejudiced Spirits, that are disobedient to their first Principle and Love of Truth, and begetteth into hatred; so it begetteth all into that Spirit, whose work is to destroy both the Good within, and the good Order without: Nay, it would, if it could, destroy the Government of Christ, and the Order of the Gospel, to set up its own Will and Spirit, which is not of God: and under pretence of crying down Man, are setting up Man, and are gathering into a Separation of disobedient Men, who float above their Conditions. And this Spirit, which nei∣ther liveth in the Truth, nor its Order, but opposeth them that do, I cannot express it, as I do see it and its work, whose end will be accordingly. And therefore, Friends, I am to warn you all, that have not lost your Simplicity, not to touch it, nor to have any Ʋnity with it; lest you be defiled, and lose your Con∣ditions of your Eternal Estate, and your Everlasting Portion: and that your Inward man, which is after God, may be pre∣served; and Christ may reign in all your hearts. And they that are joined with them, it will be very hard for them ever to come down to Truth in themselves, and to see their own Conditions, and to have that Spirit of Strife and Contention (which eateth as a Canker) to be brought down in them; which is carnal, and slayeth the tender Babe, which was once begotten in themselves: and the Philistine is got up in them, that stoppeth the Wells and Springs, and maketh a great Busle; and are crying up Men, and pleading for them instead of Christ.
And so, Friends, strive not with them; but let them take them, that cry them up: and keep you to the Lord Jesus Christ with his Light, that cometh from him; that he may be your Lord, and ye in him may be all in Ʋnity, in one Light, Life, Power and Dominion in Christ, your Head. And so the God of Peace and Power preserve you all in Christ Jesus, your Saviour; and out of and from that mischievous Spirit, which is idle and slothful, as to the Work of the Power, and Spirit, and Light of God and Christ; and its very Act is that which worketh strife and disturbance against the Peace of the Church of Christ, and thinks in its wilfulness, and stubbornness, and unruliness to set up it self, and in that to have peace: but Destruction will be the end of it; and it is sealed for the Fire and Eternal Judg∣ment. And therefore let Christ the Seed be the Head and Crown of every one of you, that nothing may be between you, and the Lord God. And be not deceived with vain Words, or fained Words, or rough: for Satan is transforming himself, as an Angel of Light, to deceive; but God's Foundation standeth sure, and God knoweth, who are his, and will preserve his upon the Rock and Foundation of Life, in his peaceable Truth and Habi∣tation; that in the same they may grow. And so keep out of Strife and Contention, with it, after that ye have born your Te∣stimony, in the Lord's Power and Truth, against it; and then keep in the Truth: for it hath a life in scribling, strife and jang∣ling, because it would enlarge its Hell, and bring others into its Misery, with the airy Power, and would get Power over the Good, and disjoin People from it; and so to make Rapes upon the Simplicity by its Subtilty. But I do believe, the Lord will defend his People, though he may try them, and exercise them with this Spirit for a time, as he hath done by it in days past, in other Vessels it hath made use of, as it doth of these now; who have a more seeming fair Outside, but foul, and rough, and rugged enough within, against the Seed, Christ, as ever were the Pharisees to destroy it: And they, under a pretence of Preaching Christ, are the men, that are the Destroyers and Crucifiers of him, and Killers of the Just not only in them∣selves, but endeavouring with all their might to destroy it in others, where it is born; Pharaoh and Herod, to slay the young Jews in the Spirit, as the Old did: I do feel it Worrying of them; and it is got up to be King, which knew not suffering Joseph. But God will plague him; and the Seed will have more rest, and be better entertained in Egypt, than under Herod, into whom Old Pharaoh's Spirit is entred. He that hath an Ear to hear, let him hear; and an Eye to see, let him see, how this Spirit hath Transformed in all Ages against the Just and Righteous: but mark, what hath been its end. But the Seed reigneth; Glory to the Lord God over all for ever! and his Truth spread∣eth: and Friends here are in Unity and Peace, and of good Report, answering the good, or that of God in People. And so my desires are, that all God's People may do the same in all places, where-ever they be, so that the Lord may be glorified,
in their bringing forth much Fruit, that is heavenly and spiri∣tual, Amen. Amsterdam the 25 of the 7th Month, 1677. G. F. After I had given forth the fore-going Epistle, whereby my Spirit was in some measure eased of the Weight, that lay upon it; I went in the Afternoon to the Monthly Meeting of Friends at Amsterdam, where the Lord was present with us, and refresh∣ed our Spirits together in himself. I thought to have gone next day to Harlem; but there being a Fast appointed to be kept that day, I was stopped in my Spi∣rit, and moved to stay at Friends Meeting that day at Amsterdam. We had a very large Meeting, a great Concourse of People coming to it; and amongst them many great Persons. The Lord's Power was over the Meeting; and in the Openings thereof I was moved to declare to the People, That no man by all his wit and study, nor by reading History in his own Will, could declare or know the Generation of Christ; who was not begotten by the Will of Man, but by the Will of God. After I had largely o∣pened this unto them, I shewed them the Difference between the true Fast, and the false; manifesting unto them, that the profest Christians, Jews and Turks were out of the true Fast, and fasted for strife and debate, being under the Band and Fists of Iniquity and Oppression, wherewith they were smiting one ano∣ther: but the pure hands were not lifted up to God. And though they did all appear to men to Fast, and did hang down their Heads for a day, like a Bulrush, yet that was not the Fast which God did accept: but in that state all their Bones were dry; and when they called upon the Lord, he did not Answer them, neither did their Health grow: for they kept their own Fast, and not the Lord's. And there I exhorted them to come and keep the Lord's Fast, which was to fast from Sin and Iniquity, from Strife and Debate, from Violence and Oppression, and to abstain from every Appearance of Evil. These things were opened to the astonishment of the Fasters; and the Meet∣ing ended peaceably and well. I went to Harlem the day following,Harlem. having before appointed a Meeting to be there that day. Peter Hendricks and Gertrude Dirick Nieson went with me; and a blessed Meeting we had. There were at the Meeting Professors of several sorts, and a Priest of the Lutherans, who sate very Attentive for several hours, while I declared the Truth amongst them; Gertrude Interpreting. When the Meeting was done, the Priest said; That he had heard nothing, but what was according to the Word of God; and desired, That the Blessing of the Lord might rest upon us, and our Assemblies. Others also confessed to the Truth, saying; They had never heard things so plainly opened to their understandings before.
We stayed that night at Harlem at a Friend's house, whose name was Dirick Klassen; and returning next day to Amsterdam, went to Gertrude's house: where we had not been long come in, before there came a Priest of great note, who had formerly be∣longed to the Emperor of Germany; and with him another Ger∣man Priest, desiring to have some Conference with me. So I took the Opportunity to declare the Way of Truth unto them; open∣ing unto them, how they might come to know God and Christ, and his Law and Gospel: and shewing them, that they could ne∣ver know it by study, nor by Philosophy; but by Divine Revela∣tion through the Spirit of God, opening unto them in the stilness of their Minds. The men were tender, and went away well satis∣fied. On the First-day of the Week following, I was at Friends Meeting at Amsterdam, where, amongst the several sorts of Pro∣fessors, that were present, there was a Doctor of Poland, who for his Religion was banished from the place, he lived in; and he being affected with the Testimony of Truth, that was born in the Meeting, came after the Meeting, to have some Discourse with me: and after we had been some time together, and I had opened things further to him; he went away very Tender and Loving. Now while I was at Amsterdam, I spent most of my time (ex∣cept it were, when I was at Friends Meetings, or when People came to speak with me) in Writing Books, Papers, or Epistles on Truth's behalf. For I writ several Epistles from Amsterdam to Friends in England and elsewhere, on several Occasions, as the Lord moved me by his Spirit thereunto. I writ also from thence A Warning to the Inhabitants of the City Oldenburgh, which was lately burnt down: Also A Warning to the Inhabitants of the Ci∣ty of Hamborough. I writ also an Epistle to the Ambassadors, that were treating a Peace at Nimmeguen. To the Magistrates and Priests of Embden I writ a Book, shewing them their Ʋn∣christian Practices in persecuting Friends. And several other Books I writ there, in Answer to Priests and others, of Hamborough, Dantzick, and other places, to Clear the Truth and Friends from their false Charges and Slanders. After some time George Keith and William Penn came back from Germany to Amsterdam, and had a Dispute with one Galenus Abrahams (one of the most noted Baptists in Holland) at which many Professors were present: But not having time to finish the Dispute then, they met again two days after; and the Baptist was much Confounded, and Truth gained ground. Between these Two Disputes we had a very great Meeting at Friends Meeting-Place, at which many hundreds of the World's People were, and some of high Rank in the World's Account: for there was an Earl, and a Lord, and divers other Eminent Persons, who all behaved themselves very Civilly. But when the Meeting was ended, some Priests began to make some Opposition; which when William Penn understood, he stood up again, and answered them to the great satisfaction of the People; who were much affected with the se∣veral
Testimonies, that they had heard declared. And after the Meeting several of them came to Gertrude's, where we were, with whom George Keith had much Discourse in Latin. Having now finished our Service at Amsterdam, we took Leave of the Friends there, and passed by Wagon to Leyden,Leyden. which is about 25 Miles; where we stayed a day or two, seeking out and visiting some tender People, that we heard of there. We met there with a German, who was partly Convinced; and he In∣formed us of an Eminent Man, that was inquiring after Truth. Some sought him out, and visited him, and found him a Serious Man; and I spake to him, and he owned the Truth. William Penn and Benjamin Furly went to visit another Great Man, that lived a little out of Leyden, who, they said, had been General to the King of Denmark's Forces; and he and his wife were very lo∣ving to them, and heard the Truth with Joy. From Leyden we went to the Hague,Hague. where the Prince of O∣range then kept his Court; and we visited one of the Judges of Holland, with whom we had pretty much Discourse. He was a Wise, Tender man, and put many Objections and Queries to us; which when we had answered, he was satisfied, and parted with us in much Love. Then leaving the Hague, we went to Delft, and from thence that night to Rotterdam,Delft. Rotterdam where we stay'd several days, and had several Meetings there. While I was here, I gave forth a Book for the Jews: with whom, when I was at Amsterdam, I had a desire to have had some Discourse; but they would not. Here also I reviewed several other Books and Pa∣pers, which I had given forth before, and were now Transcri∣bed. And now finding our Spirits Clear of the Service, which the Lord had given us to do in Holland, we took Leave of: Friends of Rotterdam, and passed by Boat to the Briel, in order to take Passage that day in the Packet-Boat for England; several Friends of Rotterdam accompanying us, and some of Amsterdam, who were come to see us again, before we left Holland. But the Packet-Boat not coming in till night, we were fain to lodge that night at the Briel: and next day, being the One and twentieth of the Eighth Month, and the First-day of the Week, we went on Board, and set Sail about the Tenth hour, viz. William Penn, George Keith and I, and Gertrude Dirick Nieson, with her Chil∣dren. We were in all about sixty Passengers, and had a long and ha∣zardous Passage: for the Winds were contrary to us, and the Weather stormy; the Boat also very leaky, insomuch, that we were fain to have two Plumps continually going both day and night; so that it was thought, there was twice as much Water plumped out, as the Vessel would have held. But the Lord, who is able to make the stormy Winds to cease, and the Raging Waves of the Sea to be calm, yea to raise them, and stop them at his pleasure, he alone did preserve us: praised be his Name for e∣ver! Though our Passage was hard, yet we had a fine time, and good Service for Truth on Board among the Passengers, some
of whom were a sort of great Folks; and they were very kind and loving.1677. Harwich. We arrived at Harwich on the 23th of the 8th Month at night, having been Two Nights and almost Three Days at Sea. Next Morning William Penn and George Keith took Horse for Colchester; but I stay'd, and had a Meeting at Harwich: and there being no Colchester-Coach there, and the Post-masters Wife being Unreasonable in her Demands for a Coach, and de∣ceiving us of it also, after we had hired it; we went to a Friend's House about a mile and an half off in the Country, and hired his Wagon, which we bedded well with Straw, and rode in it to Colchester.Colchester I stay'd in Colchester, till the First-day of the Week, having a desire to be at Friends Meeting there that day; and a very large and weighty Meeting it was: for Friends hearing of my Return from Holland, flocked in thither from several parts of the Country, and many of the Towns People coming in also, it was thought, there were about a Thousand People at the Meeting; and all was peaceable. Then having stay'd a day or two longer at Colchester, having Service amongst the Friends there, I travelled through Essex,Essex. Halsted. Braintree. Felsted. Saling. helms∣ford. London. visiting Friends at Halsted, Braintree, Felsted and Saling, and having Meetings with them. At Chelmsford I had a Meeting in the Evening; and there being many Friends Prisoners, they got liberty, and came to the Meeting: and we were well refresh∣ed together in the Lord. Next day, being the 9th of the 9th Month, I got to London, where Friends received me with great Joy; and on the First-day following went to Gracious-street Meeting, where the Lord visited us with his refreshing Presence, and the Glory of the Lord surrounded the Meeting; praised be the Lord! After I had been a little while in London, I writ the follow∣ing Letter to my Wife, whom (though I had written to her several times out of Holland) I had not written to, since I came into England. Dear Heart, TO whom is my Love, and to the Children, and to all the rest of Friends, in the Lord's Truth, Power and Seed, that is over all; Glory to the Lord, and blessed be his Name for ever beyond all words, who hath carried me through, and over many Trials and Dangers in his Eternal Power. I have been Twice at Gracious-street-Meeting; and though the opposite Spirits were there, yet all was quiet, and the Dew of Heaven fell upon the People, and the Glory of the Lord shined over all. Every day I am fain to be at Meetings about Business, and Sufferings, which are great abroad; and now many Friends are concerned with many Persons about them: So in haste, with my Love to you all— London the 24th of the 9th Month, 1677. G. F.
About this time I received Letters from New-England,1677. London. which gave account of the Magistrates and Rulers cruel and unchristian-like Proceedings against Friends there, whipping and abusing them ve∣ry shamefully: for they whipped many Women-Friends; and one Woman they tied to a Cart, and dragged her along the Street, she being stripped above the wast. Yea, they whipped some Ma∣sters of Ships, that were not Friends, only for bringing Friends thither. And at that very time, while they were persecuting Friends in this barbarous manner, the Indians slew threescore of their Men, and took one of their Captains, and fleyed the skin off of his head, while he was alive, and carried it away in Triumph: So that the sober People said; The Judgments of God came upon them for persecuting the Quakers: but the blind, dark Priests said; It was, because they did not persecute them enough. So a great Ex∣ercise I had in seeking Relief here for our poor suffering Friends there, that they might not lye under the Rod of the Wicked. Upon this and other Services for Truth, to get Friends suffer∣ings in several places taken off, I stay'd in London a month or five weeks, visiting Meetings, and helping and incouraging Friends to labour for the deliverance of their suffering Brethren in other parts. Afterwards I went down to Kingston,Kingston and visited Friends there, and there-away. And having stay'd a little among Friends there, over looking a Book, which I had then ready to go to the Press;Bucks. I went from thence cross the Country into Buckingham∣shire, visiting Friends, and having several Meetings amongst them; as at Amersham, Hunger-hill, Jordans, Hedgerly,Amersham. Hunger-hill. Jordans. Hedgerly. Wickham-Turvil-heath. Wickham and Turvil-heath: In some of which, they that were gone out from the U∣nity of Friends in Truth, into Strife, Opposition and Division, were very unruly and troublesome. Particularly at the Mens-Meeting at Thomas Ellwood's at Hunger-hill, where the Chief of them came from Wickham, endeavouring to make a disturbance in the Meeting, and to hinder Friends from proceeding in the business of the Meeting. When I saw their design, I admonished them to be sober and quiet, and not trouble the Meeting, by in∣terrupting the Service thereof; but rather, if they were dissatis∣fied with Friends Proceedings, and had any thing to Object, let a Meeting be Appointed on purpose some other day. So Friends offered them to give them a Meeting another day: and at length it was Agreed to be at Thomas Ellwood's the week following.Hunger-hill. Ac∣cordingly Friends met them there, and the Meeting was in the Barn (for there came so many, both of Friends, and of them, that the House could not receive them:) So after we had sate a while, they began their Jangling; and most of their Arrows were shot at me: but the Lord was with me, and gave me strength in his Power to cast back their Darts of Envy and Falshood up∣on themselves. And so their Objections were Answered, and things were opened to the People; and a good Opportunity it was, and serviceable to the Truth: for many that before were weak, were now strengthened and confirmed; and some that were doubting and wavering, were satisfied and settled; and the Faithful Friends were refreshed and comforted in the springings
of Life amongst us:1677. Hunger-hill. for the Power rose, and Life sprung, and in the arisings thereof many living Testimonies were born against that wicked, dividing, rending Spirit, which those Opposers were joined to, and acted by: And the Meeting ended to the satisfa∣ction of Friends. That night I lodged, with other Friends, at Thomas Ellwood's; and the same week I had a Meeting again with those Opposers at Wickham,Wickham. where they again shewed their Envy; and were made manifest to the Upright-hearted. Now after I had visited Friends in that upper side of Bucking∣hamshire,Oxfordshire. Henly. Causham. Reading. I called upon Friends at Henly in Oxfordshire, and after∣wards went by Causham to Reading, where I was at Friends Meeting on the First-day of the week; and in the Evening had a large Meeting with Friends. Next day there being another Meeting amongst Friends, concerning settling a Womens-Meeting, some of them, that had let in the Spirit of Division, fell into jangling, and were disorderly for a while; till the weight of Truth brought them down. After this Meeting I passed on through the Country, visiting Friends, and having Meetings a∣mongst them in several places,Barkshire. Wiltshire. Bristol. through Barkshire and Wiltshire, and so on till I came to Bristol; which was on the 24th day of the 11th Month, just before the Fair. I stay'd at Bristol all the time of the Fair, and some time af∣ter; and many sweet and precious Meetings we had there at that time; Many Friends being there from several parts of the Nati∣on, some on the account of Trade, and some in the Service of Truth. And great was the Love and Unity of Friends, that a∣bode faithful in the Truth; though some, who were gone out of the holy Ʋnity, and were run into Strife, Division and Enmi∣ty, were rude and abusive to me, and behaved themselves in a very Unchristian manner towards me. But the Lord's Power was over all; by which being preserved in the heavenly Pati∣ence, which could bear Injuries for his Name's sake, I felt do∣minion therein over the rough, rude and unruly Spirits: and would leave them to the Lord; who knew my Innocency, and would plead my Cause. And the more these laboured to Re∣proach and Vilifie me, the more did the Love of Friends, that were sincere and upright-hearted, Abound towards me; and some, that had been betrayed by the Adversaries, seeing their Envy and rude behaviour, brake off from them: who have cause to bless the Lord for their deliverance. When I left Bristol, I went with Richard Snead to a house of his in the Country, and from thence to Hezekiah Coale's at Winter∣burn,Gloucester∣shire. Winter∣burn. in Gloucestershire, whether came several Friends, that were under great Sufferings for Truth's sake, whom I had Invited to meet me there. And there Stephen Smith, Richard Snead and I, drew up a Breviat of their Sufferings, setting forth the Illegal Proceedings against them; which was delivered to the Judges at the Assizes at Gloucester: and they promised to put a stop to those Illegal Proceedings.Sudbury. Next day we passed to Sudbury, and had a large Meeting in the Meeting-house there; which at that time was of very good Service. We went next day to Natha∣niel
Crip's at Tedbury, and from thence passed on to Nailsworth;1677. Tedbury. Nailsworth Finchcomb where on the First-day of the Week we had a brave Meeting, and large. From thence we went to the Quarterly Meeting at Finchcomb, where were several of the Opposit Spirit, who (it was thought) Intended to have made some disturbance amongst Friends; but the Lord's Power was over, and kept them down, and good Service for the Lord we had at that Meeting. We returned from Finchcomb to Nailsworth again,Nailsworth and had another very precious Meeting there, to which Friends came from the several Meetings thereabouts; which made it very large also. We went from Nailsworth on the First day of the First Month 1677/8, and travelled through the Country, visiting Friends, and having many Meetings amongst them, at Cirencester, Crown-Allins,Cirence∣ster. Crown-Allins. Chelton∣ham. Stoke-Orchard. Tewksbu∣ry, &c. Worcester. Parshow. Evesham. Warwick∣shire. Ragley. Cheltonham, Stoke-Orchard, Tewksbury, &c. so went to Worcester, where I had formerly suffered Imprisonment above a Year for the Truth's sake: and Friends rejoiced greatly to see me there a∣gain. Here I stay'd several days, and had many very precious Meetings in the City; and much Service amongst Friends. Af∣ter which travelling through the Country, I had Meetings at Parshow and Evesham, and then struck to Ragley in Warwickshire, to visit her, that was called the Lady Conway, who I under∣stood was very desirous to see me, and whom I found tender and loving, and willing to have detained me longer, than I had freedom to stay. About Two miles from hence I had Two Meet∣ings at a Friend's house, whose name was John Stangley,Stratford. Lamcoat. Armscott. Oxfordshire. Sibbard. North-Newton. Banbury. Adderbu∣ry, &c. Bucking∣hamshire. Long-Crendon. Ilmer. Mendle. Weston. Cholsberry Chesham, &c. Hartford∣shire. Charle∣wood. Watford Hempsted. Market-street. Bedford∣shire. Luton. Albans. South-Mims. Barnet. Hendon. London. whither William Dewsbury came to me, and stay'd with me about half a day. Afterwards I visited Friends in their Meetings thereabouts, at Stratford, Lamcoat, and Armscott (from whence it was, that I was sent Prisoner to Worcester in the Year 1673) and thence passed into Oxfordshire, visiting Friends, and having Meetings at Sibbard, North-Newton, Banbury, Adderbury, &c. Then visiting Friends through Buckinghamshire, at Long-Crendon, Ilmer, Mendle, Weston, Cholsberry, Chesham, &c. having several Meetings amongst them, I came to Isaac Pennington's, where I stay'd a few days: And then turning into Hartfordshire, visited Friends at Charle∣wood, Watford, Hempstead and Market-street, at which places I had Meetings with Friends. From Market-street I went in the Morning to Luton in Bedfordshire, to see John Crook, with whom I spent good part of the day; and went towards Evening to Albans, where I lay that night at an Inn. And visiting Friends at South-Mims, and at Barnet and Hendon, where I had Meet∣ings, I came to London on the Eighth day of the Third Month. And it being the Fourth-day of the Week, I went to Gracious-street-Meeting, which was peaceable and well; and many Friends, not knowing I was come to Town, were very Joyful to see me there: and the Lord was present with us, refreshing us with his living Vertue, blessed be his holy Name. The Parliament was sitting, when I came to Town, and Friends having laid their Sufferings before them, were Waiting on them for Relief against the Laws made against Popish Recusants, which they knew, we were not; though some malicious Magistrates
took Advantages against us,1678. London. to prosecute us in several parts of the Nation upon those Statutes. So Friends being Attending on that Service, when I came, I Joined with them therein; and some probability there was, that something might have been obtain∣ed towards Friends Ease and Relief in that Case, many of the Parliament-men being tender and loving towards us, as believing, we were much mis-represented by our Adversaries. But when I went down one Morning with George Whitehead, to the Parlia∣ment-house, to Attend upon them on Friends hehalf, on a sudden they were Prorogued, though but for a short time. Yearly Meeting.About two weeks after I came to London, the Yearly Meeting began; to which Friends came up out of most parts of the Na∣tion; and a glorious heavenly Meeting we had. Oh the Glory, Majesty, Love, Life, Wisdom and Ʋnity, that was amongst us! the Power reigned over all, and many Testimonies were born therein against that ungodly Spirit, which sought to make Rents and Divisions amongst the Lord's People: but not one Mouth was opened amongst us in its defence, or on its behalf. Good and Comfortable Accounts also we had, for the most part, from Friends in other Countries; of which I find a brief Account in a Letter, which soon after I writ to my Wife, the Copy where∣of here follows: Dear Heart, TO whom is my Love in the Everlasting Seed of Life, that reigns over all. Great Meetings here have been, and the Lord's Power hath been stirring through all, the like hath not been: And the Lord hath in his Power knit Friends wonder∣fully together, and the glorious Presence of the Lord did appear among Friends. And now the Meetings are over, (blessed be the Lord) in quietness and peace. From Holland I hear, that things are well there: Some Friends are gone that way, to be at their Yearly Meeting at Amsterdam. At Embden, Friends that were banished, are gotten into the City again. At Dantzick Friends are in Prison; and the Magistrates threatned them with harder Imprisonment: but the next day the Lutherans rose, and plucked down (or defaced) the Popish Monastery: so they have work enough among themselves. The King of Poland did receive my Letter, and read it himself: and Friends have since printed it in High-Dutch. By Letters from the Half-yearly-Meeting in Ireland I hear, that they be all in Love there. And at Barbados Friends are in quietness, and their Meetings settled in peace. At Antego also, and Nevis Truth prospers, and Friends have their Meetings orderly and well. Likewise in New-England, and other places, things concerning Truth and Friends are well: and in those places, the Mens and Womens-Meetings are settled; blessed be the Lord. So keep in God's Power and Seed, that is over all, in whom ye all have Life and Salvation: for the Lord reigns over all, in his Glory, and in his Kingdom; Glory to his Name for ever, Amen. So in haste, with my Love to you all, and to all Friends. London the 26th of the 3d Month, 1678. G. F.
The Letter to the King of Poland before mentioned, is as fol∣loweth: To Johannes III. KING of Poland, &c. O King! WE desire thy Prosperity both in this Life, and that which is to come. And we desire, that we may have our Christian Liberty to Serve and Worship God under thy Domini∣on: For our Principle leads us not to do any thing prejudicial to the King or his People. For we are a People, that do exer∣cise a good Conscience towards God through his holy Spirit, and in it do serve, and worship and honour him; and towards Men, in the things that be equal and just, doing to them, as we would have them do unto us; and looking unto Jesus, who is the Author and Finisher of our Faith: which Faith purifies our hearts, and brings us to have Access to God; without which we can∣not please him: by which Faith all the Just lives, as the Scrip∣ture declares. And so, that which we desire of Thee, O King, is, that we may have the Liberty of our Consciences to serve and worship God, and to pray unto him in our Meetings together in the Name of Jesus, as he Commands; with a promise, that he will be in the midst of them. The King, we do hope, cannot but say, that this Duty and Service is due to God and Christ; and we give Caesar his due, and pay our Tribute and Custom equal with our Neighbour, according to our proportion. And we never read in all the Scriptures of the New Testament, That e∣ver Christ or his Disciples did Banish or Imprison any, that were not of their Faith, or Religion, and would not hear them, or gave any such Command; but on the Contrary, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together, till the harvest: and the harvest is the end of the World. And then Christ will send his Angels to sever the Wheat from the Tares, &c. And also he Rebuked such, that would have had fire to come down from Hea∣ven, to consume such, that would not receive Christ; and told them, That they did not know, what Spirit they were of; he came not to destroy mens lives, but to save them. And therefore we desire the King to consider, how much Persecution has been in Christendom, since the Apostles days, con∣cerning Religion? And Christ said; They should go into Ever∣lasting punishment, that did not visit him in Prison; then what will become of them, that Imprison him in his Members, where he is Manifest? And now none can say, that the World is end∣ed: And therefore, how will all Christendom answer the dread∣ful and terrible God at his Day of Judgment, that have persecu∣ted one another about Religion before the end of the World, under a pretence of plucking up Tares; which is not their Work, but the Angels at the end of the World? And Christ Commands men to Love one another, and to Love Enemies; and by this they should be known to be his Disciples. And therefore,
Oh!1677. London. that all Christendom had lived in Peace and Ʋnity, that they might by their Moderation, have Judged both Turks and Jews; and let all have their Liberty, that do own God and Jesus, and Walk, as becomes the glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. And so, our desires are, that the Lord God of Heaven may soften the King's heart to all tender Consciences, that do fear the Lord, and are afraid of disobeying him. And now, we intreat the King to read over some of the Noble Expressions of several Kings, and others, concerning Liber∣ty of Conscience; and especially Stephanus, King of Poland his sayings, viz. It belongeth not to me, to Reform the Consciences: I have always gladly given that over to God, which belongeth to him; and so shall I do now, and also for the future. I will suffer the Weeds to grow, till the time of harvest; for I know, that the Number of Believers are but small: Therefore, said he, when some were proceeding in Persecution, I am King of the People, not of their Consciences. He also affirmed, that Religion was not to be planted with Fire and Sword. Chron. Liberty of Religi∣on, Part. 2. Also a Book wrote in French by W. M. Anno 1576. hath this Sentence; viz. Those Princes, that have ruled by Gentleness, and Clemency added to Justice, and have exercised Moderation and Meek∣ness towards their Subjects, always prospered and reigned long; but on the Contrary those Princes, that have been Cruel, Unjust, Pre∣judiced, and Oppressors of their Subjects, have soon fall'n, they and their Estates, into danger, or total ruin. Veritus saith; Seeing Christ is a Lamb, whom you profess to be your Head and Captain, then it behoveth you to be Sheep, and to use the same Weapons, which he made use of: for he will not be a Shepherd of Wolves and Wild-beasts, but only of Sheep. Where∣fore, if you lose the Nature of Sheep, (said he) and be changed into Wolves and Wild-beasts, and use fleshly Weapons, then will you exclude your selves out of his Calling, and forsake his Banner; and then will he not be your Captain, &c. And also we find it asserted by King James in his Speech to the Parliament, in the Year 1609. That it is a pure Rule in Di∣vinity, that God never planted his Church with Violence of Blood. And furthermore he said; It was usually the Condition of Chri∣stians, to be persecuted, but not to persecute. And also King Charles, in his , pag. 61. said in his Prayer to God: Thou seest, how much Cruelty amongst Christians is acted under the Colour of Religion; as if we could not be Christi∣ans, unless we crucified one another. And pag. 28. Make them at length seriously to Consider, that no∣thing violent, nor injurious, can be Religious. Pag. 70. Nor is it so proper, to hew out Religious Reformation by the Sword, as to polish them by fair and equal Disputations, a∣mong those that are most Concerned in the Differences; whom not force, but reason must Convince. And pag. 66. Take heed, that outward Circumstances and Forma∣lities in Religion devour not all.
And pag. 91, 92.1678. London. In point of true Conscientious tenderness I have so often declared, how little I desire, my Laws and Scepter should in∣trench on God's Soverainity, who is the only King of Consci∣ence. Pag. 123. Nor do I desire, any man should be further subject unto me, then all of us may be subject unto God. Pag. 200. O thou Soveraign of our Souls, the only Commander of our Consciences. Pag. 346. (In his Meditations on Death,) It is indeed a sad state, to have his Enemies to be his Accusers, Parties and Judges. The Prince of Orange testified, Anno 1579. That it was impossi∣ble, the Land should be kept in Peace, except there was a free Tole∣ration in the Exercise of Religion. And further: Where hast thou read in thy day (said Menno) in the Writing of the Apostles, that Christ or the Apostles ever cried out to the Magistrate for their power against them, that would not hear their Doctrine, nor obey their Words? I know certainly (said he) that where a Magistrate shall banish with the Sword, there is not the right Knowledge, Spiritual Word, nor Church of Christ; it is Invocare Brachium Seculare, (to Invoke the Secular Arm.) It is not Christian-like, but Tyrannical (said D. Philipson) to banish and persecute People about Faith and Religion; and they that so do, are certainly of the Pharisaical Generation, who resisted the Holy Ghost. Erasmus said, That though they take our Monies and Goods, they cannot therefore hurt our Salvation: they afflict us much with Prisons, but they do not thereby separate us from God. In de Krydges wrede, fol. 63. Lucernus said, He that Commandeth any thing, wherewith he bind∣eth the Conscience, this is an Antichrist. In de Bemise Disp. fol. 71. Irenaeus affirmed, That all forcing of Conscience, though it was but a forbidding of the Exercise, which is esteemed by one or another to be necessary to Salvation, is in no wise right nor fitting. He also affirmed, That through the diversity of Religions, the Kingdom should not be brought into any disturbance. Constantius the Emperour said; That it was enough, that he pre∣served the Ʋnity of the Faith, that he might be excusable before the Judgment-seat of God: and that he would leave every one to his own Ʋnderstanding, according to the Account he will give before the Judgment-seat of Christ. Here-to may we stir up People (said he) not Compel them; beseech them to come into the Unity of the Christians, but to do Violence to them, we will not in any wise. Se∣bast. Frank, Chron. fol. 127. Augustinus said; Some disturbed the Peace of the Church, while they went about to root out the Tares before their time; and through this Error of Blindness (said he) are they themselves separated so much the more, from being united unto Christ. Retnaldus testified, That he, who with Imprisoning and Perse∣cuting seeketh to spread the Gospel, and greaseth his hands with Blood, shall much rather be looked upon for a wild Hunter, than a
Preacher, or a Defender of the Christian Religion. I have for a long season determined (said Henry the IV. K. of France in his Speech to the Parliament 1599.) to Reform the Church, which without Peace (said he) I cannot do: and it is impossible, to Re∣form or Convert People by Violence. I am King, as a Shepherd, (said he) and will not shed the Blood of my Sheep; but will ga∣ther them through the Mildness and Goodness of a King, and not through the Power of Tyranny: and I will give them, that are of the Reformed Religion, right Liberty, to live and dwell free, with∣out being examined, perplexed, molested, or compelled to any thing, contrary to their Consciences; for they shall have the free Exercise of their Religion, &c. [Vid. Chron. Van de Underg. 2. deel, p. 1514.] Ennius said; Wisdom is driven out, when the Matter is acted by Force. And therefore the best of Men, and most glorious of Princes, were always ready to give Toleration. Euseb. in his Second Book of the Life of Constantine, reports these words of the Emperour: Let them, which err, with Joy receive the like fruition of Peace and Quietness with the Faithful; sith the restoring of Communication and Society may bring them into the right Way of Truth: let none give Molestation to any; let every one do, as he determines in his Mind. And indeed, there is great reason for Princes to give Toleration to disagreeing Persons, whose Opi∣nions cannot by fair means be altered: for if the Persons be Confi∣dent, they will serve God according to their Perswasions; and if they be publickly prohibited, they will privately Convene: and then all those Inconveniencies and Mischiefs, which are Arguments against the permission of Conventicles, are Arguments for the publick per∣missions of differing Religions, &c. they being restrained and made miserable, endears the discontented Persons mutually, and makes more hearty and dangerous Confederations. The like Counsel in the Divisions of Germany, at the first Re∣formation, was thought reasonable by the Emperour Ferdinand, and his excellent Son Maximilian; for they had observed, that Violence did exasperate, was unblest, unsuccessful and unreasonable; and therefore they made Decrees of Toleration. The Duke of Savoy, repenting of his War undertaken for Re∣ligion against the Piedmontans, promised them Toleration; and was as good, as his Word. Also it is remarkable, that till the time of Justinian the Em∣perour, Anno Domini 525. the Catholicks and Novatians had Churches indifferently permitted, even in Rome it self. And Paul preached the Kingdom of God, teaching those things, which concerned the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence; and no man forbad him: and this he did for the space of two years in his own hired house at Rome, and received all that came to him. NOW, O KING, seeing these Noble Testimonies concern∣ing Liberty of Conscience of Kings, Emperours and others, and the Liberty, that Paul had at Rome in the days of the Heathen-Emperour, our desire is, that we may have the same Liberty at Dantzick to Meet together in our own hired Houses, which
cannot be any prejudice, either to the King and the City of Dantzick, for us to meet together to wait upon the Lord, and pray unto him, and to serve and worship him in Spirit and Truth in our own hired Houses; seeing our Principle leads us to hurt no Man, but to Love our Enemies, and to pray for them; yea, them that do persecute us. And therefore, O King, Consi∣der, and the City of Dantzick, would you not think it hard for o∣thers, to force you from your Religion to another, contrary to your Consciences? And if it be so, that you would think it hard to you, then do you unto others, as you would have them do unto you; do not you that unto others, which you would not have men do unto you: for that is the Royal Law, which ought to be obeyed. And so in Love to thy Immortal Soul, and for thy Eternal Good this is written. G. F. POST-SCRIPT. BLessed be the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy. And re∣member, O King, Justin Martyr's two Apologies to the Roman Emperours, in the Defence of the persecuted Christians, and that notable Apology, which was written by Tertullian, up∣on the same Subject; which are not only for the Christian Re∣ligion, but against all Persecution for Religion. Dear Peter Hendricks, and John Claus, and J. Rawlins, and all the rest of Friends in Amsterdam, Friezland and Rotterdam, to whom is my Love in the Seed of Life, that's over all. I Received thy Letter, with a Letter from Dantzick: I have written something to you to the King of Poland, which you may translate into High-Dutch, and send it to Friends there, to give it to the King; or you may print it, after it be deliver∣ed in Manuscript; which may be serviceable to other Princes. So in haste, with my Love. And the Lord God Almighty over all give you dominion in his Eternal Power, and in it over all preserve you, and keep you to his Glory; that you may answer that of God in all People. Amen. London, the 13th of 9th Month, 1677. George Fox. I continued yet in and about London some Weeks, the Parlia∣ment sitting again, and Friends Attending upon them to get some Redress of our Sufferings, which about this time were very great, and heavy upon many Friends in divers parts of the Nation; they being very unduly prosecuted upon the Statutes made against Popish Recusants: Though our Persecutors could not but know, that Friends were utterly against Popery; having born Testimony
against it in Word and Writing, and suffered under it. But though many of the Members of Parliament in either House were kind to Friends, and willing to have done something for their Ease; yet having much business upon them, they were hindred from doing the good they would: so that the Sufferings upon Friends were Continued. But that which added much to the Grief and Exercise of Friends, was, that some, who made a Profession of the same Truth with us, being gone from the Simplicity of the Gospel into a fleshly Liberty, and labouring to draw others after them, did Oppose the Order and Discipline, which God by his Power had set up and established in his Church; and made a great noise and clamour against Prescriptions: Whereby they easily drew after them such, as were loosly Inclined, and desired a broader Way, than the Path of Truth to walk in. Some also, that were more simple, but young in Truth, or weak in Judgment, were apt to be betrayed by them; not knowing the Depths of Satan in these Wiles: For whose sakes I was moved to write the following Pa∣per, for the undeceiving the Deceived, and the opening the Un∣derstandings of the Weak in this matter: ALL you, that do deny Prescriptions without distinction, you may as well deny all the Scriptures, which were given forth by the Power and Spirit of God. For do not they pre∣scribe, how men should Walk both to God and Man, both in the Old Testament and in the New? Yea, from the very first Promise of Christ in Genesis, what People ought to believe and trust in; and all along, till ye come to the Prophets? Did not the Lord prescribe to his People, both by the Fathers, and then by his Prophets? did he not prescribe to the People, how they should Walk, though they turned against the Prophets in the Old Covenant, for declaring or prescribing to them the Way, how they might Walk to please God, and keep in favour with him? And then after, in the days of Christ, did not he prescribe and teach, how People should walk and believe? And after him the Apostles, did not they prescribe unto People, how they might come to believe, and receive the Gospel and the King∣dom of God, directing unto that, which would give them the Knowledge of God, and how they should walk in the New-Co∣venant in the days of the Gospel, and by what way they should come to the holy City? And did not the Apostles send forth their Decrees by faithful, Chosen Men (them that had hazard∣ed their Lives for Christ's sake) to the Churches, by which they were established? And so you, that deny Prescriptions given forth by the Power and Spirit of God, do thereby op∣pose the Spirit, that gave them forth in all the holy Men of God. And were there not some all along in the days of Moses, and in the days of the Prophets, and in the days of Christ, and in the days of his Apostles, who did withstand that, which they gave forth from the Spirit of God? And hath there not been the
same since the days of the Apostles? And how many have ri∣sen, since Truth appeared, to oppose the Order, which stands in the Power and Spirit of God? who are but in the same Spirit, which hath opposed the Spirit of God all along from the be∣ginning. And see, what Names or Titles the Spirit of God gave that Opposing Spirit in the Old Covenant, and also in the New; which is the same now, as was: for after the Lord had given forth the Old Covenant, there were some among themselves, that did Oppose; which were worse, than publick Enemies. And likewise after, in the days of the New Covenant, in the Gospel-times, you may see, what sort did Oppose both Christ and the Apostles, after they came to some Sights of the Truth; and how they turned against Christ and his Apostles? And see, what Liberty they pleaded for, and ran into in the Apostles days, who could not abide the Cross, the Yoke of Jesus. And there∣fore we see, the same rough and high Spirit cries now for Li∣berty (which the Power and Spirit of Christ cannot give;) and cries, Imposition; and yet is Imposing: and cries, Liberty of Con∣science; and yet is opposing Liberty of Conscience: And cries against Prescriptions; and yet is prescribing both in Words and Writing: So with the Everlasting Power and Spirit of God this Spirit is fathomed, its Rise, Beginning and End; and it is Judg∣ed. And this Spirit cries, We must not judge Conscience, we must not judge Matters of Faith, and we must not judge the Spirits, nor Religions, &c. Yes: They that be in the pure Spirit and Power of God, which the Apostles were in, they Judge of Conscience, whether it be a seared Conscience, or a tender Con∣science: They Judge of Faith, whether it be a dead one, or a living one: They Judge of Religion, whether it be vain, or pure, or undefiled: They Judge of Spirits, and try them, whe∣ther they be of God, or no: They Judge of Hope, whether it be of Hypocrites, or the true Hope, that purifies, even as God is pure: They Judge of Belief, whether it be that, which is born of God, and overcometh the World; or that which runs into the Spirit of the World, which lusts to Envy, and doth not overcome the World. And they Judge of Worships, whe∣ther they be Will-worships, and the Worship of the Beast and Dragon; or the Worship of God in Spirit and in Truth. They Judge of Angels, whether they be fallen, or them that keep their Habitation. And they Judge the World, that grieves and quench∣es the Spirit, and hates the Light, and turns the Grace of God into wantonness, and resists the Holy Ghost. They Judge of the Hearts, Ears and Lips, which are Circumcised, and which are Uncircumcised. They Judge of Ministers, and Apostles, and Messengers, whether they be of Satan, or of Christ. They judge of Differences in outward things, in the Church or elsewhere; yea, the least Member of the Church hath Power to Judge of such things, having the One true Measure, and true Weight to weigh things, and measure things withal, without respect to Persons. And this Judgment is given, and all these things are done by the same Power and Spirit the Apostles were in. And
also such can Judge of Election and Reprobation; and who keep their Habitation, and who not: And who are Jews; and who are of the Synagogue of Satan: And who are in the Doctrine of Christ, and who are in the Doctrines of Devils: And who pre∣scribes and declares things from the Power and Spirit of God, to preserve all in the Power and Spirit of God; and who pre∣scribes and declares things from a loose Spirit, to let all loose from under the Yoke of Christ, the Power of God, into Loosness and Liberty. And likewise can Judge and Discern, who brings People into the Possession of the Gospel of Light and Life, over Death and Darkness, and into the Truth, where the Devil can∣not get in; and who brings them into the Possession of Death and Darkness, out of the glorious Liberty of the Gospel, and of Jesus Christ, and his Faith, and Truth, and Spirit, and Light, and Grace. For there is no true Liberty, but in that; and that Liberty answers the Grace, the Truth, the Light, the Spirit, the Faith, the Gospel of Christ in every Man and Woman, and is the Yoke to the Contrary in every Man and Woman. And that makes it rage, and swell, and puff up; for that is restless and un∣ruly, and out of patience, and is ready to curse his God, and that which reigns over him; because it hath not its Will. And it works with all Subtilty and Evasion with its restless Spi∣rit, to get in and defile the minds of the Simple, and to make Rapes upon the Virgin Minds. But as they receive the heaven∣ly Wisdom, by which all things were made (which Wisdom is above that Spirit) through this Wisdom they will be preserved over that Spirit. And Christ hath given Judgment to his Saints in his Church, though he be Judge of all; and the Saints, in the Power and Spirit of God, had and have Power to Judge of Words and Manners, of Lives and Conversations, and Growths and States from a Child to a Father in the Truth; and to whom they are a Savour of Death, and to whom they are a Savour of Life: And who serve the Lord Jesus Christ, and preach him, and who preach themselves, and serve themselves: And who Talk of the Light, and of Faith, and of the Gospel, and of Hope, and of Grace, and preach such things; and in their Works and Lives deny them all, and God and Christ, and preach up Liberty from that in themselves to that in Others, which should be under the Yoke and Cross of Christ, the Power of God. And so the Saints in the Power and Spirit of Christ can discern and distinguish, who serves God and Christ, and who serves him not; and so can put a distinction between the Prophane, and the Holy. But such as have lost their Eye-salve, and their Sight is grown dim, lose this Judgment, Discerning and Distinction in the Church of Christ; and such come to be spewed out of Christ's mouth, except they Repent: and if not, they come to Corrupt the Earth, and burden it, that it Vomits them out of it. And therefore all are Exhorted, to keep in the Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus, and in the Word of Life, and the Wisdom of God (which is above that, that is below) in which they may keep their heavenly Understandings, and heavenly
Discernings; and so set the heavenly Spiritual Judgment over that, which is for Judgment, which dishonours God, which leads into loose and false Liberty; out of the Unity, which stands in the heavenly Spirit, which brings into Conformity, and to be Conformable to the Image of the Son of God, and his Gospel, the Power of God, (which was before the Devil was) and his Truth (which the Devil is out of;) in which all are of one Mind, Heart and Soul, and come to drink into one Spirit, being baptized into one Spirit, and so into one Body, which Christ is the Head of; and so keep one Fellowship in the Spirit, and Unity in the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace, the Prince of Princes Peace. And they, that Cry so much a∣gainst Judging, and are afraid of Judgment, whether they be Apostates, Professors or Prophane, they are the Most-judging with their censorious, false Spirits and Judgment; and yet can∣not bear the true Judgment of the Spirit of God, nor stand in his Judgment. This hath been manifest from the beginning, they having the false Measures, and the false Weights: for none have the true Measure, and the true Weight, but who keep in the Light, Power and Spirit of Christ. And now there is a loose Spirit, that cries for Liberty, and against Pre∣scriptions; and yet is prescribing ways, both by Words and Writings. And the same Spirit cries against Judging, and would not be Judged; and yet is Judging with a wrong Spirit. And this is given forth in Reproof to that Spirit. London the 9th of the 4th Month, 1678. G. F. When I had finished, what Service I had for the Lord at this time here, I left London and went towards Hartford; vi∣siting Friends, and having several Meetings in the way. At Hartford I stay'd several days, having much Service for the Lord there; both amongst Friends in their Meetings, and in Conferences with such, as having let in evil surmisings and jealou∣sies concerning Friends, stood in Opposition to the Order of Truth: And in Answering some Books that had been written against Truth and Friends. And while I was here, it came upon me to write a few Lines, and send them abroad amongst Friends, as followeth: Dear Friends, LET the holy Seed of Life reign over Death and the unholy Seed in you all: that in the holy Seed of the Kingdom ye may all feel the everlasting, holy Peace with God, through Christ Jesus, your Saviour, and sit down in him, your Life and glo∣rious Rest, the holy Rock and Foundation, that standeth sure over all from Everlasting to Everlasting; in whom all the ful∣ness of Blessedness is: so that ye may glory in him, that liveth for evermore, Amen! Who is your Eternal Joy, Life and Hap∣piness,
through whom you have Peace with God.1678. Hartford. Which holy Seed bruiseth the Head of the Serpent, and will out-live all his Wrath and Rage, Malice and Envy; who was before He and It was; and remains, when He and It is gone into the fire, that burns with brimstone. The Seed, Christ will reign; and so will ye, as ye do live and walk in him, and sit down in Christ, and build up one another in the Love of God. Hartford the 10 of the 5th Month, 1678. G. F. Next day a fresh Exercise came upon me, with respect to those unruly and disorderly Spirits, which were gone out from us, and were labouring to draw others after them into a false Liberty. And in the sense I had of the hurt and mischief these might do, where they were given way to; I was moved to write a few Lines to Warn Friends of them, as followeth: All Friends, KEep in the tender Life of the Lamb, over that unruly, puf∣fed up and swelling Spirit, whose work is for Strife, Con∣tention and Division, drawing into Loosness and false Liberty, under a pretence of Conscience, and dangerous to the Spoiling of Youth. They that do encourage them, will be guilty of their Destruction, and set up a sturdy Will instead of Consci∣ence in their Rage and Passion; which will quench the univer∣sal Spirit in themselves, and in every Man and Woman: and so, that Spirit shall not have the Liberty in themselves, nor in Others, and so shut up the Kingdom of Heaven in themselves, and also in Others. And so a loose Spirit getting up under a pretence of Liberty of Conscience, or a stubborn Will, making a Profession of the Words of Truth in a Form without Power, all Loosness and Vileness will be sheltered and covered under this pretence, which is for Eternal Judgment: for that doth disho∣nour God. Therefore keep to the tender Spirit of God in all hu∣mility, that in it you may know, that ye are all Members of one another, and all have an Office in the Church of Christ; and all these living Members know one another in the Spirit, and not in the Flesh. So here is no Man ruling over the Wo∣man, as Adam did over Eve in the Fall: but Christ, the Spi∣ritual Man, among and over his Spiritual Members, which are edified in the heavenly Love, that is shed in their heart from God, where all strife ceases. Hartford the 11th of the 5th Month, 1678. G. F.
I went from Hartford to a Meeting at Rabley-Heath about six miles from thence;1678. Rabley-Heath. Stevenage. Bldock. Hi chin. Ashwel. Bedford∣shire Hunting∣ton Ives. and after the Meeting to Edward Crouch's of Stevenage: from whence next day I went to Baldock, where I had a Meeting that Evening; and after that had Meetings at Hitchin and Ashwell. Then passing through some part of Bed¦fordshire, where I had a Meeting or two; I went on to Hun∣tington, in which County I stayed several days, having many Meetings, and much Service amongst Friends; labouring to Con¦vince Gain-sayers, and to Confirm and Strengthen Friends in the Way and Work of the Lord. At Ives in Huntingtonshire George Whitehead came to me, and travelled with me in the Work of the Lord for five or six days in that County, and in some part of Northamptonshire;Northamp∣tonshire. Leicester∣shire. Great Bowden. Sding∣ton. Wigston. Knighton, Leicester. Sileby Swanning∣ton, &c. Leicester. and leaving me in Great Bowden in Leicester¦shire, he went on towards Westmorland, whither he was travel∣ling. I stay'd longer in Leicestershire, visiting Friends at Sadding∣ton, Wigston, Knighton, Leicester, Sileby, Swannington, and divers other places; where I had very precious Meetings, and very good Service amongst Friends and other People: for there was great Openness, and many weighty and excellent Truths did the Lord give me to open amongst them. At Leicester I went to the Jail to visit the Friends, that were in Prison there for the Testimony of Jesus, with whom I spent some time; encouraging them in the Lord to persevere stedfastly and faithfully in their Testimony, and not to be Weary of Suf∣fering for his sake. And when I had taken my leave of the Friends, I spake with the Jailer, desiring him to be kind to them, and let them have what Liberty he could, to visit their Families sometimes. After I had been in Leicestershire, I had a Meeting or two in Warwickshire; and then went into Staffordshire,Warwick∣shire Stafford∣shire. where I had se¦veral sweet and opening Meetings, both for gathering into Truth, and establishing therein. And while I was in Staffordshire, I was moved to give forth the following Paper: DEar Friends of the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings every where: My desire is, that ye may all strive to be of one Mind in the Lord's Power and Truth, which is peaceable (into which Strife and Enmity cannot come) and also in the Wisdom of God, which is pure, peaceable and easie to be intreated (which is above that, that is below, that is Earthly, Devilish and Sen∣sual) and that with and in this heavenly Wisdom, that is peace∣able, and easie to be entreated, you may be all ordered, and do, what ye do, to God's Glory. And, Dear friends, if there should happen at any time any thing, that tends to strife, di∣spute or contention in your Monthly or Quarterly Meetings, let it be Referr'd to half a dozen, or such alike number, to debate and end out of your Meeting (as it was at first:) so that all your Monthly and Quarterly Meetings may be kept peaceable. And then they may Inform the Meeting, what they have done; so that the Weak and Youth amongst you may not be hurt,
through hearing of Strife or Contention in your Meetings,1678. Stafford∣shire. where no Strife or Contention ought to be: but all to go on, and determine things in one Mind, in the Power of God, the Gospel-Order; in which Gospel of Peace ye will preserve the Peace of all your Meetings. And if any Man or Woman have any thing against any one, let them speak to one another, and end it betwixt themselves; and if they cannot so end it, let them take two or three to end it. And in case they determin it not, let it be laid before the Church; and then let half a dozen, or such a number out of your Monthly or Quarterly Meeting hear it, and finally end it, without Respect of Persons. And let all Preju∣dice be laid aside, and buried, and also all Shortness one towards another; and let Love (which is not puffed up, and envies not, and seeks not her own, but bears all things) rule, sway and have the Dominion in all your Meetings: for that doth edifie the Body, which Christ is the Head of; and this will sway all sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbals. Now this Love will suffer long, and is kind, and will keep down that which will vaunt it self, or be puffed up, or behave it self unseemly, or is easily provoked: It hath a sway over all such Fruits, which are not of the Spirit, the Fruit of which is Love, &c. And that with this holy Spirit ye may all be baptized into one Body, and so be made all to drink into one Spirit; in which Spirit ye will have Unity, in which is the Bond of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords his Peace. And they that dwell in Love, they dwell in God; for God is Love: Therefore let every one keep his Dwelling-place and his Habitation. So with my Love to you in Christ Jesus, the everlasting Seed, which is over all. Staffordshire, the 20th of the 6th Month, 1678. G. F. Darbyshire. Moniash. Yorkshire. Hill.Out of Staffordshire I went to visit John Gratton at Moniash in Darbyshire, with whom I tarried one night; and went next day to William Shaws of the Hill in Yorkshire, where I appointed a Meeting to be on the First-day of the Week following. Many Friends out of Darbyshire, and from several Meetings in Yorkshire came to this Meeting, and a precious, comfortable, opening Meet∣ing it was; wherein was opened the blessed Estate that Man was in before he fell; the Means, by which he fell; the miserable Condition, into which he fell; and the right Way of coming out of it, into a happy State again by Christ, the promised Seed. After this I spent about two Weeks in Yorkshire, travelling from place to place amongst Friends in the Lord's Service; and many heavenly Meetings I had in that County. Then visiting Robert Widders at Kellet in Lancashire,Lancashire. Kellet. Westmor∣land. Arnside. Swarth∣more. I passed to Arnside in Westmorland, where I had a precious living Meeting in the Lord's blessed Power, to the great Satisfaction and Comfort of Friends, who came from divers parts to it. The next day I went to Swarthmore: and it being the Meeting-day there, I had a sweet opportunity with
Friends; our hearts being opened in the Love of God,1678. Swarth∣more. and his blessed Life flowing amongst us. I had not been long at Swarthmore, e're a Concern came upon me, to visit the Churches of Christ in London and elsewhere, by an Epistle, which was as followeth: Dear Friends, TO whom is my Love in the heavenly Seed, in whom all Nations are blessed. Oh, keep all in this Seed, in which ye are blessed, and in which Abraham and all the Faithful were blessed, without the Deeds of the Law: for the Promise was and is to and with the Seed, and not with the Law of the First Co∣venant. In this Seed all Nations, and ye are blessed, which bruiseth the Head of the Seed, that brought the Curse, and se∣parated between Man and God. This is the Seed, which recon∣ciles you to God, and this is the Seed, in which ye are blessed both in Temporals and Spirituals; through which ye have an Inheritance among the Sanctified, that cannot be defiled, nei∣ther can any defiled thing enter into its Possession: for all de∣filements are out of this Seed. This is that, which leavens up into a New Lump, and bruiseth the Head of the Wicked Seed, that leavens into the Old Lump, upon whom the Sun of Righ∣teousness goes down and sets; but never goes down and sets to them, that walk in the Seed, in which all Nations are blessed: by which Seed they are brought up to God, which puts down that Seed, which separated betwixt them and God; so that there comes to be nothing betwixt them and God. Now all my Dear Friends, my desires are, that ye may all be Valiant in this hea∣venly Seed, for God and his Truth upon the Earth, and spread it abroad, answering that of God in all; that with it the Minds of People may be turned towards the Lord; that he may come to be known, and served, and worshipped: and that ye may all be the Salt of the Earth, to make the unseasoned savoury. And in the Name of Jesus keep your Meetings, who are gather∣ed into it, in whose Name ye have Salvation; he being in the midst of you, whose Name is above every Name under the whole Heaven. And so, ye have a Prophet and Bishop, Shep∣herd, Priest and Counsellor (above all the Counsellors and Priests, Bishops, Prophets, and Shepherds under the whole Heaven) to exercise his Offices among you, in your Meetings, that are ga∣thered in his Name. For Christ's Meeting and Gathering is above all the Meetings and Gatherings under the whole Heaven: And his Body, his Church, and he the Head of it, is above all the Bodies, and Churches, and Heads under the whole Heaven. And the Faith, that Christ is the Author of, and the Worship that he hath set up, and his Fellowship in the Gospel is above all Hi∣storical Faiths, and the Faiths that Man hath made, together with their Worships and Fellowships under the whole Heaven. And now, Dear Friends, keep your Men and Womens-Meetings in the Power of God, the Gospel, the Authority of them, which
brings Life and Immortality to Light in you; and this Gospel, the Power of God, will preserve you in Life, and in Immorta∣lity (which hath brought it to Light in you) that ye may see over him, that hath darkned, and kept from the knowledge of the things of God: for it is he and his Instruments (which hath darkned you from Life and Immortality) that would throw down your Men and Womens-Meetings (which were set up in the Power of God, the Gospel) and would darken you again from this Life and Immortality, which the Gospel hath brought to Light, and will preserve you in, as your Faith stands in this Power of God, the Gospel, in which every one sees your Work and Service for God. And every Heir, in the Power of God, the Gospel, hath right to this Authority, which is not of Man, nor by Man; which Gospel, the Power of God, is ever∣lasting, an everlasting Order, an everlasting Fellowship: and in the Gospel is everlasting Joy, Comfort and Peace, which will out-last all those Joys, Comforts and Peaces, that will have an end; and that Spirit also, that opposes its Order, and the glo∣rious Fellowship, Peace and Comfort in it. And, My Dear Friends, my desire is, that ye may keep in the Unity of the Spirit, that baptizes you all into one Body, which Christ is the heavenly and spiritual Head of; so that ye may see and bear witness to your heavenly and spiritual Head, and so all drink into the One Spirit: Which all People upon the Earth are not like to do, while they grieve, quench, and rebel against it; nor to be baptized into one Body, and to keep the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace, yea, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords his Peace: which it is the duty of all true Christians to keep, who are inwardly united to Christ. So with my Love to you all in the everlasting Seed. Swarthmore, the 26th of the 7th Month, 1678. G. F. There were about this time several Friends in Prison, for bearing Testimony to the Truth: To whom I was moved to write a few Lines, to comfort, strengthen and encourage them in their Sufferings; having a true sense of their Sufferings upon my spirit, and a sympathizing with them therein. And that which I writ, was after this manner: My Dear Friends, WHO are Sufferers for the Lord Jesus sake, and for the Testimony of his Truth, the Lord God Almighty with his Power uphold you, and support you in all your Trials and Sufferings, and give you Patience, and Content in his Will, that y may stand valiant for Christ and his Truth upon the Earth, over the persecuting and destroying Spirit, which makes to suf∣fer, in Christ (who bruises his Head) in whom ye have both Election and Salvation. And for God's Elect sake the Lord hath
done much from the Foundation of the World; as may be seen throughout the Scriptures of Truth: and they that touch them, touch the Apple of God's Eye; they are so tender to him. And therefore it is good for all God's suffering Children to trust in the Lord, and to wait upon him: for they shall be as Mount Sion, that cannot be removed from Christ their Rock and Sal∣vation, who is the Foundation of all the Elect of God, of the Prophets and the Apostles, and of God's People now, and to the End; Glory to the Lord and the Lamb over all. Remember my dear Love to all Friends; and do not think the time long: for all Time is in the Father's hand, his Power. And therefore keep the Word of Patience, and exercise that Gift: and the Lord strengthen you in your Sufferings, in his holy Spirit of Faith, Amen. Swarthmore, the 5th of the 12th Month, 1678. G. F. I abode in the North at this time above a year,  having Service for the Lord amongst Friends there, and being much taken up in writing Books and Papers, some in Defence of Truth, in An∣swer to Books published by Adversaries; and some for the open∣ing the Principles and Doctrines of Truth to the World, that they might come to have a right understanding thereof, and be ga∣thered thereunto. Several Epistles also to Friends I writ in this time, on divers Occasions and Subjects; whereof one was to the Friends of the Yearly Meeting, which was held in London this year 1679. a Copy of which here follows: My Dear Friends and Brethren, WHO are Assembled together in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ fill all your hearts, and establish you in his Grace, Mercy and Peace upon Christ, the holy living Rock and Foundation, who is the First and Last, and over all the Foundations and Rocks in the whole world; a Rock and Foundation of Life for all the Living to build upon, which stands sure in his heavenly, divine Light, which is the Life in him; by whom all things were made: who is the precious Stone laid in Sion (and not in the World) which all the Wise Master-Builders rejected, who pretended to build People up to Heaven with the Words of the Prophets, and the Law from Mount Sinai; but out of the Life of both: and therefore such Builders could not receive the Law of Life from Christ, the precious Stone laid in Sion, nor the Word from heavenly Jerusalem. But you, My Dear Friends, that have re∣ceived this Law from heavenly Sion, and the Word from heaven∣ly Jerusalem, in the New Covenant, where the Life and Substance is enjoyed, you do see the end and abolishing of the Jews Law and Ceremonies from Mount Sinai. And therefore my desire is,
that you all may keep in the Law of Life and Love,1679. Swarth∣more. which ye have in Christ Jesus, by which Love the Body is edified, and knit and united together to Christ Jesus, the Head. Which Love doth bear all things, and fulfils the Law; and will pre∣serve all in Humility, and in it to be of one mind, heart and soul: so that all may come to drink into that One Spirit, that doth Baptize them, and Circumcise them; Plunging down, and Cutting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, that is got∣ten up in Man and Woman by their transgressing of God's Commands. So that in this holy, pure Spirit all may serve and worship the pure God in Spirit and in Truth, which is over all the Worships, that are out of God's Spirit and his Truth. And in this Spirit ye will all have a Spiritual Unity and Fellowship, over all the Fellowships of the Unclean Spirits, which be out of Truth in the World. And so by this holy Spirit all your hearts, minds and souls may be knit together to Christ, from whence it comes; and by the Grace and Truth, which is come by Jesus Christ, which all should be under the Teachings of in the New Covenant, and not under the Law, as the outward Jews were in the Old Covenant. So that by this Grace and Truth in the New Covenant, all may be made God's free Men and Wo∣men, to serve God in the new Life, and in the new and li∣ving Way; shewing forth the Fruits of the new heart and new spirit, in the New Covenant, over death and darkness, and be∣fore it was; Glory be unto the Lord for ever! And now Friends, in this Grace and Truth is your heavenly, gracious and true Liberty to every Spiritual Mind, that makes you free from him, that is out of Truth, where your bondage was. Also your Li∣berty in the holy, divine and precious Faith, which gives you Victory over that, that hath separated you from God and Christ, and through which Faith ye have Access to God again, through Jesus Christ. So in this divine and holy Faith, ye have divine, holy and precious Liberty, yea, and Victory over him that sepa∣rated you from God: and this Faith is held in a pure Consci∣ence. So the Liberty in the Spirit of God is in that, which baptizes and plunges down Sin and Iniquity, and puts off the Body of Death, and Sins of the Flesh, that is gotten up by transgressing of God's Command, as I said before. And also the Liberty of the Gospel, which is sent from Heaven by the Holy Ghost, which is the Power of God, which was and is a∣gain to be preached to all Nations; In this Gospel (the Power of God, which is over the Power of Satan) is the true Liberty, and the Gospel-Fellowship and Order. So that the Evil Spirit or Conscience, or false, dead Faith, and that which is ungraci∣ous and out of Truth, and not in the Spirit of God, nor in his Gospel, nor in the divine Faith, its Liberty is in the Dark∣ness: For all the true Liberty is in the Gospel, and in the Truth that makes free; and in the Faith, and in the Grace, and in Christ Jesus, who destroys the Devil and his Works, that hath brought all Mankind into Bondage. So in this heavenly peaceable Spirit, and Truth, and Faith which works by Love,
and in the Gospel of Peace, and in Christ Jesus is all the Saints Peace, and pure, true and holy Liberty; in which they have Salt, and Sense, and Feeling, Discerning and Savour, yea, and Unity and Fellowship one with another, yea, and with the Son and the Father, that heavenly, eternal Fellowship. So all being subject to the Grace, and Truth, and to the Faith, and Gospel (the Power of God) and to his good Spirit, in this they distinguish all true, pure and holy Liberty from that which is false. And this will bring all to sit low: for Patience runs the Race, and the Lamb must have the Victory; and not the rough, unruly and vain Talkers, unbaptized, uncircumcised and unsanctified. For such travel not in the way of Regenera∣tion, but in the way of unregeneration; Neither go they down into the Death with Christ by Baptism: and therefore such are not like to Reign with him in his Resurrection, who are not buried with him in Baptism. Therefore all must go down∣ward, into the Death of Christ, and be crucified with him, if they will Arise, and follow him in the Regeneration, before they come to Reign with him. And Friends, Many may have precious Openings; but I desire, all may be comprehended in that thing, which doth open to them. And that they may all keep in the daily Cross; then they keep in the Power, that doth kill and crucifie that, which would lead them amongst the Beasts and Goats, to leaven them into their rough, unruly spi∣rit: But that through the Cross, the Power of God, That may be crucified, and they in the Power might follow the Lamb. For the Power of God keeps all in Order, and in Subjection, and in Humility, in that which is lovely and vertuous, decent, comely, temperate and moderate; that their Moderation comes to appear to all men. So my desire is, that all your Lights may shine, as from a City set upon a Hill, that cannot be hid; And that ye may be the Salt of the Earth, to salt and season it, and make it savoury to God, and you all seasoned with it. Then all your Sacrifices will be a sweet savour to the Lord, and ye will be as the Lilies, and Roses, and Garden of God, which gives a sweet smell unto him: Whose Garden is preserved by his Power; that is the Hedge, that hedges out all the unruly and unsavoury, and the Destroyers and Hurters of the Vines, Buds and Plants, and God's tender Blade, which springs up from his Seed of Life, who waters it with his heavenly Water, and Word of Life every moment, that they may grow and be fruit∣ful; that so he may have a pleasant and fruitful Garden. And so here all are kept fresh and green, being watered every mo∣ment with the everlasting, holy Water of Life from the Lord, the Fountain. So my dear Friends, my desire is, that this hea∣venly Seed, that bruises down the Head of the Serpent both within and without, may be all your Crowns and Lifes, and ye in him one another's Crown and Joy to the praise of the Lord God over all, blessed for evermore. This holy Seed will out∣last, and wear out all that, which the evil Seed since the Fall of Man, hath brought forth and set up. And as every one
hath received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him in the Humility, which he teaches; and shun the occasions of Strife, vain Janglings and Disputings with Men of Corrupt Minds, who are destitute of the Truth: for the Truth is peaceable, and the Gospel is a peaceable Habitation in the Power of God (which was before the Devil was) and his Wisdom is peaceable and gentle, &c. And his Kingdom stands in Peace. Oh! his Glory shines over all his Works! And in Christ Jesus ye will have Peace, who is not of the World, yea, a Peace, that the World cannot take away: for the Peace, which ye have from him, was before the World was, and will be, when it is gone: So they are not like to take his Peace away from his People. This keeps all in that, which is weighty and substantial, over all Chaff; and will be, when it is gone: Glory to the Lord God over all for ever and ever, Amen! And now, My dear Friends, the Lord doth require more of you, than he doth of other People; because he hath commit∣ted more to you. He requires Fruits of his Spirit, and of the Light, and of the Gospel, and of the Grace, and of the Truth; for herein is he glorified (as Christ said) in your bringing forth much Fruit: Fruits of Righteousness, liness, Godliness, Vertue, Truth and Purity; so that ye may answer that which is of God in all People. And be ye valiant for his everlasting, glorious Gospel, in God's holy Spirit, and Truth; keeping in the Ʋnity, and in the holy Spirit, Light and Life, which is over Death and Darkness, and was before Death and Darkness was. In this Spirit ye have the Bond of Peace, which cannot be bro∣ken, except ye go from the Spirit: and then ye loose this U∣nity and Bond of Peace, which ye have from the Prince of Peace. The World also does expect more from Friends, than from other People; because you profess more. Therefore you should be more Just, than Others, in your Words and Dealings, and more Righteous, Holy and Pure in your Lives and Conversations; so that your Lives and Conversations may preach. For the Worlds Tongues and Mouths have preached long enough, but their Lives and Conversations have denied, what their Tongues have professed and declared. And Dear Friends, strive to excel one another in Vertue, and that ye may grow in Love, that excellent Way, which unites all to Christ and God: And that all may stand up for God's Glory, and mind that which concerns the Lord's Honour and Glory; that in no wise his Power may be abused, nor his Name evil spoken of by any evil Talkers or Walkers: but that in all things God may be honoured, and ye may glorifie him in your Bodies, Souls and Spirits, the little time ye have to live. So my Love to you all in the holy Seed of Life, that reigns over all, and is the First and Last; in whom ye all have Life and Salvation, and your Election and Peace with God, through Jesus Christ, who destroys him that hath been betwixt you and God: so that nothing may be betwixt you and the Lord, but Christ Jesus, Amen.
My Life and Love is to you all, and amongst you all: And the Lord God Almighty by his mighty Power, by which he hath preserved all his People unto this day, preserve and keep you all in his power and peaceable, holy Truth, in Unity and Fellowship one with another, and with the Son and the Father, Amen. The 24th of the 3d Month, 1679. G. F. Divers other Epistles and Papers I writ unto Friends, during my stay in the North; One whereof was, in a few Lines, To Encourage Friends to be bold and valiant for the Truth, which the Lord had called them to bear witness to: and it was thus worded: Dear Friends, ALL be Valiant for the Lord's Truth upon the Earth, which the Serpent, Satan and the Devil is out of; and in the Truth keep him out, in which you all have Peace and Life, and Ʋnity with God and his Son, and one with another. And let the Love of God fill all your hearts; that in it ye may build up one another, and edifie one another in the Light, Life and holy Spirit and Power of God, the glorious, comfortable Gospel of Christ, the heavenly Man, who is your Lord and Saviour; who will fill all your Bottles and Vessels with his heavenly Wine and Water of Life, and cloath you with his heavenly Cloath∣ing, his fine Linnen, that never waxeth old: And will arm you with his heavenly Weapons and Armour, that ye may stand faithful Witnesses for God and his Son, who is come, and hath given you an understanding to know him; and ye are in him. And so walk in him, in whom ye all have Life and Salvation, and Peace with God. So my Love to you all in the Lord Je∣sus Christ, in whom I have laboured: and God Almighty in his eternal Power and Wisdom preserve you all to his Glory, Amen. Swarthmore the 29th of the 10th Month, 1679. G. F. The next day, having a sense upon me, how some, that had received the Truth, and had Openings thereof, for want of keep∣ing low, had run out there-from; I was moved to give forth the following Epistle, as a Warning and Exhortation to all to dwell in Humility.
My Dear Friends, VVHom the Lord in his tender Mercies hath visited with the Day-spring from on high, and hath opened you to confess and bow to his Name; keep low in your minds, and learn of Christ, who teacheth you Humility, and to keep in it: so that in no wise ye, that be younger, be exalted; or puffed up, or conceited through your Openings, and by that means lose your Conditions, by being carried up into Presumption: and then fall into Despair, and so abuse the Power of God. For it was the Apostles care, that none should abuse the Power of the Lord God; but in all things their Faith was to stand in the power of the Lord God: so that they all might be comprehended into the Truth, which they did speak to others; that they might not be Preachers to others, and themselves Cast-aways. Therefore it doth concern you to be comprehended into that, which ye do preach to Others, and to keep low in it: And then the God of Truth will exalt the humble in his Truth, Light, Grace, Pow∣er and Spirit, and in his Wisdom to his Glory. So here all are kept in their Measures of Grace, Light, Faith and the Spirit of Christ, the heavenly and spiritual Man. So let none quench the Spirit, nor its Motions, nor grieve it, nor err from it; but be led by it, which keeps every one in their Tents: Which ho∣ly Spirit of God giveth them an understanding, how to serve, and worship, and please the holy, pure God, their Maker and Creator in Christ Jesus, and how to wait, and how to speak, and so to answer the Spirit of God in his People; in which ho∣ly Spirit is the holy Ʋnity and Fellowship. And the holy Spirit teacheth the holy, gentle, meek and quiet lowly mind to an∣swer the Seed, that Christ hath sown upon all grounds; and to answer the Light, and Grace and Spirit, and the Gospel in eve∣ry Creature, though they are gone from the Spirit, Grace, Light and Gospel in the heart: so that by holy Walking all may come to do it, as well as by holy Preaching; that so God in all things may be glorified by you, and that ye may bring forth Fruits to his praise, Amen. Swarthmore, the 30th of the 10th Month, 1679. G. F. About the latter end of this Year I was moved of the Lord to travel up into the South again. Wherefore after I had taken my leave of my Wife and the Family, and of the Neighbouring Friends, I set forward on my Journey in the beginning of the First Month 1679/80,Westmor∣land. Lancashire. Yorkshire. and passing through some parts of Westmor∣land and Lancashire, I visited Friends at several Meetings; and so came into Yorkshire. Divers large and weighty Meetings I had in Yorkshire, before I came to York-City; and when I came there, it was the Assize-time: and there being many Friends in Prison for Truth's sake, I put Friends, that were at liberty, upon draw∣ing
up the Sufferings of the Friends, that were in Prison;1680. York. that they might be laid before the Judges: and I assisted them there∣in. There were then in York many Friends from several parts of the County, for the Quarterly Meeting of Friends was at that time; so that I had a brave opportunity among Friends, and ma∣ny weighty and serviceable things did the Lord open through me to the Meeting, relating to both the inward state of Man, how Man by faith in Christ comes to be grafted into him, and made a Member of his Spiritual Body: and also the outward state of the Church, how each Member ought to walk and act, ac∣cording to its place in the Body. I spent several days in York amongst Friends, having divers Meetings amongst them; and all was peaceable and well. I went also to the Castle, to visit the Friends that were Prisoners there; with whom I spent some time, encouraging them and strengtnening them in their Testi∣mony. Then leaving York, I travelled on Southward through York∣shire, having Meetings in many places amongst Friends,Yorkshire. Lincolnshire Burton. till I came to Burton in Lincolnshire; where on the First-day of the Week I had a large and precious Meeting. Then turning into Nottinghamshire,Notting∣hamshire. I travelled among Friends through a good part of that County, in which I had several very good Meetings; and then passed into Darbyshire, and through Leicestershire,Darbyshire. Leicester∣shire. Warwick∣shire. Warwick. Southam. Radway. Oxfordshire. North-Newton. Banbury. Oxfordshire: Gloucester∣shire Northamp∣tonshire. Bucking∣hamshire. Biddlesden Lilling∣stone. Lovel. Bugbrook. Stony∣stratford. Bedford∣shire. Dunstable. Market-street. Albans. Mims. Barnet. Middlesex. Gutters∣hedge in Hendon. London. Yearly-Meeting. and so into Warwickshire, having Meetings all along as I went, till I came to Warwick: There William Dewsberry came to me, and se∣veral other Friends; and we had a little Meeting in than Town. Then passing through Southam and Radway (at each of which places I had a very good Meeting) I came to Nathaniel Ball's of North-Newton in Oxfordshire, and so went to Banbury to a Monthly Meeting there. And after I had visited Friends at their Meetings in the bordering parts both of Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire, and Northamptonshire, I passed to Richard Baker's of Bidlesden in Buckinghamshire; and the next day (being the First-day of the Week) I had a very large Meeting in Biddlesden, at an old Abbey∣house, which a Friend Rented, and dwelt in: Many Friends and People came to this Meeting out of Oxfordshire, Northamptonshire, and the parts adjacent; and of good Service it was. After this Meeting I visited Friends in those parts, having Meetings at Lil∣lingstone, Lovel and Bugbrook; and then going to Stony-stratford, I went from thence into some parts of Bedfordshire, till I came to Edward Chester's of Dunstable. From whence passing on by Market-street, I had a Meeting at Albans; and so calling on Friends at Mims and Barnet, I came to the Widow Hayly's, at Gutters∣hedge in Hendon in Middlesex, on a Seventh-day night, and had a very large and good Meeting there the day following. I passed from thence to London on the Third-day following, and went directly to the Peel-Meeting at John Elsons; and next morn∣ing to the Meeting at Gracious-street, which was very large and quiet: and Friends rejoyced in the Lord to see me. The Yearly-Meeting was in the week following, to which many Friends came up out of most parts of the Nation; and a blessed Oppor∣tunity
the Lord gave us together; wherein the ancient Love was sweetly felt,1680. London. and the heavenly Life flowed abundantly over all. After the Yearly-Meeting was over, and the Friends, that came out of the Counties to it, for the most part return'd homewards, I continued about a Month or five weeks longer in and about Lon∣don, labouring in the Work of the Lord both in Meetings and out: for, besides the publick Testimony, which the Lord gave me to bear both to Friends and to the World in Meetings, I had much Service lay upon me, with respect to Friends Sufferings, in seeking to get Ease and Liberty for them in this and other Nations. And much pains and time I spent, while I was now at London, in writing Letters to Friends in divers parts of Eng∣land, and in Scotland, Holland, Barbados, and several other parts of America. After I had spent about six weeks time in the Service of Truth in and about London, I was moved of the Lord to go visit Friends in some parts of Surrey and Sussex.Surrey. Sussex. Kingston. I went down to Kingston by water, and tarried there certain days: for while I was there, the Lord laid it upon me to write to both the great Turk, and the King of Algier severally, to Warn them both, and the Peo∣ple under them, to turn from their wickedness, and fear the Lord, and do justly; lest the Judgments of God came upon them, and destroyed them without Remedy. But to the Algerines I writ more particularly, concerning the Cruelty they exercised to∣wards Friends and others, whom they held Captives in Algiers. Now when I had finished that Service, and visited Friends in their Meetings at Kingston, I went on further into the County, and had Meetings amongst Friends in many places;Worples∣don. Guildford. Eshing Capell. Patchgate. Worming∣hurst. Bletching∣ton. Horsham. Ifield. Rygate. Gaton, &c Kingston. Hammer∣smith. Battersea. Wans∣worth. Kensington Hendon. London. Edmunton Hartford. as at Wor∣plesdon, Guildford, Eshing, Capell, Patchgate, Worminghurst, Bletch∣ington, Horsham, Ifield, Rygate, Gaton, &c. and so came back to Kingston again: and from thence to Hammersmith. And ha∣ving spent some days in the Service of Truth amongst Friends at Hammersmith, Battersea, Wansworth and thereabouts, I crossed over by Kensington, to Hendon, where I had a very good Meet∣ing on the First-day of the Week. And (having spent about two Months time in this Journey) went from thence to Lon∣don. When I had been about Ten days in London, I was drawn forth again to visit Friends in the Country; and went down to Edmun∣ton, to Christopher Taylor's, who kept a School in his House for the educating of Friends Children. I had some Service here a∣mongst the Youths; and then went on towards Hartford, visiting several Friends in the way. At Hartford I met with John Story and some others of his Party; but the Testimony of Truth went over them, and kept them down, so that the Meeting was quiet. It was on a First-day of the week; and the next day being the Mens and Womens Meeting for business, I visited them also; and the rather, because some in that place had let in a Dis-esteem of them. Wherefore I was moved to open the Service of those Meetings, and the Usefulness and Benefit thereof to the Church of Christ, as the Lord opened the thing in me; and it was of good
Service to Friends.1680. Hartford. I had a Meeting also with some of them there, that were gone into Strife and Contention, to shew them, wherein they were wrong: and having cleared my self of them, I left them to the Lord. Then, after I had had another publick Meeting in the Town,Waltham-Abby. I returned towards London by Waltham-Abby, where I had a publick Meeting on the First-day following; and another with Friends in the Evening. Next day I went to Christopher Taylor's at Edmunton, and stay'd there a day or two;Edmunton. having some things upon me to write, which were for the Ser∣vice of Truth. When I had finished that Service,Schackle∣well. I went to London by Shacklewell, where was a School kept by Friends, for the breeding up Young Maidens, that were Friends Daughters. I abode at London most part of this Winter,London. having much Service for the Lord there, both in Meetings, and out: For as it was a time of great Sufferings upon Friends, I was drawn forth in Spirit to visit Friends Meetings more frequently; to encou∣rage and strengthen them both by Exhortation and Example. The Parliament also was sitting, and Friends were diligent to wait upon them, to lay their Grievances before them; of which we received fresh Accounts almost every day, of the sad Suffer∣ings Friends underwent in many parts of the Nation. In this Service of seeking Relief for my suffering Brethren, I spent much time; together with other Friends, who were freely given up to that Service, attending at the Parliament-House day by day for many days together, and watching all Opportunities to speak with such Members of either House, as would hear our just Com∣plaints. And indeed, some of the Members of each House were very Courteous to us; and appeared willing to help us, if they could: But the Parliament being then earnest in Examining the Popish Plot, and contriving ways to discover such, as were Po∣pishly Affected, our Adversaries took advantages against us (be∣cause they knew, we could not Swear nor Fight) to Expose us to those Penalties, that were made against Papists: though they knew in their Consciences, that we were no Papists, and had had Experience of us, that we were no Plotters. Wherefore, to clear our Innocency in those Cases, and to stop the Mouths of our Adversaries, I drew up a short Paper, to be delivered to the Parliament, which was as followeth: IT is our Principle and Testimony, to deny and renounce all Plots and Plotters against the King, or any of his Subjects; for we have the Spirit of Christ, by which the have the Mind of Christ, who came to save mens lives, and not to destroy them: and we would have the King and all his Subjects to be safe. Wherefore we do declare, that we will endeavour, to our pow∣er, to save and defend him and them, by discovering all Plots and Plotters (which shall come to our knowledge) that would destroy the King or his Subjects: This we do sincerely offer un∣to you. But as to Swearing and Fighting, which in tenderness of Conscience we cannot do, ye know, that we have suffered
these many years for our Consciencious Refusal thereof.1680. London. And now that the Lord hath brought you together, we desire you to Relieve us, and free us from those Sufferings; and that ye will not put upon us to do those things, which we have suffer∣ed so much and so long already for not doing: for if you do, ye will make our Sufferings and Bonds stronger, instead of Reliev∣ing us. G. F. About this time I received Two very envious Books, written against Truth and Friends: one of them by a Doctor (so called) of Bremen in Germany; the other by a Priest of Dantzick in Po∣land. They were both full of gross Falshoods, and ad in them many reproachful Slanders. I found it upon me to Answer them both: and that I might not be over-much interrupted therein by other Business and Company, I got out of London for a little while,Kingston upon Thames. and went down to Kingston upon Thames, were I writ an Answer to each of them; And also an Answer to some other Scandalous Papers, which had been printed and scattered about to mis-represent Friends by. While I was there, I writ also the following Paper, to per∣swade the Magistrates to Moderation towards Dissenters; and take off their Edge to Persecution. And because it should have its full Service, I directed it— To all the Rulers, Magistrates, and them that are in Authority, and Law-makers in England, Scotland and Ireland, from the Highest to the Lowest; and to all other Magistrates every where, in that which is called Christendom; Desiring their Health, and Peace, and Tranquillity, and Life and Salva∣tion in Christ Jesus the Lord of Glory, and Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World; Who is the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and all Power in Heaven and in Earth is given to him: who will reward every Man according to his Words and Works. ALL you bearing the Name of Christian Magistrates, my desire is, that you may all be found in Christ; and not only have the Name, but be made Partakers of his Divine Na∣ture: that ye may be not only Sayers of the Word, but Doers of the Word; not only Professors of Christ, and Talkers of Christ, but let Christ rule in your hearts by Faith, and be Walkers in Christ. For as Christ's great Apostle saith, As every one hath
received the Lord Jesus Christ, so let him walk in him;1680. Kingston. for in him there is peace. And if all that do Profess Christ, did Walk in Christ, they would all Walk in Peace, and be in Unity: For the Apostle exhorted the Christians in his day to keep the Ʋni∣ty of the Spirit; which is the Bond of Peace, yea, of Christ the King of Kings Peace. And all Christians, who have the Scrip∣tures, and are not in this Spirit of Christ, they are not in Uni∣ty one with another; and so have broken this Bond of Peace, which should knit and unite them together. And likewise all that do profess the Truth of Christ, should live in it; for it is peaceable; and the Gospel is the Gospel of Peace: which if all Christians, that do profess it, lived in, they would be at peace one with another, and in the glorious Fellowship of the Gospel. And also, if all Christians kept in the Fear of God, which is the beginning of the pure, heavenly, peaceable and gentle Wisdom, which is easie to be entreated (above that Wisdom, which is earthly, sensual, devillish and destroying) then there would be no difference and destroying about Matters of Religion. I do declare, the mighty Day of the Lord is Come and Coming; and the Lord God is come to Teach his People himself by his Son (Hebr. 1.) whose Son, Christ Jesus, bruises the Serpent's Head, that false Teacher, that led Adam and Eve from God their Teacher. So God will Teach his People by his Son, who was the Teacher of Adam and Eve in Paradise, before they fell and disobeyed the Lord, and forsook him, and followed the Serpent; whose Head Christ does bruise, and renews Man and Woman up again into the Image of God, which Adam and Eve was in before they fell: Glory and Honour be to God through Jesus Christ, who hath called us by his Son into his glorious Image, to serve and worship him in his Spirit and Truth; which holy Spirit and Truth the Devil is out of, and cannot come in∣to it. And now, I desire all Christian Magistrates to take heed of Persecuting any, though they differ from you in Matters of Faith, Worship and Religion. For Christ saith, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together, till the Harvest; and he forbad such, as would be plucking up Tares: The Reason was, Lest they should pluck up the Wheat also; for that, Christ said, should be his An∣gels work, to separate the Tares from the Wheat. Moreover, Christ said, They should go into everlasting Punishment, that did not Visit him in Prison in his Members: Then what will be∣come of them, that Cast him into Prison, where he is made manifest in his Members! Oh, lay these things to heart! A Day of Judgment will come, Vengeance and Recompence upon e∣very one according to their Works. And Christ said to his Disciples, who would have had Fire to come down from Heaven to consume them, that would not re∣ceive him; He turned him about and rebuked them, and told them, They did not know, what spirit they were of; for he came not to destroy mens Lives, but to save them.
And therefore let all the Magistrates, and the Priests in that which is called Christendom, consider, who have destroyed Mens and Womens Lives since the Apostles days, because they could not Receive their Religions, Ways and Worships, (or Conform to them) which they have made and set up; Have they known, what Spirit they have been of? Are they not all reproved by, and come under the Judgment of Christ? Therefore let all Per∣secution be laid away concerning Religion, and let Love bear the sway, to overcome Evil and Enemies; and let Patience o∣ver-sway Passion in all such doings: that all may retain the heavenly Reason, and the pure Understanding, that your Mode∣ration in true Christianity may be known to all Men. For have you not the Turks, Jews, Tartars, Indians and Atheists Eyes upon you, and upon Christendom? And therefore be in Uni∣ty, and let not the Name of God and Christ be blasphemed a∣mongst them by means of any, that bear the Name of Chri∣stians: So that God may be glorified by all and in all, through Jesus Christ, who is over all, who calls all to Peace, who is blessed for ever. And now, I would have you to be as Noble, as the Bereans, and search the Scriptures of Christ and the Apostles, where-ever he or they did give any Command to Imprison, Banish, Perse∣cute or put to Death any, that would not receive or conform to them, or that were contrary-minded to them in Religion, or dif∣fer'd from them in Matters of Worship? Again, I desire all Christian Magistrates to search both Scrip∣tures and Chronicles, and see, what was the End of all Perse∣cutors, and what Judgments came upon them. What came to Cain, who was the first Persecutor for Matters of Faith and Sa∣crifice? Did not he become a Runnagade, a Vagabond and a Fu∣gitive in the Earth? What became of the Old World, that grieved God and Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness? What be∣came of Sodom, that vex'd Just Lot? What became of Pharaoh, that persecuted God's People in Egypt? (though the more he perse∣cuted them, the more they grew.) What became of Ahab and Jezabel, that persecuted the Lord's Prophets? And what became of Haman, that would have destroyed the Jews? What became of the Jews and Jerusalem, that persecuted Christ and the Apostles? What was the End of all these? Are they not become Vaga∣bonds in the Earth, and driven away from their native Coun∣try? Therefore I beseech you in the Love and Fear of God, be so Noble as to search both Scripture and History, and let not your divine understanding be clouded. What will become of the Beast and Whore, spoken of in the Revelations, with their false Prophets, that have drunk the blood of the Saints, Martyrs and Prophets of Jesus? must they not all go with the Devil (who is a Murderer, Destroyer, an Enemy and Adversary of Mankind) into the Lake of Fire, that burns with Brimstone? And ye may be sure, that Spirit that stirs you up to Persecuti∣on, let it be in whomsoever it will, is not of Christ, and of his Lamb-like Nature; who takes away the Sins of the World, not the Lives of Men.
Paul was a Persecutor, and a Haler to Prison, before he was converted to Christianity; but never after. And therefore, are not all in Saul's nature (let them be of what Name or Profes∣sion soever they be) that are Persecutors, and unconverted in∣to Paul's Life of Christianity? He said, the Life that he did live, after he was Converted, was by the Faith in the Son of God: And that He lived, yet not He, but Christ lived in him, who came to save mens Lives, and not to destroy them; Which Life should be the Life of all Christians now, which Paul in his converted state lived in. And the Apostle saith, The Law is good, if a man use it lawfully; knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the Lawless, and for the Ungodly and Sinners, and for Unholy and Prophane, and for Murtherers of Fathers and Mothers, and for Manslayers, for Whoremongers, and for them that defile themselves with Mankind, for Menstealers, Liars and Perjured Persons, 1 Tim. 1. So the Law in its place, is good against such. Again the Apostle says, The Law was added, because of Transgression, Gal. 3.19. Now here all Magistrates may see, what the Law in its place is good against; and what it was made for and against; and what E∣vils, the Apostle says, it takes hold upon: He does not say, the Law should be laid upon Men, that differed from them in their Religion and Judgment, nor upon the Righteous men. And so you may see, in what condition the Law is good, and what it was made against; not against Righteous men, against whom they have nothing in their Lives and Conversations, only be∣cause they differ from them in Matters of Religion; and let Manslayers, Whoremongers, Perjured Persons, Ʋngodly, Prophane Persons, Liars, &c. go unpunished: Such do not use, nor exe∣cute the Law lawfully, as the Apostle says; The Law is good, if a man use it lawfully. Therefore it ought to be used lawful∣ly; which Law the Apostle says, is for the punishment of the Evil-Doers, and a praise for them that do well: as may be seen, Rom. 13. And so, as the Apostle said, We do not break the Law, nor make it void; but we establish the Law, Rom. 3.31. Kingston upon Thames, the 4th of the first Month 1680/1. This is from him, who desires the Eternal Good and Salvation of you all in Christ Jesus, Amen. G. F. After I had finished these Services there, I returned to London; where I stay'd about a Month,London. labouring amongst Friends in the Work of the Lord both in publick Meetings for Worship, and in the Meetings relating to the outward Affairs of the Church.Waltham-Abbey. Flamstead∣end. Edmunton Enfield. Winch∣more-hill. Then feeling my Spirit drawn to visit Friends about Enfield-side, I went down to Waltham-Abbey, where I had a very precious Meeting; and another at Flamstead-Heath (not far from thence.) And having spent some time amongst Friends there and thereabouts, and had divers good Meetings at Edmunton, Enfield, Winchmore
Hill,1681. London Yearly Meeting. and other places there aways, I came back to London a lit∣tle before the Yearly Meeting, which was in the Third Month 1681; it was a very precious Meeting, in which the Glorious Presence and Power of the Lord was eminently felt and enjoy∣ed. Some time after the Yearly Meeting was over, it came upon me to write the following Epistle, which I directed— To the Quarterly Mens and Womens Meetings that are gathered in the Name and Power of Jesus. CHrist, the second Adam, who is both Head and Husband of his Church, and Redeemer, and Purchaser, and Saviour, and Sanctifier, and Reconciler of his Sons and Daughters (his Church) to God, I say, his Presence (to wit, Christ's) feel a∣mong you, to exercise his Prophetical Office, in opening of you with his Light, Grace, Truth, Power and Spirit; and to exer∣cise his Office, as he is a Bishop, to Oversee you with his Light, Grace, Power and Spirit, that ye do not go astray from God. And as Christ is a Shepherd, feel, see and hear him exercising that Office, who has laid down his Life for his Sheep, and is feeding them in his living Pastures of Life, and makes them to drink of his living, Eternal Springs. And let him rule and govern in your Hearts, as he is King, that his heavenly and spiritual Go∣vernment all may live under, as true Subjects of his righteous, peaceable Kingdom, which stands in Righteousness, and Power, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, over Satan and his Power, and the unclean, unholy Ghost, and all unrighteousness. So all ye Sub∣jects to Christ's Kingdom of Peace, if ye want Wisdom, or Know∣ledge, or Life, or Salvation, Christ is the Treasure; feel him the Treasure among you. And every one among you, as ye have received Christ, walk in him, in whom ye have all Peace; who bruises the Head of the Serpent, that is the Author of all Strife, Distraction and Confusion: yea, you have Peace with God, and one with another; though the Trouble be from the World and the World's Spirit. And therefore, My dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters, Love one another with the Love, that is of God shed in your hearts; that ye may bear the Maks of Christ's Disciples, and it may appear, that Christ is in you, and ye in him; so that God Almighty may be glorified among you. And what∣ever ye do, let it be done in the Name of Jesus, to the praise of God the Father, keeping in Ʋnity in the Holy Spirit of God, which was, before the unholy Spirit was: Which holy Spirit is your Bond of Peace, yea, the holy King of Kings and Lord of Lords his peace. And in this holy, pure Spirit is your eternal Ʋnity and Fellowship; in which Spirit of Truth ye do serve and worship the God of Truth, who is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen. So the Lord guide you all with his Word of Patience, Word of Life, Power and Wisdom in all your Actions, Lives,
Conversations and Meetings to God's glory.1681. London. My Love to you all in the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all things were made, and who is over all, the First and the Last. London the 9th of the 4th Month, 1681. G. F. About this time I had occasion to go to several of the Judges Chambers, upon a Suit about Tithes. For both I and my Wife, and several other Friends, were sued in Cartmel-Wapentake-Court in Lancashire, for small Tithes, and we had demurred to the Ju∣risdiction of that Court. Whereupon the Plaintiff prosecuted us into the Exchequer-Court at Westminster; where they run us up to a Writ of Rebellion, for not Answering the Bill upon Oath: and got an Order of Court to the Sergeant, to take me and my Wife into Custody. This was a little before the Yearly Meeting, at which time it was thought, they would have taken me up; and according to outward appearance, it was likely indeed, that he would: and very easie for him to have done it; I lodging at the same places, where I used to lodge, and being very pub∣lick in Meetings. But the Lord's Power was over them, and re∣strained them; so that they did not take me. Yet understand∣ing, that there was a Warrant out against me, as soon as the Yearly Meeting was well over, I took William Mead with me, and went to several of the Judges Chambers to speak with them about it; and to let them understand both the state of the Case, and the ground and reason of our Refusing to pay Tithes. The first, that I went to, was Judge Gregory, to whom I tendred mine and my Wife's Answer to the Plaintiff's Bill; in which was set forth, That my Wife had lived Three and forty years at Swarth∣more, and in all that time there had been no Tithe paid nor de∣manded: and an old Man, who had long been a Tithe-Gatherer, had made Affidavit, that he never gathered Tithe at Swarthmore-hall in Judge Fell's time, nor since. There were many Particu∣lars in our Answer; but it would not be accepted without an Oath. I told the Judge, that both Tithe and Swearing among Christians came from the Pope; and it was matter of Conscience to us, not to pay Tithes, nor to swear: for Christ bid his Dis∣ciples, who had freely received, give freely; and he commanded them, Not to swear at all. The Judge said, There was Tithe paid in England, before Popery was: I asked him, by what Law or Statute they were paid then? but he was silent. Then I told him, there were Eight poor men brought up to London out of the North about Two hundred Miles, for small Tithes, and one of them had no Family, but himself and his Wife, and kept no living Creature, but a Cat. I asked him also, Whether they could take a Man and his Wife, and Imprison them both for small Tithes, and so destroy a Family? and if they could, I desired to know, by what Law? He did not Answer me; but only said, That was an hard Case. So when I found, there was no help to be had there, we left him; and went to Judge Mountague's
Chamber: and with him I had a great deal of Discourse concern∣ing Tithes. Whereupon he sent for our Adversary's Atturney; and when he came, I offered him our Answer: He said, If we would pay the Charges of the Court, and be bound to stand Tri∣al, and abide the Judgment of the Court, we should not have the Oath tendred to us. I told him, that they had brought those Charges upon us, by requiring us to put in our Answer upon Oath; which they knew before, we could not do for Conscience sake: And as we could not pay any Tithe, nor swear; so nei∣ther should we pay any of their Charges: Upon this he would not receive our Answer. So we went from thence to Judge Atkyns his Chamber; and he being busie, we gave our Answers, and our Reasons against Tithes and Swearing to his Clerk: But neither could we find any Encouragement from him to expect Redress there. Wherefore leaving him, we went to one of the most noted Counsellors, and shewed him the state of our Case, and our Answers: He was very Civil to us; and said; This way of proceeding against us was somewhat like an Inquisition. A few days after, those Eight poor Friends, that were brought up so far out of the North, appeared before the Judges; and the Lord was with them, and his Power was over the Court, so that the Friends were not Committed to the Fleet. Our Cause was put off till the next Term (called Michaelmass Term) and then it was brought before the Four Judges again. Then William Mead told the Judges, that I had engaged my self never to meddle with my Wife's Estate: The Judges could hardly believe, that any Man would do so: Whereupon he shewed them the Writing under my Hand and Seal; at which they wondred. Then Two of the Judges, and some of the Lawyers stood up, and pleaded for me, that I was not liable to the Tithes: But the other two Judges, and divers other Lawyers pressed earnestly, to have me sequestred; alledging, that I was a publick Man. At length they prevailed with one of the other Two Judges to Join with them; and then they granted a Sequestration against me and my Wife together. Thereupon, by Advice of Counsel we moved for a Limitation, which was granted; and that much defeated our Adversary's design in suing out the Sequestration: for this limited the Plaintiff from taking no more, than was proved. One of the Judges, who was called Baron Weston, was very bitter a∣gainst me; and brake forth in a great Rage against me in the open Court: but in a little time after he died. After the Yearly Meeting was over, I tarried about a Month in London;Sussex. London. and then went into Sussex, to visit Friends there: amongst whom I had many large and very precious Meetings in divers parts of that County. Yet I spent not much time now in Sussex; but returned pretty soon to London, whether I felt drawings in Spirit: and had very good Service for the Lord there, both in publick Meetings, and amongst Friends. And when I had tar∣ried some time in London,Edmunton. Bucks. I went down to Edmunton; and from thence into Buckinghamshire, where I visited Friends at several Meetings in the upper-side of that County: and then went by
Henly to Reading, where I tarried several Meetings.1681. Henly. Reading. O e. Oxfordshire. Warborow. I went no farther Westward at this time, than to Ore; where I had a very large Meeting: After which, striking off through the Edg of Oxfordshire, I had a large and very precious Meeting at War∣borow, in which the Glory of the Lord shined over all: Many Friends came to this Meeting, some out of Barkshire, some out of Buckinghamshire, and some out of Hampshire.Ilmore in the Vale of Bucks. From thence I passed to Ilmore (which is in the Vale of Buckinghamshire) where we had a glorious Meeting: And the day following I returned to Mary Pennington's. From whence I visited the Mens and Wo∣mens Monthly Meetings at Hunger-hill,Hunger-hill. Watford. and some other Meetings thereabouts: and then passed to Watford; where was a Marriage of Two Friends, at which I was present: A very large Meeting we had on that Occasion, and the Lord's Power was over all. I went from Watford to Longford in Middlesex,Middlesex. Uxbridge. Longford. visiting Friends at Uxbridge in the way. At Longford we had a large Meeting, it being on the First-day of the Week; and the presence of the Lord was preciously felt amongst us: blessed be his Name. I passed from Longford to Kingston, visiting Friends, as I went, at Stains and Sunbury.Stains. Sunbury. Kingston At Kingston I abode with Friends two Meetings, wherein we were sweetly refreshed together in the Lord. And passing on from thence towards London, I had a very precious Meeting at Wansworth:Wans∣worth. Hammer∣smith. Then crossing over to Hammersmith, I had a good Meeting there; which was the lar∣ger by reason of a Burial, that was there that time: and there being a pretty Openness in the People on that Occasion, I had a fine Opportunity to open the Way of Truth amongst them. After I was come to London,London. I was moved to write the fol∣lowing Paper, concerning that Spirit, which had led some, who profest Truth, into Strife and Division, and to oppose the Way and Work of the Lord. Friends, YOU that do keep your habitations in the Truth, that is over all, do see, that it is the same Spirit, that doth lead the Backsliders and Apostates now, from the Spiritual Fel∣lowship and Unity of God's People and the Church of Christ, that led out Adam and Eve from God, and the Jews from God and his Law, to Rebel against his Spirit; and so to turn a∣gainst God and his Prophets. And this Spirit was the same, that was in the World, which was got into the Jews, when they were gone from the Spirit of God; and then they turned a∣gainst God and his Prophets, and against Christ and his Apo∣stles: And that Spirit led them to be as bad, as Pilate, or worse. The Enmity or Adversary was got within them against the Truth, and them that walked in it, and the Spirit of the Lord; so that they killed and destroyed the Just. And this was the Spirit of the Devil, the Destroyer, who would seek not only to destroy the Truth, but the Order of it, and them that walk in it, when true Christianity was planted among
the Possessors of the Light,1681. London. Grace and Truth, and the Gospel-holy Faith and Spirit; and they did enjoy Christ in their hearts. But when some did begin to Err from the Spirit and Faith, and hate the Light, and disobey the Gospel, and to turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, and walk despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, and turn from the Truth, and Crucifie to themselves Christ afresh, and put him to open shame; These were they, that let in the Spirit of the World: who held the Form of Godliness, but denied the Power thereof; which trou∣bled the Churches in the Apostles days. And when the Spirit of Satan had got into such, they were more troublesome to the Church, than the open Persecutors, that were without: And these got into the Assemblies to deceive the hearts of the Sim∣ple; having the good Words, and fair Speeches, and Sheep's-Cloathing. Paul, Peter, John, Jude and James had much to do with such, and to keep them from troubling the Church of Christ: For they are out of the Light, Power and Spirit; and therefore the Apostles of Christ did exhort the Saints to keep to the Word of Life within, and to the Anointing, and to the Grace, and Truth, and holy Spirit in their hearts. This foul Spirit will profess all the Scriptures in words; but by the Spirit of God, which is holy, that Spirit is tried, and its fruits. And so the Apostates went from the Power and Spirit of God, and turned against the Prophets, and the Martyrs of Jesus; and be∣came the Whore, whose Cup all Nations drunk of. And the Dragon with his Tail threw down many of the Stars, and would have devoured the Woman with his Flood: but the Wo∣man, the true Church was preserved; and the Gates of Hell can∣not prevail against her: And then the Dragon made war with her Seed. So the Dragon, and the Whore, and Beast, and false Prophets, all made war against the Lamb and the Saints; but the Lamb and the Saints will overcome them all, and will have the Victory. And now the Everlasting Gospel is preached again to all Nations, Tongues and Peoples: and many are gathered into the Gospel, the Power of God; and are turned to the Light, which is the Life in Christ, and are grafted into him, and are come to walk in the Order of the New Covenant of Light and Life, in the Gospel of Peace and Salvation. The same Spirit, that opposed the Apostles and the Churches in their days, opposes now; yea, it is the same, that opposed Christ, and disdained him, that disdaineth God's Servants now: And the same, that did oppose the Prophets, and rebelled against Mo∣ses; opposes and rebels against God's Servants and People now. And it is the same dark, blind and disobedient, faithless, wilful, jealous Spirit, that doth persecute some with the Hands, and others with the Tongue. And it is the same Spirit of Enmity, the Adversary and Destroyer, that tempted Adam and Eve to disobey God, and did deceive them; which deceived the Jews, and tempted them, and deceived all those, that went from the Church in the Apostles days. And it is the same Spi∣rit, that is now going about sometimes like a roaring Lion,
sometimes like a twisting Serpent to tempt, and to deceive,1682. London. and to devour; having the fair Speeches, and good Words, and Sheeps-Cloathing in a Form of Godliness, and in pretence of the Light and Liberty, but denies the Power thereof; and inward∣ly are ravening Wolves: and if it were possible, they would deceive the very Elect. But the Elect are in the Covenant of Light and Life, and in the Power of God over them, and in Christ, who will grind them to pieces; and will slay all his E∣nemies with his spiritual Sword, who will not have him to rule over or in them. In Christ all his People have Rest and Peace, who is their Sanctuary over all Storms and Tempests. And in Christ, the Sanctuary, no Deceiver nor Destroyer can come; for he is a place of sweet Rest and Safety: Hallelujah, Praise the Lord for his Sanctuary, Amen. G. F. Sufferings continuing still hard upon Friends at London, I found, my Service lay mostly here: Wherefore I went but a little out of Town, and not far; being frequent at the most publick Meetings, to encourage Friends both by Word and Example, to stand fast in the Testimony, to which God had called them. And at other times I went about from house to house, visiting those Friends, that had their Goods taken away for their Testimony to Truth. And because the wicked Informers were grown very audacious, by reason, that they had too much Countenance and Encouragement from some Justices; who trusting wholly to their Information, proceeded against Friends without hearing them: whereby many Friends were made to suffer, not only contrary to Right, but even contrary to Law also. I advised with some Friends about it: and we drew up a Paper, which was afterwards delivered to most of the Magistrates in and about the City; which was as followeth: WHereas some Informers have obtained Warrants of some Justices of Peace, and have Convicted many of us with∣out hearing us, or once Summoning us to Appear before them; by which proceedings many have had their Goods seized and taken away, being generally fined Ten Pounds a piece for an un∣known Speaker: and some of those Persons so fined, have not been that, day at the Meetings they were fined for, and the Speaker notwithstanding hath himself been fined for the same Meeting, the same day the others were fined for the unknown Speaker. By which the Justices may see the Wickedness of these Informers, by whose false Oaths we have been Convicted for an unknown Preacher, when the Preacher hath been both known and fined. And also in their swearing such Persons to have been at such a Meeting such a day, when indeed they, whom they have so sworn against, have not been at that Meeting that day. By which proceedings several Families of the King's peaceable
Subjects are like to be ruined, if there be not a speedy stop put thereunto. Therefore we do both hope and desire, that you, who are the King's Justices, for the time to come, when a∣ny Informers shall come to any of you with an Information a∣gainst any of us, will Summon such as are Accused, to Appear before you, and hear us and our Accusers face to face; that so none for the time to come may suffer, for that they are not guilty of. For Pilate the Governour heard Christ and his Accu∣sers face to face, before he Condemned him, John 19. And the Council and Chief Priests heard Stephen and his Accusers, with the Witnesses, that were brought against him, face to face, before they Condemned him, Acts 7. The Roman Captain heard Paul and his Accusers face to face, Acts 23. And Felix the Governour heard Paul, and Ananias the High Priest, and the Elders that accused Paul, face to face, Acts 24. And when the High Priests and Chief of the Jews accused Paul to Festus, he heard Paul and his Accusers, and them that witnessed against him, face to face, Acts 25. Doth the Law of God, or did the Roman Law, or doth the Law of the Land judge any man, be∣fore he and his Accusers, and they that Witness against him, be heard face to face? This somewhat moderated the Justices: and after this several Friends, that had been Illegally prosecuted and fined, entred their Appeals; upon Trial whereof they were Acquitted, and the In∣formers Cast: which was a great discouragement to the Informers, and some Relief to Friends. A little before the time came for the Chusing new Sheriffs for the City, they who stood to be Chosen, desiring our Friends to give their Voices for them, I writ a few Lines, tending to disco∣ver, what Spirit they were of, and how they stood affected to true Liberty; and it was by way of Inquiry, thus: DO any here in London, who stand to be Chosen Sheriffs, own That Christ, that was Crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, to be the Light of the World, that doth Inlighten every Man, that cometh into the World, who saith, Believe in the Light, that ye may become Children of the Light? And is any of you against persecuting People for their Religion and Worship of God in Spirit and Truth, as Christ commandeth? For Christ said, I am not of this World, nor my Kingdom: And therefore he doth not uphold his spiritual Worship and pure Religion with worldly and carnal Weapons. And Christ said, Swear not at all; And his Apostle James saith the same: But will not you force us to swear, and so to break Christ's and his Apostle's Commands, in putting Oaths to us? And Christ saith to his Apostles, Free∣ly ye have received, freely give: Will not you force us to give Tithes and Maintenance to such Teachers, as we know, God hath not sent? Shall we be free to serve and worship God, and keep his and his Son's Commands, if we give our Voices freely for
you? for we are unwilling to give our Voices for such, as will Imprison, and persecute us, and spoil our Goods. But whatever they were, that stood to be Chosen, I observed, there was a Heat and Strife in the Spirits of the People, that were to Choose; wherefore I writ a few Lines to be spread a∣mongst them, directed thus: To the People, who are Choosing Sheriffs in London. People; ALL keep in the gentle and peaceable Wisdom of God, which is above that, that is earthly, sensual and devillish: And live in that Love of God, that is not puffed up, nor is unseem∣ly; which envieth not, but beareth and endureth all things: And in this Love ye will seek the good and peace of all men, and the hurt of no man. Keep out of all heats, and be not hot-headed; but be cool and gentle, that your Christian Modera∣tion may appear to all men: for the Lord is at hand, who be∣holds all mens words, thoughts and actions, and will reward eve∣ry one according to their works: And what every man soweth, that shall he reap. Now had I some Inclination to have gone into the Country to a Meeting: But hearing, that there would be a Bussle at our Meet∣ings, and feeling a great disquietness in Peoples spirits in the Ci∣ty about Choosing Sheriffs; it was upon me to stay in the City, and go to the Meeting in Gracious-street upon the First-day of the Week. William Penn went with me, and spake in the Meeting:Grac-Me. and while he was declaring the Truth to the People, a Constable came in with his great Staff, and bid him give over, and come down: but William Penn held on, declaring Truth in the Power of God. After a while the Constable drew back; and when Wil∣liam Penn had done, I stood up, and declared to the People the Everlasting Gospel, which was preached in the Apostles days, and to Abraham; and which the Church in the Apostles days did receive, and came to be Heirs of. This Gospel, I declared, was sent from Heaven by the holy Ghost in the Apostles days, and is so now; and was not of man, neither by man; but by the Revelation of the Holy Ghost. And now this Gospel is preached again, (as John saw, and said it should be) to all Nations, Tongues and Peoples; and all People now are to hear Christ the Prophet, in this his Gospel of the New Covenant. For as Moses said, Like unto me will God raise up a Prophet, and him shall ye hear in all things: so, said I, this Prophet Christ, is come, and all the Jews in spirit, the true believing Christians in the Light, who have the Law of God written in their hearts, and put into their minds, are to hear Christ in his Gospel, New Te∣stament and New Covenant, which is the Law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus, who bruises the Serpent's head (which is the head of Enmity) and makes free from the Law of Sin and Death. And I shewed, that all whom Christ quickens and makes alive, he makes them to sit together in the heavenly places in himself. So that they do not wander up and down, like the Fool's eye in the Corners of the Earth; nor are their Eyes abroad in the World, to sit down in the World's invented Seats of Religion; but they sit together in him, as the Saints did in the Apostles days: and so Christ was and is their Trea∣sure of Wisdom, Life, Knowledge and Salvation. Now as I was thus speaking, two Constables came in with their great Staves, and bid me give over speaking, and come down: But I, feeling the Power of the Lord with me, spake on therein, both to the Constables, and to the People. To the Constables I declared, That we were a peaceable People, who meet to wait upon God, and worship him in Spirit and in Truth; and therefore (I told them) they needed not to come with their Staves amongst us, who were met in a peaceable manner, desiring and seeking the good and salvation of all People. Then turning my Speech to the People again, I declared what further was upon me to them: and while I was speaking, the Constables drew out towards the door; and the Souldiers stood with their Muskets in the Yard. When I had done speaking, I kneeled down, and prayed, desi∣ring the Lord to open the Eyes and Hearts of all People, both high and low, that their minds might be turned to God by his holy Spirit; that he might be glorified in all and over all. After prayer the Meeting rose, and Friends passed away; the Constables being come in again, but without the Souldiers: and indeed, both they and the Souldiers carried themselves Civilly. William Penn and I went into a Room hard by, as we used to do, and many Friends went with us; and lest the Constables should think, we would shun them; a Friend went down and told them, That, if they would have any thing with us, they might come where we were, if they pleased. One of them came to us soon after, but without his Staff; which he chose to do, that he might not be observed: for he said, The People told him, he busied himself more than he needed. We desired to see his Warrant; and there∣in we found, that the Informer was one Hilton, a North-Country∣man, who was reputed to be a Papist. The Constable was ask∣ed; Whether he would Arrest us by his Warrant on that day? (it being the First-day of the Week, which in their Law was called the Lord's-day) and he said, He thought he could not: He told us also, That he had charged the Informer to come along with him to the Meeting; but he had run away from him. We shewed the Constable, that both he and we were Clear; yet to free him from all fear of danger, we were free to go to the Alderman, that grant∣ed the Warrant. Then a Friend, that was present, said; He would go with the Constable to speak with the Alderman: which they did, and came presently back again; the Alderman being gone from home: We seeing the Constable in a strait, and find∣ing him to be a tender Man, bid him, set an hour to come to
us again, or send for us, and we would come to him. So he appointed the fifth hour in the Afternoon; but neither came, nor sent for us: and a Friend meeting him afterwards in the Even∣ing, the Constable told him, He thought, it would come to nothi g, and therefore did not look after us. So the Lord's Power was over all, to him be the Glory! On the Fourth day following, it was upon me to go to Gracious-street-Meeting again: for I had heard, that they would come, to break up the Meeting that day. The Neighbours, it seems, were Informed so; and a Justice had granted a Warrant for that purpose: and the Constable told a Friend, that Hilton the Infor∣mer, had been with him about it. The Constable would have had the Informer to have gone with him to the Meeting, but the In∣former would not; but would have the Constable go without him: Whether that put the Constable by from coming, I know not; but he did not come. I was in a Travel of Spirit in the power of God, and was moved in it to go to the Meeting; and the Lord's Power did chain all down: And though they threat∣ned to bring the Red-Coats, yet none came, nor was there a∣ny disturbance; but a glorious, powerful Meeting it was, and ve∣ry peaceable: Glory and Honour and Praises be to the Lord over all for ever, Amen. During the time I thus abode at London, as I had leisure be∣tween Meetings, and from other Publick Services, I writ divers Books and Papers; some of which were printed, and others were spread about in Manuscript. Of these, One was directed To the Bishops and others, that did stir up Persecution; to shew them from the holy Scriptures, that they did not walk therein according to the Royal Law, To love their Neighbour as themselves, and to do to others as they would be done unto. Another was, 'To all the several sorts of professed Christians, as well Protestants as Papists, whose Religion and Worship stands in outward Observan∣ces and Ceremonies; pressing them, from those words of the A∣postle Paul to the Galatians, chap. 5. vers. 2, 3, 4. (Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you no∣thing. For I testifie again to every man, that is Circumcised, that he is a Debter to the whole Law. Christ is become of no ef∣fect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law: ye are fallen from Grace,) to Consider, Whether they, being gone back in∣to legal Observations and shadowy Ceremonies (in upholding Tithes, Offerings, First-Fruits, Priests-Garments, outward Al∣tars, Temples, Lamps, Lights, &c. and in Observing Days, Months, Times, Years, with many other things commanded by the Law) were not gone into the same state, that the Ga∣latians were running into; and so were fallen from Grace, and become Debtors to the whole Law. Another was, 'To direct and turn all People to the Spirit of God, that they might thereby receive a right understanding, and be able to distinguish between Right and Wrong, Truth and Error; that under pretence of punishing Evil-doers, they might not themselves do Evil in perse∣cuting the Righteous. That Paper being short, is here inserted:
The Spirit of God, which he hath poured upon all, giveth an Ʋnderstanding to all, that are led by it; and who do not quench the Motions of it, it doth give them Knowledge and Understanding to distinguish Good from Evil, and Light from Darkness, Christ from Antichrist, and the Old Testament or Co∣venant from the New, and the Old Way from the New and li∣ving Way; and the Sheep and Lambs from the Goats and from the Wolves; the Worship of God, which Christ set up above sixteen hundred years ago, from the Dragon's and Beast's Worship; and all them that worship the Works of Mens hands, and the Will Worshippers, from them that Worship God in his Spirit and in his Truth, in which God's People do worship him; which Worship is over all false Worships and Worshippers. And who believe in the Light, which is the Life in Christ, do be∣come the Children of Light, and are the Lambs of Jesus. And the Lambs do follow the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the World; and they will not follow the Hirelings, nor the Strangers, to be led into strange Ways and Doctrines, and Religions, and Churches: for the Lambs of Christ follow Christ, the Lamb of God, and do know his heavenly Voice. And they do know also, that they, who are without Christ, are Dogs and Wolves, Adulterers, Idolaters, Liars and Ʋnbe∣lievers, who would devour the Lambs: but they are in the hand of the Lord, which is his Power, that is over all. And such do good in his Power unto all: for they have the Mind of Christ, who would have all to come to the know∣ledge of the Truth, and be saved. And they that do good un∣to all, do hurt unto none: for that Spirit, that doth hurt un∣to any, is not of God; but that Spirit, which doth good unto all, and especially to the Houshold of Faith, is of God. Christ came not to destroy mens Lives, but to save them: And it is the Devil, that is the Destroyer of mens Lives about Religion, and that blinds and corrupts Men and Women, and makes them deaf and blind to the things of God, and to halt out of God's way. They that obey the Evil one, and forsake the Lord, such the Destroyer doth destroy: But Christ doth destroy that Destroyer, and in Christ all have Life. G. F. I writ another Paper also concerning Meditation, Delight, Ex∣ercise and Study; shewing from the Scriptures of Truth, what the true Christians ought to Meditate upon, and to Exercise their minds in, and what they should take Delight in, and what they should study to do. For in these things, not the prophane and loose People only, but even the great Professors of Religion are very much mistaken; taking Delight in earthly, fading, perish∣ing things; whereas they ought to Meditate on heavenly things, and to delight in the Law of God after the inward man, and ex∣ercise
themselves to have always a Conscience void of Offence to∣wards God, and towards Men, as the Apostle Paul did. And inasmuch as Sufferings continued very sore and heavy up on Friends not only in the City, but in most parts of the Nation, I drew up a Paper to be presented to the King; setting forth our Grievances therein, and desiring Redress from him in those Particular Cases, which I understood were in his power. But not having Relief from him, it came upon me to write an Epistle to Friends, to Encourage them in their Sufferings, that they might bear with patience the many Exercises, that were brought upon them, both from the outward Magistrates, and by false Brethren and Apostates; whose wicked Books and filthy Slanders did grieve the upright-hearted. This Epistle I writ at Dolston,Dolston. whither I went to visit an ancient Friend, that lay sick. FRiends and Brethren in Christ Jesus, whom the Lord hath called and gathered into him, In him abide: for without him (to wit, Christ) ye can do nothing, and through him ye can do all things; who is your strength and support in all your Trials, Temptations, Imprisonments and Sufferings, who for Christ's sake are accounted as Sheep for the slaughter: and in all these things we are more than Conquerours, through Christ, who hath loved us. And therefore, Friends, though ye do suffer by the Outward Powers; ye know, that the Pro∣phets, Christ and the Apostles suffered by the Unconverted. And though ye do suffer by false Brethren, and false Apostates for a time, and by their filthy Books and Tongues; whose Tongues indeed are become no Slander, let them speak, write or print what they will: for the sober People even of the World hardly regard it. And it is well, they have manifested themselves to the World, that their folly may proceed no farther: though to the utmost of their power they have shewed their Wicked In∣tent, to stir up the Magistrates, Professors and Prophane against us, and to speak evil of the way of Truth. But God's Judg∣ments will overtake them, and come upon them, as sure as they have come upon those, that are gone before them. Let their pretence be never so high, mark their End: for they will fall, like untimely Figs; and wither like the Grass on the top of the House. Though they may seem to flourish, and make a Boast and a Noise for a time; yet the Seed is on the head of such, which will grind them to powder: which Seed bruises the Ser∣pent's head. Therefore in this Seed, Christ, who is your san∣ctuary, rest, peace and quiet habitation, who is the First and Last, and over all, in him walk: for the Lord taketh pleasure in his People, that are faithful, and that serve and worship him. And therefore let the Saints be Joyful in Glory: and the God of Peace, the God of all Grace, who hath called us into his Eternal Glory by Jesus Christ, after that ye have suf∣fered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen and settle you; casting all your Care upon the Lord: for he careth for you. And Dearly Beloved, think it not strange concerning the
fiery Trial,1682. Dolfon. which is to Try you, s though some strange thing had hap'ned unto you: for it is etter, if the Will of God be so, that ye suffer for Well-doing, than for Evil-doing: and Re∣joice, inasmuch as ye are made Partakers of Christ's Sufferings. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator: for unto you is given, in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake. So it is given, or is a gift from Christ to suffer for his Name; and therefore (as I said before) Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are made Partakers of Christ's sufferings. And if ye be Reproached, or evil spoken of for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of God resteth upon you: On their part he is evil spoken of; but on your part he is glorified. And there∣fore if any suffer as Christians, let them not be ashamed; but let them glorifie God on this behalf. Though now for a sea∣son ye are in Sufferings, and Trials, and Temptations, that the Trial of your Faith, being much more precious than that of Gold, which perishes, though it be tried with Fire, may be found unto praise, honour and glory, who are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. Therefore mind your Keeper, where-ever ye are, or what sufferings soever ye be in; and mind the Example of the Apostle, how he suffered trouble as an Evil-doer, unto Bonds. But the Word of God is not bound, which is Everlasting and endures for ever: And they, who are in that, which is not Everlasting, and doth not en∣dure for ever, cannot bind the Word. And the Apostle said, I endure all things for the Elects sake; that they may also obtain the salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, with Eternal Glory (mark, with Eternal Glory.) And if we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with Christ, who abide faithful. Therefore strive not about words to no profit; but shun prophane and vain Babblings, for they will encrease unto more ungodliness: So that ye may be Ves∣sels of Honour, sanctified and meet for Christ, your Master's use, and prepared unto every good work. Follow after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience and Meekness, and fight the good Fight of Faith with your heavenly Weapons; which Faith is Victory (or gives Victory) by which ye lay hold on Eternal Life, and have access unto God, who will render to every man according to his Deeds: to them, who by patient continuing in well∣doing, seek for glory, and honour, and immortality; Eternal Life: but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation and wrath: Tribulation and Anguish upon every soul of man, that doth evil; but glory, honour and peace to every man, that worketh good. Christ said to his Disciples, If the world hate you, ye know, that it hated me, be∣fore it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would love it's own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. And, If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. And John in his gene∣ral Epistle to the Church saith, Marvel not, my Brethren, if the
world hate you. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren, And Christ in his Prayer to his Father saith of his Followers; As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them i the world: And the glory which thou gavest me, I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one. And therefore all ye, that know God and Je∣sus Christ (whom to know is Eternal Life) and are Partakers of his Glory, keep the Testimony of Jesus, and be valiant for his Truth upon Earth; that ye may be all settled upon Christ, the Rock and Foundation. Dolston, the 3d of the 8th Month, 1682. G. F. I made but little stay at Dolston, but returned again to London,London. where I continued most part of the Winter; labouring in the Service of Truth amongst Friends: Save that I was a little while at Kingston in the Tenth Month this Year; where I writ a Book,Kingston. setting forth The state of the Birth Temporal, and the Birth Spiri∣tual: And the Duty and State of a Child, Youth, Young Men, Aged Men and Fathers in the Truth, &c. But I staid not long at Kingston neither: for the heat of Persecution still continuing, I felt my Service to be most at London;London. where our Meetings were for the most part disturbed and broken up, or Friends were forced to Meet with∣out Doors, being kept out of their Meeting-Houses by the Officers. Yet sometimes, beyond expectation, we got a quiet and peace∣able Meeting in the Houses. One time I was minded to have gone a mile or two out of Town, to visit a Friend, that was not well: But hearing, that the King had sent to the Mayor to put the Laws in Execution against Dissenters, and that the Magi∣strates thereupon intended to Nail up the Meeting-house-doors, I had not freedom to go out of Town; but was moved to go to the Meeting at Gracious-street. And notwithstanding all the Threats, a great Meeting it was, and very quiet; and the Glory of the Lord shone over all. The same Week I went to the Meeting at the Peel in John's Street; and the Sessions were holden the same day at Hicks's-hall.Peel-Meet. I went to the Peel in the Morning; and William Mead being to appear at the Sessions for not going to the Steeple-house-worship, he came once or twice from Hicks's hall to me at the Peel; which some Ill-minded-people observing, went and Informed the Justices at the Bench, that he was gone to a Meeting at the Peel. Where∣upon the Justices sent a Messenger to see, if there were a Meet∣ing: but this being in the Forenoon, there was no Meeting there then; and so the Messenger, when he had looked about, went back and told them. Then others Informed the Justices that there would be a Meeting there about three or four in the Afternoon: Whereupon they sent for the Chief Constable, and asked him; Why he suffered a Meeting to be at the Peel, so nigh him? He told them, He did not know of any Meeting there. They asked him, How he could but know it, and live so nigh it? He said, He
was never there in his life,1682. London. and did not know, that there was a Meet∣ing there. They would have perswaded him, that he must needs know of it; but he standing stedfast in the denial of it, they said; They should take order, to have it look'd after in the After∣noon. But a multitude of Business coming before them at the Ses∣sions; when Dinner-time came, they hasted to their Dinner, with∣out giving order: And when they came to the Bench again after Dinner, the Lord put it out of their Minds, so that they sent no Officer; and so the Meeting was quiet, beginning and ending in peace; and a blessed Meeting we had, the Lord's Presence being preciously amongst us. Many Friends had a concern upon their minds, when they saw me come into the Meeting, lest I should have been taken: But I was freely given up to suf∣fer, if it was the Lord's Will, before I went into the Meeting; and had nothing in my mind concerning it, but the Lord's Glory. And I do believe, the Lord put it out of their minds, that they should not send to break up our Meeting that day. Yet the First-day after, three or four Justices (as I heard) came to the Peel, and put Friends out of their Meeting there, and kept them out; and inquired for William Mead, but he was not there. Grac. Meet.That day I was moved to go to Gracious-street-Meeting; and it was expected, that the Officers would come to break up the Meeting, or keep Friends out; and many hundreds of People came to see, what would be done to us. But the Officers came not; and so we were in peace and quietness: and many of the Peo∣ple, that came to look on, staid all the time; and a glorious, precious Meeting we had: for the Lord's Presence was plenti∣fully amongst us, and his Power came over all; Glory to his Name for ever, who is over all. I had seen the Mayor's printed Speech for putting the Laws in Execution against Dissenters: and it was much in my mind, that we should draw up a Paper to send to the Mayor and Aldermen, to clear our selves from being such, as those Laws were made against; and to set forth our peaceable Behaviour both towards the King and the Government. Accordingly a Paper was drawn up, and signed, and delivered to the Mayor; and Copies thereof to the Aldermen, and to the Bishop of London also: And they generally took it kindly, and were Civil to the Friends, that de∣livered it. About this time I was moved to write the few Lines follow∣ing to Friends: Dear Friends, FEel the Power of God in you all, and over all, and by it let all your hearts be united to one another, and to the Lord God, who hath gathered you to himself by his Power and Spi∣rit, to be a People to serve and worship him. So that you may all strive to Excel one another in Vertue, and in that Love, that doth bear all things, and doth edifie the Body of Christ, the Body of the second Adam. For the Body of old Adam in the
Fall is full of Malice, Envy and Vice. And therefore you, that are called out of Old Adam in the Fall, and have put on Christ, the second Adam, that never fell, Walk in him, who is the Treasure of Life, Wisdom and Knowledge, in whom ye have peace with God, who is the First and Last, the Beginning and the Ending. So let all be gathered up to God, into him, who re∣concileth all things in one, both things in Heaven, and things in the Earth; who is the faithful and true Witness both in Male and Female: And in him sit down, who is above the subtle Foxes in their holes, and the Fowls of the Air in their nests; I say, sit down in Christ, who hath no place among them to lay his head; he is your rest. So in him is my Love to you all. London, the 20th of the 11th Month, 1682. G. F. It was not long after this, that I received an Account by Let∣ter from some Friends, that were Prisoners in Denby in Wales: by which I understood, that many Friends there were under great Sufferings for the Testimony of a good Conscience. In the tender sense whereof I was moved in the Love of God to Visit them with a few Lines, as a Word of Consolation to them in their Sufferings; and of Exhortation, to stand fast in the Testi∣mony committed to them. And that which I writ, was thus: DEar suffering Lambs for the Name and Command of Jesus! Be valiant for his Truth, and faithful; and ye will feel the Presence of Christ with you. And look at him, who suffer∣ed for you, and hath bought you, and will feed you, who saith; Be of good Comfort, I have overcome the World: who destroys the Devil and his Works, and bruises the Serpent's head. I say, Look at Christ, who is your Sanctuary; in whom ye have rest and peace. To you it is given not only to believe, but to suffer for his Name's sake: And they that will live god∣ly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution by the ungodly Pro∣fessors of Christ Jesus, who live out of him. And therefore be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth, and look above that Spirit, that makes you suffer, up to Christ, who was, before it was; and will be, when it is gone: Consider all the Pro∣phets, Christ and the Apostles, who suffered, and were persecu∣ted; but they never persecuted them as true men, but as De∣ceivers, and yet true. And Christ is the same to day, as he was yesterday, a Rock and Foundation for your Age and Gene∣ration, for you to build upon. I have written concerning you (after I heard your Letter) to Friends in Cheshire to Visit you; understanding, that you belong to their Quarterly Meeting: And therefore I desire, that some Friends of your County would go, and lay your suffering Condition before the Monthly or Quar∣terly Meeting in Cheshire. I have written likewise to Richard
Davis, that some of that side may go and visit you; and see how your Condition is. So my Love is to you in the Lord, who is your alone Support. London, the 27th of the 11th Month, 1682. G. F. Now, because the Magistrates were many of them unwilling, to have Fines laid upon Meeting-houses, they kept Friends out in many places; setting Officers, and Guards of Soldiers at the Doors and Passages: And yet sometimes Friends were fined for Speaking or Praying, though it were abroad. One First-day it was upon me to go to Devonshire-house-Meeting in the Afternoon;Dev. Meet. and be∣cause I had heard, Friends were kept out there that Morning (as they were that Day at most Meetings about the City) I went somewhat the sooner, and got into the Yard, before the Soldi∣ers came to guard the Passages: but the Constables were got there before me, and stood in the Door-way with their Staves. I ask∣ed them to let me go in: They said, They could not, nor durst not: for they were commanded the contrary, and were sorry for it. I told them, I would not press upon them: so I stood by; and they were very Civil. I stood, till I was weary; and then one gave me a Stool to sit down on: and after a while the Power of the Lord began to spring up among Friends, and one began to speak. The Constables soon forbad him, and said, he should not speak; and he not stopping, they began to be wroth. But I gent∣ly laid my hand upon one of the Constables, and wisht him to let him alone: The Constable did so, and was quiet; and the Man did not speak long. When he had done, after a while I was moved to stand up and speak: and in my Declaration I said; They need not come against us with Swords and Staves, for we were a peaceable People; and had nothing in our Hearts, but Good-will to the King and Magistrates, and to all People upon the Earth. And we did not Meet under pretence of Reli∣gion to plot and contrive against the Government, or to raise In∣surrections; but to worship God in Spirit and in Truth. And we had Christ to be our Bishop and Priest, and Shepherd to feed us, and oversee us, and he ruled in our hearts; so we could all sit in silence, enjoying our Teacher: So to Christ, their Bishop and Shepherd I did recommend them all. And after I had spo∣ken, what was upon me at that time, I sate down: and after a while I was moved to pray, and the Power of the Lord was over all Friends; and the People, and the Constable and Soldiers put off their Hats. And when the Meeting was done, and Friends began to pass away, the Constable put off his Hat, and desired the Lord to bless us: for the Power of the Lord was over him and the People, and kept them under. After this I went up and down, visiting Friends at their hou∣ses, who had had their Goods taken from them for worshipping God; and we took an account, of what had been taken from them: and some Friends met together about it, and drew up
the Case of the Sufferings of our Friends in writing, and gave it to the Justices at their Petty-Sessions. Whereupon they made an Order, That the Officers should not sell the Goods of Friends, which they had in their hands, but keep them until the next Sessions: which gave some discouragement to the Informers, and put a little stop to their proceedings. The next First-day it was upon me to go to the Meeting at the Savoy: and by that time the Meeting was gathered,Savoy Meet. the Beadle came in; and after him came in the wild People, like a Sea: but the Lord's Power chained them all. The Spirit of the Lord went through and over all, and they were quiet, and we had a glorious, peaceable Meeting; blessed be the Lord for his unspeak∣able goodness. This was in the Twelfth Month 1682. In the First Month 1683. I went to Kingston upon Thames:  and it being then a time of Persecution, as I went to the Meet∣ing, I met the Chief Constable, who had been at the Meeting-Place,Kingston upon Thames and had set Watchmen there to keep us out; yet he was pretty Civil, and the Watchmen let Friends have a couple of Forms out, to sit upon in the High-way: so Friends met together there, and a very precious Meeting we had; for the refreshing Presence of the Lord was with us, in which we parted in peace. Having visited and encouraged Friends there, I returned to London, and went to the Meeting at Bull and Mouth,London. Bull and M. Meeting. where the Constables with their Watchmen kept a Guard, to keep Friends out of the House. So we met in the Street: and when any Friend spake, the Officers and Watchmen made a great bustle to pull him down, and take him into Custody. After some other Friends had spoken, it was upon me to speak; and I said: Heaven is God's Throne, and Earth is his Footstool: and will ye not let us stand upon God's Footstool to worship, and serve the living God? While I spake, they were quiet: and after I had cleared my self, of what was upon me to speak, we brake up our Meeting in peace. This was on the Sixth-day of the Week. On the First-day of the Week following I was moved to go to the Meeting at Gracious-street: and when I came there,Grac. Meet. I found a Guard set at the Entrance in Lumbard-street, and another at the Gate in Gracious-street, to keep Friends out of the Meeting-Place; so that we were fain to meet abroad in the Street. After some time I got a Chair, and stood up in it, and spake largely to the People, Opening the Principles of Truth to them, and decla∣ring many weighty Truths concerning Magistracy, and concern∣ing the Lord's Prayer. There was, besides Friends, a great Multitude of People, and amongst them many Professors; and all was very quiet: for the Lord's Power was over all, and in the Lord's time we broke up our Meeting, and departed in peace. The next day I went down to Guilford in Surrey:Surrey. Guilford. Sussex. Worming∣hurst. and having visited Friends there, I passed from thence to Worminghurst in Sussex; where I had a very blessed Meeting among Friends, and free from disturbance. While I was there, James Claypoole of
London (who with his Wife was there also) was suddenly ta∣ken very ill with so violent a Fit of the Stone,1683. Worming∣hurst. that he could neither stand nor lie; but through the extremity of pain cried out like a Woman in Travel. When I heard it, I was much ex∣ercised in Spirit for him; and went to him: and after I had spoken a few words to him, to turn his mind inward, I was moved to lay my hand upon him, and prayed the Lord, to rebuke his Infirmity. And as I laid my hand on him, the Lord's Power went through him; and through Faith in that Power he had speedy Ease, so that he quickly fell into a sleep. And when he awaked, the Stone came from him like dirt; and he was so well, that the next day he rode with me five and twenty miles in a Coach: though he used formerly (as he said) to lie sometimes two weeks, sometimes a month with one of those Fits of the Stone. But the Lord was intreated for him, and by his Power soon gave him Ease at this time: blessed and praised be his holy Name there∣fore. Now after I had had some Meetings in Sussex and Surrey, and had visited Friends there aways, I returned to London by King∣ston,Kingston. where I had a Meeting on the First-day of the second Month, being the First-day of the Week also. We were kept out of the Meeting-House by a Constable and Watchmen (as be∣fore) and so were fain to meet in the High-way. But it being the Monthly-Meeting-day, and many of the World's People being there, the Meeting was pretty large, and very quiet; and the Lord's blessed Presence was amongst us, blessed be his Name for ever. London. Wheel. Meet.Being come to London, I went to the Meeting at Wheeler-street near Spittle-fields; which that day proved very large: For be∣sides that there were more Friends there that day, than usually, there came also many Professors to the Meeting that day; and a glorious, blessed Meeting it was: for the Lord's Power and Truth was over all, and many deep and weighty things were opened to the People, to their great Satisfaction. I tarried now in and near about London, visiting Friends Meet∣ings, and labouring in the Service of the Gospel, until the Yearly-Meeting came on; which began on the 28th of the third Month this Year. It was a time of great Sufferings, and much concern∣ed I was, lest Friends, that came up out of the Countries on the Churches-Service, should be taken and imprisoned at London. But the Lord was with us, and his Power preserved us; and gave us a sweet and blessed Opportunity to wait upon him, and be refreshed together in him, and to perform those Services for his Truth and People, for which we met. Now inasmuch as it was a time of great Persecution, and we understood by our Friends, who came out of the several parts of the Nation, that in most Counties Friends were under great Sufferings either by Imprison∣ments, or spoilings of Goods, or both; a concern was weightily upon me, lest any Friends, that were Sufferers, especially such, as were Traders and Dealers in the World, should hazard the losing of other mens Goods or Estates through their Sufferings.
Wherefore, as the thing opened in me,1683. London. I drew an Epistle of Cau∣tion to Friends in that Case, which I communicated to the Bre∣thren at the Yearly-Meeting; and from thence it was sent forth among Friends throughout the Nation: A Copy of which here followeth; DEar Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is your only Sanctuary in this day of Storm and Persecution, Spoiling of Goods, and Imprisonments! Let every ones Eye be un∣to him, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given unto him; so that none can touch an hair of your head, nor you, nor any thing ye have, except it be permitted or suffered in this day, to Try his People, whether their minds be with the Lord, or in the Outward things. And now, Dear Friends, take care, that all your Offerings may be free, and of your own, that has cost you something; so that ye may not offer of that which is another man's, or that which ye are intrusted withal, (and not your own) or Fatherless or Widows Estates: but all such things ye may settle and establish in their places. You may remem∣ber many years ago, in a time of great Persecution, there were divers Friends, who were Traders, Shop-keepers and o∣thers, who had the Concerns of Widows and Fatherless, and other Peoples Estates in their hands. And when a great Suffer∣ing, Persecution and Spoiling of Goods came upon Friends, there was especial Care taken, that all Friends, that did suffer, what they did offer up to the Lord in their Sufferings, might be re∣ally their own, and not any others Estates or Goods, which they had in their hands, and were not really their own; so that they might not offer up another body's, but that which was re∣ally their own, which they had bought and paid for, or were able to pay for. And afterwards several Letters came out of the Country to the Meeting at London, from Friends, that had Goods of the Shop-keepers here at London upon Credit, which they had not paid for; who writ to their Creditors, whom they had their Goods of, intreating them, to take their Goods again. And some Friends came to London themselves, and treated with their Creditors, letting them understand, how their Conditions were, That they lay liable to have all that they had, taken from them; and told them, They would not have any man to suffer by them: neither would they by suffering offer up any thing, but what was really their own, or what they were able to pay for. Upon which several took their Goods back again, that they had sent down: And this wrought a very good Savour in the hearts of many People, when they saw, that there was such a righ∣teous, just and honest Principle in Friends, that would not make any to suffer for their Testimony; but what they did suffer for the Testimony of Jesus, it should be really and truly their own, not other Peoples: And in this they owed nothing to any, but Love. So in this every Man and Woman stands in the free Of∣fering, a free People, whether it be Spiritual or Temporal, which
is their own; and in that they wrong no man, neither inward∣ly nor outwardly. Ornan said unto David, I give thee the Thresh∣ing-floor, &c. and the Oxen for Burnt-offerings, and the Threshing-Instruments for Wood, and the Wheat for the Meat-offering; I give it all. But King David said unto Ornan, Nay, but I will verily buy it for the full price: for I will not take that which is thine, for the Lord, nor offer Burnt-offerings without cost, 1 Chron. 21, 22, &c. So it should be his own; and so should it be eve∣ry man's, that offers. So you may see here, that David would not accept of another man's Gift for an Offering to the Lord; he would not offer up that which cost him nothing: but it should be really his own, Psal. 112.5. A good man— will guide his affairs with discretion. Let this be read in your Monthly and Quarterly Mens and Womens Meetings. London the 2d of the 4th Month, 1683. G. F. Kingston upon ThamesSome time after the Yearly-Meeting I went down to Kingston upon Thames, to visit Friends there: and while I was there, it came upon me to write the following Epistle to Friends in ge∣neral, as a Salutation of Love unto them, and to stir up the pure Mind in them. DEar Friends and Brethren, who are turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, who are the Believers in the Light, which is the Life in Christ, and are become the Children of the Light and of the Day, and are grafted into Christ, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, and so are gathered in the Name of Jesus, in whom ye have Salvation, and not in any other Name under the whole Hea∣ven. For Christ Jesus saith; Where two or three are gathered to∣gether in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, Matth. 18.20. So here you being gathered in the Name of Jesus, he is in the midst of you, a Saviour, a Mediator, a Prophet, a Shep∣herd, a Bishop, a Leader, a Counsellor, the Captain of your Sal∣vation, who bruises the Serpent's head, and destroys the Devil and his Works. Therefore, Brethren in Christ Jesus, exhort one another daily, while it is called to day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. For you are made Partakers of Christ, if ye hold fast the beginning of your Con∣fidence steadfast to the end, Hebr. 3.14. Therefore hear Christ's voice; for he is in the midst of you a Teacher. And take heed, lest there be in any of you an Evil heart of Ʋnbelief, in de∣parting from the living God, as there is in too many in this Day of Provocation and Temptation: But while it is day hear his Voice, and let us consider one another, to provoke unto Love, and to good Works. Let us hold fast the Profession of our
Faith without wavering (for he is faithful,1683. Kingston upon Thames that hath promi∣sed, and that hath called you) not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is; (mark) as the manner of some is, that did and do forsake the Assembling of themselves together: but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as you see the Day of Light appearing. For if we sin wilfully, after we have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sins; but a certain, fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall de∣vour the Adversaries, Hebr. 10. And therefore it is good not to forsake the Assembling of our selves together; but exhort one another daily: for Christ is in the midst of his People a Teach∣er and a Prophet, who saith, Learn of me; who is the Way, the Truth and the Life. And we being many, are one Body in Christ (who are gathered in his Name) and every one Mem∣bers one of another. Having then Gifts, differing according to the Grace that is given us, whether they be Prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of Faith; and let those that do Minister, wait on their Ministery; and those that be Teach∣ers, on their Teaching; and he that Exhorteth, on Exhortation; he that gives, let him do it with simplicity; and he that ruleth, with diligence; and he that sheweth Mercy, he is to do it with Cheerfulness. Abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which is good: Be kindly affectioned one towards another, with brother∣ly love in honour preferring one another. Rejoice in hope; be patient in tribulations; be not overcome with Evil, but overcome Evil with God; and (if it be possible) as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men, Rom. 12. This is and was the pra∣ctice of the Church of Christ. And now the God of Hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the Power of the holy Ghost. And I my self also am perswaded of you, my Brethren, that ye also are full of Goodness, filled with all Knowledge, and are able also to ad∣monish one another, Rom. 15.13, 14. Here the Church of Christ, in which Christ was in the midst, a Teacher and the Head of the Church, they were and are able through him to admonish one another. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts; to which Peace of God ye are also called into one Body (to wit, of Christ.) And let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, &c. Col. 3. And whatsoever ye do, in Word or Deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God and the Father by him. And above all things put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness. And the Apostle saith to Timothy, Be not thou ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord, nor of me his Prisoner: but be thou Partaker of the Afflictions of the Gospel, ac∣cording to the Power of God, who hath saved us, and called us with an holy Calling; not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, be∣fore the world began, 2 Tim. 1.8, 9. So here it concerns every one, not to be ashamed of the Testimony of our Lord, who hath
called them by his Grace; and not to be ashamed of any of Christ's Prisoners, and afflicted Ones for Christ's and his Gospels sake, who abolishes Death, and brings Life and Immortality to Light through his Gospel: You that believe in the Light, know it. And Peter saith in his General Epistle to the Church of Christ; As every man (mark, every man) hath received the Gift, so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. If any man speak, let him speak, as the Oracles of God (so not of Men:) If any man minister, let him do it as of the Ability, which God gives (so not of the Ability of mens Arts and Sciences) that God in all things may be glorified through Je∣sus Christ, &c. For these Gifts and Grace come from Jesus into the hearts of the Members of his Church, whom he is in the midst of. And if any man suffer, as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorifie God, &c. And every true Christian hath the presence of Christ (who hath all power in Heaven and in Earth given him) to support them with his power, light and life. And Christ saith to his Believers, Beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the Councils, and they will scourge you in the Synagogues, and you shall be brought before Go∣vernours and Kings for my Names sake, for a Testimony against them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought, how or what ye shall speak; for it shall be given you in the same hour, what ye shall speak: for it is not you that speak; but the Spirit of your Father, that speaketh in you. And ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake: but he that endureth to the end, shall be saved. The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord: It is enough for the Disciple, that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord: for if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, what will they do to his Servant. Fear not them, which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul, &c. A Sparrow shall not fall to the ground with∣out your heavenly Father, &c. The hairs of your head are all num∣bred; ye are of more value, than many Sparrows. Whosoever there∣fore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father, which is in heaven: But whosoever shall deny me before Men, him will I also deny before my Father, which is in heaven. And whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, &c. Matth. 10. And again Christ saith, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father with his holy Angels, Mark 8.38. And Christ saith to his Disciples, He that receiveth you, receiveth me; and he that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me: He that receiveth a Prophet in the name of a Pro∣phet, shall receive a Prophet's reward: And he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a Cup of cold water only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. Matth. 10.40, 41, 42. Here ye may see, how Christ encoura∣ges
his Disciples, and them that receive them. And John saith, Among the chief Rulers of the Jews many believed in Christ; but because of the Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue, John 12.42. Too many such Be∣lievers are now a-days, who dare not Confess Christ, lest they should lose the favour of men. But Christ encourages the faith∣ful Disciples, and told them, They would put them out of their Synagogues; yea, that the time should come, that whoso∣ever killed them, would think, they did God service: And these things, (said he) will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me. But these things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember, that I told you of them, John 16.2, 3, 4. Here ye may see, what Christ told his Disci∣ples, should come to pass to them. And Saul, before he was Converted, did Compel the Christians to blaspheme, and made havock of the Church of Christ, Acts 8. and chap. 22. and 26. And did not the Beast (in the Revelations) Compel both small and great to worship him and his Image? And did not all wor∣ship it, but they, who had their Names written in the Lamb's Book of Life, before the Foundation of the World? And did not Nebuchadnezzar set up an Image sixty Cubits high, and six Cubits broad? And then did not he cause an Herauld to cry a∣loud, It is commanded, that all People, and Nations, and Lan∣guages fall down, and worship the golden Image, that Nebuchad∣nezzar hath set up: And whoso falleth not down, and worshippeth, shall the same hour be cast into the midst of the fiery Furnace? And were not Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego cast into the Furnace? Dan. 3. But God delivered them. Therefore it is good, to be faithful to God and his Worship in Spirit and Truth. And the Jews had agreed, that if any man should Confess Christ, he should be put out of their Synagogue, John 9.22. So it was for Christ's sake, they were Excommunicated out of their Synagogues. But as it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion a Stumbling-stone, and a Rock of Offence; and who so believes on him, shall not be ashamed. So Christ is a Stumbling-stone, and a Rock of Offence to all the Unbelievers in the Light, which is the Life in Christ, whether they be Jews, Christians, or Gen∣tiles. The Jews did believe, a Christ was To come, from the Scriptures: And the Christians believe, He is come, by the Scriptures; but do not believe in the Light (which is the Life in Christ) as Christ commands; and so do not become the Children of the Light. Therefore ye, that are the Believers in the Light, and are become the Children of the Light, walk in Christ your Way, Life and Salvation. Kingston the 5th Month, 1683. G. F.
Before I left Kingston, something further opened in me, which I was moved to write, and send forth amongst Friends; and it was as followeth: Dear Friends, MY Love is to you all in the holy Seed, that reigns over all. And my desire is, that every one, both Male and Female, may feel the Seed Christ in you, which is Heir of the Promise of Life Eternal: so that ye may all grow up in Christ Jesus, your Head, and be built upon him the Rock and Foun∣dation, that God hath laid, which stands sure over all Rocks and Foundations in the World. That ye may eat and drink of this Spiritual Rock, the Spiritual Water and Food; so that ye may truly and inwardly say, that your Rock and Foundation, and Bread of Life, and Water of Life is from Heaven, and your Bread and Water is sure; and that ye know his voice, that feeds you, and that leads you into the Pastures of Life, which are always fresh and green. In this your Affections are set on things, that are above, and seeking that which comes down from above (above that, which is from below) where Christ sits at the right Hand of God, making Intercession for you; and is your Mediator, making Peace betwixt God and you; and is your heavenly Bishop to oversee you, that ye keep in his Light, Life and Power, that ye do not go astray from his heavenly Fold and Pasture; but he your Shepherd may feed you in it: Who is your Prophet, to open to you the fulfilling of the Promises and Prophecies; himself being the Substance: That ye may live in him, and he in you, yea, and reign in your hearts; and there to exercise his Offices, his Prophetical, and Priestly, and Kingly Office, who is heavenly and spiritual. That ye may know the Three, that bear Witness in the Earth, viz. The Spirit, the Water and the Blood, which is the Life of Christ, which cleanseth from all sin; and the Water, that washes you and refreshes you; and the Spirit, that baptizes you, and circumcises you, and leads you into all Truth: And that ye may come all to drink into one Spirit, and keep the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of the heavenly Peace. So being led by the Spirit of God, ye are his Sons and Daughters, and by his Spirit will come to know the Three, that bear Witness in Heaven, viz. the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost. These are the Three Witnesses, that are in Heaven, that bear record of all things: for he is God in the Heaven, and God in the Earth. And therefore I desire, that ye may all feel his Love shed in your hearts; and in it live in Love (above the love of the World, which is Enmity) and in that you will keep in the excellent Way. For Love edifies the Body of Christ, and builds his Church up, and keeps out of the Enmity; for it is a∣bove it, and brings and keeps all in true Humanity, and in the true Divinity; and to be courteous and kind, and tender one to∣wards
another. And to shew forth the nature of Christ, and true Christianity in all your Lives and Conversations; so that the Blessings of the Lord may rest upon you, as ye all live in the Seed of the Gospel, the Seed of the Kingdom of God, in which all Nations are blessed: And in that ye will all have a Care of God's glory. And there is the Hill or Mountain, where the Light shines to the answering the Witness of God in all; and the Salt, that is a good Savour to the witness of God in the hearts of all: And that Savour and Salt being kept in, it doth not come under the feet of men. So my Love to you all in Christ Jesus, whom God hath given to be a Sanctuary for all his People, who is from above, and not of this World, in whom you all have Life, Peace, and Salvation: And in him God Almighty keep and preserve you all to his Glory, Amen. And as you all live in the peaceable Truth of God, it keeps you under, and within his protection: But they that make a Profes∣sion of the Scriptures of Truth, and yet live out of the Truth, in the Spirit of Strife, Ʋnquietness and Discontent, in a con∣triving, plotting, ravenous, destroying Spirit, which is of the Devil, and not of God, that Spirit is judged out of the Truth, and to be of him, in whom there is no Truth; whose Portion is in the Lake, and in the Fire that burns. Kingston, the 27th of the 5th Month, 1683. G. F. Having visited Friends at and about Kingston,London I returned to London: for it being a Suffering time with Friends there, I had not freedom to be long from the City. Being come back, I went to the Meeting at the Peel;Peel-Meet. which but a little before the Justices and Constable had broken up, and had carried themselves very roughly: But that day the Meeting was in the House, and quiet; and a glorious Meeting it was, blessed be the Lord. On the First-day following I went to the Meeting at Gracious-street. When I came there,Grac-Meet. I found three Constables in the Meeting-house, who kept Friends out; so that we met in the Court. After I had been some time in the Meeting, I stood up, and spake to the People; and continued speaking a pretty while. Then one of the Constables came, and took hold of my hand, and said; I must come down. I desired him to be patient, and went on speaking to the People: but after a little time he pluckt me down, and had me into the Meeting-house. I asked them, if they were not Weary of this Work? and one of them said, In∣deed, they were. They let me go into the Widow Foster's house (which joined to the Meeting-house) where I stay'd, being hot. When the Meeting was ended (for one prayed, after I was ta∣ken away) the Constables asked some Friends, Which of them would pass their words, that I should Appear, if they should be que∣stioned about me? But the Friends telling them, They need not re∣quire that; for I was a man well known in the City, to be one, that would neither fly, nor shrink; They came not to me: but went
their ways,1683. London. Sav. Meet. and left me at Liberty; and I heard no further of it. The same Week I was at the Meeting at the Savoy, which used to be kept out, and disturbed; but that day it was within doors, and peaceable, and a precious Meeting it was. The First-day after,Westm. Meet. it was upon me to go to the Meeting at West∣minster, where used to be great disturbances: But there also the Meeting was within doors that day, and it was very large. The Lord's Power was over all there, and kept all quiet and still: for though there were many loose Spirits there, yet they were bound down by the Power and Spirit of the Lord, that they could not get up to make disturbance. About this time I was moved to write the following Epistle: Friends and Brethren, WHO have received the peaceable Truth, let the fruits of its peaceableness, and of your quiet Spirit appear in all your Meetings, and in all your Words and Actions: for he that inhabits Eternity, dwells with an humble heart; and he gives Grace to the humble, and resisteth the proud. Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth ye walk upon, is his Foot-stool: happy are ye, that see and know him, that is Invisible. And now Friends,☞ Let all things be done in your Meetings, and other∣ways, in Love, without strife, or vain-glory. For Love ful∣fils the Law, and Love overcomes, and edifies the Body of Christ, and builds it up; and there is neither Self, nor Envy in Love: neither is it pufft up; but abides and bears all things. So see, that this Love of God have the sway in you all, and o∣ver you all. Christ saith, Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the Meek; for they shall inherit the Earth. Blessed are they, that do hunger and thirst af∣ter Righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain Mercy. Blessed are the Pure in heart; for they shall see God. Blessed are the Peace makers; for they shall be called the Children of God. Blessed are they, that are Persecuted for Righteousness sake; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsly, for my sake; rejoice and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in Heaven. For so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. Now Friends, here is a great deal in these words: And all must be in these States and Conditions, if they have these Blessings. And the Children of God are Peace-makers, and strive to make Peace in the Truth; and to live in Peace with all men, if it be possible. So live in the Peace, and the Good-will to all men; which Good-will is both for their Sanctification and Salvation. And Friends, consider; The Wisdom of God; which is from above, is pure, peaceable and gentle, and easie to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without Partiality and without Hypo∣crisie. And now, Dear Friends, let this pure, peaceable, gen∣tle
Wisdom, that is from above, that is easie to be entreated,1683. London. and is full of mercy and good fruits, be exercised and practised in all the true Churches of Christ; so that Wisdom may be justi∣fied of her Children. For the Works of the Flesh, or fleshly Spirit, are Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Strife, Envyings, Drunken∣ness, Revilings, Adultery, Fornication, Lasciviousness, Unclean∣ness, &c. and they which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. But the Fruits of the Spirit of God are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meek∣ness, Temperance, &c. And so, Dear Friends and Brethren, strive to exceed one another, and all People upon the Earth in Humi∣lity, in Meekness, in Gentleness, in Temperance, in Love and in Patience, in Pureness and in Mercy; and then ye will shew forth the Fruits of the Spirit of God, and of his heavenly Wisdom that is from above: And in this, Wisdom will be justified of her Children; and ye will be the Salt of the Earth, and the Light of the World set on an Hill, that cannot be hid: and your Moderation will appear to all men. And be ye just, and righteous, and faithful, and true in all your Words, Dealings and Conversations; so that ye may answer the Truth in all People: For Christ saith, his Father is glorified by such, as bring forth Fruits, when men do see their good Works; for he that doth Righteousness, is accepted with God. And he that dwells in Love, dwells in God: for Love is his Habitation: And let that be the Habitation of every one that hath received the Truth: for if it be not, such do not dwell in God, let them profess what they will. And therefore my desire is, that all you, who have received Christ, the Seed, which bruises the Serpent's head, may walk in him, your Sanctuary, Life and Sal∣vation, your Rest and Peace, Amen. London, the 14th of the 6th Month, 1683. G. F. I continued yet at London, labouring in the Work and Service of the Lord both in Meetings and out; sometimes visiting the Friends that were in Prison for the Testimony of Jesus, encou∣raging them in their Sufferings, and exhorting them to stand faithful and stedfast in the Testimony, which the Lord had com∣mitted to them to bear: sometimes also visiting those that were sick and weak in Body, or troubled in Mind, helping to bear their Spirits up from sinking under their Infirmities. Sometimes our Meetings were quiet and peaceable; sometimes they were disturbed and broken up by the Officers. One First-day it was upon me to go to the Meeting at the Savoy,Sav. Meet. and it was a large Meeting; for many Professors and sober People were there: And the Lord opened many precious, weighty things in me to the Peo∣ple, which I declared amongst them, and directed them to the Spirit of God in themselves, which the Lord had given them a measure of; that all by the Spirit might understand the Scrip∣tures, which were given forth from the Spirit of God. And
that by the Spirit of God they might know God and Christ, whom God hath sent; whom to know was Eternal Life. And that by the Spirit they might all come into Christ, and know him to be their Sanctuary, who destroys the Devil, the Destroyer, and his works; and bruises the Serpent's head. For Christ was a Sanctuary to them, to whom he was a Saviour, whom he saved from the Destroyer. And Christ did baptize them with the holy Ghost, and with Fire, and did thorowly purge his floor, and burn up their Chaff with unquenchable fire, that is, Sin and Corruption, which is got into Man and Woman by their Transgression: But Christ gathereth his Wheat into his Garner. So all that are baptized with Christ's Baptism, their Wheat is in God's Garner: and no Spoiler can get into God's Garner to med∣dle with the Wheat there; though they may be permitted to meddle with the outward Goods, &c. Now as I was speaking in the power of the Lord, and the People were greatly affect∣ed therewith; on a sudden the Constables, with the rude People, came in like a Sea: and one of the Constables said to me, Come down; and he laid hands on me. I asked him, Art thou a Chri∣stian? We are Christians. He had hold on my hand, and was very fierce to pluck me down: but I stood still, and spake a few words to the People; desiring of the Lord, that the Blessings of God might rest upon them all. The Constable still called upon me to Come down, and at length pluckt me down; and bid another Man with a Staff, Take me, and carry me to Prison. That Man had me to another Officer's house, who was more Civil: and after a while they brought in Four Friends more, whom they had taken. I was very Weary, and in a great Sweat; and seve∣ral Friends, hearing where I was, came to me in the Constable's house: but I bid them all go their ways, lest the Constables and Informers should stop them. After a while the Constables had us almost a Mile to a Justice, who was a fierce, passionate Man: who, after he had asked me my Name, and his Clerk had taken it down in writing, upon the Constable's informing him, That I preach∣ed in the Meeting, said in an angry manner; Do not you know, that it is contrary to the King's Laws to preach in such Conventicles, contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England? There was pre∣sent one — Shad, (a wicked Informer, who was said to have broken Gaol at Coventry, and to have been burnt in the hand at London) who hearing the Justice speak so to me, stept up to him, and told him; That he had Convicted them on the Act of the 22d of King Charles the Second. What! You Convict them? said the Justice; Yes, said Shad, I have Convicted them; and you must Convict them too upon that Act. With that the Justice was An∣gry with him, and said; You Teach me! What are you? I'le Con∣vict them of a Riot. The Informer hearing that, and seeing the Justice Angry, went away in a Fret; and so he was disappointed of his purpose. I thought he would have sworn some body against me; whereupon I said, Let no man swear against me; for it is my Principle Not to swear: and therefore I would not have any man Swear against me. The Justice thereupon
asked me; If I did not preach in the Meeting? I told him, I did Confess, what God and Christ had done for my Soul; and did praise God: and I thought, I might have done that in the Streets, and in all Places, viz. Praise God, and Confess, Christ Jesus; and this I was not ashamed to Confess. Neither was this contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England. The Justice said; The Laws were against such Meetings, as were con∣trary to the Liturgy of the Church of England. I said; I knew no such Laws against our Meetings: but if he did mean that Act, that was made against such, as did Meet to Plot and Con∣trive, and raise Insurrections against the King, we were no such People; but did abhor all such Actions: and did bear true Love and Good-will to the King, and to all Men upon the Earth. The Justice then asked me; If I had been in Orders? I told him, No. Then he took his Law-books, and searched for Laws against us; bidding his Clerk, take the Names of the rest the mean time: But when he could find no other Law against us, the Clerk sware the Constable against us. Some of the Friends bid the Constable, Take heed what he swore, lest he were perjured: for he took them in the Entry, and not in the Meeting. Yet the Constable, being an Ill Man, swore, That they were in the Meeting. However the Justice said; Seeing there was but one Witness, he would discharge the rest; but he would send me to Newgate, and I might preach there, he said. I asked him, If it stood with his Conscience, to send me to Newgate for praising God, and for Confessing Christ Jesus? He cried, Conscience! Conscience! but I felt, my words toucht his Conscience. He bid the Constable, Take me away; and he would make a Mittimus to send me to Prison, when he had dined. I told him, I desired his peace, and the good of his Family; and that they might be kept in the fear of the Lord: So I passed away. And as we went, the Constable took some Friends word, that I should come to his house the next Morning by the 'eighth hour. Accordingly I did go, with those Friends: and then the Constable told us, That he went to the Justice for the Mittimus, after he had dined; and the Justice bid him, Come a∣gain after the Evening-Service: which he did; and then the Ju∣stice told him, He might let me go. So, said the Constable, you are discharged. I blamed the Constable for turning Informer, and swearing against us; and he said, He would do so no more. Next day the Justice meeting with Gilbert Laty, asked him, If he would pay Twenty pounds for George Fox's Fine? He said, No. Then, said the Justice, I am disappointed: for being but a Lodger, I cannot come by his Fine; and he having been brought before me, and being of ability himself, I cannot lay his Fine on any o∣ther. After I was discharged, I went up into the City. And the same Week the Sessions coming on, where many Friends were concerned, some as Prisoners, and some on Trials of Appeals upon the Conventicle-Act, I went to a Friend's house not far off, that I might be in readiness to Assist those Friends with Coun∣sel, or otherwise, as occasion should offer: and I found Service
in it. But as my Spirit was concerned on behalf of Friends, with respect to their outward Sufferings by the Persecutors with∣out; so an Exercise also came weightily upon me at this time, in the sense I had of the Mischievous Working of that Adulterated Spirit which being gone out from the heavenly Ʋnity, and ha∣ving drawn out some, that profest Truth, into Enmity and Op∣position against Friends, endeavoured to trouble the Church of Christ with their janglings and contention. And as a further discovery of the working of that seducing Spirit, and a Warning to all Friends to beware of it, I was moved to write the follow∣ing Epistle, directed thus: To all the Elect, Faithful, Called and Chosen of God, who are the Flock and Heritage of God, who have been acquainted with the Dealings of the Lord, and have kept your habitations in his Life, Power and Truth, be∣ing built upon the holy and heavenly Rock and Foundati∣on, Christ Jesus, who was the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; which Foundation stands sure. MAny Foundations have been laid since the Apostles days, by such, as have gone from Christ, the true and sure Foundation: and their Foundations have proved rotten, and come to nought; and they themselves have come to Loss. And ma∣ny, since the day of Christ, and the Truth hath appeared in this Nation, have come out, and have had some Openings and Sights, and come among us for a time; and then gone out from us again: who have been the Comers and Goers, like such as were in the Apostles days. Such have had an outward Pro∣fession of the Truth, and such have gone from the true Foun∣dation, Christ Jesus, and so from the heavenly Society and U∣nity of the Saints in Light. And then they set up Foundations of their own: and having a Form of Godliness, but out of the Power thereof, out of the Order thereof; such have turned to Janglings and vain Disputings. This sort of Spirit you have been acquainted with, who have kept your habitations in Christ Jesus, the First and the Last. And you are not unsensible of the scurrilous and filthy Books of Lies and Defamations, which have been spread abroad in this Nation, and beyond the Seas, against the Faithful: And it is very well, that the Lord hath suffered them to publish their own shame in print, that Truth's Enemies may be discovered, that their Fruits and Spirits have appeared, and manifested themselves both in print and otherwise. And I do believe, that the Lord will yet suffer this Spirit, that it shall so publish forth its Fruits, to its publick Shame and Nakedness, to Professor and Prophane, and to all sober, mode∣rate and innocent People; that its Shame and Nakedness shall
more fully appear. And though for a time it hath been hid and covered with the Fig-leaves and an Outward Profession, and sometimes with fawning and flattering words, (as at other times it hath discovered it self by rough, lying and defaming words;) yet the Lord God will blast all such vain Talkers, that do not walk in the Order of Life, Truth and the Gospel. And therefore ye, that are Faithful, stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ hath made you free in his Government: It is upon his Shoulders; he bears it up: Of the Increase of it, and of its peace there is no end. For all the Quarrellers against his Order and Govern∣ment are without him, and without his heavenly, spiritual Go∣vernment and Peace. And therefore, ye Faithful Ones, who have had the Trial through many Persecutions, Imprisonments, Spoil∣ings of Goods, you know, that there is a Crown of Glory laid up for you: and you that Suffer with Christ, shall Reign with him in his Kingdom of Glory; and ye that die with Christ, shall live with Christ in the Eternal Life, in the World, that hath no End. Who have gone through the Sufferings without, and within by false Brethren, by Comers and Goers, that have caused the Way of Truth to be evil spoken of, and have been the Persecuters of the Faithful with their Tongues (though they have not had power to do it with their Hands.) And by printing and publishing their lying, defaming Books against the Faithful, they have stirred up the Magistrates and Priests; who were willing to get any occasion to speak evil of the right Way, and precious Truth of Christ, by which his People are made free: Such had better, they had never been born. But God hath brought them to light, and their Fruits and ravenous Spirit is seen, savoured and known; who are become Judases, and Sons of Perdition, to betray Christ now within (where he is made manifest) to the Priests, Magistrates and Prophane, as Judas did betray Christ without to the Priests and Pilate: Though some of the Magistrates, and sober People do see their Envy and Folly, and that they have more Malice, than Matter against the Faithful. But the Lord will consume this Judas, or Son of Perdition! The Lord will consume him with the Spirit of his Mouth, and shall destroy him with the brightness of his Coming! And so let all the Faithful look unto the Lord. And let that wicked Son of Perdition know, though he may be got as high as Judas without (who was partaker of the Ministry with the Apostles) The Lord will consume him with the Spirit of his Mouth, and destroy him with the brightness of his Coming: That is his portion. So the brightness of the Lord will destroy him, and the Spirit of his Mouth will consume him: And when he is destroyed and consumed, there will not be a Son of Per∣dition to betray Christ in his People, and his People, that live and walk in Christ, who hath all power in Heaven (mark, in Heaven) and in Earth given to him; and with his holy and glorious Power he limits and orders: so that nothing shall be done against his People, but what is suffered for their Tri∣al and for their Good, neither by Apostates, Persecutors with the
Tongue, Judases, Sons of Perdition to betray; or the outward Powers to Imprison, or spoil Goods: All these are limited by Christ's Power, who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him. And every ones Faith is to stand in him and his power, and rejoice in his power, and see the increase of his righteous, holy, heavenly, spiritual, peaceable Government, in which the glorious, holy order of life is lived and walked in by all his Sons and Daughters: And in his Spirit is the ho∣ly Unity and Bond of Peace. Though ye be absent in the Bo∣dy or Flesh one from another, yet all joying and rejoicing, be∣ing present in his Spirit, and beholding in the same Spirit your spiritual Order, Unity and Fellowship, and the steadfast∣ness of your Faith in Christ Jesus, who is steadfast for ever, the First and the Last, whose Presence is among his People, and who is their Head. Here is heavenly Sion known, and heavenly Jerusalem, and the innumerable Company of Angels (which are Spirits) and the Spirits of the just men made per∣fect. Here is the general Assembly, or general Meeting, and a general, heavenly, holy and spiritual joy and rejoicing, lauding and praising the Lord, the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, that lives for evermore, Amen. London, the 14th of the 8th Month, 1683. G. F. Read this in your Assemblies amongst the Faithful. I tarried yet a little while in London, visiting Friends and Meetings, and labouring in the Work of the Lord there. And being on a First-day at the Bull and Mouth,Bull and M. Meeting. where the Meeting had long been kept out; but was that day in the House, peace∣able and large: the People were so affected with the Truth, and refreshed with the powerful Presence of the Lord, that when the Meeting was ended, they were loth to go away. After some time, having several things upon me to write, I went to Kingston,Kingston. that I might be free from Interruptions. And when I came there, I understood, the Officers had been very Rude at the Meeting there, nipping and abusing Friends, and had driven them out of the Meeting-Place; and very abusive they continued to be for some time. Among other things that I writ, whilst I was there, one was a little Book (printed soon after) the Title whereof was; The Saints heavenly and spiritual Wor∣ship, Ʋnity and Communion, &c. wherein is set forth, what the true Gospel-worship is, and in what the true Ʋnity and Communion of the Saints stands; with a discovery of those, that were gone from this holy Unity and Communion, and were turned against the Saints, that abode therein. When I had finished the Services, for which I went thither, and had visited the Friends there, I returned to London; and vi∣sited most of the Meetings in and about the City.Essex. Dolston. Afterwards I went to visit a Friend in Essex; and returning by Dolston, I made
some stay at the Widow Stots, and there I writ an Epistle to Friends,1683. Dolston. declaring the Word of the Lord unto them: which Epistle being then printed, may be read amongst my other printed Books. I came from Dolston to London,London. and the next day was sent for in haste to my Son Rouse's at Kingston;Kingston. whose daughter Marga¦ret lay very sick, and had a desire to see me. I tarried now at Kingston about a week, and then returned to London;London. where I continued for the most part of the Winter, and the Spring fol∣lowing, until the General Meeting in the Year 1684. (save that I went once as far as Enfield, to visit Friends thereabouts.) And in this time I ceased not to labour in the Work of the Lord, being frequent at Meetings, and visiting Friends, that were Pri∣soners, or that were sick; and in writing Books for the spreading of Truth, and opening the Understandings of People to receive it. The Yearly-Meeting was in the Third Month, and a blessed,  weighty Meeting it was; wherein Friends were sweetly refresh∣ed together: for the Lord was with us,Yearly Meeting. and opened his heaven∣ly Treasures amongst us. And though it was a time of great difficulty and danger, by reason of Informers and persecuting Magistrates; yet the Lord was a Defence and Place of Safety to his People. Now had I drawings in Spirit to go into Holland, to visit the Seed of God in those Provinces. And as soon as the Yearly Meeting was over, and most of the Country-Friends gone out of Town; I prepared for my Journey. There went with me from London Alexander Parker, George Watts and Nathaniel Brassey, who also had drawings into that Country. We took Coach on the 31th of the Third Month 84. and got to Colchester that night.Colchester. The next day, being the First-day of the Week, we went to the Meeting there: and though there was no notice given of my coming thither, yet our being there was presently spread over the Town, and in several places in the Country, at seven and ten Miles distance; so that abundance of Friends came in double-horsed, which made the Meeting very Large. I had a Concern and Travel in my mind, lest this great Gathering should have stirred up the Town, and been more than the Magistrates could well bear; but it was very quiet and peaceable, and a glorious Meeting we had, to the settling and stablishing of Friends both in Town and Country: for the Lord's Power was over all; blessed be his Name for ever. Truly, the Lord's Power and Presence was beyond words; for I was but Weak to go into a Meeting, and my Face (by reason of a Cold I had taken) was sore: but God was strong, and manifested his strength in us and with us, and all was well: the Lord have the Glory for evermore for his supporting Power. After the Meeting there came, I think, a∣bove an hundred Friends of the Town and Country to see me at John Furley's; and very glad we were to see one another, and greatly refreshed we were together, being filled with the Love and Riches of the Lord, blessed be his Name for ever!
1684. Colchester.We tarried at Colchester two days more; which we spent in visiting Friends there, both at their Meetings for Business, and at their Houses. Then early in the Morning on the Fourth-day of the Week,Harwich. we took Coach for Harwich, where we met with William Bingley and Samuel Waldenfield; who also went over with us. About the eighth hour at night we went on board the Pac∣quet-Boat (of which one Richard Gray was Master) but by reason of Contrary Winds, it was the first hour in the morning before we sailed. We had a very good Passage; and about the fifth hour in the Afternoon next day we landed at the Briel in Holland:HOLLAND Briel. and there we stay'd that night. Early next morning we went to Rotterdam;Rotterdam where we abode some days. The next day, after we came to Rotterdam, one Wilbert Frouzen, a Burgo∣master, and Kinsman of Aarent Sunneman's, hearing, that I was there, Invited me to his Country-house; having a desire to speak with me about some business, relating to Aarent Sunneman's Daughters. I took George Watts with me; and a Brother of Aa∣rent Sunneman's had us thither. The Burgomaster received us very kindly, and was very glad to see me; and entring into discourse about his Kinsman's Daughters, I found, he was appre∣hensive, that their Father being dead, and having left them con∣siderable Portions, they might be stollen, and married to their disadvantage. Wherefore I told him, That it was our Principle and Practice, that none should Marry amongst us, unless they had a Certificate of the Consent of their Relations or Guardians: for it was our Christian Care to watch over and look after all young People, that came among us; especially those, whose na∣tural Relations were dead. And as for his Kinsman's Daughters, we should take care, that nothing should be offered to them, but what should be agreeable to Truth and Righteousness, and that they might be preserved in the Fear of God, according to their Father's Mind. This seem'd to give him great satisfacti∣on. While I was with him, there came many great People to me; and I exhorted them all to keep in the Fear of God, and to mind his good Spirit in them, to keep their Minds to the Lord. After I had stay'd two or three hours, and had had dis∣course with him of several things, I took my leave of him; and he very friendly set me to Rotterdam in his Chariot. The next day, being the First-day of the Week, we were at the Meeting at Rotterdam, which was pretty large; and we de∣declared to the People by an Interpreter. The day following one Alderman Gaul came to speak with me; and with him I and the other Friends had much discourse about Religious Matters: wherewith he seemed to be well satisfied, and was very Ten∣der. Several other Persons of Account intended to have come to speak with me that day; but being hindred by extraordinary bu∣siness (as I understood) they came not. Amster∣dam.We went next day from Rotterdam to Amsterdam, where we had a large and very precious Meeting. And in the Afternoon I was at another Meeting with the Friends there, about Business.
There is a Yearly-Meeting at Amsterdam for the Friends of Hol¦land and Germany, &c.1684. Amster∣dam. which begun now on the Eighth day of the Fourth Month: and ended on the Twelfth. Here we had a fine Opportunity of seeing Friends from divers parts, and of be∣ing refreshed together in the Love of God. And after this Meet∣ing, before the Friends, that came out of the several Provinces, were gone, we had a Meeting with some particular Friends, a∣bout the Places and Countries, into which we, who came out of England in the Work of the Ministry, were to travel; and to understand, who among them were suitable Persons to go along with us for Interpreters. When this was concluded on, William Bingley and Samuel Waldenfield took shipping for Friezland; and Jacob Claus their Interpreter. Alexander Parker and George Watts remained with me; and we tarried a few days longer at Amsterdam, where I had further Service. And before I left Amsterdam, I went to visit one Ga∣lenus Abrahams, a Teacher of Chief Note among the Mennonites (or Baptists.) I had been with him, when I was in Holland a∣bout seven Years before; and William Penn and George Keith had disputes with him then: He was then very high and very shy, so that he would not let me touch him, nor look upon him (by his good will) but bid me, Keep my Eyes off him; for, he said, they pierced him. But now he was very loving and tender, and Confessed in some measure to Truth: his Wife also and Daughter were tender and kind, and we parted from them very loving∣ly. Soon after this, feeling our Spirits drawn towards Friezland, Alexander Parker, George Watts and I, having John Claus of Amster∣dam with us for our Interpreter, took shipping at Amsterdam for Friez∣land, and having sailed some Nine or Ten Leagues, we left the Ship,Friezland. and travelled through Friezland, sometimes by Boat, sometimes by Wagon, visiting Friends and tender People in the Towns and Vil∣lages, where we came; and having commonly one, sometimes two Meetings in a day. After we had been at Leuwarden,Leuwarder Franeker. Harlingen in West-Friezland. we passed by Franeker to Harlingen in West-Friezland, which was the fur∣thest Place we went to that way. And having been out six days from Amsterdam, and had very good Service in that time, in vi∣siting Friends, and publishing Truth amongst the People, we took Ship at Harlingen for Amsterdam on the 26th of the fourth Month, and arrived there that night.Amster∣dam. The First-day following we were at the Meeting at Amsterdam, which was very large and precious: Many of the World's People were there, and some of their Teachers; some great Persons also, and they seemed ve∣ry attentive: and a good opportunity we all had, one after ano∣ther, to declare the Word of the Lord unto them, and open the Way of Truth amongst them; John Claus interpreting for us. I tarried the next day at Amsterdam: but George Watts went to a Burial at Harlem, where many hundreds of People were; a∣mongst whom he had a good opportunity, and came back at night to us.
1684. Waterland-Osan-over∣ton. Lansmeer. Amster∣dam.The day following we went by Boat to Osan-overton in Water∣land, and from thence, in another small Boat, about a League over a small River, where we passed over and by above an hundred Bridges, and so went to Lansmeer, to a Friend's house, whose name was Timon Peters; and there we had a very good Meeting. After which we returned to Amsterdam at Night; and were at the Meeting there next day. There were many at this Meeting besides Friends, and among the rest the great Bap∣tist-Teacher Galenus, who was very attentive to the Testimony of the Truth; and when the Meeting was done, came and got me by the hand very lovingly. Sardam. Alkmaer.We went next day by Boat to Alkmaer, about eight Leagues from Amsterdam, passing through Sardam (the great Town of Ship-Carpenters) and several other Towns in the way. At Alk∣maer (which is a pretty City) we stay'd, and had a Meeting there next day at one William Williams his house. There were, be∣sides Friends, many very sober People at this Meeting, who were very attentive to the Testimonies of Truth, that were born both by Alexander Parker, George Watts and my self, John Claus be∣ing our Interpreter. This was on the Sixth-day of the Week; and on the seventh we returned to Amsterdam,Amster∣dam. partly by Wagon, partly by Draw-boat, being willing to be at the Meeting at Am∣sterdam on the First-day, because it was like to be the last Meet∣ing we should have there. Accordingly we were at it, and a very large and open Meeting it was. Many great Persons were at it; some Earls (we were told) with their Attendants out of Ger∣many, very grave and sober; and the everlasting Gospel was preached unto them. After this Meeting we took our leave of the Friends of Am∣sterdam;Harlem and the next morning departed thence to Harlem, where we had a Meeting at a Friend's house, whose name is Abraham Frondenberg. There were great Numbers of People at this Meet∣ing, and of great Service it was. And after the Meeting, a Watch-maker of Amsterdam (who with his Wife was come from Amsterdam to the Meeting) desired to speak with me concerning Religion. I had pretty much discourse with him, and both he and his Wife were very Low and Tender, and received with gladness, what I spake to them; and seemed well satisfied, when they went away. Roterdam. Briel.We went next day to Rotterdam, where we tarried two Meet∣ings; and on the sixteenth day of the fifth Month, went to the Briel, to take Ship for England. It was about the fourth hour in the Afternoon, that we went on Board the Pacquet Boat, of which one William Sherman was Master; and set Sail from the Briel. But when we had gone o∣ver the Maes about a League, we cast Anchor at the place called The Pitt,The Pitt. (because it is near unto the Sands) and there we tar∣ried, till about the fourth hour next morning: when, having a pretty fair Wind, and the Tide with us, we weighed Anchor; and by the fourth hour next day were got within five Leagues of Harwich, over against Alborough-Castle; but the Wind falling short,
and the Tide growing weak,1684. Harwich. it was the first hour in the After∣noon, before we came so near to Harwich, that Boats could come to receive the Passengers and Goods. There were on Board about forty Passengers in all; of which some were English, some Scots, some Dutch, some French, some Spanish, some Flemish, and some Jews. I spent a day with Friends at Harwich, while Alexander Parker and George Watts went by water to visit Friends at Ipswich; and returned at night. Next morning early we all took Coach for Colchester, and were at the Meeting there;Colchester which was large and peaceable: And after the Meeting, and that we had refreshed our selves, we travelled on to Witham,Witham. about Ten Miles on the Road towards London; and lodged there that night. Next day we went on towards London: and William Mead meeting us on the way at Harestreet, I went with him to his House;Harestreet, the other Friends going on for London. Here, being Weak with Travel and continual Exercise, I spent some time to rest my self, and recover my Health; visiting in the mean time the Friends in that part of the Country, as I was able to get abroad. And when I was a little recovered, I went from thence to Enfield,Enfield. visiting Friends there and there∣abouts: and so to Dolston to see the Widow Stot:Dolston. And from thence to London;London. there being some Friends come over from New-Jersey in America about business, which I was desired to be present at. It was the latter end of the Summer, when I came to London; and I stay'd there the Winter following: saving that once or twice (my Wife being in Town with me this Winter) I went down with her to her Son Rouse's at Kingston. And though my body was very weak; yet was I in continual Service, either in publick Meetings (when I was able to bear them) or in particu∣lar Businesses amongst Friends, and visiting those that were Suf∣ferers for Truth, either by Imprisonment, or Loss of Goods. Ma∣ny things also in this time I Writ, some for the Press, and some for particular Service: as Letters to the King of Denmark and Duke of Holsteyn, on behalf of Friends, that were Sufferers in their Dominions; whereof the following is a Copy: For the Duke of HOLSTEYN THIS: Whom I do Intreat, in the Love of God to read over, which is sent in Love to him. I Understand, that formerly by some Evil-minded persons it was reported to thee, when one Elizabeth Hendricks came to Fredrickstadt to visit the People called Quakers there in thy Country, That it was a Scandal to the Christian Religion, that a
Woman should be suffer'd to preach in a publick Assembly religi∣ously gathered together,1684. London. &c. Upon which thou didst grant forth an Order to the Rulers of Fredrickstadt aforesaid, To make the said People leave that place forthwith, or to send them away. But the said Rulers being Arminians, and they, or their Fa∣thers being come to live there, as a persecuted People in Holland (not much above threescore years ago) made Answer to the Duke; They were not willing to persecute others for Conscience sake, who had looked upon Persecution on that Account in their own Case, as Antichristian, &c. But after that the said People of God, in scorn called Quakers, did write unto thee, O Duke, from Fre∣drickstadt; and since that time they have had their Liberty, and their Meetings peaceable, to serve and worship God almost these twenty years at Fredrickstadt aforesaid, and thereabout, freely without any molestation: which Liberty they have ac∣knowledged as a Great Favour and Kindness from thee. And now, O Duke, Thou professing Christianity from the great and mighty Name of Christ Jesus (who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) and the holy Scriptures of Truth of the Old and New Testament, Do not you use many Womens words in your Service and Worship out of the Old and New Testament? And because the Apostle saith; Let your Women keep Silence in the Churches; and that he did not permit a Woman to speak, but to be under obedience; and if she will learn any thing, to ask her husband at home: For it is a shame for a Woman to speak in the Church. And 1 Tim. 2.11, 12. Women are to learn in silence, and not suffered to Teach, nor to usurp Authority over the Man, but to be in silence, 1 Cor. 14.34. Now, here the Duke may see, what sort of Women they be, that were to be in silence, and in sub∣jection, which the Law Commands to be silent, and not to usurp Authority over the Man; nor to speak in the Church: These were Ʋnruly Women. And in the same Chapter, he Commands Women not to plate or broider their hair, nor to wear Gold, Pearls, or costly Array: These things were forbidden by the Apostle; and such Women, that wear such things, are to Learn in si∣lence, and to be subject, and not to usurp Authority over the Men; for it is a shame for such to speak in the Church. But do not such Women as these, that were Gold, and Silver, and Pearls and Gaudy Apparel, or Costly Array, and plates and broi∣ders their hair, speak in your Church, when your Priest sets them to sing Psalms? Don't they speak, when they sing Psalms? Consider this, O Duke! And yet you say, Your Women must keep silence in the Church, and must not speak in the Church: but when they sing Psalms in your Churches, are they then silent? And though the Apostle forbids such Women before-mentioned to speak in the Church; yet in another place the Apostle encou∣rages the good or holy Women to be Teachers of good things: as in Tit. 2.3, 4. And John (2 John 1.) writes to the Elect Lady and her Children; And John rejoiced greatly, that he found her Children walk in the Truth: Surely, this Elect Lady had Taught and Instructed those Children, that walked in the Truth;
and John, who was an Apostle of Christ, commended her. And the Apostle said; I intreat thee, true Yoke-fellow, help those Wo∣men, which laboured with me in the Gospel, and with other my Fellow-labourers, whose names are written in the Book of Life: Here the Apostle owns these holy Women, and encourages them,Women that laboured in the Gospel. which laboured with him in the Gospel, and did not forbid them, Phi∣lip. 4.2, 3. And the Apostle Paul commended Phoebe unto the Church of the Romans, and calls her a Servant unto the Church of Cenchrea, and sends his Epistle by her to the Romans from Corinth, and desires the Church at Rome to receive her in the Lord, as becometh Saints: And that they were to Assist her, in whatsoever business she had need of; for she had been a succourer of many, and of him also: And said, Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my Helpers in Christ Jesus, who have for my life laid down their necks; unto whom not only I give thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles. Now here the Duke may see, these were good, holy Women; the Apostle did not forbid such speaking, Rom. 16.1, 2, 3, 4. but commended them. And Priscilla and Aquilae Instructed and Expounded unto Apollo the way of God more per∣fectly; Acts 18.26. So here Priscilla was an Instructor, as well as Aquila; which holy Women the Apostle doth not forbid. Nei∣ther did the Apostle forbid Philip's four Daughters, which were Virgins, to prophesie (as in Acts.) And Women might pray and prophesie in the Church, 1 Cor. 11.5. And the Apostles said to the Jews, and shewed them the fulfilling of Joel's Prophecy: That in the last days God would pour out of his Spirit upon all flesh, and their Sons and Daughters should prophesie, &c. and Servants and Handmaids, they should prophesie with the Spirit of God. And so the Apostle encourages Daughters and Hand-maids to prophesie, as well as Sons; and if they do prophesie, they must speak to the Church or People, Joel 2.28. Acts 2.17, 18. And Miriam the Prophetess, did not she sing unto the Lord, and all the Women with her, when the Lord had delivered the Children of Israel from Pharaoh? did not she praise the Lord, and prophesie in the Con∣gregation of the Children of Israel? and was not this in the Church? Exod. 15.21. Moses and Aaron did not forbid her prophesying or speaking; but Moses said, Would God, all the Lord's People were Prophets! And the Lord's People are Women, as well as Men. And Deborah was a Judge and a Prophetess: and do not You make use of Deborah's and Miriam's words in your Service and Worship? as you may see (Judg. 5. v. 1 — 31.) Deborah's large Speech or Song: And Barak did not forbid her, nor none of the Jewish Priests. And did not she make this Speech or Song in the Congregation or Church of Israel? And in the Book of Ruth there are good Speeches of those good Women, which were not forbidden. And Hannah prayed in the Temple before Ely; and the Lord Answered her prayer: And see, what a Speech Hannah makes, and a praising of God before E∣ly, the High-Priest, and he did not forbid her, 1 Sam. 2. v. 1. to 10. And Josiah the King sent his Priest with several others, to Ask Counsel of Huldah the Prophetess, who dwelt at Jeru∣salem
in the Colledge, 2 King 22.14. 2 Chron. 34.22. So here the King and his Priests did not despise the Counsel of this Pro∣phetess: and she did prophesie to the Congregation of Israel; as may be seen in these Chapters. And in Luke 1.41. to 55. there see, what a godly Speech Elizabeth made to Mary, and what a large, godly Speech Mary made also. And Mary said; That the Lord did regard the Low Estate of his Hand-maid, &c. And don't you make use in your Worship and Service of Mary's and Elizabeth's words from Luke 2.41. to 55. who were holy Women in your Churches, and yet forbid Womens speaking in your Churches, and to be in silence? yet all sorts of Women speak in your Churches, when they sing, and say, Amen. And in Luke the second, there was one Anna, a Prophetess, she was a Wi∣dow of about fourscore and four years: which departed not from the Temple, but served God with Fasting and Prayer night and day: Did not she Confess Christ Jesus in the Temple, and gave thanks to the Lord, and spake of Christ to all, that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem? Luke 2.36, 37, 38. So such holy Wo∣men were not forbidden to speak in the Church, neither in the Law, nor Gospel. And was it not Mary Magdalen and other Women, that first preached Christ's Resurrection to the Apostles? The Woman indeed (namely Eve) was first in Transgression; and so they were Women, that first preacht the Resurrection of Christ Jesus: for Christ said to Mary, &c. Go to my Brethren, and say unto them, I Ascend unto my Father, and to your Father; and to my God, and to your God, John 20.17. And Luke 24.10. it was Mary Magdalen and Johanna, and Mary the Mother of James, and other Women, that were with them, which told the Apostles, that Christ was risen from the dead; and their words, and these Womens words, were as Idle Tales to the Apostles, and they believed them not: Ibid. vers. 11. And vers. 22. Certain Women also of our Company made us astonished, they said: So here it may be seen, that the Womens preaching the Resurrection of Christ did Astonish the Apostles; and Christ sent these Wo∣men to preach his Resurrection: so it is no shame for such Wo∣men to preach Christ Jesus: neither were they to be silent, when Christ sends them. And the Apostle says; Every Tongue shall Confess to God, Rom. 14.11. and, Every Tongue shall Confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father, Philip. 2.11. So Here 'tis Clear, that Women must Confess Christ, as well as men; if Every Tongue must Confess. And the Apostle saith, There's neither Male nor Female; for ye are all one in Christ Je∣sus, Gal. 3.28. And whereas 'tis said; Women must ask their Husbands at home, &c. Now, the Duke knows very well, Virgins have no Hus∣bands, nor Widows; for Anna the Prophetess was a Widow: And if Christ be the Husband, Men must ask Counsel of him at home, as well as Women, before they Teach. And set the Case, that a Turk's Wife should be a Christian, or a Papist's Wife should be a Lutheran, or a Calvinist, must they Ask and Learn of their Husbands at home, before they confess Christ Je∣sus
in the Congregation of the Lord? Their Counsel will be to them to turn Turks or Papists. I Intreat the Duke to Consider these things. And again I In∣treat him to mind God's Grace and Truth in his heart, that is come by Jesus; that by his Spirit of Grace and Truth he may come to serve and worship God in his Spirit and Truth: so that he may serve the Living, Eternal God, that made him, in his Generation, and have his Peace in Christ, that the World cannot take away. And I do desire his Good, Peace and Pro∣sperity in this World, and his Eternal Comfort and Happiness in the World, that is Everlasting without End, Amen. London, the 26th of the 8th Month, 1684. G. F. Besides the fore-going I writ also Epistles to Friends; one of which the following is a Copy: FRiends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom you have all life, peace and salvation: Walk in him, who is your heavenly Rock and Foundation, that stands sure; who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given unto him. So his Power is over all. And let your Faith stand in his Power, which is over all from everlasting to everlasting, and so is over the Devil and his power; that in the holy, heavenly Wisdom of God, ye may be all preserved and kept to God's glory, out of all snares and temptations: so that God's Wisdom may be justi∣fied of all his Children in this day of his power, and they all may be faithful, serving and worshipping God in his Spirit and Truth, and valiant for it upon the Earth. For, as the A∣postle saith, They that believe, are entred into their rest, and have ceased from their own works, as God did from his. Now this Rest is an Eternal Rest in Christ, the Eternal Son of God, in whom every true Believer hath everlasting Life in Christ Jesus, their Rest and everlasting Day. For Christ the Rest bruiseth the Ser∣pent's head, and through Death destroyeth Death, and the De∣vil (the power of Death) and his works: And he is the eter∣nal Rest, that giveth eternal Life to his Sheep. And Christ ful∣filleth the Prophets, and all the Figures, Shadows and Ceremonies, as in the Old Testament; and all the Promises are Yea and A∣men in Christ, their and our Eternal Rest, who was the Eter∣nal Rest to all the true Believers in the Apostles days, and ever since; and is so now. And Christ is the Beginning and the Ending, the First and Last; who is ascended above all Princi∣palities, Powers, Thrones and Dominions, that he might fill all things. For by Jesus Christ all things were made and created, whether they be things in Heaven, or things in the Earth; and he is the eternal Rest, and they that believe, are entred into Christ, their Eternal Rest, in whom they have (as I said before) E∣ternal Life, and peace with God. Wherefore I say again, in
him, who is your Rest, live and abide: for in him ye are hap∣py, and his Blessings will rest upon you. God Almighty keep and preserve you all, his true Believers, in Christ your Rest and Peace this day, Amen. London, the 18th of the 12th Month, 1684/5. G. F. About a Month after this I got a little out of London, visiting Friends, first, at South-street; then at Ford-Green and Enfield, where I had Meetings:South-street. Ford-green Enfield Waltham-Abbey. Enfield. Edmun∣ton-side and afterwards I went to Waltham-Abbey, and was at the Meeting there on a First-day; which was very large and peaceable. Then returning through Friends at Enfield, and about Edmunton-side, I came back to London in the Third Month, to Advise with and Assist Friends, in laying Friends Sufferings before the Parliament then sitting; and we drew up a short Ac∣count of our Sufferings, which we caused to be printed, and spread amongst the Parliament-men. London. Yearly-Meeting.The Yearly-Meeting now coming on, I was much concerned for the Friends, that came up to it out of the Countries, lest they should meet with any Trouble or Disturbance in their Pas∣sages up or down; and the rather, for that about this time there began to be great bustles in the Nation upon the Duke of Mon∣mouth's landing in the West. But the Lord, according to his wonted goodness, was graciously pleased to preserve and keep Friends in safety; and gave us a blessed Opportunity to Meet together in peace and quietness, and accompanied our Meeting with his living, refreshing Presence: blessed for ever be his holy Name! Now considering the Hurries and Bustles, that were in the Nation, it came upon me at the Close of this Meeting, to write a few Lines to Friends to Caution all, to keep out of the Spirit of the World, in which the Trouble is; and to dwell in the peaceable Truth. Wherefore I writ as followeth: Dear Friends and Brethren, WHom the Lord hath called and chosen in Christ Jesus, your Life and Salvation, in whom ye have all rest and peace with God; The Lord God by his mighty Power, which is over all, hath preserved you, and supported you to this day, to be a peculiar, holy People to himself; so that by his Eternal Spirit and Power ye might be all preserved and kept out of the World: for in the World is the Trouble. And now in this great Day of the Lord God Almighty, he is shaking the Heavens and the Earth of outward Professions, and their Elements are in a heat, and their Sun and their Moon are darkened, and the Stars falling, and the Mountains and Hills shaking and tottering, as it was among the Jews in the Day of Christ's appearing. And therefore, all Dear Friends and Brethren, dwell in the Seed,
Christ Jesus, who is the Rock and Foundation,1685. London. that cannot be shaken; that ye may see with the Light and Spirit of Christ, that ye are the fixed Stars in the irmament of God's Power; and in this his Power and Light, you'l see over all the wandring Stars, and Clouds without water, and Trees without fruit. And that which may be shaken, will be shaken; as will all they, that are wandred from the Firmament of God's Power. Now, Dear Friends and Brethren, you that are redeemed from the Death and Fall of Adam, by Christ the second Adam, in him ye have Life, Rest and Peace: for Christ saith, In me ye shall have Peace; but in the World, Trouble. And the Apostle saith, They that believe, are entred into their Rest, namely Christ, who hath overcome the World, who bruiseth the Serpent's Head, and destroys the Devil and his Works, and fulfils the Types, Figures and Shadows of the Old Testament, and the Pro∣phets: In whom the Promises are Yea and Amen; who is the First and Last, Beginning and Ending, Yea and Amen, who is the eternal Rest. So keep and walk in Christ, your Rest, every one that have received him, your Eternal Rest. And now, Dear Friends and Brethren, whatever Bustlings and Trouble, or Tumults, or Outrages, Quarrels and Strife should a∣rise and be in the World, keep out of them all; and concern not your selves with them: but keep in the Lord's Power and peaceable Truth, that is over all such things; in which Power ye seek the peace and good of all men. And live in the Love, which God hath shed abroad in your hearts through Christ Jesus; in which Love nothing is able to separate you from God and Christ, neither outward Sufferings, Persecutions, nor any outward thing, that is below and without; nor to hinder or break your heavenly Fellowship in the Light and Gospel and Spirit of Christ; nor your holy Communion in the Holy Ghost, that pro∣ceeds from the Father and the Son; which leads you into all Truth. And in this Holy Ghost, in which is your holy Com∣munion, that proceeds from the Father and the Son, you have fellowship with the Father and the Son; and communion and fel∣lowship one with another. And this is it, which links and joins Christ's Church or Body together, to him the heavenly and spiri∣tual Head, and in Unity in his Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace of all his Church and living Members, in whom they have Eternal and Everlasting Rest and Peace in Christ, and with God everlasting, who is to be blessed and praised for ever, A∣men! Now, Dear Friends, forsake not the Assembling of your selves together, who are gathered in the Name of Jesus; who is your Prophet, that God has raised up in the New Testament, to be heard in all things: who opens to you, and no man can shut; and shuts, and no man can open: Who is your Priest, made higher than the Heavens by the Power of an endless Life; by him you are made a Royal Priesthood, to offer up to God spi∣ritual Sacrifice: Who is the Bishop of your Souls, to oversee you, that ye do not go astray from God: Who is the good Shepherd,
that hath laid down his Life for his Sheep; and they hear his voice, and follow him, and he gives to them eternal Life. And now, Dear Friends and Brethren, abide in Christ, the Vine, that ye may bring forth fruit to the glory of God. And as every one hath received Christ, walk in him (who is not of the World, that lies in wickedness:) so that ye may be preser∣ved out of the Vain Fashions and Customs of the World, which satisfie the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, which are not of the Father, but are of the World, that passes away. And who joins to that, which is not of the Father, or encourages it; draws the mind from God the Fa∣thr and the Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore Let Christ rule in your hearts, that your Minds, Souls and Spirits may be kept, and preserved out of the Vanities of the World, both in their words, ways and actions; so that ye may be a peculiar People, zealous of good works; serving the Lord God through Jesus Christ, in whom is life: and may be a peculiar People to the praise and glory of God; and by the word of his Grace your words may be gracious, and in your Lives and Conversations ye may shew forth Righteousness, Holiness and Godliness. That so God Almighty may be glorified in you all; and through you all; who is above all, blessed and praised for ever, A∣men. London the 11th of the 4th Month, 1685. G. F. Several other Letters also I writ at this time to Friends in di∣vers Forreign Countries; from whom I had received Letters about the Affairs of Truth. Which when I had dispatched, the Yearly-Meeting being over, and the Country-Friends for the most part gone out of Town, I got a little way out of Town also; being much spent with the Heat of the Weather,South-street. Throngs in Meetings, and continual Business. I went at first but to South-street, where I abode some days. And among other Services, that I had there, a great sense entred me of the Growth and Increase of Pride, Vanity and Excess in Apparel; and that not only amongst the People of the World, but too much also amongst some, that came among us, and seem'd to make a Profession of the Truth. And in the sense I had of the Evil thereof, it came upon me to give forth the following Paper, as a Reproof and Check thereun∣to. THE Apostle Peter saith (in 1 Pet. 3.) of the Womens Adorning; Let it not be (mark, Let it not be: this is a positive Prohibition) that outward adorning of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on of Apparel: But let it be the hidden Man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of a great price: for after this manner in the old time the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves.
Here ye may see, what is the Ornament of the holy Women,1685. South-street. which was in the sight of God of a great price, and which the holy Women, who trusted in God, adorned themselves with. But the unholy Women, that trust not in God, their Ornament is not a meek and a quiet Spirit: They adorn themselves with plaiting the Hair, and putting on of Apparel, and wearing of Gold; which is forbidden by the Apostle in his general Epistle to the Church of Christ, the true Christians. And the Apostle Paul saith, (1 Tim. 2.9, 10.) In like manner also, that Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with shame∣facedness and sobriety: not with broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array; but (which becometh Women professing Godliness) with good Works. Now here ye may see, what the Women were not to Adorn themselves with, who professed Godliness: They were not to adorn themselves with broidered Hair, nor Gold, nor Pearls, nor costly Array; for this was not looked upon to be modest Apparel for holy Women, that profest Godliness and good Works. But this Adorning or Apparel is for the immodest, and unshamefaced and unsober Women, that profess not Godliness, neither follow those good Works, that God commands. And therefore it doth not become Men and Women, who profess true Christianity and Godliness, to be adorned with Gold, or Chains, or Pearls, or costly Array, with broidered Hair; for these things are for the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and Pride of Life, which is not of the Father. And therefore all the holy Men and Wo∣men are to mind that, which is more precious than Gold: who are Redeemed not with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain Conversation; but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot. Therefore as obedient Children to God, not fashioning your selves according to your former Lusts in your Ignorance; but as he, which hath called you, is ho∣ly, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. Christ saith; The Life is more than Meat, and the Body is more than Raiment, Luke 12.23. I read of a Moral-wise Philosopher, who, meeting a Woman with her Neck and Breast bare, laid his hand upon her, and said; Woman, wilt thou sell this Flesh? and she replying, No. Then pray, said he, shut up your Shop (meaning her bare Breasts and Neck.) So they were looked upon as Harlots, that went with their Necks, Breasts and Backs bare, and not Civil People, even among the Moral Heathens. Therefore they, that profess the Knowledge of true Christianity, should be ashamed of such things. You may see a Book written by the very Papists, and another by Baxter, the Presbyterian, against bare Breasts and bare Backs, and them that shewed their Flesh Ʋncovered: They that were but in an outward Profession, did declare against such things; and therefore they, which are in the Possession of Truth and true Christianity, should be ashamed of such things. Read, I pray you, the Third of Isaiah, and there you may see, how that
holy Prophet was grieved with the foolish Womens vain Attire; and how he was sent by the Lord to reprove them. And en∣vious, persecuting Jezabel her Attired Head and Bravery, like a painted Harlot out of the Truth, did not keep her from the Judgments of God, when the Lord stirred up Jehu against her. Doth not Pride go before a Fall, and a haughty Mind before Destruction? And God resisteth the Proud, and giveth Grace to the Humble. And Solomon saith, The Lord will destroy the House of the Proud, Prov. 15.25. For the Day of the Lord shall be up∣on every one, that is proud and lofty, &c. and he shall be brought low, Isa. 2.12. and Mal. 4. Therefore take heed of calling the Proud happy: for The Lord will scatter the Proud in the Imagina∣tions of their own hearts, and exalt them of low degree. And you may read in the Revelations (Chap. 17.4. and 18.16.) of the false Church, how she was outwardly decked, but full of Abomi∣nation, and came to a Downfal at last. And therefore it is good for all, that profess the Truth, to use this World, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this World passeth away; but the Word of the Lord endureth for ever. The Lord taketh pleasure in his Peo∣ple, he will beautifie the Meek with Salvation, Psal. 149.4. There∣fore all, that know the Truth, as it is in Jesus, are to be beau∣tified and cloathed with this Salvation, which Salvation is a strong Wall or a Bulwark against that Spirit, that would lead you down into the Fall from God, or into those things, which the fallen Man and Woman delight in, and beautifie or adorn themselves with. And therefore all, that profess the Truth, be circumspect, sincere and fervent, following the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not of this World; in whom ye have Life and Peace with God. South-street, the 24th of the 4th Month, 1685. G. F. After I had been some weeks in the Country at Southstreet, and at and about Enfield (in which time I had several Meetings with Friends) I returned to London.Enfield. London. And amongst other Services, that I found there, one was, to assist Friends in drawing up Te∣stimony, to Clear our Friends from being concerned in the late Rebel∣lion in the West, and from all Plots against the Government: Which accordingly we did; and delivered them to the Chief-Justice, who was then to go down into the West, with Commission to Try Prisoners. I tarried some time in London, visiting Meetings, and labour∣ing among Friends in the Service of Truth. But finding my Health much impaired for want of fresh Air, I went a little way out of Town to Charles Bathurst's Country-house at Epping-Forrest;Epping-Forrest. where I stay'd a few days. And while I was there, it came upon me to write the following Epistle to Friends:
Dear Friends, WHO are called, chosen and faithful in this Day of Trial,1685. Epping-Forest. and Temptations, and Sufferings, whom the Lord by his right Hand hath upholden in all your Sufferings (and some to Death) for the Lord and his Truths sake; Christ saith, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the World: In me ye have peace; but in the World ye have trouble. The Children of the Seed, which be Heirs of the Kingdom, know, this is true. And though ye have Trials by false Brethren, Judasses and Sons of Perdition, that are got into the Temple of God, and exalted above all that is called God; whom the Lord will destroy with the breath of his Mouth; and the brightness of his Coming: And though ye be Tried by Powers or Principalities; yet there is nothing able to separate you from the Love of God, which ye have in Christ Jesus. In that Love dwell, which bears all things, and fulfils the Law; in which edifie one another, and be courteous, and kind, and humble: for to such God giveth his Grace plentiful∣ly, and such he teacheth. And pray in the Holy Ghost, which proceeds from the Father and the Son; and in it keep your ho∣ly Communion, and Unity in the Spirit, the Bond of Peace, which is the King of Kings heavenly Peace. In that you are all bound to good behaviour, and keeping Peace among your selves, and seeking the Peace of all men; and shewing forth the heavenly, gentle and peaceable Wisdom to all men, in Righ∣teousness and Truth, answering the good in all People in all your Lives and Conversations (for the Lord is glorified in your bringing forth spiritual fruit:) that ye may eye and behold the Lord in all your actions; that the Blessings of the Lord ye may all feel to rest upon you. Whether ye be the Lord's Prisoners for his Name and Truth's sake, or at Liberty, in all things labour to be Content (for that is a Continual Feast;) and let no Trouble move you: then ye will be as Mount Sion, that cannot be removed. And in all things exercise the Word of Patience, which Word will sanctifie all things to you. And study to be Quiet, and do the Lord's business, that he requires of you; and your own, in Truth and Righteousness: and whatsoever ye do, let it be done to the praise and glory of God in the Name of Jesus Christ. All they, that do make God's People to suffer, they make the Seed to suffer in their own particulars; and Im∣prison the Just there: And such will not visit the Seed in them∣selves; but cast it into Prison in Others, and not visit it in Prison. You may read, that Christ saith, Such must go into E∣verlasting Punishment: That is a sad punishment and prison. And all such, as are become Apostates and Backsliders, that do cruci∣fie to themselves Christ afresh, and put him to open shame, and trample under feet the blood of the Son of God, by which they were cleansed, and then come to be Ʋnclean; such grieve, vex, and quench, and rebel against the Spirit of God in them∣selves: and then such rebel against them, that walk in the Spirit of God. Such are Ʋnfaithful to God and Man, and are Enemies
to every good Work and Service of God: But their End will be according to their works; who are like unto the Earth, that hath often received Rain, but brings forth Briars and Thorns; which are to be rejected, and are for the fire. Therefore, Dear Friends, in all your Sufferings feel the Lord's Eternal Arm and Power, which hath upheld you, and supported you to this day; and will to the end, as your Faith stands in it, and as you are settled upon the Rock and Foundation Christ Jesus, that can∣not be removed: in whom ye have life and peace with God. And so the Lord God Almighty in him give you Dominion, and preserve and keep you all to his Glory; that in all your Sufferings ye may feel his presence: and that, when ye have fi∣nished your Testimony, ye may receive the Crown of Glory, which God hath laid up for them, that fear and serve him, A∣men. The 15th of the 7th Month, 1685. G. F. Having spent about a week at this time among Friends in the Country,London. I returned to London: Where I continued about Two Months, visiting Friends Meetings, and labouring to get Relief for Friends from their Sufferings; which yet lay heavy upon them in many parts of the Nation. Several Papers also I writ, rela∣ting to the Service of Truth; one of which was concerning Or∣der in the Church of God, which some, that were gone out of the Unity of Friends, did much oppose. And that was, as fol∣loweth: AMong all Societies, or Families, or Nations of People in the World, they have among them some sort of Order. There was the Order of Aaron in the Old Testament; and there was the Order of Melchizedeck before that: after whose Order Christ Jesus came; and he did not despise that Order. So God is a God of Order in his whole Creation, and in his Church: And all the Believers in the Light, the Life in Christ, that do pass from death to life, they are in the Order of the holy Spirit, Power, Light, Life and Government of Christ Jesus, of the In∣crease whereof there is no End. And this is a Mystery to all those disorderly People, who have written and printed so much against Orders, which the Lord's Power and Spirit hath brought forth among his People. And you, that cry so much against Orders, is it not manifest, that you are gone into a Land of Dark∣ness (thick, as darkness it self) and of the shadow of death, into disorder, and where the Light is as Darkness? And is not this your Condition seen by all them, that live and walk in the Truth, and whose Conversations are according to the Gospel of Life and Salvation?
The Devil, Satan, Dragon, and the first and second Beast,1685. London. and the Whore and false Prophets, and their Worshippers and Follow∣ers, all these are out of the Truth, and abode not in it, nor in the Order of it: And the Truth is over them all. In Salem is God's Tabernacle, a peaceable Tabernacle; and his Tabernacle is in Shiloh: And these are far beyond the Tabernacles of Ham, (Psal. 76. and 78.) All the Figures and Shadows were and are in Time; but Christ the Substance is the Beginning and the Ending. And all Trials, Troubles, Persecutions and Temptations came up in Time: but the Lord's Power, which is Everlasting, is over all such things; in which is safety. The black World of Darkness lieth in wickedness, and by their Wisdom knoweth not God, that made the World and all things therein: for the God of the World and Prince of the Air ruleth in the hearts of all them, that disobey the living God, that made them. And so the God of this wicked World hath blinded all the Eyes of the Infidels or Heathen; so that this Wicked World by their Wisdom doth not know the living God. In the Old Testament the Lord said; With all thy Offerings thou shalt offer Salt, Levit. 2.13. And Christ saith in his New Covenant; Every one shall be salted with Fire, and every Sacrifice shall be salted with Salt. Salt is good; but if the Salt have lost its saltness, wherewith will you season it? Have Salt in your selves, and have peace one with another, Mark 9.48, 49, 50. We have received the Earnest of the Spirit, which is the Ear∣nest of the Inheritance, that fadeth not away. For God pour∣eth out of his Spirit upon all flesh: So it is God's Spirit; which is above our natural Spirit (by which alone we do not know God:) for it is with the Spirit of God, that we do know the things of God. And the Spirit of God doth witness to our Souls and Spirits, that this Spirit of God is the Earnest of an Eternal Inheritance. God opens his Peoples Ears to Discipline, and commands, that they turn from Iniquity. If they obey and serve him, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasure: but if they obey him not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge, Job 36.10, 11, 12. So the Disobedient, that do not turn from their Iniquity, have not this prosperity and pleasure; but die without the knowledge of God: And such, their Ears are shut to this Discipline, which God opens to his People. G. F. When I had been about Two Months in London, I was sent for to my Son Rouse's at Kingston, to visit a Daughter of his,Kingston. which at that time lay very sick; but recovered. Whilst I stay'd there, I had several Meetings with Friends:Hammer∣smith. and returning by Hammer∣smith, stay'd the First-day-Meeting there; which was large and peaceable. And having visited Friends thereabouts, I came back
o London again; being very intent upon the business of getting Redress for suffering Friends. In this, and other Services for Friends and Truth I continued at London, till the latter end of the Eleventh Month; save that I went, in this time, to visit an An∣cient Friend at Bednal-Green,Bednal-Green. with whom I tarried three or four days. While I was there, I was much exercised, in the sense of the Enemy's Working, to draw from the holy way of Truth into a false Liberty, and so into the World's ways and worships again. And the Example of the backsliding Jews coming before me, I was moved to write the following Paper, as a Warning to all such. HEre you may see, when the Jews Rebelled against the good Spirit of God, which he gave them to Instruct them, they forsook God and his Law, Way and Worship, and then they went a whoring after Balaam's Ways, and became like the wild Ass-Colt, snuffing up the wind, as in Jer. 2.24. And in Jer. 3. see, how Judah played the Harlot under every green Tree, and upon every high Mountain: And therefore the Lord divorced Judah, as he had divorced Israel, when she forsook his Ways, and followed the Heathens Ways. And though the Lord had fed them to the full, yet they forsook him, and committed Adultery; and Assembled themselves together in Harlot's-houses, Jer. 5.7. And with their Whoredom they defiled the Land, and committed Adulte∣ry with Stocks and Stones, Jer. 3.9. So here you may see, when they forsook the living, Eternal God, they followed the Reli∣gions and Worships of other Nations, whose Gods were made of Stocks and Stones, which the Jews worshipped, and committed Adultery withal. When they forsook the living God, and his way and worship, they forsook the worship at Jerusalem at the Temple, and followed the Heathens Worships in the Moun∣tains and Fields: and so, it was called Adultery and Whoredom, to join with other Religions, and forsake God: as in Jer. 13.27. And now, if the Children of New Jerusalem, that is above, should forsake the Worship, that Christ in his New Testament set up (which is in Spirit and in Truth) and follow the Wor∣ships of Nations, which men have set up; will not they, that do so, commit Adultery with them, in forsaking God's Worship, and Christ, the new and living Way? And in Jer. 44. ye may see, how the Children of Judah pro∣voked the Lord against them, by worshipping the works of their own hands, and following the Gods of the Land of Egypt. In this they committed Adultery, forsaking the living God, their Husband, and his Worship; and there ye may see God's Judgments pronounced against them, to their destruction. And what will become of those, that forsake the Worship in Spirit and Truth, which Christ set up; and worship the works of their own hands in spiritual Egypt, and follow spiritual Egypt's Will∣worship, which they invented? may not this be called Whore∣dom in them, that forsake Christ, the new and living Way, and his pure Religion, and his Worship, that he hath set up? And
they that do forsake the Lord's way,1685. Bednal-Green. and his worship that he set up, and follow the Worlds ways and worships, that they set up, do not they, whose Way they follow, become at last their E∣nemies? as in Lament. 1. See, how the Jews forsook the Lord's way and worship, and doted on other Lovers (the Assyrians, &c.) and with all their Idols they were defiled; and how they did not leave the Whoredoms brought from Egypt, and how they were polluted with the Babylonians Bed: as ye may read in E∣zek. 23. When they forsook the Lord, his Way and Worship, and followed the Way and Worship of the Heathen; then it was said, They went a Whoring after other Lovers, and committed A∣dultery with them. And ye may see in Ezek. 16. how the state of the Jews was likened unto that of their Sister Sodom, and how that they had played the Harlot with the Assyrians, and committed Fornicati∣on with the Egyptians, and had increased their Whoredoms, in following their abominable Idols. And therefore the Lord car∣ried away the Two Tribes, that forsook him, into Babylon; as ye may see in Ezek. 17.20. And they that forsake Christ, the new and living Way, and the Worship of God in Spirit and Truth, which Christ set up in his New-Testament, they go into Captivity in spiritual Babylon. And in Hosea 2. ye may see, how he discovers the Whore∣doms and Idolatry of the Jews, who forsook the Lord; and com∣pares them to an Harlot. And in Chap. 8. ye may see the De∣struction threatned against the Jews, for their Impiety and Ido∣latry. In Chap. 9. also, the Distress and Captivity of the Jews is threatned for their sins and Idolatry. And again they are re∣proved and threatned for their Impiety and Idolatry, Hos. 10. And this was for forsaking the Lord and his Way, and follow∣ing the ways of their own Inventions, and the Ways of the Heathen. And doth not Isaiah say, That the Lord would visit Tyre, and that she should commit Fornication with all the Kingdoms of the World upon the face of the Earth? and therefore the Lord threat∣ned Destruction upon her, Chap. 23. And in Chap. 57. you may see, how the Lord reproved the Jews for their Whorish Idolatry, and said; Ʋpon an high and lofty Mountain hast thou set thy Bed; even thither wentest thou up to offer Sacrifices.—Thou hast enlarged thy Bed, and made a Covenant with them; thou lovedst their Bed, where thou savest it. This was a Joining to the Heathens Reli∣gions, Altars and Sacrifices, and a forsaking the Lord's Altar and Sacrifices, which he commanded in the Law: And therefore that was committing Whoredom with the Heathen, and a go∣ing into their Beds, from the Living God that made them. And now in the New Testament God having poured his Spirit upon all Flesh, that by his Spirit all might come to be a Royal Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ; All that err from the Spirit of God, and rebel against it, they are not like to offer spiritual Sacrifices to God: and such their Sacrifice God doth not accept, no more than he did the Heathens,
and the Jews, who rebelled against his good Spirit, that he gave them to Instruct them. And ye may see in the 17th, 18th and 19th Chapters of the Reve∣lation, the Punishment of the great Whore Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and the Victory of the Lamb; and how he calleth God's People out of Babylon: For in her was found the Blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth: But there ye may read her Judgment, and her Downfal. And this Whore are they, that are whored from the Spirit of God, and so from God, and from his holy Worship in Spirit and Truth, and from the pure, undefiled Religion, that keeps from the Spots of the World, and from the new and living Way Christ Jesus; and so are whored from the Spirit of God into false Religions, Ways and Worships, and so corrupted the Earth with her A∣bominations. But her Judgment and Downfal is seen, over whom Christ hath the Victory: And the Marriage of the Lamb is come, Glory to the Lord for ever! And God's pure Reli∣gion, and pure Worship in Spirit and Truth Christ hath set up, as it was in the Apostles days, Hallelujah! G. F. London.I soon returned to London, but made no long stay there at this time; my Body not being able to bear the Closeness of the City long together. While I was in Town, besides the usual Services of visiting Friends, and taking care about their Sufferings, to get them eased, I Assisted the Friends of the City in distributing certain Sums of Money, which our Friends of Ireland had chari∣tably, and very liberally raised; and sent over hither for the Relief of their Brethren, who suffered for the Testimony of a good Con∣science here: which Monies were distributed amongst poor, suffer∣ing Friends in the several Counties, in proportion, according as we understood their Need. Before I left the City also, I heard of a great Doctor, that was lately come from Poland; whom I invited to my Lodging, and had a great deal of discourse with him. And after I had inform∣ed my self by him of such things, as I had a desire to know; I writ a Letter to the King of Poland on behalf of Friends at Dantzick (a Town belonging to him) who had long been un∣der grievous Sufferings. A Copy whereof here follows:
To JOHN the Third, King of Poland,1685. London. Great Duke of Lithuania, Russia, and Prussia, Defender of the City of Dantzick, &c. Concerning the Innocent and Afflicted People, in scorn called Quakers, who are now fed with Bread and Water in Bridewell of the a∣foresaid City under close Confinement; where their Friends, Wives and Children are hardly suffered to come to see them. O King! THE Magistrates of the City of Dantzick say, That it is thy Order and Command, that these Innocent and Afflict∣ed People should suffer such Oppression. Now this Punishment is Inflicted upon them, only and alone, because they come to∣gether in the Name of Jesus Christ, their Redeemer and Savi∣our, who died for their Sins, and is risen from the dead for their Justification: who is their Prophet, whom God hath raised up like unto Moses; whom they ought to hear in all things in this day of the Gospel and the New Covenant; who went astray like scattered Sheep; but now are returned to the Chief Shepherd and Bishop of their Souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. Who has given his Life for his Sheep, and they hear his Voice, and follow him: who leads them into his Pastures of Life, John 10. And now, O King! I understand, that thou openly professest Christianity, and the great and mighty Name of Jesus Christ, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, To whom is given all Power in Heaven and in Earth; who rules all Nations with a Rod of Iron. Therefore, O King, it seems hard to us, that any, that openly confesses Christ Jesus (yea, the Magi∣strates of Dantzick do the same) should Inflict those Punish∣ments upon an Innocent and Harmless People, by reason of their Tender Consciences, only and alone, because they come together to serve and worship the Eternal God, who made them, in Spirit and in Truth; which worship Christ Jesus has set up Sixteen hun∣dred years ago: as we read in John 4.23, 24. Therefore, I beseech the King, that he would Consider, Whe∣ther Christ in the New Testament ever gave such a Command to his Apostles, that they should shut up any in Prison, and feed them with Bread and Water, who was not Conformable in every particular to their Religion, Faith and Worship? Or, where did the Apostles exercise such things in the true Church after Christ's Ascension? For is not this the Doctrine of Christ,
and the Apostles, that Christ's Followers should Love their E∣nemies, and pray for them that hate them, and persecute and de∣spitefully use them? Matth. 5. And now, Is it not a shame to Christendom among the Turks and others, That one Christian should persecute another for the Doctrine of Faith, Worship and Religion? And they cannot prove, that Christ ever gave them such a Command, whom they profess to be their Lord and Master. For Christ says, that his Believers and Followers should love one another; and by this they shall be known to be his Disciples. And did not Christ Reprove those, who would have fire to come down from Heaven, to destroy them, who would not receive him; and did not he tell them, They did not know, what spirit they were of? And therefore all, who have persecuted Men, or taken away their Lives, because they would not receive their Religion, have they known, what spirit they were or are of? Therefore is it nor good for all to know by the Spirit of Christ, what spirit they are of? For the Apostle says, Rom. 8.9. If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And does not the A∣postle say, 2 Cor. 10.4. The Weapons of our Warfare are not Car∣nal, but Spiritual, &c. And we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against spiritual wickedness, &c. Thus we can see here, that the Fight of the first Christians, and their Weapons in the days of the Apostles, were spiritual in matters of Faith, Religion and Worship in the Church of Christ. Now would not the King and the Magistrates of Dantzick think, that it was contrary to their Consciences, if they should be forced by the Turk to his Religion? Would it not in like manner seem hard to the Magistrates of Dantzick, and contrary to their Con∣sciences, if they should be forced to the Religion of the King of Poland? or the King of Poland, if he should be compelled to the Religion of the Magistrates of Dantzick? And if they would not be subject thereunto, that then they should be ba∣nished from their Wives and Families, and out of their Native Country, or otherwise be fed with Bread and Water under a strict Confinement? Therefore we beseech the King with all Christian Humility, and the Magistrates of Dantzick, that they would order their proceedings in this matter according to the Royal Law of God, which is, To do unto others, as they would have others do unto them; and to love their Neighbour, as themselves. For we have this Charity, that we hope and believe, that the King of Po∣land, and his People, with the Magistrates of Dantzick, own the Writings of the New Testament, as well as of the Old: And therefore we beseech the King and the Magistrates of Dantzick, to take heed, that their Work of Imprisoning an Innocent Peo∣ple, for nothing but their meeting together in Tenderness of Conscience to serve and worship God, their Creator, may not be contrary and opposite to the Royal Law of God, and to the Glo∣rious and Everlasting Gospel of Truth.
So we desire the King in Christian Love earnestly and weigh∣tily to Consider these things, and to give Order, to set the In∣nocent Prisoners, our Friends called Quakers, at Liberty from their strict Confinement in Dantzick; that they may have free∣dom to serve and worship the living God in Spirit, and in Truth, and go home to their outward Habitations, and follow their Trades and Calling, to maintain their Wives, Children and Fa∣milies. And we believe, that the King, in doing such a No∣ble, Glorious, yea Christian Work, will not go unrewarded from the Great God, who made him, whom we serve and worship; who has the hearts of Kings, and their lives and length of days in his hands. From him, who desires, that the King and all his Mini∣sters may be preserved in the Fear of God, and receive his Word of Wisdom, by which all things were made and created; that by it he may come to order all things to the Glory of God, which God has put under his hand: That the King, both He and They, may en∣joy the Comforts and Blessings of the Lord in this Life, and in that which is to come, Life Eternal, Amen. London in England, the 10th of the 3d Month, commonly called May, 1684. G. F. Post-script. The King may please to Consider, that His and all Mens Consciences is the Prerogative of God. After this I went to Enfield, where,Enfield. and in the Country there∣abouts several Friends had Country-houses, not very far from one another; amongst whom I tarried some time, visiting and be∣ing visited by Friends, and having Meetings with them. Several things I writ in this time, relating to the Service of Truth; One whereof was concerning Judging: For some, who were departed from the Truth, were so afraid of Truth's Judgment, that they made it much of their business to Cry out against Judging. Wherefore I writ a Paper, proving by the Scriptures of Truth, that the Church of Christ hath power, and ability to Judge those, that profest to be of it, not only with respect to outward things relating to this World, but with respect to Religious Matters also. A Copy of which follows: Concerning Judging. THE Natural Man receiveth not the Things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: but he that is spiritual,
judgeth all things (mark) all things; yet he himself is judged of no Man,1685. Enfield. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. So here the Natural Man cannot judge of those things he receives not, for they are foolishness to him: but he is comprehended by the Spiritual Man, and his foolish∣ness, and is Judged, though he cannot judge the Spiritual Man. Do not ye judge them that are within? saith the Apostle; (this Power the Church had, and hath) therefore put away from amongst your selves that wicked person. And did not this Wicked person, think you, profess and plead for Liberty for his Wickedness, and his Freedom, as he was a Christian, who was lookt upon, as a Member of the Church? And the Apostle saith; For I verily, as absent in body, yet pre∣sent in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present, con∣cerning him that hath done this wicked deed, 1 Cor. 5.3, 12. Here the Apostle did Judge, though afar off, and set up Judgment in the Church against false Liberty, under what pretence soever it was. And the Apostle saith; Dare any of you, having a matter against a Brother, go to Law before the Ʋnjust, and not before the Saints. Here the Saints, the Church, are to Judge of things amongst themselves; and not for the Unjust to Judge of their Matters. Do ye not know, the Saints shall judge the World? So the Saints are to judge the Unjust, and not the Ʋnjust to judge their Mat∣ters. And farther the Apostle saith; If the World shall be judged by you, (to wit the Saints) are you unworthy to judge the smaller matters amongst you? So here it is clear, that the Saints have a Judgment given them of Christ, by his Power and Spirit, Light and Wisdom, to judge the World, and not to carry their Matters before the Ʋnjust; but to judge of them amongst themselves: and if they carry them before the Unjust, they shew their unworthiness of the Saints Judgment. And further the Apostle saith; Know ye not, that we shall Judge the Angels? (and Angels are Spirits) how much more the things which pertain to this life? If ye then have Judgment of things pertaining to this life, set them up to judge, who have least esteem in the Church, 1 Cor. 6. So here it is clear, the Church of Christ has a Judgment in the Power and Spirit of God, not only to Judge in things that per∣tain to this life; but are also to Judge of things betwixt Bre∣thren, without Brother going to Law with Brother before Un∣believers: which was a fault, and to be Judged, if they did so. But also the Saints have a Judgment to judge Angels, that kept not their Habitations; and the World. And as in Jude; He judged the Angels, that kept not their habitations; their first state: And did not he Judge in Divine Matters here? and judged the state of Cain, and Balaam, and Core, and such like Christians, that were gotten into their steps, and were gone as far as they was, though they professed themselves Christians? And here
again he judged in Divine Matters, and of their States and Be∣ings; who stood in the Divine Principle, and who were fallen from it. And the Apostle saith; Try the spirits, and believe not every spirit, 1 John 4. And here again was a Judgment in Divine Matters: And he judged such, as went out from them; which whilst they were with them, they had sight of things and open∣ings; but when they went from them, they went from the Anointing: and therefore he exhorts the Saints to keep to the A∣nointing. And such as went from them, that had the Anoint∣ing, came to be the Seducers and false Prophets, that went into the World. And John had a Judgment to try Sacrifices, and distinguished Cains from Abels; and by the Spirit of God knew, which God accepted, and which he did not accept: as in 1 John 3.12. And the Apostle Paul judged and tried such Messengers and Apostles, and Transformers of themselves, like to the Apostles of Christ: and would have the Church to try such, and have the same Judgment as he had, 2 Cor. 11. And the Apostle Peter Judged Ananias and Sapphira, and judged the Thoughts of Simon Magus, who would have been a worker of Miracles for money: and was not all this Judgment in Divine Matters? And the Apostle Paul Judged the Preach∣ers of Circumcision both in the Romans, and in the Galatians. For it was the Faith and Liberty of those Preachers, to preach up Circumcision, though it was a wrong Faith: And here did not the Apostle again Judge in Divine Matters? And James Judged in Matters of Faith, and manifested the living Faith from the dead one. And also he Judged in Mat∣ters of Religion, the vain Religion from the pure Religion; and distinguished them. And Paul Judged of the false Brethren, that would spy out the liberty of the true; to whom he would give no place by subjection, no, not for an hour, that the Truth of the Gospel might continue with the Saints; as in Gal. 2. And did not the Apostle here Judge in Divine Matters? And he Judged concerning the Matters of the Gospel, when some came to pervert them with another Gospel, and said; The Gospel, which I received, is not of Man, neither was I taught it; but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. So here was a Judgment to distinguish the Gospel of Christ from all other Gospels, which was Accursed, which is after Man, and received of Man, and taught of Man, and not by the Reve∣lation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. And he had a Judgment to know, Who made the Gospel Chargeable, and who kept it without Charge. And he set up a Judgment in the Church, that the Believers should not be unequally yoked; and to see, when Men had a Communion in the Light, and when they had it in the Darkness; and when with Christ, and when with Baal; and with the Believer, and Ʋnbeliever; and with the Temple of God, and with Idols: as in 2 Cor. 6. And did he not set up a clear Judgment here in Divine Matters in the Church?
And the Apostle Judged such Libertines through their know∣ledge, that could sit at Meat in the Idol-Temple; which caused the weak Brother to perish through his knowledge and liberty, for whom Christ died. Now these, it's like, did profess, it was their Faith, and their Liberty; but did not keep in the Unity of the true Faith, but went about to destroy it, 1 Cor. 8. And Peter, he gives Judgment upon the Angels, that sinned, and were cast down into Hell: and the state of the Old World, and of Sodom, and the state of the false Prophets then amongst them, that could speak great swelling words of vanity; and whilst they promised themselves liberty, they themselves were the Servants of Corruptions. And had not Peter here a Judgment in Divine Matters? These were such, whose work was to bring into bondage, and these was like the Dog and Sow, that was washed: which shews, that they had been washed; but was turned into the Mire a∣gain. And the Apostle Paul had a Judgment upon such with their fair words and mens wisdom, that deceived the hearts of the simple; and upon such, as served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies, and were Enemies to the Cross of Christ. And therefore he had a Judgment and Discerning, who lived in the Cross of Christ, and who did not; and exhorted all to live in the Cross of Christ, the righteous Power of God, that slew all Deceit, and the Deeds of the Old Man: agreeable to Christ's words, He that will be my Disciple, must take up my Cross, and follow me. And was not here a Judgment again in Divine Mat∣ters, and of such as walk in the Divine Power, and such as did not? And Christ sets up a Judgment in his seven Churches, and commends them, that did keep in his Judgment, and had tri∣ed them, which said, They were Apostles; which might pretend, they were sent of God and Christ, and were not: But the Church of Christ had found them Liars. And Christ Commended this Judgment of the Church of Ephesus, because they had Not born with them, that was evil; but had tried those false Apostles: And Christ commends this Church, for that they had hated the deeds of the Nicholaitans, which he also hated: And had not these Ni∣cholaitans sprung from Nicholas, one of the Deacons? and was not these become a Sect of Christians? though they might talk and preach of Christ, but Christ hated them. And likewise Christ saith to the Church of Smyrna, I know the blasphemy of them, which say, they are Jews, but are not; but are of the Synagogue of Satan. So the Church is to have a Judgment upon these blasphemers, and are to distinguish from the Jews in the Spirit, and such as are not, but of the Synagogue of Sa∣tan. And to the Church in Pergamos Christ had a few things against them, because thou hast there them, that hold the Doctrines of Ba∣laam, &c. And also them, that hold the Doctrine of the Nicho∣laitans, which I hate. Now, these that held the Doctrine of Balaam, and the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans, were got into the Church; and might have lookt upon themselves to be high
Christians, and took a great Liberty to go into Balaam's Do∣ctrine, and Nicholas's Doctrine, which was hated by Christ: but the Church was to keep a Spiritual and Divine Judgment upon the Heads of all these. And to the Church of Thyatira saith Christ; I have a few things against thee, because thou sufferest the woman Jezabel to teach, which seduces my people, &c. So here was a Suffering, which should have been a Judgment by Christ's Spirit, upon that Je∣zabel, which was erred from his Spirit, and so from Christ: and such as these were high Preachers. And is not the Church to beware of suffering such now; lest they come under the Re∣proof of Christ, for not passing to Judgment against the false Teacher and Seducer? And the Church of Sardis, that had a name to live, but was dead, and their works were not found perfect before God. There∣fore here is a Judgment to be set up in the Church, to Judge all Imperfect Works, and such as would have a Name, but not the Nature, or a name to live, but are dead: And therefore the Living must be in Christ, of all Christ's Church, living Members, and live to his Name. Though this Church had a few Names, that had not defiled their Garments, that did walk in White; But such as had a Name to live, but are dead, whilst they are in the dead state, they cannot walk in White, nor Judge in Di∣vine Matters. And behold, saith Christ, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which say, they are Jews, but are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to come, and to worship before my feet. And to the Church of Laodicea, that was neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm; I would thou wert either cold or hot: I will spew thee out of my mouth, because thou said'st thou wast rich, and wanted no∣thing; when they were wretched, miserable, poor, blind and naked. Now this was for want of living in the Power and Spirit of Christ: these could talk of high Experiences, and great Injoy∣ments, but was naked, miserable and blind; So lived not in the Power, and Spirit, and Light, and Righteousness of Christ, by which they might be cloathed, and have the Eternal Riches. So the Church of Christ had a spiritual Judgment given to them, that are faithful, in his Power and Spirit, and Light to Judge of Temporal things, and the things of this Life; and to Judge of Eternal and Divine things and States: and of Angels and Wicked men, and such as goes from Truth; and of the states of Election, and Reprobation; yea, and of the Devils, who is out of Truth; being in Christ Jesus, who is the First and Last, from whom they have the Eternal Judgment, to Judge Eternal, Spiritual and Divine things: And this Word of Power and Wis∣dom, by which all things were made, and by which all things are upheld, in this Word of Wisdom to order all things to God's Glory, and to Judge of all things in Righteousness.
And the Apostle Judged and set up a Judgment in the Church of Gifts, of Prophecies, of Mysteries of Faith, and of giving the Body to be burnt, and of giving Goods to the Poor, and of speak∣ing with Tongues of Men and Angels: And yet if they had not Love, all this was nothing; but as a sounding Brass, and tinkling Cymbal. Therefore they are to be tried by the Fruits of the good Spirit, which is Love. So here the Apostle not only Judg∣ed himself in Divine Matters; but set up a Judgment in the Church in those Spiritual and Divine Matters. And the Apostle James here Judges of Fountains, and of the Fig-trees; and of the Wisdom below, and of the Wisdom from above, and the Fruits of both, Jam. 3. And Paul Judged in Divine Matters, when he said, The Spirit spake expresly, that in the latter times some should depart from the Faith, 1 Tim. 4. And he Judged in Divine Matters, when he judged all those Teach∣ers, that was high-minded, and had got the Form of Godliness, but denied the Power; and termed them like unto Jannes and Jambrs, which withstood Moses, coming out of outward E∣gypt; as these with their Form of Godliness opposes Christ and his Power, that brings them out of spiritual Egypt now. And was not he a Judge here in Divine Matters, who judged such, as had gotten the Form of Godliness, but denied the Divine Power? 2 Tim 3. And when the Apostle said; The Priesthood of Aaron was chang∣ed, and the Law was changed, and the Commandment disanul∣led, that gave them their Tithes; did not he Judge here in Divine and Spiritual Matters? and was not the Law spiritual, which served, till the Seed came? And did not the Apostle Judge in Divine and Spiritual Mat∣ters in the Sixth of the Hebrews, where he saith; Let us go on to perfection, not laying again the foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith towards God, and of the Doctrine of Bap∣tisms, and of laying on of Hands, and of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of Eternal Judgment: and this will we do, if God per∣mit, &c. And so does not the Apostle Judge of such here, That it was impossible for those, who was once enlightened, and tasted of the heavenly gift, and were partakers of the Holy Ghost, and had tasted, of the good Word of God, and of the power of the World to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto Repentance; seeing, they crucifie to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to open shame? Hebr. 6. And was not these Spiri∣tual, Eternal and Divine Matters and States, that the Apostle Judged of? and have not the Saints the same Judgment given unto them in the same Spirit? Now has not the Apostles and the Church a Spiritual Judgment to Judge of Prophets, Mysteries, Faith, Apostles, Angels, World, and the Devil? and is not this Judgment given them of God, in Divine Matters, besides the Judgment given them in Matters pertaining unto this Life?
And had not they Judgment to discern the true Gospel, from the false? and all such as had a Profession of the Form, and did not live in the power? and such as spoke the things of God, in the words that Man's wisdom did teach? which things of God were not to be spoken in the wisdom, which Man's words taught; but in the Word, which the Holy Ghost taught. And therefore did not the Apostle exhort to know the Power, and their Faith to stand in the Power of God? for the Kingdom of God stood not in Word, but in Power. And had not all the Prophets a Divine Judgment to Judge in Divine Matters? as see Jeremiah, when he Judged the Pro∣phets. And Ezekiel Judged all such, as came with a pretence of the Word of the Lord, using their Tongues, and saying, Thus saith the Lord; when the Lord never spoke unto them: as in Je∣remiah the 23th, and in Ezekiel the 13th, and in many other places might be Instanced. And did not he judge Hananiah, who prophesied falsly? and did not this Hananiah pretend to speak the Word of the Lord to the Priests and People? as in Je∣remiah the 28th. And did not Isaiah judge in Divine Matters, when he judg∣ed the Watchmen, and the Shepherds? Isa. 56. And did not Mi∣cah judge in Divine and Spiritual Matters, when he said, he was full of the Power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of Judgment? did not he Judge both of Priests, and Prophets, and Judges, though they would lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us, and no evil can come unto us; yet did not he let them see their States and Conditions, and divided the precious from the vile? Mich. 3. And so the rest of the Prophets, you may see here, they Judged for God in his Divine Matters, who served him, and who served him not, and who lived in truth, and who not; and likewise the Apostles. And this Divine, Spiritual, Heavenly Judgment was given of God to his holy Men, and Wo∣men. And they that do Judge in God's Divine Matters, must live in his Divine Spirit, and Power, and Light now, as they did then; which Spiritual and Divine Judgment Christ has given to his Church, that be the living Stones, and living Members, that makes up his spiritual Houshold, to try Jews, and to try Apostles, and to try Prophets, and to try Faith, and to try Re∣ligions, and to try Trees and Fruits, and to try Shepherds and Teachers, and to try Spirits. So the living Members have a living and divine Judgment in the Church of Christ, which he is the Head of, the Judge of all. Nay, the Church has a Power given them, which is farther then a Judgment: for what they bind on Earth, is bound in Hea∣ven by the Power of God; and what they loose on Earth, is loosed in Heaven by the Power of God: and this Power has Christ given to his living Members, the Church. The 20th of the 12th Month, 1685/6. G. F. to Friends.
1686. London.I came back to London in the First Month 1686. and set my self with all diligence to look after Friends sufferings; which we had now some hopes of getting Relief for. The Sessions came on in the Second Month at Hicks's-Hall, where many Friends had Appeals to be Tried; with whom I was from Day to Day to advise and see, that no Opportunity were slipt, nor Advantage lost: and they generally succeeded well. Soon after also the King was pleased, upon our often laying our Sufferings before him, To give order for the Releasing of all Prisoners, that were imprisoned for Conscience sake; and which were in his power to discharge. Whereby the Prison doors were opened, and many hundreds of Friends, some of whom had been long in Prison, were set at Liberty; and some of them, who had for many years been re∣strained in Bonds,Yearly Meeting. came now up to the Yearly-Meeting, which was in the Third Month this Year: Which caused great Joy to Friends, to see our Ancient, Faithful Brethren again at Liberty in the Lord's Work, after their long Confinements. And indeed, a precious Meeting we had; the refreshing Presence of the Lord appearing plentifully with us and amongst us. After the Meeting I was moved to write a few Lines, to be sent abroad a∣mongst Friends; the tenor whereof was thus: Dear Friends, MY Love is to you all in the holy Seed, Christ Jesus, that bruises the Serpent's head, and destroys the Devil and his Works; and who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth gi∣ven to him. Let every ones Faith stand in him, and in his Pow∣er, who is the Author and Finisher of your Faith. And now ye, who have been Partakers of his Power, and are sensible of it in this Day of his Power, that is over all, whose day and pow∣er is over darkness and its power: And by his Power the hearts of the King and Rulers have been opened; by which your out∣ward Prison-doors have been set open for your Liberty. And therefore my desires are, that all may be preserved in Humility and Thankfulness, in the sense of the Mercies of the Lord; and live in the peaceable Truth, that is over all: that ye may an∣swer God's Grace, and his Light and Spirit in all, in a righteous, godly Life and Conversation. And let none be lifted up by their outward Liberty, nor let none be cast down by Suffer∣ing for Christ's sake: but all live in the Seed (which is as Wheat) which is not shaken, nor blown away by the Winds and Storms, as the Chaff is. Which Seed of Life none below can make high∣er or lower: for the Children of the Seed are the Children of the everlasting, unchangeable Kingdom of Christ and God. So in Christ Jesus, whom God hath given you for a Sanctuary, God Almighty keep you, in whom ye have Life Everlasting, and Wisdom, which is from above, pure, peaceable, gentle, and
easie to be intreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits;1686. London. Yearly Meeting. that ye all now may be exercised in it, and may practise this Wisdom in your godly, holy Lives and Conversations: so that this Wisdom may be justified of all her Children, and they (I say) exerci∣sed and preserved in it in this day of the Power of Christ; in which all his People are made a willing People, to serve and worship God in Righteousness and Holiness, and in the Spirit and Truth. So that none may abuse the Power of the Lord, nor grieve his Spirit, by which you are sealed, and kept to the day of Sal∣vation and Redemption: But always exercise your selves to have a good Conscience, void of Offence towards God, and towards all men; being exercised in Holiness, Godliness and Righteousness, and in the Truth, and in the Love of it: that ye may all study to be approved unto God in Innocency, Vertue, Simplicity and Faith∣fulness; and so labouring and studying to be quiet in the Will of God in all Conditions. And whatsoever ye do in Word or Deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus; giving Thanks to God the Father by him: That he, who is over all, may have the Praise for all his Mercies and Blessings, with which he doth and hath refreshed his People, and by his Eternal Arm and Power hath kept and preserved his People to this day; Glory to his Name over all for ever, Amen! For Christ hath called you by his Grace into One Body, to him the holy Head: And therefore live in Charity, and in the Love of God, which is the Bond of Per∣fectness in his Body; which Love edifies the Body of Christ: which Body and all his Members are knit together, and increa∣sed with the Increase of God, from whom they receive Nourish∣ment. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, and have been made all to drink into one Spirit; in which Spirit the Body, and all his Members have Fellowship with Christ, the Head, and one with another. And so the Ʋnity of this holy Spirit is the Bond of Peace of all the living Members of Christ Jesus, of which he is the Spiritual Head, Rock and Foundation. And in the midst of his Church of living Members Christ exer∣cises his Spiritual Prophetical Office, to open to them the Myste∣ries of his Kingdom: And is a Spiritual Bishop to oversee them, that they do not go astray from the living God, that made them: and a Shepherd, that feeds them with Bread and Water of Life from Heaven, and none is able to pluck his Sheep out of his hands: and he is a Priest, that died for them, and san∣ctifieth them, and presents them to God; who ruleth in their Hearts by the Divine Faith, which he is the Author and Fi∣nisher of. And his living Members do praise God through Je∣sus Christ, in whom they have Life and Salvation; who recon∣ciles them to God, that they can say, they have Peace with God through Jesus Christ: and so praise God through him that was dead, and is alive again, and reigns over all, and liveth for evermore, blessed for ever; Hallelujah, Amen!
Greet one another with an holy Kiss of Charity: and this Kiss of Charity is above all the Kisses of the World; for Love and Charity beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, and endures all things. It envieth not, and Charity vaunteth not it self, nor is puffed up, nor doth it behave it self un∣seemly: It rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth. And Charity is not easily provoked, and thinks no Evil; but suffereth long, and is kind: And Charity never faileth. I say, Greet one another with this holy Kiss of Charity; and Peace be with you all, that are in Christ Jesus, your Life and Salva∣tion. The 30th of the 3d Month, 1686. G. F. I remained for the most part of this Year in London; save that sometimes I got out to Bednal-Green for a Night or two,Bednal-Green. Enfield. Chiswick. and some times went as far as Enfield and thereabouts, amongst Friends, and once or twice to Chiswick, where an Ancient Friend had set up a School for the Educating of Friends Children: in all which places I found Service for the Lord.London. And when I was at Lon∣don, I spent my time amongst Friends, either in Publick Meet∣ings (as the Lord drew me,) or visiting Friends, that were not well, and in looking after the Sufferings of Friends. For though very many Friends were released out of Prisons, yet some re∣mained Prisoners still for Tithes, &c. and Sufferings of several sorts lay heavy yet on Friends in many places. Yet inasmuch as ma∣ny Friends, that had been Prisoners, were now set at Liberty, I felt a Concern upon me, that none might look too much at Man; but might Eye the Lord therein, from whom deliverance comes. Wherefore I writ an Epistle to Friends, and sent it abroad to be read amongst them, as followeth: Friends, THE Lord by his Eternal Power hath opened the heart of the King to open the Prison-doors, by which about Fif∣teen or Sixteen hundred are set at Liberty; and hath given a Check to the Informers: so that in many places our Meetings are pretty quiet. So my desires are, that both Liberty and Suffer∣ings, all may be sanctified to his People; and Friends may prize the Mercies of the Lord in all things, and to him be thankful, who stilleth the Raging Waves of the Seas, and allayeth the Storms and Tempests, and maketh a Calm. And therefore it is good to trust in the Lord, and cast your Care upon him, who careth for you. For when ye were in your Gaols and Prisons, Then the Lord did by his Eternal Arm and Power uphold you, and sanctified them to you (and unto some he made them as a Sanctuary;) and tried his People, as in a Furnace of Affliction, both in Prisons, and spoiling of Goods. And in all this the Lord was with his People, and taught them to know, that The Earth
is the Lord's, and the Fulness thereof;1686. London. and that he was in all places: who crowneth the year with his goodness, Psal. 65. There¦fore let all God's People be diligent, and careful to keep the Camp of God holy, pure and clean, and to serve God and Christ, and one another in the glorious, peaceable Gospel of Life and Salvation; which Glory shines over God's Camp, and his great Prophet, and Bishop, and Shepherd is among or in the midst of them, exercising his heavenly Offices in them: so that you his People may Rejoice in Christ Jesus, through whom you have Peace with God. For he that destroyeth the Devil and his Work, and bruises the Serpent's Head, is all God's Peoples heavenly Foundation and Rock to build upon; which was the holy Pro∣phets and Apostles Rock in days past, and is now a Rock of our Ages: which Rock and Foundation of God standeth sure. And upon this the Lord God establish all his People, Amen. London the 25th of the 7th Month, 1686. G. F. Divers other Epistles and Papers, relating to Friends and Truth I writ this Year; whereof one was by way of Exhortation to Friends to keep in Ʋnity in the Truth, in which there is no Divisi∣on nor Separation: And thus it was; DEar Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom ye have all Peace and Life, and in him there is no Division, nor Schism, nor Rent, nor Strife, nor Separation: for Christ is not divided, and there can be no Separation in the Truth, nor in the Light, Grace, Faith and Holy Ghost; but Unity and Fellowship, and Communion. For the Devil was the first, that went out of the Truth, and separated from it; and tempted Man and Woman to disobey God, and to go from the Truth into a false Liberty, to do that which God forbad. And so, it is the Serpent now, that leads Men and Women in∣to a false Liberty, even the God of the World, from which Man and Woman must be separated by the Truth; that Christ the Truth may make them free, and then they are free indeed. And then they are to stand fast in that Liberty, in which Christ hath made them free; and in him (as I said before) there is no Division, nor Schism, nor Rent, nor Separation; but Peace, and Life, and Reconciliation to God, and to one another. So that in Christ, Male and Female are all one: for whether they be Male or Female, Jew or Gentile, Bond or Free, they are all one in Christ. And there can be no Schism, Rent or Division in him; nor in the Worship of God in his holy Spirit and Truth; nor in the pure and undefiled Religion, that keeps from the Spots of the World; nor in the Love of God, that beareth and endu∣reth all things; nor in the Word of God's Grace, for it is pure, and endureth for ever. Many, you see, have lost the Word of Patience, and the Word of Wisdom, that is pure, and peace∣able, and gentle, and easie to be intreated: Then they run into
the Wisdom that is below, that is earthly, sensual and devilish, and very uneasie to be intreated. And they go from the Love of God, that beareth all things, and endureth all things, and thinks no Evil, and doth not behave it self unseemly; then they cannot bear, but grow brittle, and are easily provoked, and run into unseemly things, and are in that, that vaunteth it self, and are puffed up, and are rash, heady, high-minded and fierce; and become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal: but this is contrary to the nature of the Love of God, which is kind, and endureth all things, and beareth all things. And therefore, all Dear Friends and Brethren, dwell in the Love of God; for they who dwell in Love, dwell in God, and God in them. And keep in the Word of Wisdom, that is gentle, pure and peace∣able; and in the Word of Patience, that endureth and beareth all things: which Word of Patience the Devil, and the World, and all his Instruments can never wear out; It will wear them all out: for it was, before they were; and will be, when they are gone, the pure, holy Word of God, by which all God's Children are born again, and feed on the Milk thereof, and live and grow by it. And so, my desires are, that ye may all be of one Heart, Mind, Soul and Spirit in Christ Jesus, A∣men. G. F. Soon after this, finding those Apostates, whom the Enemy had drawn out into Division and Separation from Friends, continued their Clamour and Opposition against Friends Meetings, both Monthly, Quarterly and Yearly; it came upon me to write another short Epistle to Friends, to put them in mind of the Evidence and Seal they had received in themselves by the Spirit of the Lord, that those Meetings were of the Lord, and accepted by him; that so they might not be shaken by the Adversaries. Wherefore I writ as followeth: My Dear Friends in the Lord Jesus Christ! ALL you, that be gathered in his holy Name, ye know, that all your Meetings for Worship of God, and all your Quarterly-Meetings, and all your Monthly-Meetings, and all your Womens-Meetings, and all your Yearly-Meetings are set up by the Power and Spirit of the Lord God, and witnessed by his Spirit and Power in your Hearts; and by the Spirit and Power of the Lord God they are established to you, and in the Power and Spirit of the Lord God you are established in them. And the Lord God hath with his Spirit sealed to you, that your Meet∣ings are of God's Ordering and Gathering; and he hath owned them, by honouring you with his blessed Presence in them: and you have had great Experience of his furnishing you with his Wisdom, Life and Power, and heavenly Riches from his Treasure and Fountain; by which many Thanks and
Praises have been returned in your Meetings to his holy, glori∣ous Name. And so, he hath sealed your Meetings by his Spi∣rit to you, and that your Gathering together hath been by the Lord, and to Christ his Son, and in his Name, and not by Man. And so the Lord hath the Glory and Praise of them and in them, who hath upheld you and them, by the Arm of his Power, against all the Opposers and Backsliders, and their slan∣derous Books and Tongues. For the Lord's Power and Seed doth reign over them all, in which lie doth preserve his Sons and Daughters to his Glory, by his Eternal Arm and Power, in his Work and Service, as a willing People in the Day of his Pow∣er, without being weary or fainting; but strong in the Lord, and valiant for his glorious Name and precious Truth, and his pure Religion: that ye may serve the Lord in Christ Jesus, your Rock and Foundation, in your Age and Generation, A∣men. London, the 3d of the 11th Month, 1686/7. G. F. A little after the fore-going was given forth, it came upon me to write something concerning the state of the true Church, and of the true Members thereof; which I did, as followeth: Concerning the Church of Christ being clothed with the Sun, and having the Moon under her feet. THey are living Members and living Stones, which are built up a spiritual Houshold, and are the Children of the Pro∣mise, and of the Seed and Flesh of Christ; and as the Apostle saith, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone. They are the good Seed, and are the Children of the Everlasting Kingdom written in Heaven; and have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and they sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and so are clothed with the Sun of Righteousness, Christ Jesus, and have the Moon under their feet, as Revel. 12. So all change∣able things, that are in the World, and all changeable Reli∣gions, and changeable Worships, and changeable Ways, and Fellowships, and Churches, and Teachers in the World, are as the Moon: For the Moon changes, but the Sun doth not change. And so the Sun of Righteousness never changeth, nor sets, or goes down: But all the Ways, Religions, and Worships, and Fellowships of the World, and the Teachers thereof change, like the Moon. But the true Church, which Christ is the Head of, which is in God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which Church is called The Pillar and Ground of Truth, whose Conver∣sation is in Heaven; this Church is clothed with the Sun, Christ Jesus, her Head, who doth not change, and hath all changeable things under her feet. These are the living Mem∣bers, born again of the Immortal Seed, by the Word of God,
and feed upon the Immortal Milk, and live and grow by it. And such are the New Creatures in Christ Jesus, who makes all things new, and sees the old things pass away. And his Church, and all his Members, which are clothed with the Sun, their Worship is in the Spirit, and in the Truth, which doth not change: which Truth the Devil, the foul, unclean Spirit, is out of, and cannot get into this Worship in Spirit and Truth. And likewise the Church of Christ, their Religion is pure and undefiled before God, that keeps from the Spots of the World, &c. and their Way is the new and living Way, Christ Jesus. So the Church of Christ, that is clothed with the Sun, that hath the Moon and all changeable Religions and Ways under her feet, hath an unchangeable Worship, Religion and Way, and hath an unchangeable Rock and Foundation, Christ Jesus, and an unchangeable High-Priest: and so are Children of the New Testament, and in the Everlasting Covenant of Light and Life. And now all, that profess the Scriptures both of the New and Old Testament, and are not in Christ Jesus, the Apostle tells them, they are Reprobates, if Christ be not in them. And there∣fore these, that be not in Christ, cannot be clothed with Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, that never changes. And they that be not of Christ, be under the changeable Moon, in the World, in the changeable things, in the changeable Religions and Ways, and Worships and Teachers, and Rocks and Foundations. But Christ, the Son of God, and Sun of Righteousness, doth not change; in whom his People are gathered, and sit together in the heavenly places in him: And so are clothed with Christ Jesus, the Sun, who is the Mountain, that filleth the whole Earth with his Divine Power and Light. And so all his People see him, and feel him both by Sea and Land; so he is in all places of the Earth felt and seen of all his. And Christ Jesus saith to the outward Professors, the Jews, I am from above, ye are from below, or beneath; ye are of this World, to wit, that is beneath. And so their Religions, Worships, Ways, Teachers, Faiths, Beliefs and Creeds are made of Men, and are below, and of this World, that changeth like the Moon; and ye may see their Religions, Ways, Worships and Teachers, they are all change∣able, like the Moon: but Christ, the Sun, with which the Church is clothed, doth not change, nor his Church; for they are spi∣ritually minded, and their Way, Worship and Religion is spi∣ritual, from Christ, who is from above, and not of this World. For Christ hath redeemed you from the World, and their change∣able Rudiments and Elements, and old things, and their change∣able Teachers, and from their changeable Faiths and Beliefs. For Christ is the Author and Finisher of his Churches Faith, who is from above, and saith; Believe in the Light, that ye may become Children of the Light: And it is given them not only to believe, but to suffer for his Name. So this Faith and Belief is above all Faiths and Beliefs, which change, like the Moon. And God's People are an holy Nation, a peculiar People, a spi∣ritual Houshold, and Royal Priesthood, offering up spiritual Sacri∣fice
to God, by Jesus Christ; and are zealous of righteous, god∣ly, good works: and their Zeal is for that which is of God, against the Evil, which is not of God. And Christ took upon him the Seed of Abraham; he doth not say, the corrupt Seed of the Gentiles: So according to the Flesh, he was of the holy Seed of Abraham and of David; and his holy Body and Blood was an Offering, and a Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World, as a Lamb without blemish, whose Flesh saw no Cor∣ruption. And so by the one Offering of himself in the New Testament and New Covenant, he has put an end to all the Of∣ferings and Sacrifices amongst the Jews in the Old Testament. And Christ, the holy Seed, was crucified, dead and buried, ac∣cording to the Flesh, and raised again the third day; and his Flesh saw no Corruption. Though he was crucified in the Flesh, yet quickned again by the Spirit, and is alive, and liveth for evermore; and hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, and reigneth over all: and is the One Mediator betwixt God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus. And Christ said, He gave his flesh for the life of the World: And the Apostle saith; His Flesh saw no Corruption: So that which saw no Cor∣ruption, he gave for the life of the corrupt World, to bring them out of Corruption. And Christ said again, He that eateth my Flesh, and drinketh my Blood, hath eternal life: for my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. And he that eat∣eth my Flesh, and drinketh my Blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him. And he that eats not his Flesh, and drinks not his Blood, which is the life of the Flesh, hath not Eternal Life. Now, as the A∣postle saith, All died in Adam: Then all are dead. Now all coming spiritually to eat the Flesh of Christ, the second Adam, and drink his Blood; his Blood and Flesh gives all the Dead in Adam life, and quickens them out of their sins and trespasses, in which they were dead: and so they come to sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and so are living Members of the Church of Christ, that he is the Head of; and are clo∣thed with the Sun, the Sun of Righteousness, the Son of God, that never changes, and have the changeable Moon under their feet, and all changeable, worldly things and inventions, and works of mens hands; and do see the People, how that they do change from one Worship to another, and from one Religion to ano∣ther, and from one Way to another, and one Church to ano∣ther, and yet their hearts are not changed. And the Letter of Scripture is read by the Christians, like the Jews; but the My∣stery is hid: They have the Sheeps-clothing, the outside, but are inwardly ravened from the Spirit, which should bring them into the Lamb's and Sheep's Nature. The Scripture saith, All the Ʋncircumcised must go down into the Pit: And therefore all must be Circumcised with the Spirit of God, which puts off the Body of Death, and Sins of the Flesh, that came into Man and Wo∣man by their Disobedience, and transgressing of God's Com∣mands. I say, all must be Circumcised with the Spirit, which puts off the Body of Death and Sins of the Flesh; before they
come up into Christ, their Rest, that never fell, and be clothed with him, the Sun of Righteousness. G. F. Kingston.Towards the latter End of this Year I went down to Kingston to visit Friends there; and stay'd some time at my Son Rouse's near Kingston. While I Was there, I writ a Paper concerning the Falling away foretold by the Apostle Paul, 2 Thess. 2.3. Which Paper was, as followeth: THE Apostle saith, that there must be a Falling away first, before the Wicked one, and Man of sin, the Son of Perditi∣on be Revealed, which betrayeth Christ within, as the Son of Perdition betrayed Christ without: And they, that betray Christ within, crucifie to themselves Christ afresh, and put him to open shame. Before the Apostles deceased, this Man of Sin and Son of Perdition was revealed: for they saw the Antichrist come, and false Prophets, and false Apostles, and Deceivers come, ha∣ving a Form of Godliness, but denied the Power thereof. They saw the Wolves dressed in the Sheep's Clothing, and such as went in Cain's, Corah's and Balaam's way, and Jezabel's; and the Whore of Babylon, the Whore of Confusion, the Mother of Harlots, and such as were Enemies to the Cross of Christ, that served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies. These Christ saw, should come, and said, If it were possible, they should deceive the Elect; and commanded his Followers not to go after them: And the Apostle said, Turn away from such; and Christ and his Apostles warned the Church of Christ of such. And now in this day of Christ, and his Gospel, after the long Night of Apostacy from the Light, and Grace, and Truth, and Life and Spirit of Christ Jesus, the Son of Perdition, the wicked One, the Man of Sin is revealed again; and the inwardly ravening Wolves in Sheeps clothing, and the Spirit of Cain, Corah, Balaam, Jeza∣bel, the Antichrists, false Prophets, and false Apostles, and such as are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, who serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own Bellies; and crucifie Christ to themselves, and put him to open shame. This Spirit have we seen in this Gospel-day of Christ: but Christ will consume them with the Spirit of his Mouth, and destroy them with the Brightness of his Coming. But God's People, whom he hath chosen unto Sal∣vation in Christ from the beginning, through the Sanctifica∣tion of the Spirit, and the belief of the Truth, stand stedfast in Christ Jesus; and are thankful to God, by and through his Son, their Rock and Salvation, who is their Happiness, and eternal Inheritance. The Apostle saith, Ye were as Sheep going astray; but are now returned to the Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls. So, when Peo∣ple are returned to Christ, their Shepherd, they do know his Voice, and follow him; and are returned to the Bishop of their
Souls: and then they do believe in him,1686. Kingston. and receive Wisdom and Ʋnderstanding from him; who is from above, heavenly and spiritual. Then they do Act like spiritual and holy Men and Women; and come to be Members of the Church of Christ: and then a spiritual Care cometh upon the Elders in Christ, that all the Members do walk in Christ, and in his Light, Grace, Spirit and Truth, that they may adorn their Confession and Profession of Christ; and see, that all do walk in the Order of the holy Spirit, and the everlasting Gospel of Peace, Life and Salvation. And this Order keeps out of Confusion: for the Go∣spel of Peace, the Power of God was, before Confusion was. And all the Heirs of the Gospel are Heirs of its Order, and are in this Gospel, which brings Life and Immortality to Light in them; by which all Men and Women may see their Work and Services in it, to look after the Poor, Widows and Fatherless, and to see, that nothing be lacking: and that all do honour the Lord in their Lives and Conversations. When the whole House of Israel were in their Graves and Sepulchres, and were called, The scattered, dry Bones, yet they could speak, and say; Their Bones were dry, their Hope was lost, (or they were without Hope) and they were cut off: so that they were Alive outwardly, and could speak outwardly. So, that which is called Christendom, may very well be called, The scat∣tered dry Bones, and they be said to be in their Graves and Se∣pulchres, dead from the heavenly Breath of Life, and from the Spirit and Word of Life, that gathereth to God: Though they can speak, and are Alive outwardly; yet they remain in the Congregations or Churches of the Dead, that want the vertue of Life. For the Jews, whom God poured his Spirit upon, and gave them his Law; when they rebelled against the Spirit of God, and turned from God and his Law, then they came to be dry, scattered Bones, and were turned into their Graves and Se∣pulchres. And so Christendom, that is turned from the Grace, and Truth, and Light of Christ, and the Spirit, that God poureth upon all flesh, they are become the scattered, dry Bones, and are in their Graves and Sepulchres; and are the Congregations or Churches of the Dead, though they can speak, and are Alive outwardly. Christ saith, I am come, that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly: And he gave his flsh for the life of the World. And he saith, I am the Resurrection and the Life; and, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life: No man com∣eth unto the Father, but by me. And Christ is the quickening Spirit: All being dead in Adam, they are to be quickened and made alive by Christ, the second Adam. And when they are quickned and made alive by him, then they do Meet together in the Name of Jesus Christ their Saviour, who died for their Sins, and is risen for their Justification; and so was dead, and is alive again, and liveth for evermore. And all, whom he hath quickened and made alive (even all the living) do Meet in the Name of Jesus, who is alive, and he, their living Prophet, Shepherd and Bishop, is in the midst of them; and is their living Rock and
Foundation, and a living Mediator between them, and the living God. And so the Living do praise the living God through Je∣sus Christ, through whom they have Peace with God. And so all the Living have Rest in Christ, their Life; and he is their Sanctification, and their Righteousness, and their Treasure of Wisdom, Knowledge and Ʋnderstanding, which is spiritual and heavenly. And he is the spiritual Tree and Root, which all the Believers in the Light (the Life in Christ) that do pass from the death in Adam to the Life in Christ, and overcome the World, and are born of God, are grafted into; even Christ, the heavenly Tree, which beareth all the spiritual Branches or Grafts. So these do Meet in his Name, and are gathered in him; and do sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, their Life, who hath quickened and made them alive. And so all the Living do worship the living God in his holy Spirit and Truth, in which they Live and Walk. And into this Worship the foul, unclean Spirit, the Devil, cannot get; for the holy Spirit and Truth is over him, and he is out of it: This is the standing Worship, which Christ set up in his New Covenant. And they that are quickened, and made alive by Christ, are the living Stones, and living Members, and spiritual Houshold and Church, or Congregation of Christ; who is the living Head and Husband. And they that are quickened, and made alive by Christ, are a living Church, and have a living Head; and are come from the Congregations or Churches of the Dead in Adam, where Death and Destruction talks of God, and of his Pro∣phets and Apostles, in their Wisdom, that is below, and earth∣ly and devilish, and in the knowledge, that is bruitish, and in the understanding, that comes to naught. For what they know, is natural, by their natural Tongues, and Arts, and Sciences; in which they corrupt themselves. This is the state of the Dead in Adam: But the Quickened, and they that are made a∣live by Christ, do discern between the Living and the Dead. Kingston upon Thames, the 12th Month, 1686/7. G. F. While I was at Kingston, I writ also another Paper, shewing; That the Lord in all Ages called the Righteous out from amongst the Wicked, before he destroyed them. Which Paper here fol∣lows: NOah and his Family were called into the Ark, before the Old World was destroyed with the Flood of Water: And all the Faithful Generation, that lived before, were taken away, and died in the Faith, before that Flood of Destruction came up∣on the wicked Old World. The Lord did call Lot out of Sodom, before he did destroy and consume it, and the Wicked there.
Christ said; It cannot be, that a Prophet perish out of Jerusa∣lem: and he said; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Pro¦phets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathereth her Brood under her Wings! but ye would not, Luke 13.33, 34. And Christ said unto the Jews; Therefore also said the Wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets and Apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute; that the blood of all the Prophets, which was shed from the Foundation of the World, may be required of this Gene∣ration; from the blood of Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the Altar and the Temple. Verily, I say unto you, it shall be required of this Generation, Luke 11.49, 50 51. And Christ said to the Jews; Behold, your Houses shall be left unto you desolate, Matth. 23.34, &c. And Christ told his Disciples, that the Temple at Jerusalem should be thrown down, and there should not be one stone left upon another, that should not be thrown down, Matth. 24.2. And Christ said to his Disciples, that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many thngs of the Jews, Elders and Chief Priests, and be killed; and be raised again the third day, Matth. 16.21. And Christ said, When ye shall see Je∣rusalem compassed with Armies, then know, the desolation thereof is nigh. And he foretold, that the Jews should fall by the Edge of the Sword, and should be led away Captive into all Na∣tions; and Jerusalem should be trodden down of the Gentiles, Luke 21.20, 24. Here ye may see, how Jerusalem was often warn∣ed by Christ, and how often he would have Gathered them, but they would not, before they were scattered over or into all Nati∣ons, and their Houses left desolate, and their Temple and Jeru∣salem besieged with Armies, and destroyed, and thrown down. And though the Disciples and Apostles of Christ did Meet, with the Elders and Church, at Jerusalem, after Christ was risen; yet Eusebius reporteth in his Ecclesiastical History, That the Christians at Jerusalem had a Vision, or a Revelation to depart out of Jeru∣salem. And they being fore-warned also by Christ, that When they should see Jerusalem compassed with Armies, its Desolation was nigh; and that the Temple should be thrown down, and not one stone left upon another; 'Tis said, that the Christians did depart out of bloody Jerusalem, before it and the Temple were destroy∣ed by Titus, the Emperour, who besieged it with his Armies: who was of the Gentiles, and destroyed the Temple and Jerusa∣lem, as Christ had fore-spoken to his Disciples, because of the Wickedness of the Jews, and the Innocent Blood, that they had shed in it. And so the Lord called his People out of bloody Jerusalem, before he destroyed it. And it is said, that Titus did destroy the Temple and Jerusalem about Two and forty years, after they had Cucified Christ, and he was risen again; and that with so great a destruction, that the Jews never did build again the City Jerusalem, nor the Temple (as Sodom was never built again, nor the Cities of the Old World:) But the Jews for above these Thousand years have been, and are a scattered People in all Nations to this day; and Christ (whom they Cruci∣fied)
and his Doctrine is preached, and set over them: and the Gentiles, whom they hated, have Received, and do Receive him and his Doctrine, and do praise God for it through Jsus Christ, Amen. And God called his People out of Egypt, after he had poured out his Ten Plagues upon the Egyptians; when he had destroyed the First Birth of Egypt, then the Lord brought his People out of Egypt. And after the Lord had clearly brought his People out of Egypt, then the Lord destroyed Pharaoh, and all his Hosts and Chariots. And John saith, that he heard a Voice, saying; Come out of her my People (to wit, out of Babylon, the false Church) that ye be not Partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues: for her sins have reached to Heaven, and God hath re∣membred her Iniquities, Rev. 18.4, 5. Here ye may see, that God did call his People out of spiritual Babylon, before the Lord destroyed her, and cast her down, to be utterly burnt with fire, ver. 8, 9. and 21. Was not Nebuchadnezzar's Empire thrown down and ended by Cyrus and Darius, who were of the Seed of the Medes, be∣fore Cyrus and Darius gave forth their Proclamations for all the Jews to go into their own Land, out of Babylons Captivity? And was there not a Prophecy of Cyrus, That he should subdue Nations, and that the Lord would loose the Loins of Kings before him, and break in pieces the Gates of Brass, and cut in sunder the Barrs of Iron, and open the two-leav'd Gates; and that the Gates should not be shut? And the Lord said; This is for Jacob, my Servant's sake, and for Israel mine Elect, Isai. 45. And was not this fulfilled in Cyrus's and Darius's time? For did not then the Jews go out of Captivity into their own Land, Ezra 1.2, 3, 4. and ch. 6.1. and 12. and Isa. 44.28. and 45.13. And was not this Prophecy of Isaiah fulfilled, when the Children of Israel came out of Babylon? And were not the Assyrians, that carried away the Ten Tribes, subdued? and the Babylonians, that carried away the Two Tribes, were they not subdued in the days of Cyrus and Darius, in whose days the Loins of Kings were loosed, and the two-leav'd Gates of Brass and Iron were opened? and so had not Israel and Jacob their Liberty by them in their days, to go into their own Land? And here in England, was it not observed, that most of the honest and sober People were turned out of the Army, and their Commissions, Offices and Places taken from them, because they could not join with Others in their Cruelty and Persecuting? And Others laid down their Commissions themselves, and came out from amongst those Persecutors, before they were overthrown, and brought to Confusion. All that are Wise, see these things, and learn by such Examples and Way-marks, to shun such Bogs. And the Righteous are safe, that do keep in Christ, their everlasting San∣ctuary, that changes not; in whom they have Rest and Peace with God, Amen. Kingston the 29th of the 12th Month, 1686/7. G. F
While I was at Kingston, one day, as I was meditating on the Things of God, some particular Observations arose in my mind, concerning the first, and the second or last Adam. As that — THE First Man Adam was made on the Sixth day of the Week; and Christ, the Second Adam, was Crucified on the Sixth day of the Week. The first Adam was betrayed by the Serpent in the Garden of Eden: And Christ our Saviour, the second Adam, was betrayed by Judas in a Garden near Jerusalem. Christ arose from the dead on the First-day of the Week; and they that do believe on him, are entred into Christ, their Rest: The Christians do Meet together to worship God on the First-day of the Week; and on the First day of the Week it was, that God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light. The Jews Rest was on the Seventh-day of the Week, which was given to the Jews, as a Sign of the Eternal Rest of the Lord, sanctifying them, after they came out of the Land of Egypt: for before that time the Lord had not given to Man and Woman his out∣ward Sabbath-day to keep, neither in the Old World, nor after in Abraham's time, nor in Isaac's, nor in Jacob's time; until the Jews came out of Egypt to Mount Sina in the Wilderness. And then, there the Lord gave the Law, and his Sabbath, as a Sign in the Old Covenant, of Christ the Eternal Rest in the New Covenant: and they that believe, do enter into Christ, their Rest. Adam the first Man, is the Root, from whence we all spring naturally: And Christ is called the last, or second Adam, be∣cause he is the Beginning and Root of all them, that are spiri∣tual. The first Adam was made a living Soul: And Christ, the last Adam, was made a quickening Spirit. Christ by the Grace of God tasted death for every Man, that they might all come into Favour with God; and that every Tongue should Confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. I writ also a Paper there, Concerning the Two Seeds, distin∣guishing the Seed, wherein the Blessing is received, from the Seed which the Curse remains upon. Of that Paper the following is a Copy. THE Lord said to Abraham, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Gen. 22.18. And thy Seed shall be as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand, which is upon the Sea-shore, and as the Dust of the Earth, that cannot be numbred, Chap. 13.16. and 15.5. and 22.17. Now, in this Seed all Na∣tions and Families of the Earth are blessed; but not in the Seed of Evil Doers and of Falshood, nor in the Seed of the Adulterer and the Whore, Isa. 1.4. and 57.3, 4. for the Seed of the Wicked
shall be cut off,1687. Kingston. saith the Lord, Psal. 37.28. The Lord said to David, That his Seed should endure for ever, Psal. 89.36. And again it is said, Psal. 102.28. The Children of thy Servants shall continue, and their Seed shall be established before thee. Now ye may see, that here is a Distinction betwixt the Two Seeds: for the Seed of Evil Doers, and of the Adulterer and Whore, and of the Wicked shall be Cut off; and so it is not blessed. But Christ bruises the Head of the Serpent and his Seed, which he soweth in them, that do disobey and transgress God's Command, and rebel against God's good Spirit. This Wicked Seed of the Serpent is Curst, and is an Enemy to the Seed, in whom all are blessed: But Christ bruises the Head of this cursed Seed of En∣mity, and destroys the Devil and his Works; and in his Seed are all blessed, and all are in Unity in this Seed. And all the Children of the Seed are the Children of the Kingdom of God, and of Christ, and are blessed with faithful Abraham: and who are of the saving, divine, precious Faith, are of Abraham, and walk in the Steps of the Seed and Faith of Abraham, and are blessed with him, yea, all Nations, and all the Families of the Earth. And the Lord said to Abraham, Thy Seed shall be a stranger in a Land, that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them Four hundred years: and that Nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge; and afterwards shall they (to wit, God's Seed) come out with great Substance, Gen. 15.13, 14. Here ye may see, That which Afflicts God's Seed, he will judge, and did judge; for he did destroy the First-birth of Pharaoh, and overthrew him and his Host. And an holy Man said; Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a Seed or Remnant, we had been as Sodom, &c. that is, destroy∣ed and burnt. But in the Seed, which destroys the Devil and his Works, and bruises the Head of the Serpent and his Seed, are all Nations and Families of the Earth blessed. Christ, according to the flesh, was of Abraham, and of Da∣vid: for he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham; in which Seed all Nations and Families of the Earth are blessed. And so they, that are of his Seed, are of the Generation of Christ; and so are Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone.—Now, all Nations and Families of the Earth must be in this holy Seed, if they have the Blessings, and are blessed. And out of the Mouth of this Seed's Seed shall not God's Word de∣part; but shall Remain and abide in the Mouth of this Seed's Seed, in which they are blessed, Isa. 59.21. So it is not the First-birth's talking of the Words of Christ, the Seed, in whose Mouth the Word of God doth not abide, that makes an outward Profession, like the Jews, that did kill and persecute the Prophets, and crucified Christ the Seed and Substance of the Law and Prophets, which the Jews professed in words, but they denied Christ, the Seed and Life. And all the Christians (so called) that do profess the Scri∣ptures in Words, and are not in the Seed Christ, they are in the Con∣fusion, and are like the Jews: And so, neither Jews nor Christians are blessed, except they be in Christ, the Seed of Life.
But though Christ is said to be of the Seed of David, and of Abraham, as his Generation is declared by Matthew and Luke; yet Christ was not born of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. For he was Conceived by the Holy Ghost; and not by the Will of Man, but by the Will of God, born of the Virgin, and supposed to be the Son of Joseph, but was the Son of God: and his Name was called Jesus, because he should save his People from their sins; and Emanuel, God with us. And Christ took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham (as I said before) and so was made of the Seed of David according to the Flesh; and declared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the Re∣surrection from the dead, Rom. 1.4. So the Generation of Christ is a Mystery. And Christ saw his Seed or Word to grow up in his Disciples; And Christ in you, the hope of Glory, the Apostle calls The Mystery, which hath been hid from Ages and Genera∣tions; but now is made manifest to the Saints, or sanctified Ones, Col. 1.26, 27. Whom we preach; warning every Man, and teach∣ing every Man in all Wisdom, that we may present every Man per∣fect in Christ Jesus, v. 28. For in Christ, the second Adam, all are made perfect and compleat; and in Adam in the Fall, all are deformed and made imperfect: So out of Christ all Mankind are Imperfect and Deformed: Let them paint, and dress them∣selves with the Sheep's Clothing, and with the Form of Godliness, of the Prophets, and Christ's and his Apostles Words never so much; yet if Christ be not in them, they are Uncompleat, Im∣perfect, Deformed, Reprobates. But the Apostle tells the Church of Christ, Ye are compleat in Christ, which is the Head of all Prin∣cipality and Power, Col. 2.10. (for he hath all Power in Hea∣ven and Earth given to him, Matth. 28.18.) And so all the Saints are made Perfect and Compleat in Christ Jesus; blessed be the Lord God over all for ever, through Jesus Christ, Amen, A∣men. Kingston, the 15th of the 1st Month, 1686/7. G. F. Quickly after this I returned to London,London. and continued there a Month in the Service of the Lord; being daily exercised either in publick Meetings, or more particular Services relating to the Church of Christ: as visiting such as were sick or afflicted, and writing Books or Papers for the spreading of Truth, or refuting of Error. Now as it was a time of general Liberty, the Papists appeared more open in their Worship, than they were formerly wont to do; and many unsettled People going to view them at it, a great Talk there was of their Praying to Saints, and by Beads, &c. Whereupon I writ a short Paper concerning Prayer; which was as followeth:
CHrist Jesus,1687. London. when he taught his Disciples to pray, said un∣to them, When ye do pray, say; Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, &c. Christ doth not say, that they should pray to Mary, the Mother of Christ; nor doth he say, that they should pray to Angels, or to Saints, that were dead. Christ did not teach them to pray to the Dead, nor for the Dead. Neither did Christ or his Apostles teach the Belie∣vers to pray by Beads, nor to sing by Outward Organs: but the Apostle said; he would Sing and Pray in the Spirit: for the Spirit it self maketh Intercession; and the Lord, that searcheth the heart, knoweth the mind of the spirit. To take Counsel of the Dead, was forbidden by the Law of God; but they were to take Counsel of the Lord: And he hath given Christ in the New Covenant, in his Gospel-Day, to be a Counsellor and a Leader to all his Believers in his Light. And Men are not to run to the Dead for the Living: for the Law and Testimony of God forbids it. Those Jews, that refused the running Waters of Shiloh, the Floods and Waters of the Assyrians and Babylonians came over them, and carried them into Captivity: And they that refuse the Waters of Christ, they are overflown with the Flood of the World, that lieth in Wick∣edness. They that asked Counsel of Stocks and Stones, their state was in the Spirit of Error and Whoredom; and they were gone a whoring from God, Hos. 4.12. And they, that joined themselves to Baal-Peor, and ate the Sacrifices of the Dead, provoked the Lord's Anger, and brought the Lord's Displeasure upon them, Psal. 106.28, 29. So here ye may see, The Sacrifices of the Dead were forbidden. The Living know that they shall die; but the Dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a Reward: for the Memory of them is forgotten, Eccles. 9.5. Wo to the re∣bellious Children, saith the Lord, that take Counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a Covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin, Isa. 30.1. G. F. When I had stay'd about a Month in London, I got out of Town again: For by reason of the many Hardships I had under∣gone in Imprisonments, and other Sufferings for Truth's sake, my Body was grown so Infirm and Weak, that I could not bear the Closeness of the City long together; but was fain to go a lit∣tle into the Country, where I might have the benefit of the fresh Air. At this time I went with my Son-in-Law William Mead, to his Country-House called Gooses in Essex (about thirteen miles from London;Essex. Gooses.) where I stay'd about Two Weeks: and a∣mong other Services, that I had there, I writ the following Paper; being—
A Distinction between the True Offering and Sacrifice,1687. Gooses. and the False, in the Old and New Covenant. THE Lord saith, He that sacrificeth to any God, save unto the Lord only, he shall be utterly destroyed, Exod. 22.20. So no God is to minded, nor sacrificed to, but the Lord God: It is death to Sacrifice to any other God, save the Lord. The Lord saith also, Thou shalt not offer the blood of my Sacrifice with leavened Bread, Exod. 23.18. So that sour, heavy Leaven must not be offered with the Lord's Sacrifice. And again the Lord saith; Thou shalt not build an Altar of hewen stone: for if thou lift up thy Tool upon it, thou hast polluted it, Exod. 20.25. There∣fore have a care of polluting the Altar with your own Tools, you that profess to offer the Spiritual Sacrifice. Jonah said; He would sacrifice unto the Lord with the voice of Thanksgiving, when he was in the Fish's belly; and there he pray∣ed unto the Lord, Jonah 2. For Jonah in the Whale's belly had no Lambs, nor Rams, nor outward Sacrifices to offer. The Lord forbids his People to Sacrifice with Harlots, Hosea 4.14. And the Lord forbids his People to offer Sacrifice of the Blind, Lame, Sick, or that which was deformed, or had any blemish; as in Mal. 1. and many other places. So they that offer Spiritual Sacrifice, must not offer the blind, lame, blemished or deformed Sacrifice to God. The Scribe saith unto Christ, To love God with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his Neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, Mark 12.33. And when Je∣sus saw, that he answered discreetly, he said unto him; Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God, v. 34. Now ye may see, to Love God, and their Neighbour as themselves, was more than their whole Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices in the time of the Law: And therefore all Offerings and Sacrifices in the time of the Gospel, if there be not love to God, and to their Neighbour as themselves, avails nothing. David said, Let them sacrifice a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and declare his Works with rejoycing, Psal. 107.22. These are the Sacrifices that the Lord requires of his People, more than Out∣ward Sacrifices. And David said, Let my Prayer be set forth be∣fore thee, as Incense; and the lifting up of mine Hands, as the E∣vening Sacrifice, Psal. 141.2. So here David looks upon his Prayer to the Lord, and the lifting up of his Hands to him, to be accepted with the Lord, as much as the Outward Incense, and the Outward Evening Sacrifice. Again David says, The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise, Psal. 51.17. (See also Isa. 57.15. and chap. 66.2.) These be the Sacrifices that David said God would accept, and not despise; which are beyond the un∣broken
Spirit, and uncontrite heart, with Outward Offerings and Sacrifices. The Adversaries of the Jews would have joined with them towards the building of the Temple, saying unto them; Let us build with you, for we seek your God, as ye do; and we do sacri∣fice unto him. But the Jews refused them, and said; You have nothing to do with us, to build an House unto our God, Ezra 4.2, 3. So here ye may see, that God's People refused their build∣ing with them, and their sacrifice. And Solomon saith, The Sa∣crifice of the Wicked is an Abomination to the Lord, Prov. 15.8. (See also Isa. 1.11. and chap. 66.3.) Solomon also saith, Bet∣ter is a dry Morsel, and quietness therewith, than an house full of Sacrifices with strife, Prov. 17.1. Now let all People Consider, what Good your house full of Sacrifices doth with strife, when a dry Morsel, and Quietness therewith is better? And Consi∣der all People, If ye live in Wickedness, your Sacrifice is an A∣bomination to the Lord. Again, Solomon speaking of the Sacrifice of Fools, saith; They consider not, that they do evil, Eccles. 5.1. Fools are such, as do not walk in the Spirit of God, or begin in the Spirit, and end in the Flesh, like the foolish Galatians: for the Spirit of God is the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, and cannot Join with the Sacrifices of the Dead, nor of the Fools, nor of the Wicked, whose Sacrifice is Abominable; who grieve and quench the Spirit of God: by which Spirit of God the Spiritual and Righteous offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. The Apostle Paul saith, he was the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministring the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Rom. 15.16. So ye may see, that all the acceptable Offerings and Sacrifices to God must be sanctified by the Holy Ghost. The same Apostle saith to the Corinthians; Ye are bought with a price: therefore glorifie God in your Body, and in your Spi∣rit, which are God's, 1 Cor. 6.20. And to the Romans he saith; I beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that you present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service, Rom. 12.1. Now this is the duty of all true Christians. Peter also saith in his general Epistle to the Church of Christ; Ye also as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priest-hood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. So every Man and Woman must come to the Spirit of God in their own hearts, if they do offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. For as Christ saith, Every Sacrifice shall be salted with salt, Mark 9.49. And in the Old Testament ye may see, All their outward Offerings, they were to season them with salt, Levit. 2.13. a Type and Figure of Christ, who gave himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet-smelling savour, Ephes. 5.2. Therefore all his People must be baptized
with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, that they may be salted with Fire, and every Sacrifice salted with salt, with the Spi∣rit of Grace, that is poured upon all: so that they may offer up this spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Samuel said to King Saul; Hath the Lord as great delight in Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? behold, to obey is better than Sacrifice; and to hearken, than the fat of Rams, 1 Sam. 15.22. So ye may see, All Offerings and Sa∣crifices are nothing, if there be not an hearkening to the Lord in his Spirit, and an obeying of his voice. And Christ told the Jews, that were outward Sacrificers, that he would have Mercy, and not Sacrifice: and bid them Go and learn, what that meaneth, Matth. 9.13. Gooses, the 28th of the 2d Month, 1687. G. F. The beginning of the Third Month I returned to London,London. Yearly-Meeting, and continued there, till after the Yearly-Meeting, which began on the sixteenth of the same, and was very large; Friends having more freedom to come up out of the Countries to it, by reason of the general Toleration and Liberty now granted. The Meeting lasted several days; and at the Close thereof it was upon me to write the following Lines, to be dispersed amongst Friends every where, as — A Word of Counsel and Caution to them to walk circumspectly in this time of Liberty. Dear Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, THE Lord by his Eternal Arm and Power having supported you in all your Sufferings, and great spoiling of Goods, and tedious Imprisonments, only for serving and worshipping the living God, that made you; who gave up Wife and Children, and Goods, and suffered the spoil of them, and Imprisonment for his Truth and Name's sake; And now the Lord, by his Infinite Power and Mercy, having been pleased to open the King's heart towards you, by which you are set at Liberty from the Gaols, and the Spoilers of your Goods are stopt, whereby ye may fol∣low your Callings and Husbandry, and confess Christ Jesus, and call him Lord by the Holy Ghost, in your Assemblies and Meet∣ings, without being cast into Gaols, or having your Goods spoil∣ed. And now, Dear Brethren, a great Concern lies upon me from the Lord to Write unto you, That none may abuse this Li∣berty, nor the Mercies of the Lord, but prize them: for there is great danger in time of Liberty, of getting up, and getting in∣to Ease, and Looseness, and false Liberty. And now seeing, that ye have not the outward Persecutors to War withal in sufferings; with the spiritual Weapons keep down that, which would not be subject to Christ: that he, the Holy One, may reign in your hearts. So that your Lives, Conversations and Words may
preach Righteousness and Truth:1687. London. Yearly-Meeting. That ye may all shew forth good Ensamples of true Believers in Christ, in Vertue and Holi∣ness, Answering that which may be known of God in all People, that ye are the Sons and Daughters of God; Standing fast in that righteous, holy Liberty in Christ, that just and holy One, that has made you free, over the loose or false; shunning the occasions of vain Disputes, and foolish Questions of Men of cor∣rupt Minds: For the Serpent was the first Questioner of Eve, who drew her and Adam out of the Truth. Therefore as ye have received Christ, all Live and Walk in him, who bruises the Serpent's Head, who is your safe Sanctuary; in whom ye have Election, Reconciliation and Peace with God. And therefore live in the Peace, which ye have from Christ, which is not of this World; and be at peace one with another, and seek the peace of all Men in Christ Jesus: for blessed are the Peace-makers. And labour to exercise a good Conscience towards God, in obedience to him, in what he requires; and in doing to all Men the thing, that is just and honest in your Conversations and Words; giving no Offence to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God. So that ye may be as a City set on God's Sion-Hill, which cannot be hid; and may be Lights to the dark World, that they may see your good Fruits and Works Righteous and Holy, and glo∣rifie your Father, which is in Heaven: for he is glorified in your bringing forth good Fruits, as ye abide in Christ, the Vine, in this his day of Life, Power and Light, thas shines over all. And therefore all you, that believe in the Light, walk in the Light, as Children of the Light and of Christ's everlasting Day; that in the Light ye may have Fellowship with the Father and the Son, and one with another: keeping in the Unity of his holy Spirit, in the Bond of his holy Peace, in his Church, that he is Head of. And my desire is, that God's Wisdom every where may be justified of her Children, and that it may be shewed forth in Meekness, and in the Fear of the Lord in this his Day, Amen. G. F. By that time the Yearly-Meeting was over, I was very much wearied and spent: wherefore about a Week after the Meeting I got out of Town to a Friend's House a little beyond Edmunton,Edmun∣ton South-street. Winch∣more-hill. Berry-street. where, and at Southstreet I abode some time, and had Meetings amongst Friends there; and at Winchmore-hill and Berry-street. And having my mind continually exercised in the Things of God, the sense of his Infinite Goodness and Mercy to Mankind, in visi∣ting them, after they had transgressed and rebelled against him, and providing a Way and Means for their Return to him again, was very much upon me; And in the Opening of the Spirit of Truth I writ the following Paper on that Subject:
GOD, who made all Men and Women,1687. Berry-street. though they have transgressed his Commands and Laws, and rebelled against him, and hated his Light, and grieved his Spirit, and walked despitefully against his Spirit of Grace; yet God, who is merciful, would have all to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth. And all that come to the Knowledge of the Truth, must know it in their inward parts; I say, the Grace and Truth, which comes by Jesus, all that do know and find, do know and find it in their hearts and inward parts. And such do find the hidden Man of the heart, and the Pearl, and the Lea∣ven, and the lost piece of Silver, and the Kingdom of Heaven within. For until all come to the Light and Truth in their hearts, they have been strangers to these things, in Adam in the Fall, from the Image of God, and his Light, Power and Spirit, and Kingdom. But Christ, that never fell, brings Man and Woman again, that follow him, to know these things, and to know the Truth, him the Saviour, and brings them into his I∣mage, and his everlasting Kingdom. The Devil, who is out of the Truth, tempted Man and Wo∣man to disobey God; and so drew them into the Fall from the Truth. So it is the Devil, that hath stopped Mens Eyes, and Ears and Hearts from the Truth, who is called The God of the World; who hath blinded the Eyes of Infidels, or Heathen. But Christ, who bruises the Serpent's Head, and destroys the Devil and his Works, doth open Men's Hearts, and Eyes and Ears, who is their Saviour and Redeemer, and giveth Life E∣ternal to his People, that obey him and his Truth. Blessed be the Lord for ever through Jesus Christ, who hath tasted death for all Men, to bring them out of the death of Adam; and is a Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, and gave himself a Ransome for all, to be testified of in due time. For as by Adam's transgression and disobedience, Death and Condemnation came upon all Men; so by Christ's Obedience unto Death, Ju∣stification of Life is come upon all Men: and He that believeth in Christ, hath eternal life; but he that doth not, is condemned al∣ready. But God would have all Men to be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, who is their Saviour; and in him there is no Condemnation. G. F. After I had been a while here, I went to a Monthly-Meeting at Enfield, and from thence with some Friends to Hartford;Enfield. Hartford. where I stay'd three or four days, visiting Friends both at their Publick Meetings on the First-day of the Week, and at their Quar∣terly-Meetings both of Men and Women: and good Service for the Lord I had amongst them. Then passing from thence to Waltham-Abby, I had a very good Meeting with Friends there;Waltham-Abbey. and the next day went from thence to another place, to compose a Difference, which, for want of a right Understanding of each other, had happened between some Friends. I returned to
Waltham that night;1687. Waltham. Essex. Gooses. Wanstead. Barking. Gooses. and the next day went with some Friends to Gooses, which is William Mead's House in Essex. Here I stay'd some Weeks, yet was not Idle, but often visited the Meetings thereabouts: as at Wanstead, Barking, and at John Hardings. And betwixt Meeting and Meeting I writ many things for spreading of Truth, and for the opening Peoples Understand∣ings to receive it. One was a Paper, proving from the Scriptures, that People must Repent, before they can receive the Gospel, and the holy Spirit, and the Kingdom of God, or be baptized. And this was it. JOhn the Baptist came Preaching in the Wilderness of Judea, saying; Repent ye: for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Matth. 3.2. And when John the Baptist was cast into Pri∣son, Mark says; That Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and saying, The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand: Repent ye, and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.14, 15. Matthew also says; From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Matth. 4.17. And when Christ sent forth his Twelve Dis∣ciples, two and two, they went out, and preached, that Men should Repent, Mark 6.12. Christ said to the Jews, Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13.3, 5. And when the Publicans and Sinners came to hear Christ, and the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying, This Man receiveth sinners, and eat∣eth with them, Luke 15.1, 2. Christ reproved them by a Pa∣rable, and then told them; Joy shall be in Heaven over one sin∣ner, that Repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which need no Repentance, ver. 7. And adds, There is Joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner, that Repenteth, ver. 10. And Christ, after he was Risen, said unto his Disci∣ples, That Repentance and Remission of sins should be preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24.47. Peter said unto the Jews, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of sins; and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.38. And Paul said, The times of this Ignorance God winked at; but now com∣mandeth all Men every where to Repent, Acts 17.30. Simon Ma∣gus was called to Repentance, if he had regarded it, Acts 8.22. And the Apostle Paul did preach at Damascus, and at Jerusa∣lem, and throughout all the Coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles (turning them from Darkness to the Light of Christ, and from the Power of Satan to God) that they should Repent and turn to God, and do works meet for Repentance, Acts 26.20. Now here ye may see, that People must Repent, before they do believe, and are baptized, and before they receive the Holy Ghost, and the Kingdom of God; And they must Repent of their vain Life and Conversation, before they do receive the Gospel; and must be turned from Darkness to the Light of Christ, and from the power of Satan unto God, before they do receive his Holy Spirit, and his Gospel of Life and Salvation. The Lord doth command all Men every where to Repent, and do works meet
for Repentance: So they must shew forth,1687. Gooses. that their Lives and Conversations, and Tongues are changed; and that they do serve God in the Newness of Life, with new Tongues and new Hearts. Gooses the 6th Month, 1687. G. F. Another short Paper I writ about the same time, shewing, Wherein God's People should be like unto him. It was thus: GOD is Righteous: and he would have his People to be righteous, and to do righteously. And God is Holy: and he would have his People holy, and to do holily. And God is Just: and he would have his People to be just, and to do just∣ly to all. God is Light: and his Children must walk in his Light. And God is an eternal, infinite Spirit: and his Children must walk in the Spirit. God is Merciful: and he would have his People to be Merciful. God's Sun shines upon the Good and the Bad, and he causes the Rain to fall upon the Evil and the Good: so should his People do good unto all. God is Love: and they that dwell in love, dwell in God. Love worketh no Ill to his Neighbour: therefore Love is the fulfilling of the Law, Rom. 13.10. And the Apostle saith, All the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shalt love thy Neigbour as thy self, Gal. 5.14. As the Father hath loved me, so I have loved you: continue ye in my love, John 15.9. This should be the practice of all God's People. Gooses the 6th Month, 1687. G. F. And because most People would own and Confess, that God's People should be thus; but few knew, how to come to this state: Therefore in the Openings of the Spirit of Truth I writ another short Paper, directing to The right Way and Means, whereby People might come unto Christ, and so be made like unto God. That was thus: CHrist saith, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; no Man cometh unto the Father, but by me, John 14.6. And again, No Man can come to me, except the Father, which hath sent me, draw him, John 6.44. Now, what is the Means, by which God doth draw People to his Son, but by his holy Spirit, who pour∣eth out of his Spirit upon all Flesh (that is, all Men and Women.) And by this holy Spirit the holy and righteous God doth draw People from their Unrighteousness and Unholiness to Christ, the righteous and holy One, the great Prophet in his New Covenant and New Testament, whom Moses in the Old Covenant and Testa∣ment said, God would raise up, like unto him, and whom Peo∣ple should hear in all things: and they that would not hear him,
should be Cut off. Now they, that do not hear the Son of God, the great Prophet, do not mind the drawing of the Father by his holy Spirit to his Son: But they, that do mind the drawings of the good Spirit of the Father to his Son, the Spirit doth give them Understanding to know God, and Jesus Christ, which is Eternal Life. And then they do know, that Jesus Christ is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and that none can come unto God, but by and through his Son Jesus Christ; who is their Shepherd to feed them at his Pastures and Springs of Life; and his Sheep do know his holy Voice, in whom there was no sin, and in whose mouth there was no guile; and an Hireling they will not hear, for he careth not for the Sheep: for they are not the Hireling's, but Christ's; who hath laid down his Life for his Sheep. And he that robs and steals his Neighbour's Words, and climeth up another way, and entereth not by the Door, he is a Thief and a Robber: But Christ is the Door into his Sheep∣fold, for his Sheep to enter in by. And so they know, that Christ is the Bishop of their Souls, to see, that they do not go astray from God, nor out of his Pastures of Life: And they do know, that Christ is their Mediator, and makes their Peace with God: And they do know, that Christ is their High-Priest, made higher than the Heavens, and hath died for their sins, and doth cleanse them with his Blood, and is risen for their Justification, and is able to the utmost to save all, that come to God by him. Gooses, the 6th Month, 1687. G. F. Before I left this place, I writ another Paper, the Scope where∣of was to shew, by many Instances taken out of the holy Scrip∣tures, That the Kingdom of God, which most People talk of at a distance, and refer altogether to another life, is in some measure to be known and entred into in this life; but that none can know an Entrance thereinto, but such, as are Regenerated and Born again. Of that Paper the following is a Copy: CHrist saith, Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is spirit, ver. 6. (So, Except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he can∣not enter into the Kingdom of God, ver. 5. And John, writing to the seven Churches in Asia, calls himself their Brother, and Companion in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Je∣sus Christ, Rev. 1.9. Here you may see, that John was in the Kingdom; so, he was born again: for he did not only see the Kingdom, but was in it. And John saith; Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God: there∣fore the World knoweth us not, because it knew him not, 1 John
3.1. And, Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, ver. 2. And, If ye know, that he is Righteous, ye know, that every one, that doth Righteousness, is born of him, Chap. 2.29. And, Who∣soever is born of God, doth not commit sin; for his Seed re∣maineth in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, Ch. 3.9. Again John saith, Let us love one another: for love is of God: and every one that loveth, is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is love, Ch. 4.7, 8. Again, Whosoever believeth, that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, Ch. 5.1. And, Whatsoever is born of God, over∣cometh the World: and this is the Victory, that overcometh the World, even our Faith, ver. 4. Were not these, that were Born of God, in the Kingdom of God? And seeing John says, Every one that doth Righteousness, is born of God; do not such see the Kingdom of God, that stands in Righteousness, and enter into it? Peter, in his first general Epistle to the Church of Christ, saith; As new-born Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. And he tells them, they were a Cho∣sen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar Peo∣ple, that they should shew forth the praises of him, who had called them out of darkness into his marvellous light, ver. 9. And that, as lively stones, they were built up a spiritual house, an holy Priest∣hood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, ver. 5. Did not these New-born Babes, these lively Stones, spiritual Houshold, Royal Priesthood, holy Nation and chosen Generation, who were called out of darkness into Christ's mar∣vellous light, see, and enter into his holy Kingdom, being Heirs of the same? who were Born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which liveth and abi∣deth for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. And had not such an Entrance ministred to them into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ? James, in his general Epistle to the Church of Christ, saith; Hath not God chosen the poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he hath promised to them that love him? James 2.5. The Apostle Paul saith; God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, &c. to redeem them that were under the Law; that we might receive the Adoption of Sons: And because ye are Sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a Ser∣vant, but a Son; and if a Son, then an Heir of God through Christ, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6, 7. The same Apostle saith; As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God: And tells the Saints at Rome, Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit it self beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the Children of God: And if Children, then Heirs; Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with Christ: if so be we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together (namely with Christ) Rom. 8.14, 15, 16, 17. Now seeing, they are the (Sons of God, that are led by the Spirit of God, and the Spi∣rit beareth witness unto their Spirit, that they are the Children
of God, and Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with Christ: Are not all these Children of God Heirs of the righteous, glorious King∣dom of God? and do they not see it, and enter into it? The Lord saith in Hosea 1.10. Where it was said unto them, Ye are not my People; there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the Sons of the living God. Did not this relate to the Gospel-days of the New Covenant? see Rom. 9.26. And what the Lord said by the Prophet Jeremiah, Ch. 31.1. the Apostle applies to the Gospel-days, and says; Be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the Unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, saith the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. Are not these the Children, that see, and enter into the righteous Kingdom of God, that seperate from that which is Ʋnclean, and touch it not? The Lord saith also by Isaiah: I will say to the North, Give up; and to the South, Keep not back: Bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the ends of the Earth, Isa. 43 6. Then doth not he bring them to his Kingdom of Glory, that stands in Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost? And the Lord said to Job, When the Morning-stars sang to∣gether, and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy, Job 38.7. Where did these Sons of God shout for joy? Was it not in his Kingdom of Glory? Christ saith, The least in the Kingdom of God is greater than John, Luke 7.28. And in Chap. 16.16. he says, The Law and the Prophets were until John: since that time (viz. since the Law, and the Prophets, and John) the Kingdom of God is preached, and every Man presseth into it. The good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom, Matth. 13.38. And the righteous shall shine forth, as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father, ver. 43. And Christ said unto his Disciples; Ʋnto you it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, Mark 4.11. And Christ lifted up his Eyes upon his Disciples, and said; Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the Kingdom of God, Luke 6.20. And the Apostles preached the Kingdom of God. These were Born again: that saw and knew the Kingdom of God, preached it. Christ said to his Disciples; Fear not, little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure, to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. And, I appoint to you a Kingdom, said Christ, as my Father hath appointed to me, Chap. 22.29. The Lord said; He that over∣cometh, shall Inherit all things: and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son, Rev. 21.7. And John saith; I have written unto you, Young men, because ye are strong, and the Word of God abi∣deth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked One, 1 John 2.14. And Christ, by whom are all things, is said To bring many Sons to Glory, Hebr. 2.10. Christ said, Wo unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men; for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them, that are entring, to goin, Matth. 23.13. He also said, Wo unto you Lawyers; for ye
have taken away the Key of Knowledge: ye entred not in your selves; and them that were entring in, ye hindred, Luke 11.52. Christ gives unto his Children the Keys of the Kingdom, his Spirit: but the Scribes, and the Pharisees, and the Lawyers, great Professors, who were erred from the Spirit, like the great Professors in our Age, that scoff at the Spirit, and draw Peo∣ple from the Spirit of God within, these shut up the Kingdom from Men, and draw People from the Key of Knowledge, and the Key of the Kingdom. For no Man knows the things of God, but by the Spirit of God; for the Things of God are spiritually discerned. So the Spirit is the Key, by which the Kingdom of God, and the Things of God are revealed, and discerned, and known, according to 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 13, 14. The Apostle names some in his Epistle to the Colossians, and says; These are my Fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God, Col. 4.11. And he tells that Church, that God hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Chap. 1.13. So ye may see, these were born again, that were translated into the Kingdom of Christ; and were Fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God. Christ exhorts his Disciples to Love, and to do Good; that they might be the Children of their Father, which is in Hea∣ven, Matth. 5.45. And he bids them be perfect, even as their Father, which is in Heaven, is perfect, ver. 48. And the A∣postle saith to the Church at Philippi; That ye may be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without Rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation; amongst whom ye shine, as Lights in the World, holding forth the Word of Life, &c. Phil. 2.15, 16. And writing to the Church of the Thessalonians, he puts them in mind, how he had exhorted them, That they would Walk worthy of God, who had called them into his Kingdom and Glory, 1 Thess. 2.12. The Lord had promised by the Prophet Joel, that he would Pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh, and that Sons and Daughters should Prophesie; Old men should dream Dreams, and Young-men see Visi∣ons, Joel 2.28. Now the Cause, that Sons and Daughters, Hand-maids, Servants, Young-men and Old men have not these heavenly Visions, Dreams and Prophecies, is, because they are Er∣red from the Spirit of God, which he poureth upon them: but as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. John saith, Christ was the True Light, which lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World, John 1.9. And that, As ma∣ny as received him, to them gave he power, to become the Sons of God, ver. 12. which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, ver. 13. Now, the Reason, why People do not become the Sons of God, is, because they do not receive Christ. The Jews, the great Professors, which had the Promises, Prophecies, Figures and Shadows of him, they would not receive him, when he came. And now the Priests, and high Professors of Christ, they are so far from re∣ceiving
the Light of Christ, and believing in it, that they have hated the Light, and scoff at it, calling it a Natural Conscience; and some have called it Jack in the Lanthorn. Such are not like to become the Sons of God, nor to see the glorious King∣dom of Christ, which stands in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. For the Light, that shines in the heart, gives the Light of the Knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus. And they that do not receive Christ Jesus, but hate his Light (which is the Life in him) and yet profess him in words; such neither know the Children of the Light, nor true Fellowship in the Light, nor the Kingdom of God, that stands in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: but by the Light they are condemned. And this is the Condemnati∣on, that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness ra∣ther than Light, because their deeds are evil. For every one that doth evil, hateth the Light, neither cometh to the Light, lest his deeds should be reproved, John 3.19, 20. But the Children of the Light, that walk in the Light, they come to heavenly Je∣rusalem, and to the City of the living God, and to the innu∣merable Company of Angels, and to the general Assembly, and Church of the First born, that are written in Heaven; and can sing Hallelujah! Gooses, the 2d of the 7th Month, 1687. G. F Having now been somewhat more than a quarter of a Year in the Country,London I returned to London, somewhat better in health, than formerly; having received much benefit by the Country-Air. And it being now a time of General Liberty, and great Openness amongst the People, I had much Service for the Lord in the City; being almost daily at Publick Meetings, and frequently taken up in Visiting Friends, that were sick, and in other Ser∣vices of the Church. I continued at London about Three Months: and then finding my strength much spent, with continual labour∣ing in the Work of the Lord, and my Body much stopped for want of fresh Air,Kingston. I went down to my Son Rouse's by Kingston; where I abode some time, and visited Friends at Kingston. While I was there, it came upon me to write a Paper concern∣ing the Jews, shewing; How by their Disobedience and Rebellion they lost the holy City and Land. By which Example the prosest Christians may see, what they are to Expect, if they continue to disobey, and provoke the Lord. Of that Paper the Copy here follow∣eth: THE Lord gave the Jews in the Old Testament the Land of Canaan, and they built the Temple at Jerusalem to worship in; and it was called The Holy Temple, and Jerusalem was cal∣led The Holy City, and Canaan, The Holy Land. But when the Jews rebelled against the good Spirit, which God gave them to
instruct them, and rebelled against his Law,1687. Kingston. and set up Idols and Images, and defiled the Land and the City; the Lord sent his Prophets to Cry against them, and to bring them back again to his Spirit, and to his Law, and so to God, to serve and worship him, that they might not worship Images and Idols, the works of their own hands. But instead of hearkening to God's Pro∣phets, they persecuted them; and at last killed his Son Christ Jesus, and persecuted his Apostles. But Christ told the Jews, that both their City and Temple should be laid Waste, and they should be scattered over all Nations: And it was so, when Ti∣tus the Roman Emperour came, and took Jerusalem, and destroy∣ed the City and Temple; which was a Day of Vengeance upon the Jews, for all their Idolatries, and their Wickedness, and for the Innocent blood they had shed, both in City and Country: And they were driven out of their own City and Land, and scatter∣ed over all Nations. And the Jews had never power to get the and since, nor to build Jerusalem, nor the Temple: But the Turk hath both the Land of Canaan, and that which is called, The City Jerusalem. Now, the Turk neither makes Ima∣ges, nor Worships Images: And so it is a just Hand of the Lord, that he should be over the persecuting, Idolatrous Jews, so that they cannot defile the Land of Canaan now with Images and Idols, for the Turk hath it; who neither makes Images, nor Idols, nor worships them. And the Jews must never hope, be∣lieve nor expect, that ever they shall go again into the Land of Canaan, to set up an outward Worship at Jerusalem, and there for their Priests to offer outward Sacrifices of Rams, Sheep and Heifers, &c. for Burnt-Offerings: for Christ, the one Offering, hath offered himself once for all; and by this one Offering he hath perfected for ever, them that are sanctified. And Christ hath changed the Priesthood of Aaron, that offered Sacrifices, which was made after the power of a Carnal Commandment; but Christ was made after the power of an endless Life, a Priest for ever, who was holy and harmless, and separate from Sinners; and is a Priest made higher than the Heavens. This is the Priest, that gives power to all that receive him, to become the Sons and Daughters of God: And Jerusalem, that is above, is the Mo∣ther of all the Sons and Daughters of God; which is free: but Jerusalem that is below, is in bondage with her Children. And they that are the Children of Jerusalem, that is above, do not look down at Jerusalem, that is below; but they look at Jerusa∣lem that is above, which is their Mother. Christ said, Nei∣ther at Outward Jerusalem, nor in the Mountain of Samaria should God be worshipped; but God should be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: for he is a Spirit, and such he seeks to worship him, John 4. This is the Worship, that Christ set up above Sixteen hun∣dred years ago: And therefore the Idolatrous Jews must never think to Offer their outward Offerings and Sacrifices, nor set up their outward Worship at Jerusalem, in the holy Land of Canaan more. For Christ, by the Offering up of himself once for all for the Sins of the whole World, hath ended all the Jews Of∣ferings;
and changed the Priesthood, and the Law, by which it was made: and hath blotted out the Hand-writing of Ordinan∣ces, which commanded both Priests and Offerings, and tri∣umphed over them. And so he is the Offering and Sacrifice of all the Children of the New Testament, and New Covenant, and heavenly new Jerusalem, that is above; and he is their Pro∣phet, that openeth to them; and Shepherd, that feeds them; and Bishop, that oversees them; and Priest, that died for their Sins, and is risen for their Justification, and sanctifies them, and presents them to God. So he is the one Mediator betwixt God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus. Kingston, the 9th of the 10th Month, 1687. G. F. Guilford.After this I went from Kingston to Guilford, to visit Friends there, and stay'd three days with them; and had a large and very good Meeting there on the First-day of the Week. After which I came back to Kingston again,Kingston. and tarried there about Two Weeks longer, visiting the Friends, and having Meetings a∣mongst them, both at their Publick Meeting-house, and in their Families. Many things I writ, while I was now at Kingston; amongst which the following Paper was one: GOD so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him, shall not perish (mark, not perish) but have everlasting life, John 3.16. And again he saith; He that believeth on the Son of God, hath (mark, hath) everlasting Life, ver. 36. So these Believers have Everlasting Life, while they are upon the Earth. And, he that believeth on Christ, is not condemned: but he that believeth not, is condemned already, and the wrath of God abideth on him. And, He that heareth Christ's word, and believeth on God that sent him, hath (mark hath) everlasting life, and shall not come into Condemna∣tion; but is passed from death (the death in the first Adam) to life (the life in Christ, the second Adam) John 5.24. And that Meat, which Christ doth give, endureth unto Everlasting Life, as in John 6.27. And the Water, that Christ doth give, shall be in him that drinks it, a Well of water springing up in∣to everlasting life, John 4.14. Christ said to the Jews, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they, which testifie of me: And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life, John 5.39, 40. Here ye may see, the Eternal Life is to be found in Christ, and not in the Scriptures, which testifie of him, the Life. Christ's Sheep, that hear his Voice, and know and follow him, he gives unto them Eternal Life; and they shall not perish, neither shall any pluck them out of his hand. They shall not pluck Christ's Sheep, to whom he hath given Eternal life, out of his Eternal hand. Christ said to Martha, I am the Resurrection, and the Life: he that believeth in
me, though he were dead (mark, though he were dead) yet shall he live; (mark, live, though he were dead) and whosoever liveth, and believeth in me, shall never die. Believest thou this? Mar∣tha said, Yea, Lord, John 25.26. This is the true and substan∣tial Belief, which they that do believe, shall not perish, but have Everlasting life. John saith, This is the Record, That God hath given to us Eternal Life; and this Life is in his Son, 1 John 5.11. The Life was manifested, and we (saith he) have seen it, and bear witness, and shew unto you that Eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us, 1 John 1.2. So these were the Believers, that had Eternal Life in the Son of God, and shewed it unto others. He that hath the Son, hath life (saith John) and he that hath not the Son of God, hath not life, 1 John 5.12. Christ saith, Every one that hath forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my Names sake, shall receive an hun∣dred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life, Matth. 19.29. And the Wicked, that do not receive Christ, shall go into everlast∣ing punishment: but the Righteous into everlasting life. And the true Servants of God have their fruits unto holiness, and their End is everlasting life. For the Wages of Sin is death: but the Gift of God is everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And such have a Building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Therefore I desire, that God's People may endure all things, that they may obtain this Salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, with Eternal Glory, a Glory, which is Eternal: For Christ being made perfect, became the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them, that obey him. And this E∣ternal Salvation is above an External Salvation: for they come to receive an Eternal Inheritance, and live in the possession of the everlasting Gospel of Joy, Comfort, Peace and Salvation; having eternal and everlasting life in Christ Jesus, which shall never die. Kingston, the 6th of the 11th Month, 1687. G. F. Another Paper I writ there, Concerning the Stone spoken of by Daniel, Chap. 2. which became a great Mountain, and filled the whole Earth; shewing, that thereby was set forth the King∣dom and Power of Christ. WHen Christ, the Stone, that became a great Mountain, and filled the whole Earth, had broke to pieces the Head of Gold, and the Breast of Silver, and the Belly of Brass, and the Legs of Iron, and the Feet part Iron part Clay (which were the four Monarchies, to wit, the Babylonian and Mede, the Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman) and had ended the out∣ward
Jews Typical Kingdom; Daniel saith, In the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall ne∣ver be destroyed, Dan. 2.44. Christ saith; All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, Matth. 28.18. And he saith, My Kingdom is not of this World, John 18.36. And Christ is the Image of the Invisible God, the First-born of every Creature. For by him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible, and invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: all things were created by him, and for him; and he is before all things, and by him all things consist, Col. 1.15, 16, 17. Here ye may see, All things Con∣sist by Jesus Christ, and all things were Created by Christ, and for him, whether they be things in Heaven, or things in Earth, visible or invisible, they were Created by him and for him; yea, Thrones, Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, these were all created by him and for him. So Christ is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16. And the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Chap. 1.5. And out of his Mouth goes a sharp Sword, with which he shall smite the Nations; and he shall rule them with a Rod of Iron: As the Vessel of a Potter shall they be dashed in pieces, who do not obey him, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords. This is Christ, by whom all things were made, who doth rule the Na∣tions, who saith; I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the First and the Last: So he is over all Nations, and above them all. Now we must understand, this Rod of Iron, by which Christ, who is the First and Last, doth rule the Na∣tions, is a Figurative Speech of Christ, who is Ascended into Heaven, and is at the right hand of God; yet all Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto him, and All things were cre∣ated by him and for him: So then, they are Christ's, and he hath power over all things; for all are his. So, as the Scrip∣ture saith, By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice, Prov. 8.15. But if they abuse his Power, and do not do Justice, as is decreed by Christ, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the First and the Last; they must feel and know the weight of his Rod of Iron, by which he will rule such, as abuse his Power, and do not do Justice (that is decreed by him) who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, and rules in the Kingdoms of Men. Kingston, the 11th Month, 1687. G. F. Several other things I writ, while I was now at Kingston: for my Spirit being continually exercised towards God, I had many pre∣cious Openings of Divine Matters; and divers places of Scripture, both in the Old Testament and in the New, relating to a state of Regeneration, and Sanctification, &c. were brought to my remem∣brance by the holy Spirit: some of which I committed to writing, and were as followeth:
THey that Touched the dead, were unclean, and were to be cleansed by the Water of Purification, Numb. 19. And they which touch the dead Doctrines or Faiths, and let them in, burden the pure, and defile and make themselves unclean; until the Spring of the Water of the Word do arise, and wash and cleanse them: for all the Dead in Adam in the Fall are Ʋn∣clean, and they must be washed by Christ, in his Blood and Water of Life, who quickeneth, and makes alive. A Dwarf might not come near, to Offer upon God's Altar; but he might eat ot the holy Bread, that he might grow: Levit. 21.20. &c. So the New-born Babes may eat of the Milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby and increase. And he that had any Blemish, might not come near to Offer upon God's Altar: neither might any thing be Offered upon God's Altar; that had any Blemish, or was Ʋnclean, Lev. 21. And it is said, The Ʋngodly shall not stand in the Judgment, nor Sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous, Psal. 1.5. But God standeth in the Congregation of the Mighty, Psal. 82.1. The Camp of God was to be kept Clean and Holy: All that, which was unclean, or defiled, was to be kept out of God's Camp in the Old Testament. And in the New Testament, all that is defiled and unclean, must be kept out of God's Kingdom; the new and heavenly Jerusalem, that is from above. All was to pass through the Fire (even of those things, that would bear the Fire) and to be purified by Fire and Water, before the People might come into God's Camp, Numb. 31. So all must be Circumcised, and Baptised with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, and be cleansed with the Blood of Christ, and washed with the Water of the Word, before they come into the Kingdom of God, and into heavenly Jerusalem. The Apostle Paul saith, We know, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our House, which is from Heaven, that mortality might be swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 4. Here is [WE in the Earthly House of this Taber∣nacle;] which [We] are they, that have received Christ, and are become the Sons of God, and New Creatures, and Children of the Light, that do believe in Christ's Light: who have an E∣ternal House in the Heavens, where Mortality is swallowed up of Life; in which House from Heaven they will not groan. And Peter said; I think it meet, as long as I am in this Taber∣nacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance, knowing, that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shewed me, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14. So Peter knew, he must put off this Tabernacle shortly; but as long as he was in it, he did stir up the Saints to their duty in holiness, that they might remember it, after he was deceased.
The Apostle Paul saith; The first Man is of the Earth, Earth∣ly, (mark, Earthly, 1 Cor. 15.47. And as we have born the I∣mage of the Earthy, we shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly, (mark, the Heavenly, ver. 49. And, We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, &c. 2 Cor. 4.7. And I live (said he) yet not I, but Christ liveth in me, Gal. 2.20. who is the Life of all God's People. And Christ said to the Jews; That the Dead are raised, even Moses shewed at the Bush, when he calleth the Lord, the God of A∣braham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: for he is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living; for all live unto him, Luke 20.37, 38. So, None of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself: For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord. Whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's. For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and li∣ving, Rom. 14.7, 8, 9. For all died in Adam: and Christ by the Grace of God tasted death for every Man, that they might come out of the death in Adam, to the Eternal life in Jesus Christ. Who is also a quickening Spirit: for as in Adam all died; even so in Christ shall all be made alive. So Christ, that Died and Rose again, is Lord both of the Living, and of the Dead: for the Living live to the Lord, and die in him, and are blessed. All Christendom say, that they do believe in God, and in Christ, and that they do believe Moses and the Prophets, and preach Christ, Moses, and the Prophets: So their Words and Writings are preached and printed; and ye say, ye do believe them. But now what Life do ye live? Are ye through the Law dead to the Law, that ye may live unto God? And are ye Crucified with Christ? and doth Christ live in you? And is the Life, that ye now live in the flesh, by the faith of the Son of God, and ye do not live, but Christ liveth in you, who gave himself for you? Is this your present Life? for the Just live by the faith which Christ is the Author and Finisher of: by which holy, divine and precious Faith they have Victory over that, which is vile and unholy, and is not divine; and in this Faith they do please God, and have Access to God and his Son, who fulfil∣leth the Law and the Prophets. For the Law and the Prophets were until John; and since that, the Kingdom of God hath been preached, and Men do press into it: And the Least in the King∣dom of God is Greater than John, though he was the greatest Prophet born of a Woman. So see, whether ye are in the Kingdom, that stands in Peace and Righteousness and Joy in the Holy Ghost, or not. Christ, who is the Image of the In∣visible God, the First-born of every Creature, was before any Creature; for by him were all things created, that are in Heaven and that are in the Earth, visible or invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him and for him, and he was before all things, and by him all things consist: And he is the Head of the Body, the Church, and is the beginning, the First-born from the dead.
So here ye may see, that all things were made by Christ Jesus, and all things were created for Christ Jesus, and by him all things consist and have their being; who is the First-born from the dead, and dieth no more. And it pleased the Father, that in him all Fulness should dwell; and by Christ to reconcile all things unto himself, whether they be things in Heaven, or things in the Earth. And in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; who is the Head of all Principality and Power: for all Power in Heaven and in Earth is given to him, the First-born of every Creature, and the First-born from the dead, who liveth for evermore in his power over all; the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World: and while the World's Spirit rules in mens hearts, they do not know Christ, nor the beginning nor ending of the Work of God. Christ was out∣wardly crucified and slain, without the Gates of Jerusalem, by the disobedient Jews: And they that hate the Light of Christ, and disobey his Gospel, and quench his Spirit, and are erred from his Faith, do crucifie to themselves Christ afresh. So Adam and Eve, and their Children, that disobeyed God, did slay the Lamb; and the blind Jews, that disobeyed God, crucified Christ Jesus: and the outward Christians, that live and walk not in Christ, but in Sin and Evil; though they do make an out∣ward Profession of Christ, yet they do Crucifie to themselves Christ afresh. But as to Christ himself, he is Ascended far above all Principalities, Thrones, Powers and Dominions; so that they cannot put him to death, or Crucifie him any more, as to him∣self: But what the Killers, and Crucifiers, and Persecutors do now upon the Earth, it is against Christ, as in themselves, and in his Members; as Christ said to Saul, Why Persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4. For what is done to his Members, Christ takes as done to himself, Matth. 25.40, and 45. And they, that did not visit Christ, but persecuted him in his Members, they perse∣cuted Christ in themselves first. The Serpent, that Enemy to Man and Woman, and Satan, that Adversary to Man's prosperity, and the Devil, the destroy∣er, the God of the World and Prince of the Air, that ruleth in the hearts of the Disobedient, he got in by disobedience. But Christ bruises his head, breaketh his power to pieces, and de∣stroys the Devil and his Works; and through death destroys death, and the Devil, the power of death. And so Christ, the Light and Life, hath all power in Heaven and Earth; and openeth the Prison-doors, and the Eyes of the blind, and takes Captive him, that hath led into Captivity, and gives Gifts unto Men. And so Christ bindeth the strong man of sin, and spoils his goods (for Christ is stronger than the Devil) and casts him out; Hallelu∣jah! For the strong man of sin is the God of the World, and his House is the whole World, that lieth in Wickedness: And the God of the World hath kept his house, and his goods have been in peace; until a stronger than he comes, and binds the Devil, and casts him out; and then destroys him and his goods. And so Christ, the Son of God, who is stronger than the Devil, ha∣ving
destroyed the Devil and his Works, setteth up his House? and all the Believers in the Light are the Children of Light, and are of the Son of God's spiritual House, and the Son of God is over his House for evermore: Glory to God in the Highest, through Jesus Christ, Amen. God spake by the mouth of all his holy Prophets concerning Christ Jesus, his Son, the holy One: so they were holy men, and not unholy, that God spake by. And therefore all, that name the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, are to depart from Iniquity. Kingston upon Thames, the 11th Month, 1687. G. F. I returned to London towards the latter end of the Eleventh Month 1687.Chiswick. Hammer∣smith. visiting Friends in the way at Chiswick, and at Ham∣mersmith, where I had Two Meetings, one upon a First-day, and the other upon the Occasion of a Marriage there; at which were many of the World's People, amongst whom I had a very seasonable Opportunity of opening the Way of Truth. London.Being come to London, I visited Friends Meetings in and about the City, as the Lord led me; in whose Service I continu∣ed labouring in the City, until the middle of the First Month 1687/8.Enfield. Barnet. Waltham-Abbey. At which time I went down towards Enfield, and visited Friends there, and thereabouts; and at Barnet, and Waltham-Ab∣bey, and other places; where I had many Meetings, and very good Service amongst Friends: in which I spent several Weeks. And then returned to London:London. Yearly-Meeting. where I continued labouring in the work of the Gospel of our Lord, until after the Yearly-Meeting was over; which this Year was about the beginning of the Fourth Month. A precious Meeting it was, and a very refreshing Season Friends had together; the Lord vouchsafing to honour our Assemblies with his living and glorious Presence, in a very plentiful manner. At the Conclusion of the Meeting I felt a Concern upon my Spirit, to give forth the following Paper, to be dispersed abroad amongst Friends. ALL you Believers in the Light, that are become Children of the Light, walk as Children of the Light, and of the Day of Christ, and as a City set on a Hill, that cannot be hid; and so let your Light shine, that People may see your good Works, and glorifie your Father, which is in Heaven. For a good Tree bringeth forth good Fruit: and therefore be ye Trees of Righte∣ousness, the planting of the Lord, having Fruits unto Holiness; and then your End will be Everlasting life. And such are the Wells and Cisterns, that hold the living Water of life. which springs up in them to Eternal life: so ye may all drink Water out of your own Cisterns, and running Water out of your own Wells; and eat every one of his own Fig-tree, and of his own Vine: having Salt every one in your selves, to season every one's Sa∣crifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; and like unto the Wise Virgins, that have Oil in their Lamps, and follow the
Lamb, and enter in with the Bridegroom.1688. London. Yearly-Meeting. And now is the time to Labour, while it is day (yea, the Day of Christ) and to stir up every one's pure Mind, and the Gift of God that is in them; and to improve your Talents, that Christ hath given you, that ye may profit: And to walk every one according to the Mea∣sure, that Christ hath given you; for the Manifestation of the Spirit of God is given to every one to profit withal. Now consi∣der, what you have profited in spiritual and heavenly things, with the heavenly Spirit of God: and be not like the wicked and slothful, that hid his Talent; from whom it was taken, and he cast into Utter darkness. And a Dwarf, or one that had a∣ny blemish, was not to come nigh to Offer upon God's Altar: And therefore mind the Word of Wisdom, to keep you out of that which will Corrupt you, and Blemish you; and that ye may grow in Grace, and in Faith, and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: and feeding upon the Milk of the Word, may grow by it, that ye may not be Dwarfs; and so to Offer your spiritual Sacrifice upon God's holy Altar. For the Field or Vine∣yard of the slothful grows over with Thorns and Nettles, and his Walls go down: such are they, that are not diligent in the Spirit of God, and the Power, which is the Wall, a sure Fence: and the Spirit of God will Weed out all, both Thorns, and Thistles, and Nettles out of the Vineyard of the heart. And you, that are Keepers of others Vineyards, see, that you keep your own Vineyard clean with the Spirit and Power of Christ: and sanctifie your selves, and sanctifie the Lord in your hearts, that ye may be a holy People to the Lord, who saith; Be ye holy, for I am holy: that ye may be the holy Members of the Church of Christ, that is clothed with the Sun, and hath the Moon under her feet; the changeable World with all her change∣able Worships, Religions, Churches and Teachers. And be ye new and heavenly Jerusalem's Children: for new and heavenly Jeru∣salem, that is above, is the Mother of all the Children of the Light, and that are born of the Spirit; and these be they, that have been persecuted, and have suffered by the false Church, My∣stery Babylon, and Mother of Harlots. And now, all heavenly Jerusalem's and Sion's Children, that are from above, labour in the Gospel, the Power of God, and the Seed, in which all Nations, and all the Families of the Earth are blessed: which Seed, Christ, bruises the Serpent's head, and destroys the Devil and his Works; and overcomes the Whore, the false Church, and the Beast, and the false Prophet: And takes away the Curse, and the Vail that is spread over all Nations, and over all the Families of the Earth: and brings the Bles∣sing upon all Nations, and upon all the Families of the Earth (if they will receive it) saying; In thy Seed shall all Nations and all the Families of the Earth be blessed. And this is the Go∣spel of God preached to Abraham, before Moses writ his Five Books; and was preached in the Apostles days, and is now preached again: Which Gospel brings Life and Immortality to light; and is the Gospel of Peace, Life and Salvation to every
one that believes it. And so all Nations, and all the Families of the Earth must be in Christ, the Seed, if they be blessed, and be partakers of the Blessing in the Seed; which Gospel God did preach and reveal to Abraham, as in Gal. 3.8. And this Gospel was revealed and preached by Christ unto his Apostles, who preached it; which is not of Man, nor from Man. And now, God and Christ hath Revealed the same Gospel unto me, and many others in this Age, (I say, the Gospel and the Seed, in which all Nations and Families of the Earth are blessed;) in which Gospel I have laboured, and do labour, that all may come into this blessed Seed, Christ, who bruises the head of the Serpent, that in it they might have peace with God. And this Everlasting Gospel is preached again to them, that dwell upon the Earth; and they that believe it, and receive it, receive the Blessing, and the Peace, and Joy, and Comfort of it, and the stability in it, and the life and immortality, which it brings to light in them and to them: And such can praise the Everlasting God in his Ever∣lasting Gospel. And Friends all, seek the peace and good of all in Christ: for Truth makes no Cains, Corahs, Balaams, nor Judasses; for they come to be such, that go out of the peaceable Truth. And therefore walk in the peaceable Truth, and speak the Truth in the love of it, as it is in Jesus. G. F. Sometime after the Yearly-Meeting was over, I went to my Son Mead's House,Essex. Gooses. called Gooses in Essex, and abode there some Weeks; often visiting Friends Meeting near there, and sometimes at Barking. And after I had been a while there, I went to vi∣sit Friends at Waltham-Abbey and at Hodsdon,Waltham-Abbey. Hodsdon. Efield. South-street. Ford∣green. Winch∣more-hill. and about Enfield, South-street, Ford-Green, and Winchmore-Hill; where I had seve∣ral very serviceable Meetings amongst Friends, the Lord opening many deep and weighty things through me, both for the Inform∣ing the Understandings of Inquirers, and building up those, that were gathered into the Truth, and establishing them there∣in. It was in the Seventh Month, that I returned to London, ha∣ving been near Three Months in the Country for my health's sake, which now was very much Impaired; so that I was hardly able to stay in a Meeting the whole Time thereof: and often after a Meeting was fain to lye down upon a Bed. Yet did not my Weakness of Body take me off from the Service of the Lord; but I continued to labour in Meetings, and out of Meetings in the work of the Lord, as the Lord gave me Opportunity and Abili∣ty. I had not been long in London, before a great Weight came upon me, and a sight the Lord gave me of the great Bustles and Troubles, Revolution and Change, which soon after came to pass. In the sense whereof, and in the movings of the Spirit of the Lord I writ a few Lines, as — A general Epistle to Friends, to
fore-warn them of the approaching Storm;1688. London. that they might all re∣tire to the Lord, in whom safety is. That Epistle was, as follow∣eth: ALL my Dear Friends and Brethren every where, who have received the Lord Jesus Christ; and he has given you power to become his Sons and Daughters: In him ye have both life and peace, and in his Everlasting Kingdom, that is a stablish∣ed Kingdom and cannot be shaken; but is over all the World, and stands in his Power, and in Righteousness, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, into which no unrighteousness, nor the foul, un∣clean Spirit of the Devil in his Instruments can enter. And therefore, Dear Friends and Brethren, every one in the Faith of Jesus, that he is the Author and Finisher of, stand in his Power, who has all power in Heaven and Earth given to him, and will Rule the Nations with his Rod of Iron, and dash them to pieces, like a Potter's vessel, that are not Subject and Obedient to his Power: Whose Voice will shake the Heavens, and the Earth, that that which may be shaken, may be Removed, and that which cannot be shaken, may Appear. And stand in him; and all things shall work together for good, to them that love him. And now, Dear Friends and Brethren, though these Waves, and Storms, and Tempests be in the World, yet you may all appear the harmless and innocent Lambs of Christ, walking in his peaceable Truth, and keeping in the Word of Power, and Wisdom, and Patience; and this Word will keep you in the Day of Tri∣als and Temptations, that will come upon the whole World, to Try them, that dwell upon the Earth. For the Word of God was before the World, and all things were made by it: It is a Tried Word, which gave all God's People in all Ages Wisdom, Power and Patience. And therefore let your dwelling and walking be in Christ Jesus, who is called The Word of God; and in his Power, which is over all: And set your Af∣fections on things that are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God (mark) on those things which are above, where Christ sits; and not those things, that are below, which will change, and pass away. And blessed be the Lord God, who by his Eternal Arm and Power hath gathered a People to himself; and by his Eternal Arm and Power hath preserved his, Faithful to himself through many Troubles, Trials and Temptations: His Power and Seed, Christ, is over all, and in him ye have life and peace with God. Therefore in him all stand, and see your Salvation, who is First and Last, and the Amen. God Al∣mighty preserve and keep you all in him, your Ark and San∣ctuary; for in him you are safe over all Floods, Storms and Tempests: for he was, before they were; and will be, when they are all gone. London, the 17th of the 8th Month, 1688. G. F.
About this time great Exercise and Weights came upon me (as hath usually done before great Revolutions and Changes of Government) and my strength departed from me; so that I reeled, and was ready to fall, as I went along the Streets. And at length I could not go abroad at all, I was so Weak for a pretty while; till I felt the Power of the Lord to spring over all, and had received an Assurance from him, that he would preserve his faithful People to himself through all. In the time that I kept in, I writ a Paper, shewing; How Mo∣ses, as a Servant, was faithful in all his House, in the Old Testa∣ment; and Christ, as a Son, is over his House in the New Testa∣ment. THE House of Israel was called God's Vineyard, in Isa. 5.7. and all the Israelites were called the House of Israel. Is∣rael signifies, A Prince with God, and a Prevailer with Men, Gen. 32.28. And when Peter did preach Christ to the House of Israel, he said; Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that God hath made the same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36. So they were all called the House of Israel. And it is said, Moses was faithful in all his House (to wit, this House of Israel,) as a Servant; for a Testimony of those things, which were to be spoken after: But Christ, as a Son, over his own House; which House are we, if we hold fast the Confidence, and the Rejoycing of the hope firm unto the end, Hebr. 3.5, 6. Here it is manifest, that Moses was faithful in all his house, as a Servant, viz. in the house of Israel, in the Old Testament: but Christ Jesus, the Son of God, is over his house in his New Testament and Covenant; and all his true Believers are of his House. The Apostle tells the Ephesians (who were the Church of Christ) They were Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Houshold of God, Eph. 2.19. And the Saints are called The Houshold of Faith, Gal. 6.10. And Peter in his general Epistle, tells the Church of Christ; They were a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2.9. And that as lively Stones, they were built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, ver. 5. And the Apostle saith to the Church of Christ at Corinth; If our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. And Christ said to his Disciples; Let not your hearts be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father's house are many Mansions; (a Mansion is a Dwelling, or Abiding-place) If it were not so, I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also, John 14.1, 2, 3. The Psalmist saith; Those that be planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God: They shall bring forth fruit in old Age; they shall be fat and flourishing, Psal. 92.13, 14. And
again; Holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, for ever, Psal. 93.5. Isaiah also said by way of Prophecy; It shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it, Isa. 2.2. Is not that a great House? Now, is not this Mountain, Christ, who is over his House in the New Testament and New Covenant? And to this Mountain and House all the Children of the New Testament and New Covenant slow in these latter days; so that it is come to pass, which was prophesied of by Isaiah. For he said; Ma∣ny People shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the Moun∣tain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke many Peo∣ple; and they shall beat their Swords into Plon-shares, and their Spears into Pruning-hooks: Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more. O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the Light of the Lord, ver. 3, 4, 5. Here ye may see, They that come to the Mountain of the house of God, and to God's Teaching, they must walk in the Light of the Lord; yea, the House of Jacob. Jacob signifies a Sup∣planter: he supplanted profane Esau, who is hated, and Jacob is loved. Now these Two Births must be known within: And they that walk in the Light of the Lord, and come to Christ, the Mountain of the house of the Lord, established above all Mountains and Hills, they break their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning-hooks: and in Christ, this Moun∣tain and House of the Lord, there are no Spears, nor Swords to hurt one another withal. And Christ, the Son of God, is o∣ver his House and great Family, the Children of the Light, them that believe in it, and walk in it, who are the Children of the Day of Christ, and are of his Holy and Royal Priesthood, that offer up spiritual Sacrifice to God by him. All such are of Christ's (the spiritual Man's) house; who are born of God, and led by his Spirit: They are of the Lord of Lords, and King of King's House and Family, which he is over; and are of the Houshold of the holy, divine, pure and precious Faith, which Christ is the Author and Finisher of. And they that be of the Son's house, they are pure, righteous and holy, and can do no∣thing against the Truth, but for it, in their Words, Lives and Conversations; and so are a chosen Generation, a holy Nation, a peculiar People, that they should shew forth the Praise of him, who hath called them out of Darkness into his marvellous Light. And these are Christ's lively Stones, that build up a spiritual House, which he (Christ, the spiritual Man, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) is over. London, the 10th Month, 1688. G. F.
1688. Essex. Gooses.Sometime after this, my Body continuing Weak, I went down with my Son Mead to his House in Essex; where I staid some Weeks. In which time I Writ many things relating to the Ser∣vice of Truth, of which some were printed soon after; others were spread abroad in Manuscript. And amongst other things, 'there were a few Lines to this purpose: THat, while Men are contending for Thrones here below, Christ is on his Throne, and all his holy Angels are about him; who is the Beginning and the Ending, the First and Last, over all. And that the Lord will make way and room for himself, and for them that are born of his Spirit, which are heavenly Jerusalem's Children, to come home to their free Mo∣ther. A few Words also I writ concerning the World's Teachers, and the Emptiness of their Teaching. Which were thus: DOth not all that, which is called Christendom, live in Talk∣ing of Christ's, and of the Apostles and Prophets Words, and the Letter of the Scriptures? And do not their Priests mi∣nister the Letter, with their own Conceptions thereupon, to them for Money, though the holy Scriptures were freely given forth from God and Christ, and his Prophets and Apostles? Yet the Apostle saith, The Letter killeth: but the Spirit giveth Life, 2 Cor. 3.6. And the Ministers of the New Testament are not Mini∣sters of the Letter, but of the Spirit: And they do sow to the Spirit, and of the Spirit do reap Life Eternal. But Peoples spend∣ing their time about Old Authors, and their Talking of them, and of the outward Letter; this doth not feed their Souls. For Talking of Victuals, and Cloaths doth not clothe the Body, nor feed it, except they have Victuals to eat, and Cloaths to put on. No more are their Souls and Spirits fed and clothed, except they have the Bread and Water of Life from Heaven to feed them, and the Righteousness of Christ to clothe them. So only Talking of Outward things and Spiritual things, and not Ha∣ving them, they may starve both their Bodies and their Souls. Therefore quench not the Spirit of God, which will lead to be diligent in all things. With this I writ another short Paper, shewing the hurt that they did, and the danger they run into, who turned People from the inward Manifestation of Christ in the heart. THE Jews were commanded by the Law of God, Not to remove the outward Land-mark, Deut. 19.14. And they that did so, or that caused the Blind to wander, were Cursed in the Old Covenant, Deut. 27.17. In the New Covenant the Apostle saith; Let him be Accursed, that preacheth any other Gospel, than that, which he had preached, Gal. 1.8. Now the Gospel, that
he preached, was The Power of God unto Salvation,1688. Gooses. to every one that believeth, Rom. 1.16. And the Gospel, that was preached to Abraham was, That in his Seed all Nations, and all the Fami∣lies of the Earth should be blessed. And in order to bring Men to this blessed state, God poureth out of his Spirit upon all Flesh; and Christ doth enlighten every one, that cometh into the World; and the Grace of God, which bringeth Salvation, hath appeared unto all Men, and teacheth the Christians, the true Believers in Christ; and God doth write his Law in the true Christians hearts, and putteth it in their minds, that they may all know the Lord, from the greatest to the least; and he giveth his Word in their hearts to obey and do, and the A∣nointing within them; so that they need not any Man to Teach them, but as the Anointing doth Teach them. Now all such, as turn People from the Light, Spirit, Grace, Word and A∣nointing within, remove them from their heavenly Land-mark of their Eternal Inheritance, and make them blind, and cause the Blind to wander from the living way to their Eternal House in the Heavens, and from New and Heavenly Jerusa∣lem. So they are Cursed, that cause the Blind to wander out of their way, and to remove them from their heavenly Land∣mark. G. F. I writ also a Paper to shew, by Instances taken out of the Holy Scriptures, That many of the holy Men and Prophets of God, and of the Apostles of Christ, were Husbandmen and Trades∣men: by which People might see, how unlike to them the World's Teachers now are. RIghteous Abel was a Shepherd, a Keeper of Sheep, Gen. 4.2. Noah was an Husbandman: and he was a Just man, and perfect in his Generation, and walked with God, Gen. 9.20. and 6.9. Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, was an Husband∣man, and had great Flocks of Cattel; And just Lot was an Husbandman also, and had great Flocks and Herds, Gen. 13. Isaac also was an Husbandman, and had great Flocks and Herds of Cattel, and great store of Corn, Gen. 26.12, 14. And the Promise was with Isaac: for the Lord said to Abraham, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called, Gen. 21.12. Jacob was an Husbandman, and his Sons Keepers of Flocks of Cattel, Gen. 46.32, 34. and God loved Jacob. Moses kept Sheep, Exod. 3 1. and the Lord spake to him, when he was keeping Sheep, ver. 4. and sent him to Pharaoh, to bring God's People, or Sheep, out of Egypt. And by the hand and power of the Lord, he and Aaron his Brother brought them out of Egypt, a Land of Anguish, Bon∣dage, Darkness and Perplexity. And Moses kept the Lord's Peo∣ple, or Sheep, forty years in the Wilderness: A Meek Shepherd of God he was, and kept his great Flock of Sheep; though some of them were scabbed with the Leprosie of Contention
and Murmuring, and were destroyed in the Wilderness. David (though he afterwards came to be a King) was a Keeper of his Father's Sheep in the Wilderness, 1 Sam. 17.15, 28. And the Lord God called him from the Sheep-Cotes to feed his Sheep, the House of Israel, and to defend them from the spi∣ritual Wolves, Bears and Lions; and he did it to purpose, who was a Man after God's own heart. Elisha was a Plowman, 1 Kings 19.19. and he was called from the Plow, that was outward, to Teach God's People, the Children of Israel, to plow up the Fallow ground of their hearts, that they might bring forth Seed and Fruits to God, their Creator. And the Word of the Lord came to Amos, when he was a∣mong the Herdsmen of Tekoa, Amos 1.1. And Amaziah, the Priest of Bethel, said to Amos; Prophesie not again any more at Bethel: for it is the King's Chappel, and it is the King's Court, Chap. 7.13. Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophet's Son; but I was an Herdsman, and a gatherer of Sycomore-fruit: and the Lord took me, as I followed the Flock. And the Lord said unto me, Go, pro∣phesie unto my People Israel, ver. 14, 15. Here ye may see, how the Lord made use of a poor man, and how he called him from following the outward Flock, and from gathering of out∣ward Fruits, to gather his Fruits, and to follow his People or Flock, the Children of Israel. Christ called Peter, and Andrew his Brother, when they were Fishing, and casting their Net into the Sea (for they were Fishers:) and he said unto them, Follow me, and I will make you Fish∣ers of Men, Matth. 4.18, 19. And likewise Christ called James and John his Brother, when they were in a Ship, with Zebe∣dee, their Father, mending their Nets; And they immediately left the Ship, and their Father, and followed him, ver. 21, 22. And he gave them power (a Net that will hold, and not want mending) and made them Fishers of Men, to fish them out of the great Sea, the World of Wickedness. And we read, that when Peter, and Thomas, and Nathaniel, and the Sons of Ze∣bedee and other Disciples went a Fishing together, and that Night caught nothing; And in the Morning Jesus appeared to them, and said, Cast the Net on the right side of the Ship, and ye shall find: and they did so, and catched so great a Multitude, that they were not able to draw them to the shore. And when thereupon one of the other Disciples said unto Peter, It is the Lord; Peter hearing, that it was the Lord, Girded his Fisher's Coat unto him, John 21.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And this was, after Christ was risen. So here ye may see, Peter had not laid away his Fisher's Coat all this while, that he had been preach∣ing before Christ's Death, and after he was Risen. And Jesus saw Matthew sitting at the Receipt of Custom, and he said unto him, Follow me. And he arose, and followed him, Matth. 9.9. And Christ imployed Matthew to gather his People, that were scattered from God; another manner of Trea∣sure,
than the outward Custom of the Romans.1689. Gooses. Luke was a Phy∣sician, whom Christ made a Physician spiritual; which was better, than Outward. Paul was a Tent-maker; and being of the same Craft with Aquila and Priscilla, he abode with them at Corinth, and wrought; (for by their Occupation they were Tent-makers:) Acts 18.3. And did not Paul, and Priscilla and Aquila bring many to their heavenly Tents, and to be settled upon Christ, the heavenly Rock and Foundation? Joseph, the Husband of Mary, was a Carpenter: And the Jews said of Christ, Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary? &c. Mark 6.3. The Jews meant only an outward Carpenter; not knowing, that Christ was also a spiritual Carpenter, who doth build up the fallen Estate of Man and Woman into the Image of God, which they were first made in; and had shod them with the Gospel of Peace, the Power of God, which will never wax old; and Clothed them with fine Linnen, that never will wear out; and armed them with Armour and Weapons, that will ne∣ver rust; which all the Weapons of the Wicked can never blunt nor pierce: The Saints have tried it. Gooses, the 1st Month, 1688/9. G. F. It was now a time of much Talk: and People too much busied their minds, and spent their time in hearing and telling News. To shew them the Vanity thereof, and to draw them from it, I writ the few following Lines: IN the Low Region, in the Airy Life all News is Ʋncertain; there is nothing stable: But in the Higher Region, in the Kingdom of Christ, there all things are stable and sure, and the News always good and certain. For Christ, who hath all Power in Heaven and in Earth given unto him, ruleth in the Kingdoms of Men: And he, who doth inherit the Heathen, and possess the utmost parts of the Earth with his Divine Power and Light, he Rules all Nations with his Rod of Iron, and dashes them to pieces, like a Potter's Vessels; the Vessels of Dishonour, and the leaky Vessels, that will not hold his living water of Life: And he doth preserve his Elect Vessels of Mercy and Honour. And his Power is certain and sure, and doth not change; by which he doth remove the Mountains and Hills, and shakes the Hea∣vens and the Earth. And leaky, dishonourable Vessels, and the Hills and Mountains, and the Old Heavens and the Earth, they are all to be shaken, and removed, and broken to pieces; though they do not see it, nor him that doth it: But his Elect and Faith∣ful do both see it, and know him, and his Power, that cannot be shaken, and which changeth not. The 5th of the 1st Month, 1688/9. G. F.
1689. LondonAbout the middle of the First Month 1688/9. I went to London, the Parliament then sitting, and being then about the Bill for Indulgence. And though I was but Weak in Body, and not well able to stir to and fro; yet so great a Concern was upon my Spirit on behalf of Truth and Friends, that I Attended continu∣ally for many days, with othet Friends, at the Parliament-House, labouring with the Members thereof, that the thing might be done Comprehensively, and Effectually. In this, and other Services at Meetings and amongst Friends, I continued, till towards the end of the Second Month; when be∣ing much spent with continual Labour, I got out of Town for a little while,South-gate as far as South-gate and thereabouts. And while I was there, I writ a Letter to Peter Hendricks, a Friend at Am∣sterdam in Holland; in which I inclosed an Epistle to the Friends at Dantzick in Poland, who at this time were under great Per∣secution. And as I writ unto them, to Incourage and Strengthen them in their Testimony, and to Comfort them in their Sufferings for the Truth; so also I writ a Paper to their Persecutors, the Magistrates of Dantzick; laying before them the Evil of Perse∣cution, and perswading them to Christian Moderation, and To do unto others, in Matters of Religion, as they would be done unto. Which Papers were as followeth: To Peter Hendricks at Amsterdam; and to Friends at Dantzick, who are under Persecution. Dear Friend P. H. WIth my Love to thee and thy Wife, and J. Clause, and J. Roeloffs, and all the rest of Friends every where in Christ Jesus, who Reigns over all. And I am glad to hear, that Friends are well in all those Provinces and Places every where, except Dantzick; and that you were so diligent in spread∣ing my Papers to the strengthening of Friends. I have lately printed the Life of William Caton, but not made a Collection of his Books: and I think to send some of them to you, which you may Translate and Print, if you will; it may be service∣able among Friends, especially them that knew him. Now concerning Dear Friends at Dantzick, whom the Lord hath supported by his Eternal Arm and Power to this Day, I hope, by the same Arm and Power he will support them, and in it they will feel his Blessed Presence with them in all their Suf∣ferings; who is over the Cruelty of their Persecutors, who will hardly let them breathe neither Outwardly nor Inwardly, in the Common Air of their Natural Soil. Which shews both their Im∣morality, Inhumanity and Ʋnchristianity, and that they want the Counsel of a Gamaliel amongst them; whose Actions are below the Law of God, To do unto others, as they would have them do un∣to
them: And God will not Bless the Doings of such.1689. Southgate. And how∣ever I desire, that Friends may mind the Lord's Power, that is over all, and be valiant for his Truth, and keep upon their Rock and Foundation Christ Jesus, that stands sure in this time of the heat of the Sun of Persecution, which is so hot upon you; who will not let you, nor suffer you to have so much as your Natural Houses to work and sleep in, nor meet, nor serve God in: And the Lord doth behold all such Actors and their Actions. And therefore look over all such Actors and Actions to him, who is able to Deal with them, and Reward them according to their Works. And so God Almighty preserve you all in Christ Jesus, in whom you have Rest, Life and Peace, Amen. Southgate, the 28th of the 2d Month, 1689. G. F. To the Magistrates of Dantzick: Christian Shroder, President of the Council, and Emanuel Dilger, N. Gadecken, and N. Frate∣rus, Deputies of the Council, and the Rest of the Magistrates and Priests. WE have seen your Order, and of your Breathing out Per∣secution against that Little Flock, the Lambs of Christ, that lived under your Jurisdiction in the City of Dantzick; and how that you have Imprisoned and Banished Two by the Hang∣man out of the Government of your City: and others you threa∣ten to do the same to; with great punishment, if they Return. And likewise you threaten them with punishment, that they Rent their Houses of, if they let them have their Houses either to Live in, or Meet in to Serve and Worship the Lord, that made them: Truly, I am heartily sorry for both your Magistrates and Priests, that go under the Name of Christians, and shew such Immoral and Inhuman, Ʋnchristian Actions, below the Royal Law of God, which is, To do to others, as you would have them do unto you. For would you think it was Moral, Human or Christian, or according to the Law of God, if the King of Po∣land, who is of another Religion than you, should Banish you out of your City by the Hangman, and call you Murderers of Souls: Could you say, but this was according to the Law of God, To do unto you, as you have done unto others? But if you say, That you have the Sword and the Horn, and the Power; but blessed be the Lord, that hath shortened your Sword, and your Power, and your Horn, that it reaches no further, than your Jurisdiction of Dantzick: and you do not know, how long God may suffer you to have your Horn, and your Power, and your Sword. We are sure, you have not the Mind nor Spirit of Christ: and the Apostle saith, They that have not the Spirit of Christ, are none of his; as in Rom. 8. And Christ bids Peter,
Put up his Sword: They that draw the Sword concerning him, to Defend him and his Worship and Faith, should perish with the Sword. And Peter, and the Apostles never drew the outward Sword after; but said, Their Weapons were Spiritual, not Carnal: and they did not wrestle with flesh and blood. And Christ never gave forth any such Command, that they should Banish any by the Hangmen, that were not of their Religion, nor would not receive it. Are not you worse than the Turks, who let many Religions be in their Coun∣try, yea Christians, and to Meet peaceably? Yea, the Turkish Pa∣troons let our Friends, that were Captives, Meet together at Al∣giers, and said, It was good so to do: And at Sally those barba∣rous People, who do not profess Christianity, you are worse than they; for you profess Christ in Words, but in Works deny him. And did you ever know either in Scripture or History, that any Persecutors prospered long? And you are worse, than they are in the Mogul's Country, who they say, permits Sixty Religi∣ons in his Dominions: and many others might be mentioned, which you are worse, than them all in your Cruelty and Persecu∣tion of God's People only for Meeting together in the Name of Jesus, and Serving and Worshipping God, their Creator. No, they must not Breathe in their Natural Air, neither Natural, nor Spiritual, in your Dominions: I pray, where had you these Commands from? neither from Christ, nor his Apostles. And do not you profess the Scriptures of the New Testament to be your Rule? but I pray you, what Scripture have you for this your practice? It is good for you to be Humble, and do Just∣ly, and love Mercy; and Call home your Banished, and Love them, and Cherish them: yea, though they were your Enemies, you are to obey the Command of Christ, and Love them. I wonder, how you and your Wives and Families can sleep qui∣etly in your Beds, that do such Cruel Actions, without think∣ing, the Lord may do to you the same! Yout cannot be without Sense and Feeling, except you be given over to Reprobation with∣out Sense and Feeling, and your Consciences seared with a hot Iron. But Christian Charity doth hope, that you are not all in that state; but that there may be some Relenting or Considera∣tion of your Actions among some of you, either according to the Law of God, or his Gospel. From him, that desires your Temporal and Eternal Good, and Salvation, and not Destruction, Amen. Middlesex, the 28th of the 2d Month, 1688. G. F. Peter, Thou may'st Translate this into High-Dutch, and send them; and you may print it, if you will, and spread it abroad: and Translate that part of the Letter, that is to Friends, into High-Dutch, and send to them.
Having stay'd in the Country about Three Weeks,1689. London. Yearly-Meeting. I return'd to London a little before the Yearly-Meeting, which was in the Third Month this Year, and was a very Solemn, Weighty Meet∣ing; the Lord (as formerly) visiting his People, and honouring the Assembly with his glorious Presence, to the great Satisfacti∣on and Comfort of Friends. After the Business of the Meeting was over, it was upon me to add a few Lines to the Epistle, which went from the Meeting to Friends, after this manner: Dear Friends and Brethren, WHO have known the Lord's Eternal Arm and Power, that hath preserved you upon the heavenly Rock and Founda∣tion, and hath built your House upon it; you have known ma∣ny Winds, Tempests and Storms, that have risen out of that Sea, where the Beast rose; and many raging Storms, that have risen by Apostates of several sorts: but the Seed, that bruises the Serpent's head, and is the Foundation of God's People, stands sure. And therefore, Dear Friends and Brethren, though there be great Shakings in the World; the Lord's Power is over all, and his Kingdom cannot be shaken. And therefore, all ye Chil∣dren of God, Children of the Light, and Heirs of his Kingdom, a Joyful, Peaceable Habitation keep in; keeping out of all the Heats, Contentions and Disputes about things below. And Lay hand on no man, nor no thing suddenly; lest they should be puffed up with that which fades, and so come to loss: but mind the Lord's Power, that keeps open your heavenly Eye, to see things present, and to come; and in that ye will see and han∣dle the Word of Life. And Dear Friends every where, Have power over your own Spirits. As God hath blessed you with his Outward things, have a care of Trusting in them; or falling in∣to Difference one with another about these Outward Things, that are below: which will pass away. But all live in the Love of God, and in that live in peace with God, and one with another. And follow the Works of Charity, and overcome the Evil with the Good to all. For what Good have all the Tinklers done, with their Cymbals and sounding Brass? They always bred Con∣fusion, and never did Good in any Age; Tinkling with their Cym∣bals, and sounding with their Brass, to draw out the Simple to follow them. And therefore it is good for all the Children of God, to keep in their Possessions of Life, and in the Love of God, that is Everlasting. And as for all the Tumults of the World, and the Apostates from the Truth, the Lord's Power is over them all, and Christ reigns; and the Lord saith, No Wea∣pon, that is formed against thee, shall prosper, (Isa. 54.17.) And now Friends, you are not unsensible, how many Weapons have been formed against us, who are the Sons and Daughters of God; and the Lord hath restrained them, according to his Promise: they have not prospered. And the Lord said; Every Tongue, that shall rise up in Judgment against thee, thou shalt Con∣demn:
so God hath given such a Power to his Children, to Con¦demn all the Tongues, that shall rise up in Judgment against them; and this is the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, Their Righteousness is of me, saith the Lord. And you are not unsensible of the many Tongues, that have risen up against us in Judgment, yea, of Apostates and Prophane: But in and with the Truth, and the Power of God, according to the Promise of God, Every Tongue, that riseth against thee, thou shalt Condemn. So it is not one Tongue only thou shalt Condemn; but Every Tongue, that shall rise up in Judgment against thee, thou shalt Condemn. So the Lord giveth this Power to his Servants and Children, to judge the Evil Tongues, and he doth restrain the Weapons formed against them; so that they shall not prosper a∣gainst his Children, that he hath begotten: Praises and Honour be to his holy Name for ever! Amen. G. F. Soon after this Meeting was over, the Yearly Meeting began at York; which because of the Largeness of that County, and for the Conveniency of Friends in the Northern parts, had for some Years been held there. And inasmuch as there had been some Hurt done in that place, as some Division made there, by some that were gone out of the Ʋnity of Friends; It was upon me to write a few Lines to Friends of that Meeting, to Exhort them to keep in the pure, heavenly Love, which brings into and keeps in the true Unity. And that which I writ was thus: Dear Friends and Brethren in Christ Jesus, WHom the Lord by his Eternal Arm and Power hath pre∣served to this day, all walk in the Power and Spirit of God, that is over all, in Love and Ʋnity: For Love over∣comes, and builds up, and unites all the Members of Christ to him the Head; for Love keeps out of all strife, and is of God. And Love and Charity never fails, but keeps the Mind above all outward things, or strife about outward things; and is that, which overcomes Evil, and casts out all false Fears: And it is of God, and unites all the hearts of his People together in the heavenly Joy, Concord and Unity. The God of Love preserve you all, and settle and establish you in Christ Jesus, your Life and Salvation, in whom ye have all Peace with God. And so Walk in him, that ye may be ordered in his peaceable, hea∣venly Wisdom, to the Glory of God, and the Comfort one of a∣nother, Amen. London, the 27th of the 3d Month, 1689. G. F.
Being much Wearied and Spent with being at many large Meetings,1689. Kingston. and in much Business with Friends, during the time of the Yearly-Meeting, and finding my health much impaired there∣by; I went out of Town with my Daughter Rouse, to their Country-house near Kingston, and tarried there most of the re∣maining part of the Summer. In which time I sometimes visi∣ted Friends Meetings at Kingston, and writ divers things for the Service of Truth and Friends. Amongst those things that I writ there, one was an Epistle to Friends in Barbados; and it was, as followeth: To all Friends in Barbados, that are Convinced of God's Truth. MY Desires are, that ye may live and walk in his peace∣able Truth, and shew forth, that ye are Children of the Light and of the Truth: for the heavenly, gentle and peace∣able Wisdom is justified of her Children. But Debate, Strife, Wilfulness, and laying open one another's Nakedness and Weak∣ness, that is not heavenly Wisdom's Children's doing (but Ham's) nor from the Spirit of Christ; nor such, as bite and tear one another: That's from a devouring Spirit, and not from the Spirit of Jesus, which cloaths and covers that which is un∣comely, and can forgive. And now my Friends, you profess that Truth, which is beyond all the World's ways; therefore see, that you do Excel them in the heavenly, gentle Wisdom, that is easie to be intreated: for the Wisdom of the World is not easie to be intreated; and sometimes will not be intreated at all. And now pray see, how you do excel the World in Wisdom, in Vertue, in Kindness, in Love that is over hatred, in Meekness, and Lowliness, and Humility, and in Sobriety, Civility and Modesty, and in Temperance and Patience, and in all that which is called Morality and Humanity (which will not act any thing below Men, or unmanly) and to shew forth true Christianity, and that ye are the Converted and Translated Be∣lievers in Christ, dwelling in the Love of God, that beareth all things, and endureth all things, and is not puffed up, and en∣vies not. For they that be out of this Love of God, and Chri∣stian Charity, are nothing, but as a tinkling Cymbal and a sound∣ing Brass; and are discontented, Murmurers and Complainers, full of Doubts, Questions and false Jealousies. Keep that Spirit out of the Camp of God: for do not you read in the Scriptures, both of the New and Old Testament, that the End of such was Misery? Therefore in the Love of God build up one another: for Love edifies the Body of Christ; and he commands his Be∣lievers to love Enemies, and to love one another: By this they are known to be the Disciples of Christ. But to live in Envy, Strife and Hatred, is a Mark, they are no Disciples of Christ: For he
that loveth not his Brother, abides in Death; and whosoever hates his Brother, is a Murderer: and ye know, that no Murderer hath eternal life abiding in him. But they, that do love the Brethren, are passed from death to life, 1 John 3.14, 15. And, If a Man say, I love God, and hateth his Brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his Brother, whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? And this Commandment have we from God, that he who loveth God, loveth his Brother also, Chap. 4.20, 21. Therefore love one another: for Love is of God, and Hatred is of the Devil; and every one that loveth, is born of God, and knows God. Now all are Children of God by Creation: and therefore in that state they are to love their Neigbours, as them∣selves; and to do unto all Men, as they would have them do unto them. Secondly, God pouring his Spirit upon all Flesh (or all Men and Women) all that are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, and Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with Christ; and so are in Fellowship in the Everlasting Gospel: and so are in Ʋnity in the Spirit, the Bond of Peace. And they that go out of this Unity, and out of the Bond of Peace, and do not keep it; they break the King of Kings Peace: but they that keep in the Unity, and Fellowship in the Spirit, and walk in the Light, have Fellowship one with another, and with the Father and the Son. So it is not every one, that talks of the Light, and talks of the Word, and of Righteousness, and talks of Christ, and of God; but he that Doth the will of God. And therefore, My Friends, all strive to excel one another in Love, and in Vertue, and in good Life and Conversation; and strive all to be of one Mind, Heart and Judgment in the Spirit of God: for in Christ all are one, and are in peace in him. The Lord God Almighty preserve you in him, who is your holy Rock and Foundation, that is heavenly, and stands sure; that ye may all be Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and for the Lord and his glori∣ous Name; so that ye may all come to serve him in your Ge∣neration, and in his New Creation in Christ Jesus, Amen. And now, that you are come into so much Favour with the Magistrates and Powers, that they let you serve the Office of a Constable, &c. without swearing or taking any Oaths; hereby Christ's Doctrine and Command, and his Apostle's is set up. And therefore I desire, that you may double your diligence in your Offices, in doing that which is just, and true, and righ∣teous; so that ye may excel and exceed all them, that are tied, shack'led or bound by Swearing or Oaths, to perform their Offi∣ces: and you can do it at Yea and Nay, so say and so do; ac∣cording to Christ's Doctrine and Command. For Adam and Eve by disobeying the Command of God, fell under Condemnation: and they that disobey the Command of Christ in taking Oaths and Swearing, go into Evil, and fall into Condemnation, Matth. 5. and Jam. 5. So my Love in the Lord is to you all. Kingston upon Thames, the 10th of the 5th Month, 1689. G. F.
I stay'd at Kingston, till the beginning of the Seventh Month; where not only many Friends came to visit me, but some Con∣siderable People of the World, with whom I discoursed about the Things of God. Then leaving Kingston, I went to London by Water, visiting Friends as I went,Hammer∣smith. and taking Hammersmith-Meeting in my way. And having recovered some strength by being in the Country, when I was come to London,London. I went from Meeting to Meeting; labouring diligently in the work of the Lord, and opening the Divine Mysteries of the heavenly things, as God by his Spirit opened them in me. But I found, my Body would not long bear the City; wherefore, when I had travelled a∣mongst Friends there about a Month,Totten∣ham-High-Cross. Winch∣more-hill. Enfield. I went to Tottenham-High-Cross, and from thence to Edward Man's Country-house near Winchmore-hill, and to Enfield; spending a matter of Three Weeks time amongst Friends thereabouts, and had Meetings at all those places. Then, being a little refreshed with being in the Coun∣try, I went back to London; where I tarried, labouring in the Work of the Ministry, till the middle of the Ninth Month: at which time I went down with my Son Mead to his House in Essex, and abode there all the Winter.Essex. Gooses. During which time I stirred not much abroad; unless it were sometimes to the Meet∣ing, to which that Family belonged, which was about half a Mile from thence: but I had Meetings often in the House with the Family, and those Friends, that came thither. Many things also I writ, while I was there; some of which follow here. One was an Epistle to the Quarterly and Yearly-Meetings of Friends in Pensylvania, New-England, Virginia, Maryland, the Jerseys, Caro∣lina, and other Plantations in America. And it was thus: MY Dear Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, who, by believing in his Light, are become Children of his Light and of his Day; my desires are, that you may all walk in his Light and in his Day, and keep the Feast of Christ, our Passover, who is sacrificed for us, not with Old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness; but let all that be purged out: that ye may be a New Lump, keeping the Feast of Christ, our Passover, with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth. Therefore let no leavened Bread be found in your Hou∣ses, nor in your Meetings, nor in the Camp of God, or Houshold of Faith, which are the Houshold of Christ: But all that sour, old Leaven, which makes Peoples hearts sour, and to burn one against another; all that must be purged out of the Camp of God, and kept out. For the Feast of Christ, our Passover, must be kept, in the New Covenant, with his heavenly, unleavened Bread of Life. The Jews in the Old Testament their Feast was kept with outward unleavened Bread: And now, in the New Te∣stament, in the Gospel-Day, our Feast is to be kept with the heavenly, unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth. Therefore Friends, I desire you seriously to consider, and to keep this Feast, which the Apostle directed the Church of Christ to keep.
Do not you see Christendom,1689. Gooses. so called, keep their Feasts with the leavened Bread of Malice and Wickedness? which makes them so sour, and their hearts to burn one against another, that they have destroyed, and do destroy one another about Religion. Therefore all live in the love of God, which keeps above the love of the World; so that none of your Hearts may be choaked or surfeited with these outward Things, or with the Cares of the World, which will pass away: But mind ye the World and the Life, that is without end, that ye may be heirs of it. And Friends, you should strive to Excel all, both Pro∣fessor and Prophane, both in Morality, Humanity and Christiani∣ty, Modesty, Sobriety and Moderation, and in a good, godly, righ∣teous Life and Conversation; shewing forth the Fruits of the Spirit of God, and that you are the Children of the living God, and Children of the Light, and of the Day, and not of the Night. And serve God in Newness of Life: for it is the Life, and a living and walking in the Truth, that must Answer the Wit∣ness of God in all People; that they, seeing your good Works, may glorifie our Father, which is in Heaven. Therefore be valiant for God's holy, pure Truth, and spread it abroad, among both Pro∣fessors and Profane, and the Indians. And you should write o∣ver once a year, from all your Yearly-Meetings, to the Yearly-Meeting here, concerning your Diligence in the Truth, and of its spreading, and of Peoples receiving it, both Professors and Profane, and the Indians; and concerning the Peace of the Church of Christ amongst your selves. For, blessed be the Lord, Truth doth get ground in these Parts, and many are made very loving to Friends, and the Lord's Power and Seed is over all: In which God Almighty keep all his People to his Glory, Amen. Gooses, the 28th of the 11th Month, 1689. G. F. While I was in the City, I had a Concern upon my Spirit with respect to a Twofold Danger, that attended some, who pro∣fest Truth: one was of Young Peoples running into the Fashions of the World; and the other was of Old Peoples going into the Earth. And that Concern coming now again weightily upon me, I was moved to give forth the following Paper, as a Reproof to such, and an Exhortation and Warning to all Friends to beware of, and keep out of those Snares. To all that do Profess the Truth of God. MY desires are, that you may walk in Humility in it. For when the Lord first called me forth, he let me see, That Young People grew up together in Vanity, and the Fashions of the World; and Old People went downwards into the Earth, raking it together: and to both these I was to be a stranger. And now Friends,
I do see too many Young People, that do profess the Truth,1690. Gooses. do grow up into the Fashions of the World; and too many Pa∣rents indulge them: And amongst the Elder, some are grow∣ing downwards, and raking after the Earth. Therefore take heed, that you are not making your Graves, while you are Alive outwardly, and loading your selves with thick Clay (Hab. .6.) For if you have not power over the Earthly Spirit, and that which leadeth into a Vain Mind, and the Fashions of the World, and into the Earth; though you have often had the Rain fall upon your Fields, you will but bring forth Thistles, Briars and Thorns, which is for the Fire. And such will become brit∣tle, peevish, fretful Spirits, that will not abide the heavenly Do∣ctrine, and the Admonitions, Exhortations and Reproofs of the Holy Ghost, or heavenly Spirit of God; which would bring you to be Conformable to the Death of Christ, and to his Image, that ye might have Fellowship with him in his Resurrection. And therefore it is good for all to bow to the Name of Jesus, their Saviour, and that all may Confess him to the Glory of God the Father. For I have had a Concern upon me, in a sense of the Danger of Young Peoples going into the Fashions of the World, and Old Peoples going into the Earth, and many go∣ing into a loose and false Liberty; till at last they go quite out into the Spirit of the World, as some have done. Such their House hath been built upon the Sand on the Sea shore, not up∣on Christ the Rock; that they are so soon in the World again, under a pretence of Liberty of Conscience. But it is not a pure Conscience, nor in the Spirit of God, nor in Christ Jesus: for in the Liberty in the Spirit there is the Ʋnity, which is the Bond of Peace; and all are one in Christ Jesus, in whom is the true Liberty. And this is not of the World: for He is not of the World. And therefore all are to stand fast in him, as they have received him; for in him there is peace, who is the Prince of Peace: but in the World there is Trouble. For the Spirit of the World is a Troublesome Spirit; but the Spirit of Christ is a Peaceable Spirit: and in it God Almighty preserve all the Faith∣ful, Amen. Gooses, the 1st of the 2d Month, 1690. G. F. Another Paper, that I writ while I was here, was concern∣ing the Ensign, which Isaiah prophesied the Lord should set up for the Gentiles, which I shewed was Christ. Of that Paper this which follows, is a Copy: THE Lord saith; They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my ho∣ly Mountain: for the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea, Isa. 11.9. And in that day there shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall stand for an Ensign of the People; to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his Rest shall be glo∣rious,
ver. 10. And he shall reign over the Gentiles, and in him shall the Gentiles trust, Rom. 15.12. This Ensign is Christ, which was prophesied of by the Prophet; which Prophecy the Apostle, who was a Minister to the Gentiles, sheweth was ful∣filled in the New Testament. And in this Day of Christ, Isaiah saith, The Lord shall set his hand again the second time, to Reco∣ver the Remnant of his People, which shall be left, from Assyria and from Egypt, &c. And he shall set up an Ensign for the Nati∣ons, and shall assemble the Outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four Corners of the Earth, ver. 11, 12. This is in the Day of Christ, and his Gospel of Life and Salvation, which is preached to every Creature under Heaven, who Enlighteneth every Man that cometh into the World, both Jews and Gentiles; that by his heavenly, divine Light they may see Christ, their Ensign, and Captain of their Salvation: So Christ is one Ensign both to the Jews and Gentiles. And Isaiah saith, The Redeemer shall come to Sion, &c. Isa. 59.20. And, This is my Covenant with them, saith the Lord, my Spirit, that is upon thee (to wit, Christ) and my Words, which I have put in thy Mouth, shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed's Seed, saith the Lord, from hence-forth and for ever, ver. 21. Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, Chap. 60.1. And the Gentiles shall come to thy Light, ver. 3. And the abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee, ver. 5. (the Sea is the World.) The Lord shall be thy everlasting Light, ver. 20. And, Thou shalt call thy Walls, Salvation, and thy Gates, Praise, ver. 18. And the Lord saith; I will make the place of my Feet glorious, ver. 13. Heaven is his Throne, and Earth is his Footstool, Chap 66.1. And he that puts his trust in me, saith the Lord, shall possess the Land, and shall inherit my holy Mountain, Chap. 57.13. Which Mountain is Established above all the Mountains and Hills, Isa. 2.2. The Lord saith (speak∣ing of Christ) I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles, Isa. 42.1. And he saith of him, I will give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a Light of the Gentiles; To open the blind Eyes, to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in Darkness, out of the Prison-house. I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory will I not give to another, neither my Praise to graven Images, ver. 6, 7, 8. So Christ the Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen; and the Gentiles are come to the Light of Christ: and this Prophesie of Isaiah concerning Christ, many of the Gentiles witness ful∣filled, that Salvation is come to the Gentiles, Rom. 11.11. And God gave his Glory to his Son: And Christ saith, The Glory, which thou gavest me, I have given them (namely, his Believers and Followers) that they may be one, even as we are one, John 17.22. Now here you may see, how the Promises and Pro∣phecies are fulfilled in Christ Jesus, whom God hath given for an Ensign both to the Jews and Gentiles, and the Captain of their Salvation; and he doth enlighten every one, that cometh
into the World: that with his heavenly, divine Light they might see Christ, the Lord from Heaven, their Captain and En∣sign, and trust in him, who is their Conqueror; who bruises the Serpent's head, and destroys the Devil and his Works: And Christ and his Followers overcome the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet. And therefore all Jews, Gentiles and Christians, that come to believe in Christ, are to stand to their Ensign, Christ; who is also the Captain of their Salvation, who is above all En∣signs and Captains below. For he is from above, and therefore all are to trust in him; for he is certain and able to save to the utmost, &c. and is the same Ensign and Captain to day, as he was yesterday, and so for ever, the First and Last, the Begin∣ning and Ending, and Lord of all Lords, and King of all Kings upon the Earth; and there is nothing certain to be trusted in, below Christ Jesus, who is from above. You see in the Scriptures, there were many Ways and Religions among the Heathen, as there were many Sects among the Jews, when Christ came: And now there are many Sects, or Religions among the Chri∣stians, who believe from the Scriptures, that he is come; as the Jews believed, he was to come. But they that close their Eyes, and stop their Ears to the Light of Christ, they are not like to see Christ, who hath enlightened them, to be their Ensign, and the Captain of their Salvation, that see not with the heavenly Eye, nor hear with the heavenly Ear, to see and hear their hea∣venly Ensign, and Captain of their Salvation, to convert them and heal them; that they might follow him, and be of his ho∣ly Camp, and be his heavenly Soldiers, to whom he gives spi∣ritual Arms and Armour, the Helmet of Salvation, the Breast-plate of Righteousness, the Armour of Light, and the Shield of Faith (which will quench all the fiery Darts of Satan, and give Victory) and the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, which shall cut and hammer down, and burn up all the Strong holds of Satan. Also he cloatheth his Soldiers with fine Linnen, white and clean, his Righteousness, and shooeth them with the ever∣lasting Gospel of Peace, the Power of God; which Cloths and Shooes will never wax Old. And all that are shod with the E∣verlasting Gospel, the Power of God, they will never wax Old; but will stand all Storms and Tempests in the World. And they that are shod with the Gospel, the Power of God, can in it tread upon Serpents, Vipers and Scorpions, and all the venemous Beasts upon the Earth, and all the Thorns, Briars, Brambles, Thistles, and sharp Rocks and Mountains, and never be hurt, nor never wear out their Shooes; but their Feet are always beautiful up∣on the Mountains. Moses a Captain, the Servant of the Lord, said unto the People of Israel, I have led you forty years in the Wil∣derness: your Cloths are not waxen old upon you, and thy Shooe is not waxen old upon thy foot, Deut. 29.5. Here ye may see, the Jews in the Old Testament, their Cloths and their Shooes did not wax old: But they, who are Christ's followers, whom he shoo∣eth with his Everlasting Gospel of Peace, and Cloatheth with his fine Linnen, his Righteousness, and Arms with his Arms and Ar∣mour,
they are cloathed, shod and armed, with that which will never decay, nor wax old, nor canker, nor rust, nor corrupt, nor grow blunt. Now all, (whether Christians, or Jews, or Gentiles) that hate the Light of Christ, and close their Eyes, and stop their Ears to it, are not like to see Christ their En∣sign, and Captain of their Salvation, but are blind. And as there is no outward Captain, would List a Company of blind and deaf men, and cloath and arm them with outward Armour; so such, as are blind and deaf, whose Eyes are closed, and Ears stopped to the heavenly Light of Christ, he is not like to cloath them with his fine Linnen, and arm them with his heavenly and spi∣ritual Armour; nor are they like to be spiritually and heaven∣ly disciplined, and to see and know his holy and spiritual, li∣ving Camp, nor to follow him, while they are deaf and blind, and hate his Light, which is the Life in Christ, the heavenly Ensign and Captain of their Salvation. For it is the Light, that shines in the heart, which gives the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus; who is the Ensign and Captain of Mens Salvations, and who hath brought, and doth bring ma∣ny Sons unto glory: Praises, Honour and Glory be unto the Lord over all, who liveth for ever, Amen. Gooses, the 14th of the 2d Month, 1690. G. F. London.A Week after this I return'd to London: and after a little stay there,Kingston. went down to visit Friends at Kingston, where I stay'd not long;London. but came back to London, and remained there in the Lord's work,Yearly-Meeting. till after the Yearly-Meeting, which was in the Fourth Month this Year: in which the wonted Goodness of the Lord was witnessed, and his blessed Presence enjoyed, and his heavenly Power livingly felt, opening the hearts of his People unto him, and his Divine Treasures of Life and Wisdom in and unto them; whereby many useful and necessary things, relating to the safe∣ty of Friends, and to the honour and prosperity of Truth, were weightily treated of, and unanimously concluded. After the Meeting was over, I writ the following Paper to Friends, to be added to the Epistle, which from the Yearly-Meet∣ing was sent into the several Counties. ALL Friends every where, that are alive to God through Jesus Christ, and are living Members of Christ the holy Head; Be still, and stand still in the Lord's Camp of Holiness and Righteousness, and therein see the Salvation of God, and your Eternal Life, Rest and Peace: and in it you may feel and see, the Lord's Power is over all; and how the Lord is at work in his Power, and ruling the Nations with his Rod of Iron, and is breaking (in the Nations) the old, leaky Vessels and Cisterns to pieces, like the Potter's Vessels, that will not hold his living Wa∣ter of Life, who are erred from the Spirit. But blessed be the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth,1690. London. Yearly Meeting. who by his Eternal Arm and Power hath settled all his People upon the living, holy Rock and Foundation, that stands sure; whom he hath drawn by his Spi∣rit to his Son, and gathered them into the Name of Jesus Christ, his only begotten Son, full of Grace and Truth: who hath all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him. Whose Name is a∣bove every Name under the whole Heaven: and all his living Members know, there is no Salvation given by any other Name under the whole Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus; and he, their Salvation, and their living Head is felt in the midst of them in his Light, Life, Spirit, Grace and Truth, and his Word of Patience, Wisdom and Power: who is his People's Prophet, that God hath raised up, in his New Testament and Covenant, to open to them; and their living Shepherd, that hath purchased, redeemed and bought them with his precious Blood. And Christ, the living One, feeds his living Sheep in his living Pastures of Life, and his living Sheep know their living Shepherd's voice, with his living Bread and Water, and follow him; and will not follow any of the World's Hirelings, nor Thieves, nor Robbers, nor Climbers, that are without Christ, the Door. And likewise Christ's living Children know Christ, the Bishop of their Souls, to oversee them with his heavenly and spiritual Eye, that they may be preserved in his Fold of Life, and go no more forth. And also they know Christ, their holy Priest, that by the Grace of God tasted Death for them, and for every Man, and is a Propitiation for their Sins; and not for their Sins only, but for the Sins of the whole World: and by the one Offering up of himself he hath perfected for ever, them that are sanctified. And such an High-Priest becomes Christ's Sheep in his New Covenant and Testament, who is holy and harmless, and separate from sinners, and is made higher than the Heavens; who is not made a Priest after the Order of Aaron, with his Tithes, Offerings, &c. but he makes an end of all those things, and hath abolish∣ed them: and is made an High-Priest after the Power of an endless life, who ever liveth to make Intercession for his Peo∣ple; and is able to save to the uttermost, all that come to God through him. Who is the one holy Mediator betwixt God and Man: and who sanctifies his People, his Church, that he is Head of, and presents them to God without spot, or wrinkle, or blemish, or any such thing; and makes them an holy, royal Priesthood, to offer up spiritual, holy Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, who is King of all Kings, and Lord of all Lords in the Earth. So an holy, heavenly King, who hath all power in Heaven and Earth given to him; and rules in all the hearts of his Sheep and Lambs by his holy, divine, precious Faith, that is held in all the pure Consciences of his People: which holy Faith, Christ, the holy One, is the Author and Finisher of. By which holy Faith all the Just live, and in which holy, divine and precious Faith all the Just and holy Ones have Unity; and by it they do quench all the fiery Darts of Satan: and by this holy, divine and precious Faith they have access to the pure
God, in which they do please him. And Christ, who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens, in his New Testament and New Covenant, is a Minister of the Sanctuary and true Tabernacle, which the Lord hath pitcht, and not Man. And therefore all the Lambs and Sheep of Christ must feel this holy Minister in their Temple and Sanctuary, who mi∣nisters spiritual, holy and heavenly things to them in their San∣ctuary and Tabernacle. For all the Tabernacles and Sanctuaries, that are built or pitcht by Man, Men make Ministers for them; and such Ministers are of Men and by Men, with their world∣ly Sanctuaries and Tabernacles of Mens pitching, by Mens hands. And now, all Dear Friends and Brethren every where, that are the Flock of Christ: Christ, our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us all keep this heavenly Feast of our Passover in his New Testament and Covenant, not with Old Leaven nei∣ther of Malice nor Wickedness; but let all that be purged out, with the sour old leavened Bread, that all may become a new Lump: and so keep this heavenly Feast of Christ, our heavenly Passover, with the unleavened Bread (mark, with the unlea∣vened Bread) of Sincerity and Truth. My desires are, that all the Flock of Christ every where may keep this heavenly Feast of Christ, our heavenly Passover, with his heavenly, unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth, Amen. G. F. I stay'd in Town between Three Weeks and a Month, after the Yearly-Meeting was over: and then went into the Country, first to Tottenham-High-Cross,Totten∣ham-High-Cross. Ford-green. Enfield. where was a Meeting on the First-day of the Week, which I was at; and then went to Edward Man's House at Ford-Green near Winchmore-Hill: and on the First-day following went from thence to the Meeting at Enfield; where the Lord gave me many precious Openings to declare to the People. Afterwards, moving to and fro amongst Friends thereabouts, I visited the Meetings at Chess-hunt,Chess-hunt Waltham-Abbey. Enfield Tottenham Winch∣more-hill. Hartford. Waltham-Abbey, Enfield, Totten∣ham and Winchmore-hill frequently; the Lord being with me, and opening many deep and weighty Truths, divine and hea∣venly Mysteries to his People through me, to their great Re∣freshment, and my Joy. After some time I went to Hartford, to visit the Friends there; and was at their Meeting on a First-day. And having something more particular upon me to the Ancient Friends of that place, I had a Meeting with some of them the next day, and imparted to them, what the Lord had given me for them.Ware. Then passing thence to Ware, I made a little stay amongst Friends there, and was at their Meeting. After which, returning,Edmun∣ton Tottenham London. amongst Friends about Edmunton-side and Tottenham, and taking Meetings as I went, I came back to London in the end of the Seventh Month.
I remained now at London,1690. London. till the beginning of the Ninth Month, being continually exercised in the Work of the Lord, ei∣ther in Publick Meetings, opening the Way of Truth to People, and building up and establishing Friends therein; or in other Services relating to the Church of God. For the Parliament now sitting, and having a Bill before them concerning Oaths, and a∣nother concerning Clandestine Marriages; several Friends did at∣tend the House, to see to get those Bills so worded, that they might not be hurtful to Friends: In this Service I also assisted, attending on the Parliament, and discoursing the Matter with se∣veral of the Members. Having stay'd more than a Month in London, and much spent my self in these Services, I went out of Town to Tottenham,Tottenham Ford-Green. and some∣time after to Ford-Green near London; at which Places I conti∣nued several Weeks, visiting Friends Meetings round about there, at Tottenham, Enfield and Winchmore-Hill.Tottenham Enfield. Winch∣more-hill. In this time several things came upon me to Write: whereof One was an Epistle to Friends in the Ministry; and was as followeth: ALL Friends in the Ministry every where,Ford-Green. to whom God hath given a Gift of the Ministry, and who use to Travel up and down in the Gift of the Ministry, Do not hide your Ta∣lent, nor put your Light under a Bushel; Nor Cumber your selves, nor entangle your selves with the Affairs of this World. For the natural Soldiers are not to Cumber themselves with the World; much less the Soldiers of Christ, who are not of this World; but are to mind the Riches and Glory of the World, that is Ever∣lasting. And therefore stir up the Gift of God in you, and Im∣prove it: and do not sit down, Demas-like, and embrace this present World, that will have an end; lest ye become Idola∣ters. But be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth, and spread it abroad in the Day-light of Christ, you who have sought the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof, and have recei∣ved it and preached it; which stands in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost: As Able Ministers of the Spirit sow to the Spirit, that of the Spirit ye may reap Life Everlasting. And go on in the Spirit, plowing with it in the purifying Hope; and threshing, with the Power and Spirit of God, the Wheat out of the Chaff of Corruption, in the same Hope. For he that looks back from the spiritual Plow into the World, is not fit for the Spiritual and Everlasting Kingdom of God; and then he is not like to press into it, as the Faithful do. Therefore you that are awakened, and are come to Righteousness, and to the Knowledge of the Truth, keep your selves awakened in it; then the Enemy cannot sow his Tares in your Field: for Truth and Righteousness is over him, and before he was. So my de∣sires are, that all may fulfil their Ministry, that the Lord Jesus Christ hath committed to them; and then by the Blood (or Life) and Testimony of Jesus you will overcome the Enemy, that opposes it, within and without. And all you that do preach the Truth, do it as it is in Jesus, in Love: And all that are Be∣lievers
in Jesus,1690. Ford-Green. and receivers of him, he gives them Power to become the Sons of God, and so Joint-heirs with Christ; whom he calleth Brethren: and he gives them the Water of Life, which shall be a Well in them, springing as a River up to Eternal Life; that they may water the spiritual Plants of the living God. So that all may be spiritual Planters, and spiritual Waterers; and may see with the spiritual Eye the Everlasting, Eternal God o∣ver all to give the Increase, who is the Infinite Fountain. So my desires are, that you may be kept our of all the beggarly Ele∣ments of the World, which is below the spiritual Region, to Christ the Head; and may hold him, who bruiseth the Head of Enmity, and was, before it was: So that ye may all be united together in love, in your Head, Christ, and be ordered by his heavenly, gentle, peaceable Wisdom to the Glory of God. For all that be in Christ, are in love, peace and Ʋnity; and in him they are strong, and in a full Perswasion: and in him, who is the First and Last, they are in a heavenly Resolution and Con∣fidence for God's Everlasting Honour and Glory, Amen. From him, who is Translated into the Kingdom of his Dear Son, with all his Saints, a heavenly Salutation: And salute ye one another with a holy Kiss of Charity, that never faileth. G. F. Ford Green, the 25th of the 9th Month, 1690. Another Epistle I writ soon after, more particularly to the Friends in the Ministry, that were gone into America: which was thus; DEar Friends and Brethren, that are Ministers, and Exhorters, and Admonishers, that are gone into America and the Islands there-aways: Stir up the Gift of God in you, and the pure Mind, and improve your Talents; that ye may be the Light of the World, a City set upon an Hill, that cannot be hid: and let your Light shine among the Indians, and the Blacks and the Whites; that ye may answer the Truth in them, and bring them to their Standard and Ensign, that God hath set up, Christ Jesus. For from the Rising of the Sun to the Going down of the same God's Name shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every Temple, or sanctified Heart, Incense shall be offered up to God's Name. And have Salt in your selves, that ye may be the Salt of the Earth, that ye may salt it; that it may be preserved from Corruption and Putrefaction: so that all Sacrifi∣ces, offered up to the Lord, may be salted and seasoned, and be a good Savour to God. And all grow in the Faith and Grace of Christ, that ye may not be like Dwarfs: for a Dwarf shall not come near to Offer upon God's Altar; though he may eat of God's Bread, that he may grow by it. And Friends, Be not negligent, but keep up your Negroes-Meetings and your Fa∣mily-Meetings;
and have Meetings with the Indian Kings,1690. Tottenham and their Councils and Subjects every where, and with others: and bring them all to the Baptizing and Circumcising Spirit, by which they may know God, and serve and worship him. And all take heed of sitting down in the Earth, and having your Minds in the earthly Things, Coveting and Striving for the Earth: for to be carnally minded brings death, and Covetousness is Idolatry. There is too much Strife and Contention about that Idol, which makes too many go out of the Sense and Fear of God; so that some have lost Morality and Humanity, and the true Christian Charity. O therefore, be awakened to Righteousness, and keep awakened: for the Enemy soweth his Tares, while Men and Wo∣men sleep in Carelesness and Security. Therefore so many slothful Ones go in their filthy Rags, and have not the fine Lin∣nen, the Righteousness of Christ; but are stragling, and plowing with their Ox and their Ass, in their woollen and linnen Gar∣ments, mixt Stuff, feeding upon Torn food, and that dieth of it self, and drinking of the dregs of their old Bottle, and eat∣ing the sour, leavened Bread, which makes their hearts burn one against another. But all are to keep the Feast of Christ, our Passover, with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth. And this unleavened Bread of Life from Heaven makes all Hearts and Souls glad and joyful, and lightsome and cheer∣ful, to serve and love God, and to love and serve one another in the peaceable Truth, and to keep in the Ʋnity of God's Spirit, which is the Bond of (the Lord of Lords, and the King of all Kings his) Peace. In this Love and Peace God Almighty keep and preserve all his People, and make them valiant for his Truth upon the Earth, to spread it abroad both in Doctrine, and good Life and Conversation, Amen. All the Members of Christ have need one of another. For the Foot hath need of the Hand, and the Hand hath need of the Foot: The Ear hath need of the Eye, and the Eye of the Ear. So that all the Members are serviceable in the Body, which Christ is the Head of; and the Head sees their Service. There∣fore let none despise the least Member. And have a Care to keep down that greedy, earthly Mind, that raveneth and coveteth after the Riches and Things of this World; lest ye fall into the low Region, like the Gentiles or Heathen, and so lose the Kingdom of God, that is Everlasting: But seek that first, and God knows, what things ye have need of; who takes care for all both in Heaven and in the Earth: Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable Gifts, both Temporal and Spiritual. Tottenham, the 11th of the 10th Month, 1690. G. F.
Not long after this I returned to London, and was almost daily with Friends at Meetings.1690. London. And when I had been near Two Weeks in Town, The sense of the great Hardships and sore Suffer∣ings, that Friends had been and were under in Ireland, coming with great weight upon me; I was moved to write the following Epistle, as a Word of Consolation unto them. DEar Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, whom the Lord by his Eternal Arm and Power hath upheld through your great Sufferings, Exercises, Trials and Hardships (more, I believe, then can be uttered) up and down that Na∣tion, which I am very sensible of; and the rest of the faithful Friends, that have been Partakers with you in your Sufferings: and cannot but suffer with the Lord's People, that suffer. And my Confidence hath been in the Lord, that he would and will support you in all your Sufferings; and that he would preserve all the Faithful in his Wisdom, that they would give no just Occasion to one nor other to make them suffer: And therefore, if that you did suffer wrongfully, or unjustly, the righteous God would assist you, and uphold you; and reward them according to their Works, that opprest or wronged you. And now my desire is unto the Lord, that in the same holy and heavenly Wisdom of God ye may all be preserved to the End of your days, to the Glory of God, minding God Almighty's supporting Hand and Power: who is God Al-sufficient, to strengthen, help and refresh in time of Need. And let none forget the Lord's Mercies and Kindnesses, which endure for ever: but al∣ways live in the sense of them. And truly Friends, when I con∣sider the thing, It is the great Mercy of the Lord, that ye have not been all swallowed up; seeing with what Spirits ye have been compassed about. But the Lord carrieth his Lambs in his Arms, and they are as tender to him, as the Apple of his Eye: And his Power is his Hedge about his Vineyard of heavenly Plants. And therefore it is good for all his Children, to be given up to the Lord with their Minds and Souls, Hearts and Spirits, who is a faithful Keeper, that never slumbers nor sleeps; but is able to preserve and keep you, and to save to the utmost: and none can hurt so much as an hair of your Heads, except he suffer it, to try you; for he upholds all things, in Heaven and Earth, by the Word of his Power: All things were made by Christ, and by him all things do consist (mark, consist) whether they be Visibles, or Invisibles, &c. So he hath power over all; for all Power in Heaven and Earth is given to him: and to you, that have received him, he hath given Power to become the Sons and Daughters of God; so living Members of Christ, the living Head, and grafted into him, in whom ye have Eternal Life. And Christ, the Seed, reigns, and his Power is over all; who bruises the Serpent's Head, and destroys the Devil and his Works, and was before he was. And so all of you live and walk in Christ Jesus; so that nothing may be between you and God, but
Christ, in whom ye have Salvation, Life, Rest and Peace with God. As for the passages of Truth in this Land and abroad, I do hear, that in Holland and Germany and there-aways, Friends are in Love, Ʋnity and Peace: And in Jamaica, Barbados, Me∣vis, Antego, Maryland and New-England I hear nothing, but Friends are in Ʋnity and Peace. The Lord preserve them all out of the World, (in which there is Trouble) in Christ Jesus, in whom there is Peace, Life, Love and Ʋnity, Amen. So my Love in the Lord Jesus Christ to all Friends every where in your Land, as though I named them. London, the 10th of the 11th Month, 1690. G. F. THus, Reader, hast thou had some Account of the Life and Tra∣vels, Labours, Sufferings and Manifold Trials and Exercises of this holy Man of God, from his Youth to almost the time of his Death: Of which himself kept a Journal; out of which the fore∣going Sheets were transcribed. It remains, that an Account be ad∣ded of the Time, Place and Manner of his Death and Burial; Which were thus: The next day, after he had written the foregoing Epistle to Friends in Ireland, be went to the Meeting at Gracious-street, which was large (it being on the First-day of the Week:) And the Lord ena∣bled him to preach the Truth fully and effectually, opening many deep and weighty things with great Power and Clearness. After which having Prayed, and the Meeting being ended, he went to Hen∣ry Gouldney's (a Friend's House in Whitehart-Court, near the Meet∣ing house:) and some Friends going with him thither, he told them, He thought, he felt the Cold strike to his heart, as he came out of the Meeting; yet added, I am glad I was here: Now I am clear, I am fully clear. As soon as those Friends, that were with him, were withdrawn, he lay down upon a Bed (as he sometimes used to do, through Weariness after a Meeting) but soon rose again; and in a little time lay down again, complaining still of Cold. And his Strength sensibly decaying, he was fain soon after to go into Bed; where he lay in much Contentment and Peace, and very sensible to the Last. And as in the whole Course of his Life, his Spirit in the universal Love of God, was set and bent for the exalting of Truth and Righteousness, and the making known the Way thereof to the Nations and Peoples afar off; so now, in the time of his outward Weakness, his Mind was intent upon, and (as it were) wholly taken up with that: And some particular Friends he sent for, to whom he exprest his Mind and Desire for the Spreading Friends Books, and Truth thereby in the World, and through the Nations thereof. Di∣vers Friends came to visit him in his Ilness; unto some of whom he
said, All is well: The Seed of God reigns over all, and over Death it self. And though (said he) I am weak in Body; yet the Power of God is over all, and the Seed reigns over all disor∣derly Spirits. Thus lying in an heavenly frame of Mind, his Spirit wholly exercised towards the Lord, he grew weaker and weaker in his natural Strength; and on the Third day of that Week, between the hours of Nine and Ten in the Evening, he quietly departed this Life in Peace, and sweetly fell asleep in the Lord, whose blessed Truth he had livingly and powerfully preached in the Meeting but two days before. Thus ended he his Days in his faithful Testimony, in perfect Love and Ʋnity with his Brethren, and in Peace and Good-will to all Men, on the 13th day of the 11th Month 1690. being then in the 67th year of his Age. Ʋpon the 16th day of the same Month (being the sixth of the Week, and the Day appointed for his Funeral) a very great Con∣course of Friends, and other People of divers sorts, Assembled together at the Meeting-house in White-Hart-Court near Gracious-street, about the middle time of the day, in order to attend his Body to the Grave. The Meeting was held about two hours with great and heavenly Solemnity, manifestly attended with the Lord's blessed Presence and glorious Power; in which divers living Testimonies were given, from a lively Remembrance and Sense of the blessed Mini∣stry of this Dear and Ancient Servant of the Lord, his early En∣tring into the Lord's Work at the breaking forth of this Gospel-day, his innocent Life, long and great Travels, and unwearied Labours of Love in the Everlasting Gospel, for the turning and gathering many Thousands from Darkness to the Light of Christ Jesus, the Foun∣dation of true Faith; his manifold Sufferings, Afflictions and Oppo∣sitions, which he met withal for his faithful Testimony, both from his open Adversaries, and from false Brethren; and his Preservations, Deliverances and Dominion in, out of and over them all, by the Power of God: To whom the Glory and Honour always was by him, and is, and always ought to be by all Ascribed. After the Meeting was ended, his Body was born by Friends, and accompanied by very great Numbers of Friends, and other People, to Friends Burying-Ground near Bunhill-Fields: where, after a solemn Waiting upon the Lord, and several living Testimonies borne, recom∣mending the Company to the Guidance and Protection of that Divine Spirit and Power, by which this holy Man of God had been raised up, furnished, supported and preserved to the end of his Day, his Bo∣dy was decently committed to the Earth; but his Memorial shall Re∣main, and be Everlastingly Blessed among the Righteous.
An Epistle of Dear George Fox's, which was writ with his own Hand, and left Sealed up with this Superscription, (viz. Not to be opened before the Time;) which after his Decease being opened, was thought meet to be printed, being as followeth: Viz. For the Yearly and Second-Days-Meeting in London, and to all the Children of God in all Places in the World. By and from G. F. This for all the Children of God every where, that are led by his Spirit, and do walk in his Light, in which they have Life, and U∣nity, and Fellowship with the Father, and the Son, and one with another. KEep all your Meetings in the Name of the Lord Jesus, that be gathered in his Name by his Light, Grace, Truth, Power and Spirit; by which you will feel his blessed and re∣freshing Presence among you and in you, to your Comfort and God's Glory. And now all Friends, All your Meetings, both Mens and Wo∣mens, Monthly and Quarterly, and Yearly, &c. were set up by the Power, and Spirit, and Wisdom of God; and in them you do know, that you have felt both his Power, and Spirit, and Wis∣dom, and blessed refreshing Presence among you, and in you, to his Praise and Glory, and your Comfort: So that you have been a City set on a Hill, that cannot be hid. And although many loose and unruly Spirits have risen betimes to Oppose you and them, both in Print and other ways; but you have seen, how they have come to Nought: and the Lord hath blasted them, and brought their Deeds to Light, and made them Manifest to be the Trees without Fruit, and Wells with∣out Water, and Wandering Stars from the Firmament of God's Power, and the Raging Waves of the Sea, casting up their Mire and Dirt: And many of them are like the Dog turn'd to his Old Vomit, and the Sow that was washed, turned again to the Mire. And this hath been the Condition of many, God know∣eth, and his People! And therefore all to stand Stedfast in Christ Jesus, your Head, in whom you are all one, Male and Female, and know his Go∣vernment, and of the Encrease of his Government and Peace there shall be no End; but there will be an End of the Devil's, and of all them, that be out of Christ, and do Oppose it and him, whose Judgment doth not linger, and their Damnation doth not slumber: And therefore in God and Christ's Light, Life,
Spirit and Power live and walk, that is over all (and the Seed of it) in Love and in Innocency, and Simplicity; and in Righte∣ousness and Holiness dwell, and in his Power and Holy Ghost, in which God's Kingdom doth stand. All Children of New and Heavenly Jerusalem, that is from above, and is free, with all her Holy, Spiritual Children, To her keep your Eyes. And as for this Spirit of Rebellion and Opposition, that hath ri∣sen formerly and lately, it is out of the Kingdom of God and Heavenly Jerusalem; and is for Judgment and Condemnation, with all its Books, Words and Works. And therefore Friends are to live and walk in the Power and Spirit of God, that is over it, and in the Seed, that will bruise and break it to pieces: In which Seed you have Joy and Peace with God, and Power and Authority to Judge it; and your Unity is in the Power and Spi∣rit of God, that doth Judge it: and all God's Witnesses in his Tabernacle go out against it, and always have and will. And let no Man live to Self, but to the Lord, as they will die in him; and seek the Peace of the Church of Christ, and the Peace of all Men in him: for Blessed are the Peace-makers. And dwell in the pure, peaceable, Heavenly Wisdom of God, that is Gentle, and Easie to be entreated, that is full of Mercy; all striving to be of one Mind, Heart, Soul and Judgment in Christ, having his Mind and Spirit dwelling in you, building up one another in the Love of God, which doth edifie the Body of Christ, his Church, who is the holy Head thereof. So Glory to God through Christ, in this Age and all other Ages, who is the Rock and Foundation, and the Emanuel, God with us, Amen, over all, the Beginning and the Ending; in him Live and Walk, in whom you have Life Eternal, in whom you will feel me, and I you. All Children of New Jerusalem, that descends from above, the Holy City, which the Lord and the Lamb is the Light thereof, and is the Temple; in it they are born again of the Spirit: So Jerusalem that is above, is the Mother of them, that are born of the Spirit. And so they that come, and are come to Heaven∣ly Jerusalem, are them that receive Christ; and he giveth them Power to become the Sons of God, and are born again of the Spirit: So Jerusalem, that is their Mother. And such do come to Heavenly Mount Sion, and the innumerable Company of Angels, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect; and are come to the Church of the Living God written in Heaven, and have the Name of God, and the City of God written upon them: So here is a New Mother, that bringeth forth a Heavenly and a Spiritual Generation. There is no Schism, nor Division, nor Contention, nor Strife in Heavenly Jerusalem, nor in the Body of Christ, which is made up of living Stones, a Spiritual House. And Christ is not divi∣ded, for in him there is Peace. Christ saith, In me you have Peace. And he is from above, and not of this World; but in the World be∣low, in the Spirit of it there is Trouble: therefore keep in Christ, and walk in him, Amen. G. F.
And Jerusalem was the Mother of all the true Christians be∣fore the Apostacy; and since the outward Christians are broken into many Sects, and they have gotten many Mothers: But all they, that are come out of the Apostacy by the Power and Spirit of Christ, Jerusalem that is above, is their Mother, (and none below her;) who doth nourish all her Spiritual Children. Read at the Yearly-Meeting in London, 1691. G. F. Reader, please to note, That these following Papers and Epistles (some of which being mention'd in the Journal, page 452, &c. and there omitted) are found meet to be here insert∣ed; and are as followeth. A Warning to the Magistrates and People of the City of Oldenborg. Friends, HAve you not seen and felt the Judgments of God upon your City, the Lord sending Lightning from Heaven,  Amster∣dam. that de∣stroy'd and burnt it? And as I passed thorow your City on a First-day of the Week, which you call your Sabbath,To pag. 448 I saw some drinking, and Soldiers playing at Shuffle-board, and others with their Shops open, and Trading, when they should have been Waiting upon God, and Worshipping him: And your People were light and vain, without any sense of God's Judgments, or Repentance. O therefore Repent, lest the All-seeing God, who sees all your Acti∣ons, and is over all, do bring swift Judgment upon you in his Wrath and Fury, and Indignation. And so Repent, and lay away all manner of Evil, and Wickedness, and Ungodliness, and Ʋnrighteous∣ness: for the Day of the Lord will come upon all that do Evil, and the Workers of Iniquity; and this mighty Day of the Lord will find them all out, and will burn, as an Oven; and burn up all the Proud and Wicked, and neither leave them Root nor Branch. And therefore all ye Magistrates, Priests and People, search in your selves to find out the Cause, and what Wickedness and Evil it has been you have Committed, that has brought the Wrath, and Vengeance, and Judgments of God upon you and upon your City, in burning of it. And therefore all Return, and come to the Light of Christ in your hearts, and to God's Spirit, and to the Grace and Truth in your hearts, that comes by Jesus Christ; that with it ye may search your hearts. And so, do not grieve, nor vex, nor quench God's good Spirit in your hearts, and walk not despite∣fully against the Spirit of Grace, nor turn from it into Wanton∣ness;
and yet make a Profession of God and Christ in Words,1677. Amster∣dam. when your hearts are afar off, and living in Pleasures, and wan∣tonly upon the Earth, sporting your selves, killing the Just, and Crucifying to your selves Christ afresh, and putting him to open shame: And so dishonouring God and Christ, and Christianity, and making a Profession and a Trade of the Scriptures; keeping Peo∣ple always Learning, that they may be always paying. Therefore Cease from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, and look unto the Lord, all ye ends of the Earth, and be saved: for the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is come, to teach his People himself by his Light, Spirit, Grace and Truth, and to bring them off all the World's Teachers. And God hath raised up Christ Jesus his Pro∣phet, whom People should hear; and saith, This is my beloved Son, hear ye him: and Christ saith, Learn of me, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; and no Man comes to the Father, but by me. And there is no Salvation by any other Name under the whole Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus, who saith, I am the good Shepherd, and have laid down my Life for my Sheep, and my Sheep hear my voice and follow me, and will not follow the Hireling: For Christ feeds them in the Pastures of Life, that will never wither. And God hath anointed Christ Jesus to preach, if you will hear him; and God hath given Christ for a Counsellor, and a Leader, if you will be Led and Counselled by him; and God hath given Christ for a Bishop to Oversee you, and a King to Rule you, if you will be Overseen and Ruled by him. And you that will not have Christ to Rule over you, who never sinned, nor Guile was found in his Mouth; you may read his Sentence in the New Te∣stament upon such. And is not Christ a sufficient Teacher, whose Blood was shed for you, and tasted Death for every Man? And doth not Christ say to his Ministers, Freely ye have received, freely give? And the Apostle saith, We covet no Man's Gold, Sil∣ver or Apparel; but Laboured with their Hands, and kept the Gospel without Charge: Have they that are called Ministers a∣mongst you, done the same, and kept this Command of Christ Jesus? Let them be Examined, and Examine themselves. And have you not trimmed your Outsides? but look within with the Light and Spirit of Christ Jesus, and see, if your Insides be not black and foul. For Christ Jesus, who doth Enlighten every Man, that cometh into the World, with the Life in himself, who is the Word, he saith; Believe in the Light, that ye may become Chil∣dren of the Light: and with the Light ye may see all the Evil Deeds ye have done, and all your ungodly Deeds, that ye have acted and committed; and all your ungodly Words you have spo∣ken; and all your ungodly Thoughts ye think; that ye may turn from them, and turn to Christ, from whence the Light comes: who is your Saviour and Redeemer, who hath given you a Light to see your Sin, and how that you are dead in Adam; that with the same Light you may see Christ, the quickening Spirit, who makes you alive to God, and saves you from your sin. But if you hate the Light, which is the Life in Christ, the Prince of Life; and Love the Darkness and the Prince of Darkness more,
than the Light, or the Life in Christ, whose Deeds be Evil, and because it will Reprove you; Christ tells you, This Light will be your Condemnation, John 3. And therefore be Warned now in your Day, and while you have Time, turn to the Lord, and do not quench the Spirit of the Father, by which he draws to his Son: nor hate the Light of Christ; for if you do, you hate the Life in Christ, and so remain under Condemnation from God and Christ with the Light, who now speaks to his People by his Son, as he did in the Apostles Days; so the same God, that was the Speaker by the Prophets to the Fathers, and Speaker to A∣dam and Eve in Paradise: And happy had Adam and Eve, and the Jews, and all Christians been, if they had kept to this Speaker, and not have followed the Serpent, that false Speaker, and his In∣struments. And now God is the true Speaker by his Son, who bruises the Head of the Serpent, the false Teacher, who is the Head of all false Ways, and false Prophets, and false Churches, and false Religions and Worships. And so God and Christ is bringing Peo∣ple to the pure and undefiled Religion, that will keep them from the Spots of the World; and into the new and living Way, Christ Jesus; and to the Church in God, which Christ is the Head of, as he was in the Apostles Days; and to worship God in the Spirit and Truth, which Worship Christ set up above Sixteen hun∣dred years since. And therefore must all People come to the Grace and Spirit of Truth in their own hearts, to know the God of Truth, who is a Spirit, and in the Spirit and Truth to worship, and serve, and honour, and glorifie the Living God, who is over all, and Worthy of all, Blessed for evermore, Amen. And ye Magistrates and Officers, read this in all your Assemblies, and cause all your Priests to read it in their Churches; that they and you, and all People may hear and fear the God of Heaven, as you will Answer it at the Great and Terrible Day of Judg∣ment, and Vengeance of the Lord God Almighty. And this is in Love to your Souls, and for your Temporal and Eternal Good. Amsterdam, the 19th of the 7th Month, 1677. G. F.
1677. Harlingen in Friez∣landAn Epistle concerning true Fasting, true Prayer, true Honour, and against Persecution, and for the true Liberty in Christ Jesus;To pag. 438 and that all may have a care, that the Apostle hath not bestowed his Labour in vain upon you in your observing of Days, Months, Times, Feasts and Years, and of coming under the beggarly Elements, and the Yoke of Bondage again, and of bring∣ing and forcing People into them. WHere did ever Christ or his Apostles Command any Belie∣vers or Christians to observe Holy-Days or Feast-Days? and let us see, where it is written in the Scriptures of the New Testament, in the Four Evangelists, or the Epistles, or the Re∣velation, that ever Christ or his Apostles gave the Christians any such Command, that they should observe the Time called Christ∣mas, or a Day for Christ's Birth? or that they should observe the Time called Easter, or Whitsuntide, or Peter, or Paul's, or Mark or Luke's Days, or any other Saints Day? Now you, that profess your selves to be the Reformed Churches from the Papists, Jews and Heathen, and the Scriptures to be your Rule, and are Professors of the New Covenant, where do you prove out of the Scriptures of the New Testament, that the Apo∣stles and the Primitive Church practised or forced any such thing, or that Christ and his Apostles gave any such Command to the Churches, that they should practise and observe any such Days? Let us see, where this Command is written. For did not the Apo∣stle say unto the Galatians in the fourth Chapter; But now, after that ye have known God, or rather ye are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly Elements, whereunto ye desire a∣gain to be in bondage? Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times and Years; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you La∣bour in vain. And in the Third of Galatians it is said; O foo∣lish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth, &c. And in Galatians the Fifth, the Apostle exhorts them to stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ had made them free: and moreover said, Be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bon∣dage. Now doth not this manifest, that there were some Teachers, that were drawing the Church of the Galatians into these beg∣garly Elements, and bringing them again into Bondage, in ob∣serving of Days, Months, Times and Years? for it was the Apo∣stle's Work to bring them out of those Bondages and beggarly E∣lements; and therefore, when they were going back again into observing Days, Months, Times and Years, he was afraid, that he had bestowed his Labour upon them in vain: and he Exhorts them, to stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ Jesus hath made them free, and not to be entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage: and
Again signifies, That they had been once entangled with that Yoke of Bondage and beggarly Elements. But O! how are People, called Christians, since the Apostles Days gone again under this Yoke of Bondage, and these beggarly Elements, in observing Days, Months, Times and Years, let their practice declare. Nay, do not both Papists and Protestants force People to observe Days, Months and Times? &c. And therefore is not the Apostle's Labour and Travel bestowed upon Christendom in vain, which was to bring People from under such beggarly Elements and that Yoke of Bondage, (which the Law did require;) to stand fast in the Liberty, where∣with Christ hath made them free, and not to be entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage? So it was and is Christ, that hath made and doth make his People free, from these things and beggarly Elements. And therefore they that are Redeemed, are to stand fast in that Liberty, wherewith Christ hath made them free. And this Liberty, which all true Christians are to stand fast in, they are made free by Christ, and not by Man; for Man with out the Spirit and Mind of Christ, seeks to force and compel Christ's Fol∣lowers, and such as he hath made free from the Yoke of Bondage, to outward things, that the Law commanded, and to the observing of Days, Months, Times, Feasts and Years: such weak, beggarly Elements, them that know God, or are known of God and Christ; are to stand fast in their Liberty, and not come under, nor be en∣tangled with the Yoke of Bondage of such things again, seeing, he hath made them free. For they that are in such things, and would force others to them, are gone from that, which gives them the knowledge of God; and have not stood fast in the Li∣berty, wherewith Christ makes free. And now concerning Prayer, we do not read, that ever Christ or his Apostles did Compel by force any to Fast or Pray, and make a Law to strain the Goods of such, as would not observe Days to fast and pray with them. But Christ taught them, how they should pray, and be distinct from the Hypocrites; and Christ's words are as followeth: When thou prayest, thou shalt not be, as the Hypocrites are; for they love to stand praying in the Synagogues; and in the Corners of the Streets, that they may be seen of Men, &c. But when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father, which is in secret, and thy Father, that seeth in secret, will Reward thee openly. But when you pray, use not vain Repetitions, as the Heathen do; for they think, that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like them; for your Father knoweth, what things ye have need of, before ye ask him, &c. So as the Apostles and Saints did, so do we; we pray in secret, and we pray in publick, as the Spirit gives us utterance, which helps our Infirmities, as it did the Apostles and true Christians: and after this manner we pray for our selves, and pray for all Men both high and low. Concerning Fasting, Christ saith; Moreover when ye fast, be not as the Hypocrites of a sad Countenance; for they disfigure their Fa∣ces, that they may appear unto Men to fast. But when thou fastest, anoint thy Head, and wash thy face, that thou appear not unto Men
to fast,1677. Harlingen in Frietz∣land. but unto thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father, which seeth in secret, shall Reward thee openly. And likewise you may see in Isaiah the 58th, what the true Fast is, the Lord requires: where it is said to the Prophet; Cry aloud, and spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, and shew my People their Trans∣gression, and the House of Jacob their sins; yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God: they ask of me the Or∣dinances of Justice, they take delight in approaching to God. Where∣fore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore have we afflicted our Soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your Fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your Labours. Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the Fist of Wicked∣ness; ye shall not fast, as ye do this day, to make your Voice to be heard on high. Is it such a Fast, that I have chosen? A day for a Man to afflict his Soul? Is it to bow down his Head as a Bull-rush, and to spread Sackcloth and Ashes under him? Wilt thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable Day to the Lord? Is not this the Fast that I have chosen, saith the Lord; To loose the Bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free, and that ye break every Yoke? 'So this Fast that the Lord requires, is not to lay Yokes, and Oppress and lay Heavy Burdens, and to make fast the Bands of Wickedness; but to loose and to break such things. And further, Concerning the true Fast the Lord requires; Is it not, to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor, that are cast out, to thy House? When thou seest the Naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thy own Flesh? (Do you keep this true Fast?) Then shall thy Light break forth as the Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth spee∣dily: and thy Righteousness shall go before thee, the Glory of the Lord shall be thy Re-reward. Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall An∣swer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, here I am: If thou take away from the midst of thee the Yokes, the putting forth of the Finger, and speaking Vanity: And if thou draw out thy Soul to the Hungry, and satisfie the afflicted Soul; then shall thy Light arise out of ob∣scurity, and thy Darkness be as the Noon-day. And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfie thy Soul in drought, and make fat thy Bones: and thou shalt be like a watered Garden, and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters fail not, &c. Now here is the practice of the true Fast the Lord requires of his People; and they that observe this Fast, the Lord saith; When they call, he will Answer. And you may see what glorious and happy Comforts they do receive from the Lord, that keep this true Fast; but such as fast for Strife and Debate, and smite with the fists of Wickedness, to make their Voices to be heard on high, and afflict their Souls for a day, and bow down their Head as a Bull-rush, and looses not the Bands of Wickedness, and does not undo every heavy Burden, and break off every Yoke, and let the Op∣pressed go free, and does not deal his Bread to the Hungry, and clothe the Naked, and bring the Poor to his House, but hides himself from
his own Flesh, and cloaths not the Naked: Such Fasts and Fasters the Lord doth not accept, neither hath he chosen them. But these appear to Men with their disfigured Faces, and hanging down their Heads as a Bull-rush for a Day, like the Hypocrites to fast, as Christ speaks of in Matth. 6. And is it not the Command of Christ, that in their Fast they should not appear unto Men to Fast? And now you, that would force us to shut up our Shops on Fasting-days, or for a Day, does not this Fast appear to Men? and is not this the Fast, that the Lord saith in Isaiah, he doth not accept? for he saith; Is this the Fast that I have chosen, a Day for a Man to afflict his Soul, and bow down his Head, as a Bull-rush, &c. Wilt thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable Day to the Lord? Isai. 58. And therefore all God's People are to keep the true Fast of the Lord from Debate and Strife, and the Fists of Wickedness; and that Fast, that breaks the Bands of Wickedness, and undoes e∣very heavy Burden, and breaks every Yoke, and lets the Oppressed go free, and deals Bread to the Hungry, and cloaths the Naked, and brings the Poor that are cast out, to his own House. So every one that keeps this true Fast, their Health shall grow, and when they Call, the Lord will hear them; and the Lord will be their Guide continually, and satisfie their Souls in drought, and make their Bones fat, and shall be like a watered Garden, and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters fail not. Now you, that keep not this true Fast, when you call upon the Lord on your own Fasting-days, does the Lord Answer you, and say, Here I am? doth the Lord guide you continually? and is your Bones made fat by him, and your Souls satisfied in drought? and are you like a watered Garden, and like a Spring, whose Waters fail not? But you that keep not this true Fast, do you not want these Waters, which fail not? so your Souls are not satisfied in drought, but your Bones are lean, and you hear not the Voice of the Lord, who saith, Here I am: and so you lose the Heritage of Jacob, and ride not upon the High-places there; but come under. And therefore every Man and Woman, shut your hearts against all manner of Evil whatso∣ever, and trade not with Babylon's Merchants of Confusion; but keep the Supernatural Day of Christ, that is sprung from on high, that is, by believing and walking in the Light of Christ, and being grafted into him: and this will bring you to the true Fast, from feeding upon any Evil, and to the true praying in the Spirit, as Christ and the Apostles have taught: which Fruits of the Spirit is Love, &c. which Birth of the Spirit is not a perse∣cuting Birth: But he that is born of the Flesh, will persecute him that is born of the Spirit, because he will not follow the Birth of the Flesh, with its weak, beggarly Elements, that entan∣gles with its Yoke of Bondage, and its observing of Days, Months, Times, Fasts, Feasts and Years; which the Birth of the Spirit is to stand fast against in the Liberty, wherewith Christ hath made it free. And do you not know, that the very Turks keep their Sab∣bath on the Sixth Day, and the Jews upon the Seventh Day,
and the Christians meet together on the First Day of the Week? And that Day, which the Turks keep, the Jews and Christians Shops are open; and that Day the Jews keep, Christians and Turks Shops are open; and the First-Days, that the Christians keep, both Jews, and Turks Shops are open? and so the Turk does not force the Jews nor the Christians, to shut up their Shops on their Meeting-Days, but lets them have their Liberty in the Turks Country. And where do you read, that ever the Turks forced any Christians to observe any of their Holy-Days, or Fasts, or Feasts? And if not, should not Christians be beyond the Turks in giving Liberty to all tender Consciences to serve God, seeing Christ and the Apostles command not, nor force People to ob∣serve Holy-Days, or Times, or Months, or Years, but should Pray always in the Spirit, and Fast always from Strife and De∣bate, from all manner of Sin and Evil; and that will keep down the Fist of Wickedness, and the Bond of Iniquity? &c. And why should not People, that be of a tender Conscience, have their Liberty to exercise their Consciences towards God, that they may have a good Conscience always, towards God and Man, to that which God requires, and to do unto all Men, as they would have them to do unto them, and to love their Neighbours as themselves; seeing that there are so many debauched, evil and seared Consciences, as with an hot Iron, have the Liberty in their loose Lives and Con∣versations, and in their loose Words, whose Tongues are at Li∣berty to Swear and Curse, and their Spirits are at Liberty in Drun∣kenness and Uncleanness? So let the Magistrates look and see, how this evil, seared Conscience hath its Liberty to be Exercised in all manner of evil things, yea all Christendom over; which is a great shame and dishonour to God and Christ, and Christianity, yea and Humanity. And therefore why should not God's People have their Liberty to Exercise their good and tender Consciences towards God and Man? For the Mystery of Faith, which Jesus Christ is the Author and Finisher of, is held in a pure Conscience. And should not the Work of the true Christian Magistrate be to encourage the Exercise of this pure Conscience towards God and Man, and to discourage the Exercise of this evil, seared Consci∣ence, that dishonours both God and Christ, and true Christianity? If not, how are they a Praise to them that do well, and a Ter∣rour to Evil-doers? And now Concerning the not putting off Hats, for which ma∣ny, that goes under the Name of Christians, have taken Offence at us, because we could not put off our Hats, and bow down to them: For which we find no such Command from Christ or his Apostles;Joh. 5.41, 44. but rather to the contrary. For Christ saith, I re∣receive not honour of Men (mark, he did not Receive Honour of Men:) And further Christ saith; How can ye believe, which receive Honour one of another, and seek not the Honour, that comes from God only? Now Christ declares it to be a Mark of Un∣believers, that seek Honour one of another, and seek not that Ho∣nour, that comes from God only; and is not the putting off the Hat, and Bowing with it, an Honour of Men, which they seek one of
another, and are offended, if they have it not? Nay, have they not Fined, Persecuted and Imprisoned some, because they did not put off their Hats to them? Nay, do not the very Turks mock at the Christians in their Proverb, saying; That the Christians spend much of their time in putting off their Hats, and shewing their bare Head to one another? But should not the Christians be beyond the Turks, that bear that Noble Name of Christian, of seek∣ing Honour one of another, and Persecuting them that will not give it them, when all true believing Christians should seek the Honour, that comes from God only? which is the Duty of all true Believers in Christ Jesus, for he would not receive Honour of Men. And he that believeth on the Son of God, hath Everlast∣ing Life: and he that believeth not the Son, shall not see Life; but the Wrath of God abideth upon him, John 3.36 And now, is not the Turks Proverb a Reproach to the Christians, who say; That the Christians spend much of their time in putting off their Hats, and shewing their bare Head one to another? Nay, have you not Fined and Imprisoned many, because they would not put off their Hats to you, and shew you their bare Heads? Nay, in ma∣ny of your Courts they shall not have Right and Justice, nor Liberty and Freedom in Cities or States, though they have truly served their Time, and are honest and civil Men, unless they will put off their Hats, and shew you their bare Head? And have you not made a Law against such, as will not put off their Hats, and shew you their bare Heads; and that they must forfeit two Gilders, if they did it not? Yea, and to compel and force them to do it, and fine such, as do not, as at Lansmeer in Waterland? And is not this the Honour, that you seek one of another? Did not the Pharisees and Jews do the same? Now as for your saying, The Apostle commands to honour all Men; and such as Rule well, are worthy of double honour: Now, if this honouring all Men were to put off their Hats to all Men, and shew all men their bare heads, then this Command you break your selves; for you do not do this to all Men generally: and if they that Rule well, must have double Hat-honour, then they must put off their Hats twice, and shew them their bare heads. Now, if this Hat-honour, and shewing the bare head, be an Invention of Men, and not from God, and ye cannot prove it by Scripture, and yet say, It is your Rule; then you Act beside the Rule, and compel People to act contrary to your Rule. For where did ever the Prophets, Christ or the Apostles Command any such thing? Let us see a Command, a Practice and an Example for it. Ne∣buchadnezzar, who was a Persecutor, and cast the three Children of Israel into the Fire with their Hose, Cloaks and Hats, we do not read, that he was offended at them, because they did not put off their Hats, and shew him their Bare heads; but because that they would not bow to his Image. And is it not said in the Margent of the Bible, where it is said, Honour all Men (it is said,) Have all Men in Esteem? then they that Rule well, are worthy of double Esteem; and this Esteem must be truly in the Heart, without any envy, malice or hatred. As all Men are the Work∣manship
of God, they are to be esteemed in the heart with the Spirit of God; and they that Rule well, are worthy of double E∣steem: and here is true honour from the heart both to God and Man, his Workmanship. For People may put off their hats, and shew their bare heads one to another once, or twice to the Officers and Magistrates, and yet be full of envy, and malice, and hatred, and murder in their hearts one against another; and give them that honour, as you call it, and yet speak or wish bad things of them, when they have turned their backs on them: which the true Honour or Esteem in the heart to all Men, as they are God's Creation, is without any Evil Wish or Thought in the heart to all Men, and to them that Rule well; which have the double esteem, whom God hath placed over People. There is no evil in the heart, that gives this respect, esteem or honour, and brings them to love their Neighbours, as themselves, and to do unto all Men, as they would have them do unto them, in that they esteem all Men, and they have a double esteem to them that Rule well: and this is beyond all the honour of putting off the Hats once to all Men, and twice to them that are worthy of the double honour, as you may call it. But we would ask the Christians, that practise this Hat-honour, and shewing one another their bare heads, Who did in∣vent this single honour, and double honour, that they should put off their Hats one to another, and shew their bare heads, seeing, that they cannot prove, that ever Christ or the Apostles did Com∣mand or Practise any such thing; or Moses in the time of the Law? Now, do not say or think, that we had this Practice of not putting off the hats from the Turk; for we were moved by the Spirit of the Lord to it, before ever we heard of the Turks Proverb and Practice, to leave the honour that is below, and seek the honour that comes from above, when we came to be true Believers in Christ Jesus. Now Concerning Persecuting, Imprisoning and Banishing God's People, in whom Christ is manifest, and dwells in their hearts; Doth not Christ tell you, that you Imprison him? and then do you not Banish him, and Persecute him out of your Cities and Corporations? And how can you enter into his Kingdom, and have a share of his Kingdom, though you may profess him in Words? And do not they go into Everlasting Punishment, that did not visit Christ in Prison? Then what will become of you, that do Banish and Imprison him, where he is manifest in his Members, nor suffer them to Meet together to enjoy him amongst them, according to his Promise? And therefore you, that will not let Christ Reign in his People, and have his Liberty in them in your Cities and Countries, to Exercise his Offices, you will not have your Liberty in Heaven: and you that will not let Christ Reign in your Hearts, nor suffer him to Reign in his People here upon the Earth in this World, in your Kingdoms; you will not Reign with Christ in Heaven in his Kingdom, nor in the World without end. And so you, that banish the Truth out of your Cities or Coun∣tries, or his People for its sake, you do banish the Truth and
Christ out of your hearts from Ruling there: and so you your selves are not the Temples of God. And then, when you have banish∣ed Christ and his Truth out of your own hearts, then you do ba∣nish such, in whom he Rules, out of your Estates and Country: and then see, what Judgments the Lord doth bring upon you, when you are left to your selves; yea, Fears and Troubles, and one Judgment after another, that come upon you, you are even filled with them. But the Banished and Sufferers for Truth and Christ's sake have a peaceable habitation in the Truth, which the Devil is out of, and cannot get in: which habitation will out∣last all the habitations of the Wicked and Persecutors, though they be never so full of Words without Life and Truth. So the Life and the Truth will out-last all Airy Notions; and Christ the Lamb and patient Seed, will overcome the Devourer, and the un∣patient Seed: and they that have the Garments, the Righteous∣ness of Christ, which is the fine Linnen, it will out-last all the Rags and Inventions of Men. For Christ saith to his Learners, Be of good chear, I have overcome the World, the persecuting World: and so he said unto his Disciples; Marvel not, if that the World hate you, for it hated me before you. And therefore let all that profess themselves Christians, lay away Persecution about Religion, Churches or Wor∣ship, Fasting or Praying-Days; for you have no Command from Christ and his Apostles to Persecute any. For Christ, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, when they called him a De∣ceiver, and blasphemed him, and said, He had a Devil; he did not Persecute any of them for it, nor force or compel any to hear and believe him, nor the Apostles after him; but he bad them, that would have been plucking up the Tares, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together until the Harvest. So you have no Com∣mand from Christ or his Apostles to Persecute, Imprison or Banish, or Spoil the Goods of any, for matter of pure Conscience and Re∣ligion, Worship, Faith and Church in the Gospel-times. Harlingen in Friezland, the 11th of the 6th Month, 1677. G. F. A Warning to the Magistrates, Priests and People of the City of Hamborough, to Humble themselves before the Lord, and not to be High-minded. Friends, YOU have painted and garnished the Inside of your outward Houses and High-places;  but look within your Hearts with the Light of Christ,Amster∣dam. which he hath enlightned you and e∣very Man, that cometh into the World, withal, and with it you may see,To pag. 448 how foul your Hearts and Insides are with Sin and Evil, which Christ tells you, ye should make clean; who told the Pharisees, how they painted the Sepulchres of the Righ∣teous, and they themselves were full of Rottenness, and Corrupti∣on.
Therefore look into your selves,1677. Amster∣dam. and your own hearts, what you are full of: to paint out the Sepulchres of the Righte∣ous Apostles, and making a Trade and a Profession of their words, without the same Holy Ghost, and Power, and Light, and Truth which they were in, will not stand at the Day of God's Venge∣ance. And therefore Repent, while you have Time, and turn to the Lord with your whole hearts; and do not think your selves to be secure, without his Immediate, Almighty Protection. For it is not all your Works, nor all your own Strength, and Power and Defence, that can protect you, and you to look at them, and think your selves secure, and to sit down in your Security; and in it let your hearts be merry, and at rest and ease. But then when the Lord brings a Scourge upon you, that you are filled with Terrours and Fears, remember you were Warned, that you were set down, but not in the true Rest: and then all your own Strength and Force will stand you in no stead; and you will acknowledge, that it must be God, that must protect you. And therefore take Warning; for your Priests and People are too high, and are swallowed up too much in this World; and the Vani∣ties of it carry your Minds away from God, and your Care is more for the World, than for God, and more after the Riches of the World, than after the Riches of the World that has no end. For know you not, that all your Heaps of outward Treasure must have an end, and that you must Leave them all behind you? Therefore I am to Warn and Advice you, both High and Low, Priests and People, to come to the Grace, Light and Truth, that comes by Jesus Christ; and also to come to the Manifesta∣tion of the good Spirit of God, which is given to you to profit withal; that with This Grace, and Truth, and Light, and Spirit of Christ, you may turn to Christ Jesus, from whence it comes, who saith, Learn of me; and God saith, This is my beloved Son, hear ye him. And so all the Children of the New Covenant, that walk in the New and Living Way, do hear Christ their Prophet, that God has raised up, who is their Teacher and Priest, whom God hath anointed to Preach. And so now, God doth speak to his People by his Son, as he did in the Apostles Days. And so the Lord is come to Teach his People himself by his Grace, Light, Truth and Spirit, and to bring them off all the Worlds Teachers, that are made by Men since the Apostles days; who have kept People always Learning, that they may always be paying of them: And is come to bring them off all the Worlds Religions, to the Religion that he set up in the Apostles Days in the New Covenant, which is pure and undefiled before God in his sight, and keeps from the Spots of the World, &c. And the Lord is come to bring them off all the World's Churches, to the Church in God, which Christ the heavenly Man, is Head of: and to bring them off all the World's Worships, to worship God in Spirit and in Truth, which Christ set up above Sixteen hun∣dred years since. So all Men and Women must come to the Spirit and Truth in their hearts, by which they must know the God of Truth, who is a Spirit; and then in the Spirit and Truth
they will Worship him, and know, what and who they Worship. And also the Lord is come to bring his People off all the World's Temples, that with the Spirit they may know, at their Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost. And the Lord is come to bring his People off all the World's Crosses, and Pictures, and I∣mages and Likenesses, to know, that the Power of God is the Cross of Christ, which Crucifies them to the World, and brings them up into the Likeness and Image of God, as Man and Wo∣man was in, before they fell, and so to Christ that never fell. And this Work of Christ must all know in their hearts, by the Light of Christ Jesus, who is the true Light, that lighteth every Man, that cometh into the World. It is called the Light in Man and Woman, and the Life in Christ the Word: and Christ saith, Believe in the Light, that ye may become Children of the Light. And the Light lets you see all your Evil Actions, that you have done and committed; and your ungodly Ways you have walked in; and your ungodly Words and Thoughts: and now, if you do hate this Light, and love the Darkness, and the Prince of it, more than this Light, which is the Life in Christ, the Prince of Life, and will not come to it, because your Deeds be Evil, and it will reprove you; Christ tells you, This Light is your Condemna∣tion. And then what is all your Profession good for, when you remain under the Condemnation of the true Light, in which you should believe; and so become Children of Light, and out of Condemnation? And therefore every one must believe in the Light, if they do receive Christ Jesus; and as many as receives him, he gives them Power to become the Sons of God. So he that hath the Son of God, hath Life; and they that have not the Son of God, have not Life: and then if you have not Life, what good doth all your Profession of the Scriptures from Genesis to Revelations do you, any more than the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, that would not receive Christ the Life; upon whom God brought his overflowing Scourge. And therefore do you take heed of that, for your Strength will be no better than theirs, if you have not God and Christ's supporting Power, when God's Scourge comes upon you, and you are filled with Horrours and Fears. But my desires are, that you may all Repent, even from the Highest to the Lowest, and not grieve, nor quench, nor vex, nor rebel against God's good Spirit in you, nor walk despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, nor turn from it unto Wantonness, which would teach you, and bring your Salvation. Which if you do, how can you escape the over-flowing Scourge of the Al∣mighty, and the Wrath of the Lamb? But my desires are, that you may all obey God's good Spirit of Truth, which will lead you out of all Evil, into all Truth, and reprove you for your Righteousness, and for your own Judgment and Sin, &c. and it will bring you to cleave to that which is good, and for∣sake that which is evil; and to turn to the Lord, who will re∣ceive you in his Mercy and Kindness: By which Means you may escape the over-flowing Scourge in the Day of Vengeance, which dreadful Day is coming upon all Evil-doers. And this as a Warn∣ing
to you, both for your Temporal and Eternal Good: and for you to Read it in your Assemblies, and your Priests to Read it in their Churches; so that all People may hear and fear, as you will Answer it at the Terrible and Dreadful Day of Judgment. Amsterdam, the 19th of the 7th Month, 1677. G. F. For the Embassadors, that are Met to Treat for Peace at the City of Nimmeguen in the States Dominions. To pag. 448CHrist Jesus saith, Blessed are the Peace-makers, for they shall be called the Children of God, Matth. 5.9. so all Christian men are to forsake Evil, and do Good, and seek Peace and fol∣low it, if they will love Life, and see good Days, 1 Pet. 3.11. for God hath called all true Christians unto Peace, 1 Cor. 7. and therefore all Christians ought to follow this Peace, which God calls them to: and they should let the Peace of God rule in all their Hearts; which is above the Peace of this World, that is so soon broken. For the Apostle Commands the Christians to let the Peace of God rule in their Hearts; to which all Christi∣ans should be subject: Now the Practice of this should be among Christians, that profess Christianity; and this Peace is above that, which Christ takes from the Earth, Rev. 6. which is the Peace of the Wicked. And the Apostle saith to the Christians, Be at Peace among your selves, 1 Thess. 5. Now, all Christians should obey this Command, and be at Peace among themselves, and not in Wars and Strife. And further the Apostle exhorts the Christians to keep the Ʋnity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace: so this Ʋnity, and this Bond of Peace should be kept (and not be broken) by all that bears that Noble Name Christian; and they should keep the Unity of the Spirit of Christ in the Bond of the Prince of Princes, and King of Kings, and Lord of Lords Peace, which is the Duty of all true Christians to keep: In which they may honour Christ, in bringing forth the Fruits of Peace, which is Love and Charity. For the Apostle tells you, The fruits of the good Spirit is Love, Joy and Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, &c. Gal. 5. And the Apostle exhorts the Christians, and saith; If it be pos∣sible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceable with all Men: and this should be the Endeavour of all Christians. For it is no ho∣nour to Christ, that Christians should war and destroy one ano∣ther, that do profess the Name of Christ, who saith, He came to save Mens lives, and not to destroy them: For Christians have E∣nemies enough abroad without them, and therefore they should Love one another, as Christ commands, who saith; By this ye shall be known to be my Disciples, if ye Love one another. For Christians are commanded to love Enemies; therefore much more one another. And Christ saith; As the Father hath loved me, so
I have loved you: Continue ye in my Love, John 15.8. and By this shall all Men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye Love one another, John 13.35. But if Christians do war and destroy one another, this will make both Jews, Turks, Tartars and Heathens to say, That you are not Disciples of Christ. And therefore, as you love God, and Christ, and Christianity, and its Peace, All make Peace, as far as you have power, among Christians, that you may have the Blessing. For you read, that Christians were called the Houshold of Faith, the houshold of God, a holy Nation, a peculiar People: and they are commanded to be Zealous for good Works, not for bad: and Christians are also commanded not to bite and devour one another, lest they be consumed one of a∣nother. And is it not a sad thing for Christians to be biting and con∣suming one another in the sight of the Turks, Tartars, Jews and Heathens, when they should Love one another, and do unto all Men, as they would have them do unto them? And such Work and Devouring as this, will open the Mouths of Jews and Turks, Tartars and Heathens to Blaspheme the Name of Christ, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and cause them to speak e∣vil of Christianity, for them to see, how the Unity of the Spi∣rit is broken among such, as profess Christ and Christ's Peace. And therefore all Christians are to mind God and Christ's Teach∣ing, who teacheth Christians to Love one another, yea, Enemies; and perswade all Kings and Princes, to give Liberty to all ten∣der Consciences in Matters of Religion and Worship, they living peaceable under every Government: so that for the time to come there may be no more Imprisonment and Persecution among the Christians, for Matters of tender Consciences about Matters of Faith, Worship and Religion, that the Jews, Turks, Tartars and Heathens may not see, how Christians are Persecuting one another for Religion. And seeing, from Christ and the Apostles Christians have no such Command, but on the contrary, to Love one ano∣ther; and knowing, that Christ said to such, as would have been plucking up Tares, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together, till the Harvest (which is the End of the World) lest they plucked up the Wheat; and at the End of the World Christ would send forth his Angels, and they should sever the Wheat from the Tares: So Christ tells you, that it is the Angels work at the End of the World, and not Mens work, before the Harvest at the End of the World. Hath not all this Persecution, Banishing, and Imprisoning and putting to Death concerning Religion, been the pretence of plucking up Tares? and hath not all this been be∣fore the Harvest, and before the End of the World? And there∣fore, have not all these been the Actors against the Express Com∣mand of Christ, the King of Heaven? which all Kings and Ru∣lers, especially they, that call themselves Christians, should obey their Lord and Saviour's Command, which he expresly Commands: Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together, till the Harvest; and the Harvest is the End of the World: and then Christ will send his Angels, and they shall sever the Wheat from the Tares, &c.
And also Christ told some of his Disciples, that would have had Fire to come down from Heaven, to destroy such as would not receive him (in their Zeal;) That they did not know, what Spirit they were of: and rebuked them, and said; He came not to destroy Mens Lives, but to save them. And therefore all such, that have destroyed Mens Lives concerning Religion, and Worship of God, have they known, what Spirit they have been of? Have they not done, that they should not do? and done that, which Christ forbad, who saith, Lest ye should pluck up the Wheat with the Tares, and saith, It is the Angels work at the End of the World? And hath not God shewed unto Man, what is Good, and his Duty, To Love Mercy, and to do Justly, and to walk Humbly with his God? which Man is to mind. And the Apostle exhorts the Christians, to Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord, Hebr. 12.14. And why should Christians War and Strive one with another, seeing they all do own in words one King, and Lord and Saviour Christ Jesus, whose Command is, That they should Love one another; which is a Mark, that they shall be known by, to be Christ's Disciples, as I said before. And Christ, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, saith; As I have Loved you, so love one another, John 15.12. and John 13. And the Apostle saith, Christians ought to be patient towards all Men, 1 Thess. 5.14. From him, who is a Lover of Truth and Righteousness, and Peace, and desires your Temporal and Eternal Good; and desires, that in the Wisdom of God, that is pure, and gentle, and peace∣able from above, with that you may be Ordered, and Order all things, that God hath Committed to you, to his Glory, and stop those things among Christians, so far as you have power, which dishonour God, Christ and Christianity! Amsterdam, the 21th of the 7th Month, 1677. G. F.
THE FIRST TABLE, CONTAINING The Names of the Countries, Cities, Towns and Places mentioned in the Author's Journal of his Travels, and Labours on Truth's Account in England, &c. and beyond the Seas. [Note, The Pages with a Star refer to the like Pages with a Star; to begin p. 189* 190*—200* 201*, &c. these Pages being double.] A. ABbyholm 268* Aberdeen, Scotl. (407) Acton 141 Adderbury 388. 457 Addingworth 430 Albans 171. 430. 457. 479 Alborough-Castle 522 Aldenham 78 Alexandria in Egypt (248. 253) Alkmaer, Holl. 438. 522 America 408 Amersham 455 Amoroca-River (Amer.) 380 Ampthill 430 Amsterdam 433-438. 446-451, 452. 520-522. 594. 617-619. 627-632 Anamessy-River, Amer. 380 Anderigo, Friezl. 444 Antego 356, 357. 458 Apledon 318, 319 Appingdalen, F. 439 Applebye 91 Apre, Denmark 440 Arnside 103. 215, 216. 269. 470 Armscot 388, 389. 457 Arundel 171 Ashford 259 Ashwell 469 Atherston 30. 132 Aylesbury 388 B. BAdcow, Scotl. 269* 271* 276* Badgesley 167. 170. 225* 213. 310. 325. 429 Baghurst 341 Bagworth 29 Balby 54. 67. 69. 129. 213, 214. 326. 429 Baldock 170, 171. 316. 469 Ballowfield 429 Banbury 316 Bandon, Irel. 328 Bandon-Bridge, Irel. ibid. Barbados 351-361. 379. 382. (599) Barking 570 Barnet 3. 430. 457. 479. 584 Barnet-hills 254, 255 Barnstaple 318 Barrow 28. 254 Barton 423 Barton-Abbey 215 Basingstoke 244* Battersea 480 Beavor Vale 16. 18-26 Becliff 79 Bedall 423 Bedfordshire 149. 166. 170. 282* 259. 310, 311. 430. 457. 469. 479 Bednalgreen 536-538. 550 Bentham 297 Berkshire 254. 335. 342. 456 Berry-street 568, 569 Berwick 281* Beverley 54 Beumaris, Wales 258* 259* Biddlesden 479 Birmingham 167. 325 Bishopsdale 423 Bishop-starford 156 Black-Rock, Chesh. 327 Bletchington 480 Block-Island, Amer. 369 Bodmin 178, 179 Bohemia-River, Amer. 365. 372 Bonners-Creek, Amer. 376, 377 Boston, Lincolnsh. 225* Boston, New Eng. 242. 379 Boulton 280 Bowden mag. 469 Bowtell 104, 105 Bradforth 71 Braintrie 457 Brecknock 246* 247* Bremen, Germ. 440, 443 Bremer-Haven, Germ. 443 Bridge-Town, Barb. 356 Bridport 244 Briell, Holl. 433. 453. 520. 522 Brigflats 423 Bristol 221* 222* 245* 210. 212. 253, 254. 266. 310. 315. 332. 334. 456 Bristol-Harbour 383-386 Buckinghamshire 3. 224* 196. 310. 316. 341. 387. 430. 455. 457. 479 488, 489 Bugbrook 479 Bullocks-Hill 430 Burlington 307 Burnt-Island 276* Burroby 57. 423 Burrow-bridge 269 Burton, Linc. 479 Burton upon Trent 53 Bushel-house 53 Buxtehude, Germ. 440 Buykslote, Holl. 438 C. CAmbridge, 155, 156 Cambridgeshire 224* 204 259. 336. Camsgill 423 Canterbury 151. 342 Capell 480 Cardiff 245* 317 Carlisle 108-117. 268* Carlisle-Bay, Barbad. 351 Carolina 376, 377 Carterford 217 Cartmeil 270 Causham 456 Charingcross 137-139 Charlewood 457 Chattan 168 Chelmnsford 454 Cheltonham 457 Chesham 457 Cheshire 247* 281* 226. 312. 327-332
Cheshunt 608 Chesterfield 30, 31 Chester-River, Maryl. 364. 372 Chichester 171 China 248 Chiswick 550, 584 Cholsberry 457 Chopthank-River 381 Christian-River, Amer. 371 Cirencester 225* 457 Clauson, Leicest. 18 Cleaveland 57, 58. 281* (312) Clifts, Maryl. 364. 374, 375. 380. 382 Closter-Seven, Germ. 4. 10 Cockan 87, 88 Cocermouth 105, 106 Coggeshall 152. 248 Colchester 152, 153. 248. 432. 154. 519, 520. 523 Coldbeck 108. 118 Collumpton 221* 265 Point Comfort, Amer. 379 Connecticut, Amer. (363) Cony-Island, Amer. 370 Crk 328 Conwall 174. 187. 219* 220* 207 262-265. 318, 319 Cossel 407 Centry 4, 5. 29, 30. 169, 170 Couede 423 Cranes-Island 373 Crantzick 55, 64 Cranbrook 150, 151, 259 Crickatrough, Amer. 378 Crook 76 Crosland 83 Crowland 224* 225* Crownallins 457 Cumberland 104. 118. 120. 268* 370. (312) D. DAlgelthly, Wales 256* 257* Dalton 79 Dantzick (408. 458. 463. 539. 540. 594, 595, 596) Darby 31-46. 49-53. 213 Darbyshire 6. 15. 17. (30) 54. 129, 130, 131. 167. 281* 213. 267. 309. 311. 336. 429. 470. 479 Darwen-water 119. 269. 270 Deal 342. 349 Delaware-Bay 371. (372) -River 365 Delft, Holl. 433. 453 Delfziel, Friezl. 44. 439 Delmenhorst, Germ. 440 Denbyshire 312. 501, 502 Dent 73 Deteren, East-Friezl. 440 Devonshire 207. 209. 262. 265. 318, 319 Dingley, Northamptonsh. 429 Dockum, Friezl. 439. 444 Dolston 497-499. 518. 523 Doncaster 54, 69, 429 Dorchester 172. 244* 206 Dorsetshire 206. 262. 319 Dover 151 Dons 349, 350 Douglas, Scotl. 269* Drawell 423 Drayton 1. 4. 131-136. 167. 213 Draitwich, Worcest. 312 Dublin 327. 331 Duckenfield 12 Dumfreez, Scotl. 269* Dunbar, Scotl. 280* 281* Duncow, Scotl. 16, 170 Dunstable 407. 479 Durham 118. 281.* 269. (312) E. EAst-Friezland 439 East-Jersey, Amer. 365. 370 Edenborough 272*-275* 278** 280* Edghill 225* Edmonton 480. 481. 485. 488. 528. 568. 608 Eems-River, Friezl. 439 Eldreth 326, 327 Elmshoren, N. Holl. 441 Ey 155. 259 Embden, E. Friezl. 439. 444 Enfield, 343-347. 485. 523. 528. 532. 541. 547. 550. 569. 584. 586. 601. 608. 609 Enkhuysen, North-Holl. 438 Epping-Forest 532-534 Eshing, Surrey 480 Essex 151. 196. 203. 248. 259. 311. 336. 342. 387. 432. 454. 518. 564 570. 586. 590. 601 Eton 17 Evesholme 168. 225* 404. 457 Exeter 220* 245* Eyder-River, Holst. 441 F. FAlcon-Island, Amer. 370 Falmouth 177, 178. 263 Farnham 243* 320 Felsted 454 Fen-Country 224* 259 Firbank-Chappel 74, 75. 79 Fisher-holder, Germ. 440 Fishers-Island, Amer. 369 Flampstead-Heath 485 Flintshire 259* Flushing, Amer. 365. 370 Fordgreen 528. 586. 608-610 Forest of Dean 317 Franeker, Friezl. 445, 521 Frederickstadt, Holst. 441, 442 Friezland 438. 444. 521 G. GAinsborough 67, 68 Gardick 444 Garners-Island, Amer. 369 Garsdale 423 Garshore, Scotl. 269* Garstrang (276) Gatton 480 Germany 440 Gickleswick, 297 Giisland 119, 120. 268* Glascow, Scotl. 276 Glasson 79 Glocester 212, 213 Glocestershire 225* 266. 315, 316. 332-334. 386. 456. 479 Gooses, 564-567. 570-576. 586. 590-593. 601-606 Grarigg 102, 103, 269 Gravesands, Amer. 365, 370 Gravesend 342. 349 Great-Bay, Amer. 374 Griscdall 73 Groningen, 7. Prov. 439. 444 Guilford 342. 480. 503. 578 Gulf of Florida, Amer. 362 Guls-Island, Amer. 369 Gutters-hedge 479 H. HAgue, Holl. 453 Hallifax 124. 128, 129 Halsted 454 Hamborough, 440-442. 627-630 Hammersmith 480. 489. 535. 584 601 Hampshire 206. 261. 341. 387 Hampton-Court, 195 -Park ibid. Harborough 137 Harestreet 523 Harlem 433. 451. 522 Harlingen 438. 445. 521. 620-627 Hartshill 429 Hartshorn ibid. Harwich 432. 454. 420. 423 Hatters-Island, Amer. 374 Haverford-west 254* Heads, Scotl. 269* 276* Hedgeley 455 Heistone 175. 263 Hempensarmer, Friezl. 444 Hempsted 457 Hendon 388. 430. 457. 479. 480 Henly 456. 489 Hereford 266 Herefordshire 266. 314. 388 Hertford 156. 467, 468. 480, 481. 569. 608 Hertfordshire 170. 259. 316. 336 457 Hexham 119 Hide-Park 223* Higham 170 Highgate 407. 430 Highlands, Scotl. 269* 276* Hightown 71 Hill, Yorksh. 470 Over the Hills 316, 317 Hitchin 469 Hodsdon 586 Hoghen-horn, Holst. 441 Holdendike 307 Holderness 64. 128. 225* 281* 267. 326 Holland 304. 433. 458. 520 Holstein 441 Honiton 173. Honington 388 Hoorn 438 Horn-Church 342 Horse-bridge 209. 265 The two Horse-Races, Amer. 369 Horsham 151. 480 Horsham-Park 171 Howlker 218 Howlker-Hall 271-273 Hull 67. 281* 307 Humber 225* Hunger-hill 455, 456. 489 Hunger-River 381 Huntington 224* 469 Huntingtonshire 224* 204. 259. 311. 336. (305)
J. JAmaica 361, 362. (357) —a Town in Long-Island 370. 379 Jersey 370 Ifield 480 Ilchester 319 Ilmore 457. 489 Indian Towns 370 Johnstons, Scotl. 276* 278* 279* Jordans 455 Ipswich 153 Irby's Court 318 Ireland 170. 327-332. 379 Itzchoa, Holst. 440 Ives 176, 177. 469 K. KEby, Westph. 443 Kellet 81. 470 Kempston 430 Kendal 76. 81. 267* 296 Kensington 480 Kensworth 430 Kent 150. 243* 259. 321, 322. 342 Kent-Island, Amer. 373, 374 382 Kentish-shore, Maryl. 372, 373 Keswick 270 Kidsley-Park 31. 130 Kings-Bridge 174. 262. 319 Kings-Road 383 Kingston Tham. 223* 195. 310. 349. 387. 406. 432. 455. 480. 482-485 489. 499. 503, 504. 506-511. 518 519-535. 556-563. 56-578-584 599-601. 606. 612-617 Kirby-hall 270, 271 Knighton 429. 469 L. LAmcoat 457 Lancashire 12. 77. 84. 103. 269, 270. 312. 470. 478 Lancaster 81. 88. 92. 124. 261* 215. 217, 218. 226. 273. 297. 407 Lanceston 178-219* 220* Lands-end 207. 263, 319 Landsmeer, Hll. 448. 522 Langlands 120. 268 Lagstrehdale, Yorksh. 423-428 Leer, E. Friezl. 439. 444 Leeward-Islands, Amer. 379 Leicester 15, 16. 136, 137. 256-258. 310. 429. 469 Leicestershire 3, 4. 7. (13) 15. (18) 28. (30) 53. 131. 166. 170. 225* 282* 213. 254, 255. 310, 311. 336. 479 Leith, Scotl. 272* 278* Lemster 252, 253* 314 Leuwarden, Friezl. 439. 444, 445. 521 Leyden, Holl. 433. 453 Lillingstone 479 Lime 245* Lincolnshire 67. 129. 224* 259. 311. 479 Litchfield 53, 54 Lithgow, Scotl. 272* Littleport 259 Liverpool 259* 260* 327. 332 London 3. 137. 140-149, 150. 152. 156-166. 171. 223*-243* 248*-251* 286-288* 189-195-197. 200-206. 226-254. 259. 310, 311 315, 316. 322-325. 235-341. 347-349. 387. 394. 406. 430-432. 454, 455. 457. 479-497. 499-506. 511-519. 523-530. 532. 534-536. 538-541. 548-556. 563, 564. 567, 568. 576. 584-589 594. 597, 598. 601. 606-609. 612 613 Long Crendon 457 Longford 489 Long-Island, Amer. 365. 370 (369) Loo 262 Lovel 479 Lugmer, Friezl. 444 Luneburg's Country 442, 443 Luton 149. 430. 457 Lutterworth 3 Lyn 154, 155. 259 M. MAckum, Friezl. 438 Macocomocock-River, Amer. 376 Maidston 150 Malpas, Chesh. 260* Malra 252 Malton 60, 61. 267. 298. 307 Manac-River, Amer. 380 Manchester 12. 260* Mansetter 4 Mansfield 13. 15. 17, 18. 54. 309 Mansfield-Wood-house 27, 28 Marick-River, Amer. 376 Mrket-bossoth 30 Market-Jew 175, 176 Market-street 171. 430. 457. 479 Marleborough 223* 387 Maryland 362-364. (372) 373-375. 378-383. Eastern-shore, 364. Western-shore 374 Membury 319 Mendle 457 Mendlesham 153 Menhenniot, Cornw. 174 Merionehshire 312 Mevis, Amer. 356, 357. 408. 453 Middlesex 341. 387, 388. 430. 479. 489. 596 Middletown, E. Jers. 365. 371 Middletown-Harbour 370, 371 Mildum 423 Mile-end 241 Miles-River, Maryl. 363. 369. 372 Milford-Haven 379 Mims 479 Minehead 318 Monish 470 Monmouthshire 314 Montgomeryshire 251* 312 Moors 63 Morpeth 281* Mumbles 317 N. NAilsworth 212. 457 Nancemum, Amer. 375 Narraganset, Amer. 368 Natton-Island, Amer. 370 Nevis, see Mevis. Newbury 223* New-Castle 281* New-Castle, Amer. (alias New-Am∣sterdam) 365. 371, 372 New-England (364. 367-379) 241 242. 244. (408) New-Garden, Irel. 328 New-Jersey 379 Newick 261 Newport-Pagnel 3. 317. 407 Newton in Cartmel 77 New-York (36, 370) Nimmguen (630. 632) Non-Eaton (167) 226 Norfolk 153, 154. 203, 204. 259. 311 Northallerton 423 Northampton 3. 137. 407. 430 Northamptonshire 166. 170. 224* 282* 259. 310. 469. 479 North-Country 121. 128 North-Holland 438 North-Newton 316. 457 Northumberland 118, 119. 281* 269. (312) Norwich. 153. 203, 204. 259 Nottingham 18. 26, 27. 281* 282* 309. 325, 326. (249.) 429 Nottinghamshire 7. 13, 14. 16, 17, 54. 67. 130. 167. 224 281* 213. 215. 254. 309. 311. 479 Nottingley 429 O. Olsterbay (Long-Island) 365. 370 Okington 220* Oldenborg, Westph. (617) 440. 443, 444 Oldeston 212. 318. 334 Oley 430 Oram 64. 307 Orchard 457 Ore 387. 489 Ormskirk (275) Osan-Overton, Holl. 522 Overdelent (ob. Nielant) 440 Ouerkirk, Holl. 433 Oxford 225* Oxfordshire 310. 316. 335. 341. 387, 388. 456, 457. 479. 489 P. PAgan-Creek in Amer. 375 Pardsey-Crag 268* 270 Pardihaw 457 Pashur 312 Patch-gate 480 Patrington 64-67 Peak-Country 7. 130. 267 Peak-Hills 311 Pell-mell 20 Pembroke 254* Pembrokeshire 254* Pendle-hill 72 Penryn 175, 263 Pickering 62 Piscattaway, Amer. 369 The Pit (at Sea near the Briel) 522 Plimouth 174. 207-209. 262. 304. 319 Point Judah, Amer. 369 Poland (595) Pomfret 281* Pontamile 247* Pool 172. 244* 206 Posset 318 Portsmoutk 172. 244* Potomack-River, Amer. 379 Pottuxon, Maryl. 375. 380. 382
Pottuxon-River in Maryl. 375. 379 Powbank 423 Prester John's Country (248) Preston 261*. 226. 276. 407 Preston-Patrick-Chappel 75 Providence, Amer. 368 Puddimore 221* 266. 319 Pulner 261 Purgatory, Amer. 370 Purmerent, Holl. 438 R. RAbley-heath 469 Radnorshire 251* 252* 267. 313 Radway 479 Ragley 457 Ramside 78 Ranzenny's Monument, Denm. 441 Raphahannock-River, Amer. 379 Reading 151, 152. 223* 198, 199, 200. 310. 341. 387. 456. 489 Reconow-Creek Amer. 382 Redruth 177. 263. 266 Rexham 259 Rickmansworth 388 Ringwood 172. 244* 206. 261 Road-Island 366-369. (379) Roan-Oke, Amer. 369. 376 Rochester 150. 342 Rome (241) Ross 315 Rotterdam, Holl. 433. 453. 520 Rumney 150, 151 Rye in N. E. 150. 370 Rygate 171. 480 S. SAddington 469 Saling 454 The Sands, Lanc. 407 Sandside 261* Sardam, Holl. 522 Saxifrax-River, Maryl. 365. 372 Scale-house 281* Scarborough 60. 267. 298-307. 326 Scar-house 423. (428) Scotland (140, 141) 268*-281* (312. 407) At Sea, from Ireland, 332. to Barbados 350. 351. for Jamaica 361. for Maryland, 362, 363. for Long-Island, 369, 370. for Vir∣ginia, 375. for England, 383. Sedber (Sedberg, Sedbur) 73, 74. 269. 423 Selby, Yorksh. 54 Severn, Amer. 374 Shacklewell 347. 481 Shearhampton 383 Shelter-Island, Amer. 368, 369 Isle of Sheppey, Kent. 342 Shrowsbury, 247* 312, 313. -in Amer. 370, 371 Shropshire 267. 312 Sibbard 457 Silebie, Leicest. 167. 310. 429. 469 Skegby 130. 215. 254. 309. 429 Skypton 215. 317 Slattenford 222. 266. 386. 387 Slone 245* Smirna (248) Somersetshire 209. 266. 318, 319 Sommerton, Amer. 375. 377 The Sound in Amer. 369, 370 Southgate 594-596 Southam 479 Southampton 172. 261. 320 Southmims 430. 457 Southstreet 528. 530-532-568. 586 Staffordshire 225* 226. 267. 311. 327. 469. 470 Stains 489 Stainsby 429 Stainmoor 269 Starling, Scotl. 276* Stath 58-60 Stenning 151 Stevenage 469 Stickhusen, East-Friezl. 439 Stoke 264. 457 Stony-stratford 479 Stratford 342, 343. 457 Stratton 319 Street 266 Strickland-head 267* 268* 118. 269 Strobus, Friezl. 439. 444 Sudbury 456 Suffolk 153. 203. 259. 311 Sunbury 489 Sunderhill-green 124. 128. 213. 267. 308 Surrey 171. 243* 206. 320. 325. 342. 387. 432. 480. 503 Sussex 150, 151. 243* 206. 261. 320 321. 325. 342. 432. 480. 488. 503 Sutton 155. 259 Swanington, Leicest. 131. 170. 213. 255. 256. 258. 429. 469 Swan-Island, Maryl. 373 Swanzey, Wales 254* 317 Swarthmore 77-80. 82, 83. 86. 88. 94-101. 103, 104. 118. 124. 261*-264* 281* 216. 226. 269-271. 273. 407-423. 470-478 Syleby, see Silebie. T. TAmworth 4 Taunton 221* 266 Tedbury 457 Tenby 253* 254* Tenterden 259-261 Tewksbury 168, 169. 213. 457 Theobald's 139 Tickhill 69 Tiverton 265 Todcaster 429 Topsham 173, 174. 262. 319 Totness 174. 262 Tottenham 608. 611 Tottenham-High-Cross 601 Tredington (398. 400) Tredington-Parish 388 Tredhaven-Creek, Maryl. 364. 373 382 Tregangeeves 319 Trent 67, 311 Truro 263, 264. 319 Turry 430 Turvil-heath 455 Twitnam (Twytham) 197, 198 Twycross 30. 131. 213. 258 V. VAle of Beavor 16. 18-26 Virginia 375. 377, 378. (364. 369. 375. 382) Capes of Virginia 383 Ulverston 77, 78. 84-86. 216, 217. (407. 422) Underbarrow 76. 81, 82. 269 Upper-Dinidock, Amer. 371 Uxbridge 489 W. WAkefield 54. 70 Wales 245* 255* 256. 267. 312 Walney-Island 79. 87 Walthan.-Abbey 139. 316. 481. 485. 528. 569. 584. 586. 601. 608 Wansted 570 Wansworth 480. 489 Wapping 349 Warborough 489 Ware 608 Warrington 312. 327. 407 Warwick 169. 225* 310. 325. 479 Warwickshire 4. 15. 131. 167. 170. 282* 225* 226. 258. 267. 310, 311. 336. (388, 389) 429, 430. 457. 469. 479 Waterland, Holl. 448. 522 Watford 457 Wellingborough 166 Wellington 265 Wensdale 423 Wentzerdale 72, 73 Westchester 259* 240 West-Friezland 521 West-Jersey, Amer. 365 Westmorland 74. 80, 81. 83, 84. 101. 118. 267* 269, 270. (312. 408.) 423. 470. 478 Weston 316. 457 West-Riding 69, 70 Weymouth 173. 244* Whetston 136, 137. 166, 167 Whispool, Friezl. 444 Whitby 60. 267. 307. 326 Whtehall 137, 138. 140-149. 223* 225* 230 Whitehaugh 267 Whittington, Warw. 429 Wickham 455, 456 Wicocomako-River, Amer. 381 Wighton 118. 270 Wigston 469 Willoughby-Point, Amer. 378 Wiltshire 222* 223* 254. 262. 266. 1. 315. 335. 386. 456 Winchmore-hill 485. 568. 586. 608 Winterburn 456 Witham 523 Worcester 168. 213. 312. (388) 389. 395. 457 Worcestershire 167. 225* 312. 388 Workum, Friezl. 438 Worminghurst 432. 480. 503, 504 Worplesdon 432. 480 The Woulds 60. 326 Wye, Amer. 382 Wye-River, Amer. 364 Wymes-would 429 Y. YArmouth 153 Yelland 88. 216 York 57. 267-269. 297. 298. 308. 32. 428. 479 Yorkshire 54. 56. 61. 63. 66. 68, 69. 72. 128. 225* 281* 213. 269. 297. 423. 429. 470. 478, 479
THE SECOND TABLE, CONTAINING The Names of Friends and others, mentioned in this Volume, with their respective Pages. A. ABrahams Galenus 452. 521, 522 Aldam Thomas 68-70. 130 140. 199 Andries Cornelis, Friezl. 444 Anglesey, Earl 296 Archer, Judge 249, 250. 318, 319 Ashfield, Col. 276* Ashley John 401 Askburnham, Constable, 216. his Wife 306 Atherton Oliver 275, 276 -Godfrey ibid. Atkins Christopher 153 Atkins, Judge 488 Atkinson Thomas 271 d'Aubenny, Lord 252 Audland John 74, 75. 80. 84. 124. 131. 222* 267* -Anne 269 B. BAiley Charles 241 Bailey William 172, 361 Baker Daniel 248 Baker Nathaniel 479 Ball Nathaniel 316. 479 -Richard 429 Barclay Robert 407. 433-435. 446 Barnes William 327. 332 Barwick Grace 307 Bateman Miles 76. 82 Bathurst Charles 532 Bates Nathaniel 376 Baxe Richard 342 Beard Nicholas 151 Beaton William 221* 266 Bennet, Col. Just. 37. 41. 187 217* 219* Benson, Just. 73. 80. 90, 91. 101. 103. 111. 116, 117. his Wife 112. -Francis 270 Beaumont, Lord 255. 258 Bewley Thomas 108. 118 -George 262. 263. 270 Bicliff Anthony 226 Billing Grace 212* 272* -Edward 272* 277* Bindlas Robert, Esq 93 Bingley William 520, 521 Birdet— 64 Birkenhead, Sir John 304 Birkhead, Serj. 197 Birkhead Abraham 374 Bishop George 152. 210. 244 Blackmore, Major 245* Blaykling John 74. 80. 267. 269. 423 Bolton John, and Wife 171 Bond Thomas 153 -Nicholas 286* Bonner, Bishop 293 Booth George 202 Bottomley Jacob 131 Bousfield, Major 73 Bradden, Capt. 179, 180. 184. 185 Bradford, Capt. 128 Bradshaw, Judge 80 Brassey Nathaniel 519 Brathwait John 77 Brickley Anthony 131 Brigges Thomas 90. 259, 260. 265. 327. 332. 341. 349. 356, 357. 361 Britland, see Priest. Broadstreet Simon 243, 244 Bromley Thomas 148 Brown, Capt. 254. John 316 Bryerley James 430 Bushel Thomas, Ranter 59 Burnyeate John 363, 364. 367, 368. 432 Burrough Edward 76. 84. 124. 131. 286* 241, 242. 259 Burton, Just. 213 C. CAm John 84. 124. 170. 225* -Thomas 423 Cannon Richard 396 Canterbury, Bishop 245 Cartwright John 349. 357. 361. 364. 366-369. 382 Cary Robert 174 Caton William 150. 594 Ceely Peter, Just. Major 176. 182-184. 187. 219 Chamberlain, Col. 352 CHARLES II. King 225. 228, 229. 238. 241-243. 245-248. 250 272. 277. 279, 280. 325. 336. 349. 402. 404, 405 CHARLES I. 226. 460, 461 Charles Thomas 430 Chetham George, Sheriff 228 Chevers Sarah 252 Claessen Dirick 452 Clark, Just. 309 Clause John, Holl. 433. 438, 439. 444. 446. 463. 521. 594 Claypoole, Lady 189 -James 503, 504 Coale William, Amer. 374 -Hezekiah 456 Cob Francis, Esq 298. 303. 326 Cob, Ranter 139 Cock— 76 Colburn, Capt. of Amer. 380 Cole— 167, 168 Colonel of Bristol 210 Conway, Lady. 457 Cooper Edward 430 Corbet Thomas 405, 406 Costrop Richard 248 Cotton Arthur 304 Covel Richard 383 Countess of Derby 275 Cradock, Dr. of Coventry 4. 301 Craven Robert. 224* 225* (129. 140) Crips Nathaniel 222* 225* 310. 315. 456, 457 Craston Thomas, Just. 114 Cromwel Oliver 136-138. 169. 187. 214* 223* 224* 269* 288* 190. 194-196. 392. 448 -Richard 196. 229. 418. 199, 200. 204. 229. 238 Crook John 149, 150. 169. 282* 286* 457 Crosland Jordan 298. 300. 305 Crouch Edward 469 Crowder Dr. 393 Cubban Richard 259* 276 Cubham Richard 282 Cummings Thomas 218 Curtis Thomas, and Anne 220* 244* Thomas 216. Anne 222 D DAndy John 222* 266 Darcy Abigail 314 Davenport, Capt. 279
Davis Richard 405 Dennis, Col. 204 Desborow, Maj. Gen. 178. 214*-217* Dewes, Col. Amer. 375 Dickinson James 77. 80 Dilger Emanuel of Dantzick 595 Dirick Niesson Gertrade 434. 446. 451-453 Dixon Alexander 102 Dodgson, Constable 306 Doily Bray 388. 389 Dove, Lieut. 281 * Downer Anne 186, 187 Dowes Sybrand, of Friezl. 439. 444 Drakes John 352 Draper Henry 269 Drury, Capt. 136-138 Dry Thomas 311. Widow 343 Duisbury William, and Wife 54. 118. 137. 430. 457. 479 Duncon Robert 153. 432 E. EAston Nicholas, Governour 366 Eccles Solomon 349. 361, 362 379 Edmundson William 170. 349. 356. 361. 364. 369. 379 -John of Maryl. 372, 373 Edwards Edward 255* Elizabeth, Princess of Herwerden 435. 438 Ellis John 245 * 263 Ellwood Thomas 455, 456 Elson John 406. 479 Endicot John, of New Engl. 242, 243 Evans Catharine 252 F. FAirfax, Widow 301 Farnsworth Richard 54. 70, 71. 80. 131 Fauks Thomas 255 Faulconbridge, Lord 300 Fell, Judge 77. 80. 83. 88. 90, 91. 103. 261* his Son 85 — Margaret 78. 88. 216. 221, 222. 231. 238. 262. 266. 271. 273. 278. 289. 295. 312. 334. 336. 346 384. 387. 389. 402. 404. 407. 423 428 - Daughters 152 - Henry 230. 248 - Leonard 79. 258. 262. 269-271. 312. 325. 407. 423. 430 - Mary 262 - Rachel 387. 389. 423 - Sarah 262. 336. 407 - Susan 407 Fisher Samuel, and Wife 150, 151 - Martha 349 Fleetwood Charles 269* Fleming Daniel, Just. 270. 273. 278-181. 306 Fletcher 270 Floyd Charles 312 Forstall Richard 351, 352 Forster Thomas 349 Foster, Judge 226, 227 - Lieut. 279* -Widow 511 Fox Christoph. & Mary 1. 390. 396 - George 46. 48, 49, 192 Fox John 332, 333. 336, 337. 429 Capt. 178. 211 * Fraterus of Dantzick 295 Frecheville, Lord 297, 298 Fretwell Ellen 309 -Ralph 356. -Samuel 429 Frith Susan 309 Frizbey James 374 Frondenberg Abraham of Harlem 522 Frouzen Wilbert of Rotterd. 520 Frye — 262 Fuce Joseph 154, 155 Furly Benjamin 245. 433. 435. 453, 519 - John 432, 433 G. GAdecken of Dantzig 595 Gamboll Thomas 430 Gandy Will. 247* 226. 332. 407 Garland, Wid. 296 Gaul, Alderm. of Rotterd. 520 Geary John, Amer. 379, 380 General of Denmark 453 Gerard, Lord 230 Gibbs Henry 312 Gilpin — 123 Glyn, Judge 179-185. 189* 200* Goldsmith Ralph 242 Goodyear Thomas  54 Governour of Barbados 356. 361 - of Carlisle 117 - of Carolina 376 - of Jamaica 362 - of Mevis 357 Gouldney Tho. 210. -Henry 613 Gray Richard 520 Green, Wid. 71. -Thomas 218 Grimes, Coll. 225* 213 Gratton John 470 Gritton — 149 Gwin Paul 221* 222* H. HAcker, Coll. 136, 137. 166. 195. 238. 260. 272 Haistings, Lord 258 Hales, Chief Just. 405, 406 Haley, Wid. 430. 479 Halford John 388, 389 Halhead Miles 84 Hambleton Margaret 269* Hambley Loveday 212* 219* 262, 263. 319 Hamberry Richard 247* 316 Hammersley Thomas 130. 311 Hancock Edward 174 Harding John 570 Hardy — 218 Harris George 319 - Jailer 404 Hartiss George 64 Hartshorn Richard 365. 370 Harvey — 137. 195 Harwood Robert 372 Hawkings George 264 Hellen Joseph 262, 263 Hendricks Peter 451. 463. 594 - Elizabeth 523. 594. 596 Hill John 442. 444 Hodges Francis 263 Hodgson, Doctor 272 -Peter 307 Holder Christopher 370 Holmes Thomas 124. 246* Holstein, Duke 441. 523-527 Hookes Ellis 304 Hotham, Just. 55. 64. 66. 80. 326 Howard Luke 151 Howgil Francis 74. 83, 84. 120. 124. 131. 216 Howsigoe Thomas 150 Hubberthorn Richard 84. 93. 124. 153. 156. 204. 226, 227. 229. 231 250 Hubbersty Miles, 76. 84 -Steph. 76 Hull John 349 Hunter — 297. 306 Huntington Robert 239 Hutchinson Hugh 269 -Jam. 33 Hutton Eliz. 7. 349. 361, 362 - Thomas 87 J. JAckson Henry 326 Jacobs Hessel, Friezl. 438. 445 Jay John 368. 370 Jenkins Walt. 167. 246* 247* 314 Jews 441. 453. 559, 560 Indian Emperor 364. 372. 382 - Empress 382 - King 365. 375. 377. 379. 382 - Priest (called Pawaw, or Bawaw) 377 - Captain ibid. John ap John 123. 240. 251 * 253 — 259 Johnson Richard 332 Jones Rice 127, 128. 281** 282* - James, Just. Amer. 381 - the King's Attorney 394 Jose Nicholas 207. 263 Justices in Wales 245* 253* 254* 281* K. KEat, Capt. 177-179. 187 Keith Geo. and Wife 433-435. 452-454. 521. Geo. 407 Kellet, Priest 15 Killam John 213 King of Poland 458-463. 538 — 541. 594, 595 Kirby William, Col. 270, 271 273, 274. 278. 289. 293. 296. 306. 308. 327. 343. 407 Knipe John 77. 271. 306 L. LAgo Mary 1 Lambert —214, 215 Lambol George 152 Lancaster James 87. 105. 277* 327 332. 349. 357. 361. 364. 366-368 370. 384. 407. Wife 87, 88 Lawrence, Capt. 153, 154. 259 Lawson Thomas 78. 87 -John 81. 90 -Justice 110 Laythes Thomas 270 Ledger, Alderman of Newcast. 281 * Leek John 54 Lenthal John, Marshal 227-229 Leper Thomas 93 Lidcot, Col. his Wife 272* Light John 304 Lindley Isaac 326. 428 Line John, Constable 262 Lingard, Capt. 267 Lodge Robert 327, 332. 428
Long Richard 379 Love John 241 Lower Humphry 185. 219* 245* 262. 264, 265. 319 -Thomas 211* 212* 245* 209. 304. 384. 388, 389. 396. 392-395. 402. 407 -Doctor 390, 391 -Mary 336. 407 Lyne, Col. 357 M. MAcham, Priest 5 Mallet, Judge 226-229 Man Edward 395 Marcellinus, Pope 299 Marsh, Esq 226-228. 230. 303, 304 322-325 Marshal of the K. Bench, see Lenthal Maylin Bartholomew 387 Mayor of Huntington (and Wife) 224* 259 -of Bristol 210 -of Cambridge 239. 259 Mayor John, Amer. 379 Mead William 341. 430. 488. 499, 500. 523. 564. 570. 590 Merrick James 315 Middleton, Just. 216. 271-273 his man Thomas 216 Milner James 103 Monk, General 204. 211 Moore Thomas 171. 238. -John 326 -Richard 313 Morris William 243. -Paul 328 -Lewis, Col. 356 Mounce Thomas 174, 175. 214* 219* 220* 262. 264 Mount, Constable 216, 217. 306 Mountague, Lady 128 Musgrave, Dep. Gov. 270 Myer Richard 103, 104 Myers Elizabeth 349 N. NAylor James 70. 80. 83. 87, 88 90. 156. 167. 171. 220* 245* Needham, Hacker's Son 136 Newport, Earl 286* Newton Nathaniel 429 Nicholas Edward 228 Nicholson Joseph 104, 105 O. OAtes, a Baptist 28 Oldenburgh, Earl 440 Osburn Will. Col. 268* 272* 276* Otway, 267* Sir John 336 Overton, Col. 66 Owen Dr. 223* P. PAcker, Col. 139 Parker Alexander 136. 140. 149. 224* 277*-279. 253. 315. 342. 519. 521-523 -Henry, Just. 388, 389. 391-393. 395, 396. 399. 404 Parnel James 112, 113. 132. 152 -Thomas 259 Patchyn Thomas 171. 231 Pattison George 349. 357. 361 363-365. 367, 368 Pauls William (Fredrickstadt) 441 Pawaw an Indian Priest, Amer. 377 Pearson Anthony, Just. 64. 104. 110. 111. 118. 281** 199 -William 270 Thomas 423 Penford John 310 Penn William 341. 384. 432-435 445, 446. 452-454. 493, 494. 521 -Gulielma Maria 384. 388 Pennington Isaac 196. 341. 457 -Mary 489 Pennyman John 357 Perrot John 241. 248, 249. 310 Peters Hugh, Chaplain of O. C. 187 Peters Timon, Holl. 522 Pickering— 3 Pittaway Edward 168. 404 Pocock— 314 Pollexfen Henry 201* 254* 262 Pool, Capt. 277* Pope Blanch 262 Porter John, Amer. 378 Porter, Just. 216, 217. 219. 221, 222. 229. 306. 262 Preston Thomas, Just. 271. 278. 306 -his Wife 218 -James, Amer. 375. 379, 380 Priest Bennet of Cartmeil 82. 102 Priest Bowles of York 57 Priest Byes 63 Priest Britland 30 Priest Burton 101 Priest Camelford 77 Priest of Coventry, Dr. Cradock 4 Priest of O. Cromwel 140 Priest Crowder 393 Priest of Gilsland 119 Priest of Grarigg 102 Priest Rowland Haines of Honington 388-390 Priest Hewes 240 Priest of Hexham 119 Priest Hull 208 Priest Jaccus 89-91 Priest Keilet 15 Priest Lampit 77, 78. 80. 82. 84. 86. 95, 96. -Died 422, 423 Priest Larkham of Cockermouth 106 Priest of Leicester 15, 16 Priest Marshal 70. 88, 89 Priest Mounce 174. (See Mounce.) Priests of Newcastle 281* Priest of Reading 206 Priest Roger Williams 432 Priest of Scotland 59, 60. 307 Priest Stephens 4-6. 30. 131. 134-136 Priest of Sutton 155 Priest Tamworth 4 Priest Tatham 100 Priest of Tewksbury 168, 169 Priest Tombs 252 * Priest Townsend 203, 204 Priest Whitehead 81 Priest Wilkinson 105, 106. 120. 268 * Priest at Harlingen 445, 446 -at Harlem 451 Purfoy, Col. 30 Pursloe, Capt. 54, 55. 64 Pyot Edward 131. 172-177. 189*-200* 214. 221*-224* 210-213. 253 R. RAwlinson Tho. 201* 278* — Just. 271. 273, 274. 306 Reckless John, Sheriff, and Wife 27. 309. 429 Reeves, Capt. 320 Richardson Richard 216 Ripan, Mayor 90 Roberts Gerard 169. 246. 340. 343. 347. 384. 396 Robertson Thomas 296 Robinson Richard, Just. Yorksh. 64. 73. 80. 308. 423 —Andrew, Scotl. 271* 272* 333 —William 244 —Col. in Cornw. 264. —Geo. 423 Roeloffs John (Amsterd.) 446 463. 594 Roper, Lieut. 70 Rouse, Col. Just. 185. 264 — John 342. 349. 352. 361. 384. 389. 535. 556. 576 — Margaret 336. 599 — Thomas 352. 354. 356. 361 Rush John 430 S. SAle Richard 240 Salisbury (Earl's) Son 402 Salmon, Ranter 30 Sanders Mary 223* Sands Adam, Capt. 77. 80. 99, 100 Sands, Col. 391 Savil Henry 390 Sawrey Just. 78. 80. 85. 88-91. 94, 95 Scaif (Scafe, Scarf) Philip 58, 59 Scott Joseph, Amer. 376 Sharman Thomas 213. 251, 252 Sharp Peter, Maryl. 374 Shattock Samuel 242 Shaw William 470 Sheriff of Lincoln 129. 311 Sherman William 522 Shipton Richard 307. 326 Shroeder Christian, Dantz. 595 Sidon Henry 429 Simcock John 407 Smith William 167. 255-257. 311. 429. 432 — Humphrey 168 — Stephen 342. 387. 456 — Hugh, Amer. 376, 377 Snead Richard 456 Speed Thomas 210 Spencer, Just. 273 Stacy Thomas 128. 429 Stangley John 457 Starling Samuel 341 Stephens Nathaniel, see Priest. -William, Amer. 381, 382 Stoddard Amor. Capt. 15. 152, 153. 155. 169. 124* 343 Stookes, Just. 223* Stor Marmaduke 137. 307 Story John 480 Stot, Widow 519. 523
Street, Justice 398-401, 402 Stroud George 394, 395 Stubbs Thomas 120 -John 123. 150. 245. 248. 253, 254. 279. 327. 332. 342. 349 361. 366-369 Studholm Cuthbert, Just. 114 Sunman Aarent 520 a Swede 442 Sympson William 239. Just. 391-393. 401 T. TAylcoat William 433 Taylor James 77. 270 -Thomas 83. 128. 132. 252* 253* 215. 308. 326 -Thomas of Amer. 382 -Christopher 84. 480, 481 -John 428 Tennant, 73. Widow 423 Thomas Margaret 253 Thompson, Just. 88, 89 Thurston Thomas, Amer. 382 Tickel Hugh 270 Toldervey John 171 Trelawney Elizabeth 174. 211* 245 Tripe Nicholas, and Wife 174 a Trooper 45 Turner, Judge 276-278. 288-293. 396 Judge's Son ibid. Twisden, Judge 227. 276-278. 288. 293-295 Twitty, Clerk of the Peace 401. 405 V. VAn de Wall John 432 Vane Henry, Esq 197 Ʋnder-Sheriff of Lancaster 296. 306 W. WAldenfield Samuel 520, 521 Walters Thomas 280 Ward, Capt. 296 Watkins Morgan 251 Watkinson George, Just. 281** 308 Watts George 433. 519. 221-523 Welch William, his Wife 272* Wells William 429 Wennington Miles 104 West, Col. 89, 90. 92-94. 261* 273 -Matthew 306 Weston, Baron 488 Whitehead George 124. 204. 342. 458. 469 -John 267. 304, 305. 428 A Wicked man 17 Widders Robert 93. 118. 261 * 268* 276*-279* 215, 216. 226, 227. 265. 269. 297. 312. 349. 361. 364, 365. 367, 368. 381. 384. 423. 470 -his Wife 423 Widow-woman, Maryl, 378 Wiggan, Major 196, 197. 281, 282 Wild, Major 312 Wild, Judge 394. 402. 405 Willems Willem of Alkmaer 438. 522 Williams, Capt. 342 Wilkinson William, Capt. 303 Wilson William 279 -George, Amer. 374 Windham, Judge 92 Windsore, Lord Lieutenant 389-391 Winsmore Dr. Just. 381 Winthrop, Governour 244 Wittey, Dr. 300 Women several 12. 27, 28. 48. 55. 381. Wright, Widow. Amer. 375. 378 Wrey Richard, Esq 129 -John and their Wives 224* Y. YArrow William, Maryland 375 Yeomans William 318 -Isabella 334. 433. 444. 446 York, Duke 230 Young Peter 314
THE THIRD TABLE, CONTAINING Some of the Subject Matters and Things occur∣ring in this Volume. A. ABuses done to G.F. 70. 85, 86 by Professors, &c. 103, 104. 118. 132, 133. 169. 244* Friends abused 118. 197. 216. 257. 313. at Meetings 197, &c. Action in the Fields, near London, where Friends had been much abused, G. F. had a Meeting 197 Adam, the First and Second com∣pared 561 Affections, Lusts and Desires mor∣tified 261* 262* 285* Aged Friend of 100 years old 58. one of 122 years old 269 Allegiance to the King 277. 279. 300. 325. and Supremacy 399. (see Oath.) America, G. F's, &c. Travels there from Maryland to New-England, &c. through the Woods and Wilderness, over Bogs and great Rivers (not without great Dan∣ger of some of their Lives) and lying a-nights in the Woods, by a Fire in a very cold Season, the Wolves howling about them, 364-380. Truth's prosperity there, 458. G. F's Epistle to those places, 601, 602 Anointing within teacheth the Be∣lievers 5, 6. 436 Anti-Christs, see False Prophets. Apostasy entred since the days of the Apostles 227* 282** Apostates, back-sliders and false Brethren are got into the Tem∣ple of God 533, 534. 556. 597, 598 Apostles were Trades-men 591-593 Apparel for Pride, judged 530-532 Apparition of the Death of O. C. seen by G. F. 195 Appeals of London-Friends Tried, 548 Apprentices put forth by Monthly, Meetings 335 Arminians, strangers to the Spirit of the Apostles 147 Assizes of G.F's. Trials at Carlisle 110 111. Lancaster, 92. 276-278. 288-295. Lanceston, 179, 180. Not∣tingham 249, 250. Worcester 396. (See Sessions.) Astrologers, see Stargazers. B. BAcksliders warned, 535-538 (see Apostates.) Banishment of G.F's. in Scotl. 274* 275* 277* Banishing and Im∣prisoning for Religion is not Christ's Doctrine, 459, 460. 594-396. Friends Banished in Eng∣land, 304. at Dantzick 595 Baptism. 172. 229* 237* Baptist-Meetings 13. 109, 139. Baptists discoursed by G. F. 28, 29. 108, 109. 149. a Teacher con∣vinc'd 118. 150. 167. Baptists in Warwick, 169. in Notting∣hamshire, 16, 17. Baptists and Fifth-Monarchy-men Prophesied of Christ to come that Year to reign, 211. A Baptist-Woman restored, 170, 171. Baptists deny G. F. their Meeting-house 172. Particular Baptists, 173. Battledore, the Author's Account thereof 245. 272 Believers are born of God 5 Bible given to G. F. to swear upon, which forbids Swearing, 291, 292. and teaches the plain Lan∣guage 301 Blacks or Negro's to be trained up in the fear of God 352. 359— 361. 377 Bond for Appearance refused, 260. —for good behaviour 395 Book, see Bible. Books writ and answer'd by G.F. 295. 308. 406. 408 Bowling and foolish Exercises de∣nied 218* 219* Bread and Wine, see Papists. Brown's Prophecy of G. F. 13 Brownists 247. 435 Butchers and rude People bind themselves with an Oath to kill G. F. 128, 129 C. CAlvinists 247. 483 Cambridge-Scholars rudeness, 155 Captain much given to laughter, Convinc'd, 173. A Captain's in Scotland impious saying 214 Carlisle in an uproar 109. G. F. in Carlisle-Dungeon 111-117 Cartmeil Wapentake-Court 487 Certificates to be brought by Friends proceeding to Marriage 315, 316. 347 A Cheat discovered by G. F. 318 Christ the Teacher of his People, 107. 628, 629. the Rest 527-530. Sun of Righteousness, 554, 555. a quickning Spirit, 557, 558. who can speak to Mens Condi∣tions, 8. 10. 13. 175. and is known by Revelation 8. &c. Church the true and the false, 283* the Church of Christ clothed with the Sun 553-556 Church of Rome degenerated, 246, 247. 286. persecuting, 288* Church of England's Faith, 196 Climates sudden change and varie∣ty in America 378-380 Cloisters, Monasteries, &c. there is no Scripture for them 286* 287* Coldbeck-Steeple-house, Robert Widders going thither, &c. was almost killed by the People 118 Colledges cannot make Ministers of Christ 281* Collegians 435. 439 Committee of Safety, &c. their Pro∣claiming Fasts, is like Jezabel's 194 Conjurer (so reputed) reproved by G. F. in Jail 48 Conscience a Witness to Truth, 192-194. is not to be forced, 539-541. must be void of Offence 549 Contentions not to be in Meetings 469, 470 Conventicle-Act is not, To do, as they would be done by 337-340 Convincements in the Nation in the beginning, 12. 15, 16, &c. 118. 120. 123. 129. 135. London, 140. In O. C's. House and Family, 141. 147, &c.
Cromwel Oliver his Discourse with G. F. 137, 138. 169. A Friend offers himself to O. C. to lie in Doomsdale for G.F. 214 The Cross, the Power of God, 10. 12. 282* 285* Covetousness of Wracks reproved, 207, 208. 611 A Cutpurse at Sessions searching Friends Pockets, is set at liberty 258 D. DAngers and Perils of G. F. 24. 30. 258. 71. 73. 81. 86-88. 92-94. 101. 105. 110-113. 128. 130. 139. 177-179. 184. 188, 189. 224* 225* 246* 256* 267* 286* 210. 213-215. 259. 266, 267. 269 307, 308. 313. 318. 329. At Sea, 350, &c. by Knives, Rapiers, rude Multitudes, Beatings, Bruisings and binding themselves with an Oath to kill him, &c. Day of Judgment coming upon Persecutors, 346. the Day of the Lord's Wrath is kindling upon them 146 Deceivers beyond the Priests that stand in Deceit, described 19 Declaration of G. F's. offer'd by him to the Court, instead of the Oath 399, 400 Devil, he was not made of God 152. 263 Differences about outward things to be shunned 597 Disputes at Leicester, 15, 16. with the Priest of Grarigg, &c. 102. at Drayton, 131, 132. G.F. with Priest Wilkinson 120 A Dispute of James Naylor with 8 Priests, 167. A vain Disputer answered, 272* Vain Janglings to be shunned 414 Dogs did not move their Tongues against them 377 Do unto others, as you would, &c. 25. 275* 208, 209. 539-541. 595, 596. 600 Dreams relied upon by a People 6 Drought was great in England 247* Drunkenness testified against by G.F. at Inns in his Travels 174. 225* 313. Great Drunkenness at the Choosing of Parliament∣men 213 Dwarfs not to come nigh the Al∣tar of God, 581. 585. 610. Out of Christ all Mankind are Im∣perfect and Deformed 563 E. EGyptians afflict Israel till the Lord overthrows them 207* Election and Reprobation 62. 108. 173. 254* 269* 270* 330, 331 Embassador with Irish-men came to disturb the Meeting 240, 241 Embassadors at Nimmeguen, G. F. his Epistle to them 630-632 Enemies, who are the worst to Truth? 418 Episcopal-mea cannot affirm, they have the same Spirit the Apostles had 247 Errors pleaded in Margaret Fell's Indictment 289, 290 Errors in G. F's. Indictment pleaded by himself, 290, 291. and the second Indictment quasht by Errors 294 Examples, see Judgments. Excise-man warned 30 Excommunicated Friends in Scot∣land, none was to buy or sell with them, 276* in England, 301, 302 Experiences formerly had, or other mens, spoken and preached from 83. 411. 418, 419 F. FAith gives Victory over Sin, 271*. Christ is the Author of— 196. Faith stands in the Power of God, 409-412. Dead Faiths and Doctrines 587 Fanaticks, who and what they are? 205. 220 Fashions and Vanities of the world testified against, 25. 602, 603. (see Apparel.) Fast of G. F's. 92. 103. of a Wo∣man in Lancashire, 12. Fast proclaimed by O. C. for Rain, 147*. a Day of Humiliation, 190. The true and false Fast, 194. 248* 251* Fast and Holy-days (so called) 387. Fasting and Prayer 621-624 Feastings and Sporting whilst o∣thers were, G. F. visited the Poor, relieving them 5 Fees Marshal's, 230, 231. 303. G.F. could not pay, being Innocent; and the Jailer's 217* 258 Fell, Judge, sends a Warrant a∣gainst the Abusers of G. F. 88. and grants a Supersedeas of a Warrant against him 90 —Margaret shews to the King Friends Sufferings and Innocen∣cy 231 Fellowships in outward things will corrupt and wither 288 Fifth-Monarchy-mens Uproar, 229, 230. 238. They cleared Friends openly at their Execution, 240. 247. They look for Christ's Personal Coming, 247. are Fighters 248 Fighters are not of Christ's King∣dom, 200. Sion needs no such, 201. 204. 246. 268. (See Wars.) Fox George, his place of Birth, Parents and Relations, 1-3. 30. 41. 135. 213. 310. 390. 396. his Cloths and Wear, 60. 173, 174. his Marriage, 334. A great Weight fell upon his Spirit, 342. his Travel and Sufferings at Reading, 198, 199, 200. 213. 229. Offers his Hair and Cheek to the Threatner, 240, 241, &c. and Labours diligently in the Work of the Lord, 601. his Persecu∣tors would have hanged him, 110. His care for Truth and Friends, 613, 614. He prays to the Lord, 7. 348. and for the Afflicted, 30. 503, 504. &c. (See Miracles.) His weakness of Bo∣dy, 594. 613. His Death and Burial, 614. whose Name is written in the Lamb's Book of Life, which was before the Foundation of the World, 22 His Epistle left sealed up, &c. 615-617 —Mary, Mother of G.F. 1. died, 369 Frederickstadt-Friends Cause plead∣ed by G. F. 423, 424 Friends much abused by Priest and People, 69, 86. Their Charity to the Poor, 215. going for a Sign, see Sign. G. GAoler, see Jailer. God's People to be like unto him, 571, 572. The Power of God thundred amongst the Ma∣gistrates of Darby, &c. 31. Good Behaviour G. F. Could not consent to be bound to, who had committed no Ill Behaviour, 41. (See Bond.) Good morrow, good evening, &c. Vain Customs and Traditions forbidden 24 Goods ill gotten, are a Curse to Men 208 Gospel is not the four Evangelists 264. 436. Governments Change, God has a mighty Hand therein 224 Governor of Dover Convinced 151 -of Tinmouth Castle with others, visits G. F. in Prison. 300 Grace of God teaches those that turn to it, 22, 23. 239* 240* 264* which hath appeared to all men. 300 Grammar and Accidence distinguish the Singular from the Plural 30 Groans which brake forth through G. F. did reach to People, and strike them 57. 10 H. HAbeas Corpus, &c. for G. F.'s Removal, 222, 223. 394. 399. 405. Hacker (Coll.) his Son Needham's wicked Saying of G. F. 136. Hacker (Coll.) cut off being hanged at Tyburn, 137. His Wife and Marshal convinced of Truth, 166. Hagget Judge, his Wife visits G.F. &c. in Lanceston-Gaol, and was convinced 200* Hair worn long of G.F. 176. 221* 259* Hales Judge, his Answer to G.F.'s
Adversaries in Court 406 Hands not to be laid on any sud∣denly 283** 597 Hat-honour proud Flesh looks for, 24, 25. 121. 179, 180. 182. 184. 273* 219*. A Pro∣fessor's absurd Proof for it from Scripture (pretendedly) 188. 192*-196* 202* Professors offended at it, 244* 198. Friends fined for it, 211. and Imprison'd, 254* 197, 198. 205. 227. 239. 273, 274. 276. 339. The Hat kept on in Prayer by J. Perrot and his Party, 310. 394. 624-626. Hebrew, Greek and Latin makes no Minister of Christ 281* Hirelings and Diviners for Money get vast Sums of it by selling the Scriptures 26. 133 Honour, the true from the false distinguished, 24. 202* 284* 274. 308. Hornby-Castle robb'd of the Wain∣scot and Bucks-horns in Major Poter's House 222 House-Creepers, leading silly Wo∣men Captive, &c. are such as having crept into Temples with Tithes and Offerings, keep People always learning under them, &c. 196 House of Israel, the House of God 588, 589. Humility goes before Honour, 202* 416. 478. 548, 549. I. JAiler of Darby watches G. F. for evil, being in a rage against him, 32. His Vision concerning G. F. 37. Was convinced of Truth, G. F. finding him a∣mong Friends, 213. and after∣wards he writ a sensible Letter to G. F. 251, 252 Jailers of Carlisle, their Cruel∣ty against G.F. 110. 112. so that the Under-Jailer was put into the Dungeon to G. F. for using him so badly 117 Jailer at Lanceston, 179. his Wickedness and Rage against G. F. &c. 186. who had been a Thief and burnt in the Hand, 187. 214* and afterwards was put into Doomsdale himself, and died in Prison ibid. Under-Jailer at Lancaster a very wicked Man, 218. 222. And the Upper-Jailer Hunter was cut off in his Young days, for his Wickedness to G. F. 297. 306. Jailer at Leicester was very Cruel to Friends in his Prison before G. F. came there, 256, 257. Jailer of Durham incensing the Governor and Soldiers of Scarb. Castle against G. F. was cut off in his Wickedness 306 Jeroboam's Calves-houses likened to the Houses called Churches, set up in the darkness of Pope∣ry 84 Jerusalem, which comes down from Heaven, its State descri∣bed, 345, 346. The Children thereof 616, 617 Jesuits, two of them (fawning upon Friends) discoursed by G. F. concerning the degene∣racy of the Churcn of Rome, 246, 247. 286* 287* who are filthy Dreamers, dreaming they are the Apostles Successors, 247. and are in a Rage against the Work of the Lord, 331. and persecute to Death for Religion 288* A Jew discoursed by G. F. con∣cerning the Coming of the Mes∣siah, 441. others would not discourse 453. 559, 560 Imprisonments for not Swearing, 164. 168. for Tithes and going to Steeple-houses, &c. 231 * 253*-255* 258* 263* 153. G. F. Imprison'd in a nasty, stinking Prison at Nottingham, 26, 27. in Darby-Prison, 32-46. 49-53. in Darby-Dungeon. 46-48. in Lanceston Prison, 178, 179. 185, 186. Doomsdale, 186-188. Lanceston Goal, 189* 210*-219* at Leicester, 256-258 in Lancaster Prison, 274-297. in Scarborough-Castle, 298-305. Taken at London-Meetings, and had before Magistrates, 339, 340, &c. G. F. in Worcester Goal, 389, being premunired, 405. and pleading the Errors of the Indictment at the K.'s-Bench-Bar, was set at Liberty 406 Friends Imprison'd to Death, 252. 304. Independent-Woman's prejudice against G.F. 154. Independents, 247 Indian King discoursed by G. F. and several Indians at the King's Cabbin, 379. their Gravity and Attention 382 Indictment's Errors pleaded by G. F. 289-294. 297. 400-402. calls it a bundle of Lyes, 398. is quash'd 405, 406 Informers hired in Cumberland, 270. set at work by Priests, 343. a Papist-Informer against G. F. 339. they make spoil, 491, 492. Hilton, 494, 495. Sad, 514. Inn-keepers in Wales, their Trea∣chery to G.F.'s Horse, &c. 255* 256* another (of Topsham) burns G. F.'s Leathern Girdle, 173, 174. Inquisition) Friends Travelling in the Service of the Lord, were many times in danger thereof, but preserved, 123. and at Dun∣kirk, 151. Two Women Friends were in the Inquisition at Mal∣ta 252 Ireland-Friends Charity for the Relief of Friends Sufferers in England 538 Judge and Juries wrong Proceed∣ings in G. F.'s Case, 400, 401. a Judge's base Expression, 398. a Judge in Holland discoursed by G.F. 453 Judging) The Church of Christ hath power and ability to Judge, &c. 464-467. 541-547. 597, 598. Judgments of God on Darby, 53. upon a false Accuser of G. F.'s, 67, 68. on a Persecutor, 95. upon Adam Sands, 100. on two persecuting Justices of Carlisle, 123. on Conspirators against G. F. 129. on Captain Drury, 138. on a Mocker of Friends Meetings, 206, 207. on Preston's Wife, 218. upon New England, 244. an Independent Scottish Pastor, 271* 272* a Souldier speaking evil of the Light, 278* upon persecuting, envious Of∣ficers, 262. upon a Persecutor in Cornwall, 264, 265. in Lan∣cashire, 276. on Justice Flem∣ming, 281. on Major Wiggan, ibid. on Persecutors and bad Men, 303, 304. on Justices, G. F.'s Persecutors, 306. upon a persecuting Justice, 309. up∣on a common Swearer in Bar∣bados, 352. on Justice Simpson, 401. and on Justice Street, 401, 402. on persecuting Powers, 204, 205. Day of Judgment, See Day. Justices fair Promises at Worcester-Assize broken, 391, 392. en∣snaring Questions 423. 428 Justices sitting about hiring of Servants, were admonished and exhorted by G. F. to Justice, and the Servants to do their Duty, 17. Courts of Justice warned by G. F. to do justly 25 K. KEat Capt. his base Carriage to G. F. 177, 178 King Charles II. his Coming in, 198, 199. 212, 213. 219. 221, 222. Old Kings Judges Executed 238 To the King and Council, a Declaration 233. 237 King's of France and Spain, and the Pope to prove all things, &c. in an Epistle of G. F.'s to the Pope, and all Kings and Rulers in Europe 146 King's Bench-Bar) G. F. being removed by Habeas Corpus, had his Tryal there, 227, 228. 394, 395. 399. 405, 406. King's Evil, a Friend's Daughter being healed of 407
Kingdom of Christ has been set up above Sixteen hundred Years ago, 274. is in Peace and Righ∣teousness, 234. the Heirs of the Kingdom of Christ are such as are Regenerated and Born a∣gain, 572-576 L. LAndmark) those that remo∣ved it to cause the Blind to wander, were cursed 590 Languages, see Tongues. Law of God is perfect, 11, 12. 14, 15. is written in the Heart, 238* 243 Lawyers must be reformed, and brought into the Law of God, 18, 19 Liberty and Freedom Man is brought into by the Ministry of Christ and his Teaching, 12. An Intention was in the Go∣vernment, of granting Friends Liberty, 229. 325. true Liberty is in that which puts down Sin and Iniquity, 474. outward Liber∣ty from Prisons, is the Lord's Mercy, 548, 549. 567, 568, the false Liberty is from the way of Truth 536-538 Life Eternal is in Christ, not in the Scriptures 578, 579 Light is not Natural, 252* 253* 257*. 22, 23. 125, 126, &c. 136. 176. 181. 223* 224* 238* 261, 262. Light and Grace, 270* 271* Light Curst by the Scotch Priests, 270* 190. 192. All are enlightned, 281, 282. The Light to be in the Indians, was denied by Dr. Witty, 300. and a Dr. in Carolina denied it also, 376. Which Light gives the Light of the Knowledge, &c. 436. 569. 575, 576. 604, 605. Little Ease, a Prison or Hole, whereinto Rich. Sale was squee∣zed, that not long after he died 240 Love of God, its Infiniteness, 9. 14. 416. Love and Charity's Effects, 550. 552. 598. Love and Unity is from the Spirit of God 598 M. MAgistrates must yield to Truth, 254*-256*-260* 114-117. 256* 260* 259*. are to do Justice, 209. and stop Pro∣faneness, 225. 244. their Sword against Evil-doers, 272, 273. Magistrates of Dantzick their Work of Persecution, 458-463. 538-541. 594-596 Marriages, 5. stated, 302. 307. The Proceedings thereof setled, 315, 316. 352. 354. 422. To be laid before the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, 312. and to have Certificate, 316. A Case of Marriage tried at Not∣tingham-Assizes, 249, 250. A Marriage in Road-Island, 367. Friends Care therein, 520. Mar¦rying, Meats and Drinks, 12. 229 Major-General of Northamptonshire, an old Persecutor, sharply re∣proved by G. F. 224* Meetings) G. F. meeting with some friendly People in Darby∣shire, &c. 6, 7. at Broughton, 13, &c. Meetings of Friends set up, 84. at F Lepers, 93. Arnside 103 Great Meetings at London, 140. Near Acton in the Fields 141 A Meeting near London, where Friends were much abused 197 Monthly and Quart. Men and Womens Meetings set up in London, and in the Nation 310-315-320. in the Power of God, which is the Authority thereof, 413. 417. and are of God's Or∣dering, 552, 553. being set up in the Wisdom of God, 615 Womens-Meetings set up, and the Service thereof 386. 419-421 Yearly-Meetings 1657, 1658. in Bedfordshire, 282* 286*. at Balby (Boulthie, Yorkshire) 213, 214. York 598. and at London, a Yearly Meeting (1670.) 349 Meeting for Sufferings at Skip∣ton set up 215 Powerful Meetings in Ireland 327-332 Ministers went forth, 104. 120. from the North-Country over England, 124. into Scotland, 140, 141. and beyond the Seas, 150. Truth spreading in England, 200* True Ministers Trial, 147. Ex∣ercising their Gift, 283* 286* and sounding abroad their Trumpets 329, 330 Ministry of Christ, 5. 8. 12. 300. 412. takes no Hire 368 Miracles wrought by the Power of God, 167. She that was rea∣dy to die, raised up again, 170, 171. The Lame made whole, 103. The Diseased restored, 407. A distracted Woman healed, 27, 28. (See Trouble of Mind.) A great Man given o∣ver by Physicians, restored, 30. 258. G. F. prays for a Woman ready to die, 70. and for a di∣stracted Woman at Chichester, 171. Restores John Jay's Neck broke (as the People said) by a fall from an Horse in East-Jer∣sey, 370, 371. Speaks to a Sick∣man in Mary-land, who was raised up by the Power of the Lord, 373. and prays the Lord to rebuke J. C's. Infirmity, and the Lord by his Power soon gave him Ease, &c. 503, 504 Monk General his Order, requi∣ring all Officers and Soldiers to forbear to disturb the Quakers Meetings, &c. 212. 229. which are not Seditious, 237. yet di∣sturbed 240. 314, 315. 326 Mountebanks Vanity, 25. Their Ignorance 245* Mountague Judge, G. F. discour∣sing him at his Chamber (in London) about Tithes 487, 488 Muggletonians 247 Musheto's in Amer. (little Flies or Gnats.) 369 Musick and Singing 23. 25 N. NAmes are given to Things ac∣cording to their Nature 18 Natures of Creatures outward to be read within Man, 13. 20. 82. That all Things come by Na∣ture, refuted 16 Naylor James, running into Ima∣ginations, is warned by G. F. 220* his Recovery, ibid. 232* his Followers 245* Nebuchadnezzar's Dream of Christ's Kingdom, which is not of this World 247, 248. 45. Negroes and Family-Meetings re∣commended, 610, 611. (See Blacks) New-England Professors proclaim∣ing a Fast, 194. soon after put four of our Friends to Death, and became bloody Persecuters, 241, 242. G. F. charged their Magistrates with Murdering them, according to their own Confession, 243, 244. who felt God's Judgments for their Wickedness 455. 458. 601 News hearing and telling, 65. 539. Nicknames, see Sirrah. O. OAth or Engagement to O. C. 123, 124. Swear not at all, 130. 180, 181. Oath of Abju∣ration, 163, 164. tendred to G. F. 176. his Paper against Swearing, read in Court, 180-182. 185. Oaths and Swearing, 229. 239. 600. refused by G. F. 301. being unlawful. ibid. -Allegiance and Supremacy, 250. 255-257. 403, 404. Oaths taken falsely against Friends, 262. 273-280. Oath tendered to G. F. 288. 292, 293. 295. 392. Allegiance wherein it con∣sists, 300. 318. what G. F. could say instead of it, 392. and of Supremacy, 395, 396. 400 Offering, the true and the false, 560-567. 577. 581. 607 Old Cause) The setting up there∣of was for themselves 205 Oldenburgh Magistrates and People a Warning to them 617-619. Openings of G. F's. 3. 5. 8-10. 13, 14. 16. of the things of the Creation, 18. of Physick, Divi∣nity and Law, 18-22, &c. 586. 588. 602 Opposers of the Faithful come to nought 615, 616.
Order of Bodmin-Sessions for the Prisoners Ease, 187. Order and Discipline in the Church of Christ maintained, 534, 535, is of the Spirit 557 Oxford and Cambridge-Teachers, 263. cannot make Ministers of Christ, 5. 8. Oxford-Scholars Rudeness 155, 225* P. PApists, their Superstition of Consecrated Bread and Wine, 287* 288* Images, Crosses and Relicks 286* 252. pray by Beads, 247. 328. 564. and sprin∣kle Children, 323. their Pur∣gatory, ibid. and Mother-Church pretended, 324. A Warning to them, 146, 147. and their mur∣thering false Doctrine confuted 299, 300 Pardon being offered by the King to G. F. he could not take it, 404, 405. and was fairly freed without it, 406 Parliament-men discoursing G. F. in Prison 300 Parnel James Convinced (1653) 112. was at a Dispute of G. F's. against eight Priests, &c. at Drayton on an Hill (1654) 132. Imprisoned in Colchester-Castle (1655) 112. is visited by G.F. in Prison, 152. The Gaoler's Wife threatned to have his Blood, 153. who died by a fall from a Ladder, going up to his Prison, 112, 113. Of whom Professors (to cover their Cru∣elty) said, He fasted himself to Death ibid. Patience and Faith's Exercise, 265* People flew like Chaff before the dreadful Power of God, 81. 31. People trembled and shook in Carlisle-Steeple-house, 109. (See Shaking.) Perfection, a Priest Discourses G.F. about it, 397. Perfection in Christ is above Adam's, 357.546. Imperfection pleaded for by Pro∣fessors 36, 37. 119 Persecution Judged, 94-96. 98-100. testified against and Persecutors warned, 191-199. they being blinded, 210* 263* 264* 225. and not knowing what Spirit they are of, 224. Persecutors to Blood, 318, 319. Persecutors restrained, 308. 312, 313. 328. Persecution violent at London-Meetings, 343. Testimonies against it, 460-462. 482-485. 496-499. 626, 627. 631, 632. Four Friends in New-England hanged 240-244 Physick and Letting Blood a Priests Remedy against a troubled Mind 5 Physicians must be in in the Wis∣dom of God 18. 30. 245 Pleasures and vain Delights deni∣ed 217* 219* 220* 204 Plots and Fightings, Friends De∣claration against, 231. 233-237. 267. 395. 481. and denied, 272. 274. 303 Poland's Exil'd Protestants, 190, 191. King of Poland, 458. Two Letters to him from G. F. 459-463. and 539-541. Powers of the Earth 286* Prayer in Sighs and Groans, 266* how to pray 564 Preachers (Congregational) at a Meeting with G. F. 252* Premunire of G. F. 295. 297. of two Friends in Devonshire, 318. Counsellor Corbet's Plea for G.F. in Court 405 Presbyterians Meeting stuff't with Bread and Cheese, &c. 314, 315. 391 Press-masters on Board G. F's. Vessel 349. 383 Pride in Apparel 144, 145 Priests sell the Scripture, 26. pray by Form, 134, 135. their Spirit, 25. they are Hirelings, 106. 133, 134. Tithe-takers, 228* Rob∣bers of the People, and not Ministers of the Gospel, 295. 333, 334. plead for Sin and Imperfection, 32. 36, 37. 52. are confounded, 60. 119. dreaded the Man in Leather-Britches, 60. A Priest trembles, 69. hides himself from G. F. 79. are mi∣serable Comforters, 45. repro∣ved by Judge Fell, &c. at Ses∣sions for their gross Assertions, 89. reproved in the Streets, 90. Eight Priests dispute against G. F. 132. are false Prophets and Antichrists, 106. 556. One pleads for Adultery, 393. one beats Friends, 59, 60, 326. are choaked by a Parsonage, 30, 31. and love a fat Benefice, 167. 300, 301. so much a Year, 211. The Devils Lawyers and Coun∣sellors, 265*. Oppressors, 296. Persecutors: 207. 308, 309. 343. 415 Prophecy of R. Jones vain, 127, 128. of Brown's, see Brown. A Womans Prophecy of the Kings Coming in, 199. Prophecy of Priests and Professors against the Quakers vain, 120, 121. false Prophecies and Prophets 128 Prison of G. F. its badness, 288. 292, 293. 295. 297. and that of Scarborough-Castle 298 Prison-Keeper struck with ter∣ror 37 Prisoners many, 194. Friends offer their Bodies one for ano∣ther, ibid, died Prisoners, 197. 250. 275, 276. 278. 280. 304. 318. Prisoners set at Liberty by the King 229. 548 Pyrates 363. 350, 351 Q. Quakers first so called 37, 38 Quakers Love to all Men, 308. A Quaker's upright Verdict, being upon a Jury, commended by the Judge in Court 130 Quakers Principle stated to the King by G. F. 402-404 R. A great Rain fell after a Meeting in Cheshire in a great Drought 247* Ranters confounded, 29. 57. 59. 130, 131. 139. 151, 152. 225* 247. A Ranting Woman at Low, 262, 263. Their Wicked∣ness, and the Judgment fallen on them 320 G. F. had a meeting with the Raniers in Road-Island 367 Rebellion and Plots denied 532 Regeneration must be known, to enter into the Kingdom of God 572-576 Religion, the Reformed by Traditi∣on, 191. The true one is the Life and Power of God, 223, 436, 437. The Pope's, 191. (See Papist.) Repentance of some that had run out, 310. Repentance goes be∣fore the Gospel 570, 571 Reports raised of G. F. falsly, 244* at Nailsworth, 332. Of G.F. and Friends at Barbadoes, 357. 361 Restitution made of wrong done 27 Restoration out of the Fall, into the state that never fell 346 Revelation of John is a sealed-up Book, said the Priests to G. F. 6. By Revelation God is known 8 Righteous Men are preserved from Destruction 558-560 Rude People at Meetings and Inns, 243* 244* in Wales, 255* at Manchester, 260* in Scotland, 272* Rude Fellows by the way-side, 276* Rude Serving-men abusive to Friends in and out of Meetings, 93. and to Women going home, 216. Fel∣lows encompassing G.F. by the way, 224* Rude Priests 218 Rude People 240, 241. 269. 317 Rule of Life 397 S. Sacrament of Bread and Wine, the denial of it objected and an∣swered, 230* 231* 237* 287* 288* Sally-man of War, that gave chase to the Vessel G. F. went in to America, his report thereof 355 (55) Salutation of G. F.'s to the Coun∣cil of Edenburgh, being had be∣fore them, 273*
Schools set up for Friend's Chil∣dren, one at Waltham-Abbey for Boys, 316. and at Shackle∣well another for Girls, ibid. 347. 387 Scots challenging a Dispute with Friends were overthrown, 271* A Scotch Officer's impious Say∣ing 272* Scotch Priests Princi∣ples, 269* Curses 270* 271* Blindness 274* 275* Scriptures are the Words, not the Word of God 102. 211* and understood by the Spirit, 22, 23. 511, 512. being given forth by it, 359. Scripture-Knowledge without the Life, vain 7, 8. 13. 437 Seekers 247, 435 Separation and its Spirit, a war∣ning against it, 420-422. pleads a Liberty, 434. has the Name of Truth, but not the Nature, 434. 446. 448-451. 455. 464. 467, 468. 481. 489-491. 516-518. 551-553. Unruly Spi∣rits at Reading, 456. In Ame∣rica G. F. had a Meeting with them 366 Sessions at Lancaster 88-92. 273, 274. Leicester, 257, 258. Wor∣cester, 391, 392. 398. 401. Bodmin 187 Serpent 9. Speaking in People 14 Serving-men: See Rude. Shaking of the House, G. F. pray∣ing, 15. A Meeting of Friends were greatly shaken, 17. Peo∣ple shook 109. (See Steeple-house.) Sheriff of Lincoln convinc'd, 129. (See Craven.) Sheriffs to be Chosen by Friends, such as they can give their Voices for 492, 493 The Sick and afflicted restored. (See Trouble in Mind, & Miracles.) Shipwracks called God's Grace 207. 209 Sign) Tho. Aldam a Sign to O. C. 199. Rob. Huntington, 239. Some in Sackcloth and Ashes, 296. 306. Another before the Fire of London, 305. Another go∣ing naked, 306. A Woman going before the Parliament, &c. 199. (See Prophecies.) Ri∣chard Sale carrying, &c. 240 Silent-Meeting 63 Singing in the Spirit with a me∣lodious Sound 277* Sin Priests preach up for Term of Life, 32. 239. Sin's Entail and Original cut off, 265*. Professors distinguish the Guilt and the Power of it, 196. and plead for Sin, 397, 398. Sin's Deceitfulness to be watched a∣gainst 506, 507 Sirrah, and other reproachful Nick-names given by Ma∣gistrates to Prisoners, reproved 277 Slander raised by a Priest on a Meeting of Friends he was at 102 Socinians 247. 387. 435 Soldiers, one proffered G. F. to assist him, 86. others were Convinced, and their Wives at Meetings, 106. 108, 109. and at Cranbrook, 150. Ano∣ther, begins to draw his Sword at a Friend 188. Some could not take the Oath to O. C. 123, 124. others took it, and fell into Danger, ibid. A Soldiers wick∣ed Saying of Christ, 214*. Several Officers Convinced in Scotland, 279*. Some Sol∣diers striking Friends at Meet∣ing, 210, 212. Troopers came to see G.F. in Prison 297 Soldiers Testimony of him, 305 Lewd Soldiers in Germany, 443. Blind Men are not Listed for Soldiers (neither outward nor inward) 606 Somerset-House 199 Soul) A People holding, That Women have no Souls 5, 6 Spirit of Discerning in G. F. 14. 108. The Spirit tries Do∣ctrines, 26. and leads into all Truth, 238* A measure of it is given to every one, 281. Its Fruits, if obeyed, 402, 403. (A Spirit in the Ship, and in the Steeple-House 55. 350, 351 Sports and Feastings denied 5 Steeple-Houses and Markets, Truth preached in them, 262* the Sound of its Bell seemed like the Sound of a Market-Bell, 25, 26. 31. G. F. in the Steeple-house at Beverly and Crantzick, 54-57. Mansfield-Woodhouse the People fell upon him, &c. Stee∣ple-house shook, 82. 102. 109 Friends declaring Truth in Steeple-houses, 149. 151. 177. 188 276*. others admonished the Bowlers 217* Streets, Truth preached in them, 246. 254*-258* Stone laid in Sion, rejected, 473. That became a great Mountain 579, 580 Stilness, the Mind feels the Prin∣ciple of God in it 189 Students at Aberdeen, some Con∣vinced 407 Sufferings of G. F.'s and Friends for being contrary to the World's Ways and Customs, 24. G. F. cruelly beaten by a Clerk in the Steeple-house, 69. by a rude Multitude, 87. banished, (see Banishment.) su∣fered in bad Prisons, 289, &c. Sufferings of Friends for Tra∣velling about their Occasions, 201* for going to Steeple-hou∣ses, &c. 262* 263* &c. laid before O.C. 195 Sufferings of Friends at Meet∣ings, 197. by Imprisonments, ibid. 198. 295, 296. 321. 250. And after the Monarchy-mens Rising, 231. some Banished, &c. Dantzick Friends Suffer∣ings 458-463. 538-541. 594-596 Swear not at all, 292. Friends not swearing, how discerned from others not swearing, 324, 325. See 481. 514. Offices served by Friends without Swearing, 600. Justices and Jury For∣sworn at Lancaster-Assizes in G. F's. Case, 289, 290. Three Officers of the Court Forsworn in the same Case 294 Syllogisms and Sophistick Ar∣guments overthrown 273* T. TAlents, 240* 241* and the slothful Servant. 611 Talkers airy, 8. 14. 185, 186. Tawnies, see Blacks. Teacher) God was the first Teacher in Paradise, &c. 384 Tempest great with Thunder and Rain 309 Temples made with Hands God dwells not in 6.31 Temptations to Despair upon G. F. 3, 4. 6. 8. for the Trial of his Faith, 10. was under great Temptations sometimes 13, 14 Thee and Thou to a single Person, 279* 198. 205. 239. 245. 301. (See Hat.) Thieves lying hid by the highway in Scotland, reproved by G. F. 276* Tithes Quakers cannot pay 229. 118. Great Havock and Spoil made for them by Priests, 162. 239. some Imprison'd to Death for them, 275, 276. 302. Friends to keep up the Testimony a∣gainst them, 430. 432. 487. 550. Tithes pleaded for by the Priests 228 Tongues and Languages the Beast has power over 281* Toleration pray'd against by a Priest, 240. how to use it, 567, 568 Two Thirsts in Man 8, 9 Thrones on Earth contended for, 590 Trading of Friends increased, Peo∣ple seeing their honest Dealing, 12 Transgression of the Life of God, what it leads to 189, 190 Travels of G. F's. into 1657 Wales 245* and 261*   Scotland 268*-281* 1669 Ireland 327-32 1671 Barbados 34-361   Jaimaca 361-363
1672 Maryland 363-365   E. and W. Jersey 365   Long Island in N.E. ibid   Road Island 366-369   Jerseys -370   Maryland 372-375   Virginia 375   Carolina 375-377   Virginia 377, 378 1673 — Maryland 378-383 Returning thence to England he went over to 1677. Holland, Friezland, Ger∣many, Holstein, &c. 432-454 1684 Holland and Friezland 520-523 Trembling and Quaking owned, 157-160 Trials of G. F's. &c. see Assize. Two Triers sent from Wales, both were convinced, 123. A pretended Trier of Spirits con∣founded, 149. A Day of Trial is coming upon all, &c. 287. 533. 587 Troubles of Mind spoken to, 189. Of a Woman in Maryland, for whom G.F. intreated the Lord, 381. Troubles upon a Trooper concerning G. F. 45 Truth is honourable, 284* is peaceable, 486. in Unity, 551, 552. the Pearl, 569 Tumult of the People at Brecknock 246* Turks and Turkish Patrons give Li∣berty of Religion 596 V. VEngeance is the Lord's 244 Victory and overcoming of Temptations known 8. 166 Vision of G. F's. of a Bear, &c. 69. Of a desperate Creature, &c. 267* Of New Engl. Sufferings to Death, 241. Concerning the Turk, 295. Of himself to be taken Prisoner, 389. A Vision in Ire∣land, 328. and in his Voyage for America, 350. the Christi∣ans at Jerusalem, had a Vision before its Destruction 559 Voice coming to G. F. 8, 9. (see Openings) the Voice of the Lord to a Trooper 45 Voyages of G. F.'s to Ireland, 327. for England, 332. to Barbadoes, 349-351, &c. W WAiting upon God 203, 204 Wales) The Governor of Tenby must yield to Truth, 253* 254* and Magistrates in other Places, 255* 256* the Mode∣ration of a Town in Wales, 257* 258* A Lady and her Preacher send for G. F. 259* Wars and Fightings denied by G.F. 3, 4. 46. 48, 49. They arise from the Lusts in the Fall, 200, 201. None to go down to E∣gypt for help, 202, 203. It is not our Principle, 235. but do testifie against it, 285-287. and is not becoming Christianity, 630-632. being a Work of Darkness 137 Warrants against G. F. 118. 188. 267* 278* 203. 213. 216, 217, &c. 271. 308. 326. 341. for Tithes, 487. Warrant against all Quakers 203* 223* Watches set up in the Streets and Highways in Cornwall, &c. to stop Friends from Travelling, 200*-203* 206* 208* 209* Weakness of G. F.'s Body, 310. by long and close Imprisonment, 295, 296. 407. 564. by con∣tinual Travel, 430. and spent at Meetings, &c. 568. his Health being much impaired, 586. A great Exercise came upon him 588 Wicked Man cut off, 303. another plagued 304 Worship, the World's, 23, 24. Will Worship, 213* The Dra∣gon's and the Beast's 227* The Worship in the Spirit, 245, 246 Wrong, see Restitution. Y YEA and Nay, 2. 121. is more binding than an Oath to many, 292, 293. 403, 404. Z. ZEal against Unrighteousness many will God provoke un∣to, 224 The FOURTH TABLE; Being a Catalogue of the Epistles, Letters and Papers of G. F.'s and others contained in this Volume. THE Appearance of the Lord's Everlasting Truth, &c. Testim. p. xviij. 1650. G. F. his Mittimus by Bennet and Barton, Just. 32 To the Priests of Darby 33 To the Magistrates of Darby ibid. To Barton and Bennet, Just. 34 To Justice Bennet ibid. To Justice Barton 35 To the Mayor of Darby ibid. To the Court at Darby 36 To the Ringers ibid. To Friends and others 38 To the convinced People 40 To the Faithful an Encourage. 41 To the Justices of Darby ibid. To the same 42 To the same ibid. To the Priests of Darby 43 To the Justices of Darby ibid. To Col. Barton, Justice 44 1651. To the Judges 47 To the same ibid. To Justice Barton and Bennet 49 To the convinc'd and tender Peo∣ple 50 To the Magistrates of Darby 51 A Lamentation over Darby 52 1652. J. Naylor's Account of Lancaster Sessions 90 To Justice Sawrey 94 To William Lampit 96 To the People of Ʋlverstone ibid. To the Followers of P. Lampit 98 To Adam Sands 100 1653. A. P. To the Judges of Assize 111 G. F.'s Challenge to Professors 113 To T. Craston and C. Studholm 114 G.B. To the Mag. at Carlisle 116 1654. To Friends in the Ministry 124 To all Professors of Christ. 141 To such as follow the World's Fa∣shions 144 To the Just. Trying Ministers 147 1655. To those that Scorn at Trembling and Quaking 156 To the Churches in outward Forms 161 To Friends to offer themselves for their Brother, &c. 165 An Encouragement to Friends 166 To Fr. in the N. of Ireland 170 To the 7 Parishes at Landsend 175 1656 Concerning Swearing 180 Peter Ceely's Mittimus 183 E. Pyot to J. Glyn, C. Just. 189* To Magistrates of Watches 201* Answer to Exon-Warrant 203* To Priests and Professors 207* To Friends in the Ministry 212* E.P. To M. Gen. Desborow 215* G. F. To the same 216* Concerning Pleasures 218* To the Bowlers ibid.
To all the Elect 232* To Fr. to keep up Meetings ibid. Judging any in Meetings 233* An Answer to a Professor 235* Profes. Priests &c. Darkness 238* 1657 The true Fast and false 248* Of Lusts, Affections, Desires 261* To try all things, &c. 263* Be valiant for the Truth 265* Order of Council in Scotl. 273* To the Council of Edenburg 274* 1658 Bedfordshire yearly Meeting 283* To the Lady Claypool 189 Concerning Fasting 191 To the Parliament, of Profes. 195 To Friends to go on faithfully 197 About the Image of O. C. 200 1659 To keep from Plots, &c. ibid. To keep out of Powers, &c. 202 Of the day of Recompence 204 Concerning Shipwracks 207 1660 G. Monk's Order 212 G. F's. Ans. to his Mittimus 219 M. Fell to all Magistrates 221 Concerning true Religion 223 Against Persecution 224 Concerning Change of Gov. ibid. To K. Charles the Second 225 The Sheriff of Lancast. Return 228 The K.'s Order for G.F.'s Rel. ibid Judge Mallet's Warrant 239 To Friends to send up Suffr. 232 A Declar. against Plotters 233 The K.'s Mandamus to N. E. 243 1661. Of the true Worship 245 Keeping on Hat in Prayer 249 The World saith Kiss the Book 250 1662. To the K. Friends Sufferings ibid. T. Sharman's Letter to G.F. 251 The Grounds of Persecution 252 Conc. E. Burrough's Decease 259 1663. Of Ol. Atherton's Death 276 Lanc. Prisoners to J. Flem. 278 1664. G. F. To Dan. Flemming 281 To Judges giving Nicknames 282 A Testimony against Plotting 285 A day of Trial and Exercise 287 To keep out of J. P.'s Spint ibid. 1665. Concerning Tithes 295 1666. G.F.'s Discharge and Pasport 305 1668. Against the Dark Spirits 318 1669. Is. Lindley's Letter to G. F. 326 Sound, sound abroad, you faithful Servants of the Lord 329 Of putting Children to Trades 335 1670. To Margaret Fox 336 Conc. the Act against Meet. 337 Friends to stand to their Test. 338 Encouragement under Suffr. 344 Visitations abused, &c. 346 All Friends that do Marry 347 1671. G. F.'s Prayer to the Lord 348 From Barb. to Fr. in Engl. 353 Another Epist. to Fr. in Engl. 355 For the Governor of Barbados 359 To Margaret Fox 361. 362 1673. To the same 384 G.F.'s Mittimus to Worc. Pris. 389 To Margaret Fox ibid. To the L. Windsor G.F.'s Case ibid. G. F.'s Habeas Corpus 394 G.F.'s Allegiance and Suprem. 399 1674. To the K. the Qu.'s Principle 402 H. Parker to the Gaoler 404 1675. To Friends in Westmorland 408 1676. To Friends at Yearly Meet. 409 Spirit of Opposers and Work 402 1677. To Margaret Fox 428 A Testimony against Tithes 431 The Spirit of Separation 434 To Princess Eliz. Herwerden 435 The Princess her Ans. to G.F. 438 Fasting, Prayer, &c. 620 Getting the Affections of Peo. 446 To Friends at Dantzick 447 To Mag. and Peo. of Oldenb. 617 To Magist. Priests, &c. Hamb. 627 To the Embas. at Nimeguen 630 The Spirit of Separation 449 To Margaret Fox 454 1678. To the same 458 To John III. King of Poland 459 To Friends in Amsterdam 463 Concerning Prescriptions 464 Let Life reign over Death 467 The hurt of Disorderly Spirits 468 To Qu. and Monthly Meetings 469 To the Churches of Christ 471 To Friends in Prison 472 1679. To Fr. of the yearly Meeting 473 Be Valiant for the Truth 477 To dwell in Humility 478 1680. To the Parliam. against Plots 481 To Magist. to be moderate 482 1681. To the Quarterly Meetings 486 Spirit of Strife and Division 489 1682. Informers convicting Friends 491 To the Sheriffs to be chosen 492 To the Pople that chuse them 493 To distinguish Truth and Err. 496 Exercises from Mag. and Apo. 497 Feel the power of God in you all 500 Be Valiant for Truth 501 1683. To the Yearly Meet. in Lond. 505 To Friends, a Salutation 506 My Love is to you all 510 Fruits of Peace and Quietness 512 To all the Elect, &c. 516 1684. To the Duke of Holstein 523 To Friends, an Epistle 527 1685. Keep out of the World's Spirit 528 Excess in Apparel 530 To Friends who are called 533 Among all Societies, &c. 534 Here you may see, when— 536 To John III. King of Poland 539 Concerning Judging 541 1686. Antient Pris. at the Y. Meet. 548 The King opening Prisons 550 In Christ is no Separation 551 Men and Women Q. Meet. 552 Church clothed with the Sun- 553 The Falling away, &c. 556 Noah and his family were call'd 558 The First and Second Adam 561 1687. Concerning the two Seeds ibid. Concerning Prayer 564 True and false Offering 565 Caution in time of Liberty 567 God's Goodness to Mankind 569 Repentance before Baptism 570 God's People to be like him 571 The right Way to Christ ibid. Except a man be born again 572 The Jews Rebel. their Loss 576 God so loved the World, that he- 578 The stone became a mountain 579 Regeneration and Sanctifica. 58 1688. All you Believers in the Light 584 An approaching Storm 587 Moses and Christ's House 588 Thrones on Earth contended 590 The World's Empty Teachers ibid. Not to remove the Landmark ibid. Apostles Husbandmen, &c. 59 1689. Hearing and telling News 593 To P. H. and Fr. at Dantzick 594 To the Magist. of Dantzick 595 Great Shakings in the World 597 To keep in Love and Unity 598 To Friends in Barbados 599 To Q. and Y. Meet. in America 60 1690. Against Fashions, &c. 602 Christ the Ensign, &c. 603 Stand still and see Salvation 606 To Friends in the Ministry 609 To Fr. in the Minist. in Amer. 610 To suffering Friends in Irel. 612 G. F.'s Death and Burial 613 His Epistle left sealed up, &c. 615 OMitted p. 356. line 41. viz. Paul Gwin came into the Meeting, and began to Babble, and asked me, How I spelt Cain? And whether I had the same Spirit as the Apostles had? And I told him, Yes: And he had the Judge take Notice of it. And I told him; He that had not a measure of the same Holy Ghost, as the Apostles had, was possest with an unclean Ghost: And then he went his ways. (See p. 221* 222*) The Letter against Plotting is printed p. 200. and the same over again p. 267. by a mistake.
