H209 12872313 94801
A SHORT, But Cleare, DISCOVRSE, Of the Institution, Dignity, and End of the Lords-Day. Upon Occasion of those words of St. IOHN. I was in the spirit on the Lords-Day. Written by George Hakewill, Doctor in Di∣vinity, and Arch-Deacon of Surrey. LONDON, Printed by Iohn Raworth, for George Thomason and Octavian Pullen, MDCXLI.
REVEL. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords-Day. THey are the words as ye see of Saint Iohn the holy Evangelist, the blessed Apostle, the beloved Disciple, the glorious Confessor, the soaring Ea∣gle, the Sonne of Thunder, the Di∣vine by an Excellency, and the Pen∣man of this most Divine and excellent Book of the Revelation: And here he makes known unto us the place where, the time when, the state in which he was, when the high and deep mysteries of this Book were made known unto him: The place where it was, in the Isle of Patmos, whither by Domitian the Emperour, he was banished for the Word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, as it is in the verse going before my Text: The time when, on the Lords Day, the best Day of the week, shining among the other dayes velt inter ignes Luna minores, as the brightest Moon, when she fills-her circle with light, among the other Stars: The state in which himself then was, in the Spirit, in Spirituall exercises, in Spi∣rituall meditations, and, by means thereof, in Spi∣rituall raptures and elevations, in Spirituall exasies of the soul, above the ordinary pitch of humane condition.
Wee have here presented to our consideration these foure things. First, That there is a certain time, a certain day, which may deservedly be cal∣led, and is indeed the Lords day. The second, That th dy here spoken of, is that particular day, and why it is o clled. The third, Is the great privi∣ledges, and speciall prerogatives of this day, be∣yond, and above all other. The fourth, Is the du∣ties which belong to us upon this day; it is to be in the Spirit, as St. Iohn was; though not in Spirituall Trances, yet in Spirituall Exercises and Medita∣tions. For the first of these, it is certain, most certain, That there is not, nor ever was any Nation under the Cope of Heaven since the first Creation, which acknowledged a Deity, but withall it acknow∣ledged a Divine Worship and Service due to this Deity; and that not onely inward in the minde, but outward, in sacred and solemn Rites and Observan∣ces, as being both the kindely effects, and lively characters of he in bred Notions and Motions of the Soul: And to this purpose they had not onely Temples, and Altars, and Sacrifices, and forms of Invocation, but Festivall dayes, set dayes, or dayes set apart; as for the publique and Civill affairs, so likewise for the religious Rites and Ceremonies. And this they had partly from the dictate of rea∣son, which tells us, That every action requires, as a place, so a time suteable thereunto, partly from ex∣perience, which teacheth us, That that which is left at randome, and hath no day prefixed, is seldome performed as it should be on any day; and partly
from those broken remainders of the Image of God left in them, and an imitation of the Church of God, though from it, in the main points of his Worship, they had much degenerated. It may be well thought, that the first man created immediately by God himself, even in the state of Innocency, had both a certain place and time for the Worship of his Maker; Howsoever sure it is, that before we reade of the fall of man, we reade of a Seventh day, blessed and sanctified by God himself, Gen. 2. 3. sanctified, that by man it might be kept holy to his glory; and blessed, that man by keeping of it holy, might receive a blessing from God. When Enos was born of Seth, the sonne of Adam, it is said, That men then began to call upon the Name of the Lord, Gen. 4. at the last verse: that is (as I take it) to call upon his Name in Publique Assemblies; for which, no doubt but they had a certain place appointed, lest otherwise men might be disappointed in their meetings: And most like it is that it was the same day which Abell, and Seth, and Adam observed before them, and the rest of the Pa∣triachs after them, that day in which God himself rested, having fully finished the great work of the worlds Creation. Etiam ante legem non dubito primis il∣lis patribus doctore Deo, diem hunc solennem, augustum & sacrum fuisse, saith the learned Mercerus. Even beforein Gen. 2. 3. the Law I doubt not but this Day by Gods teach∣ing, was solemn and sacred to those primitive Fa∣thers. And Peter Martyr, Nec ejus observatio coepit legeLoc. Com. cs 2. c. p 7. data in Sina, sed ante celebrabatur; Neither did the ob∣servation thereof begin with the giving of the
Law in Sinai, but it was celebrated before. Of the same opinion is Rivet, who likewise answers all theIn 2  Gen. exer∣ci. 13. arguments brought to the contrary, which toge∣ther with them I the rather embrace, for that before the giving of the Law in Mount Sinai, we have an expresse and severe charge for the keeping of it in gathering Manna, Exod. 16. and upon that occasion two such miracles shewed to ratifie and magnifie that day, as seldome shall ye reade of more remark∣able thorow the book of God; whereof the one was, that the Manna fell in great plenty upon all the other dayes of the week, but upon the Seventh none at all; The other, That being gathered on the Sixth day, it remained sweet till the Seventh, and not so on any other day of the week besides: Either of which miracles were doubtlesse as great or greater than that fabulous one of Plinie, secon∣ded by some of the Jewish Rabbins, of a River in Iudea, which is said to runne the sixe first dayes of the week, and on the seventh to dry up; so as we shall not need go seek out that River to au∣thorize that day. Yet after all this was this very day again for the better observation of it, proclaied in Mount Sinai, and that in a dreadfull and glori∣ous manner, Exod. 20. having a more solemn entrance into it, and more weighty reasons to hedge it in and confirm it, than any other of the Commandements. And besides, all the rest are negative onely, the first of the second Table, and this last of the first Table are affir∣mative, nay this onely is both affirmative and
negative, standing in the midst of the two Tables, to shew that they both depend upon the observa∣tion of it; which I conceive to be the reason that in some passages of Scripture the keeping of the Sabbath day is put for the whole body of Gods Worship, and pressed with more earnestnesse both in the following Chapters of the same book, and in the books following of Moses and the Prophets, than any of the other Precepts; so as till the com∣ing of Christ, and at his coming too, nay, for a while after his death and passion, resurrecti∣on and ascention (that the mother Synagogue (as St. Augustine speaks) might be buried with the greater honour) it was dely and constantly observed by the Church of God. But when the fulnesse of time was come for the abrogation of it, yet the equity of the Commandement (which Divines do call the morall part thereof) remain∣ing still in its full strength and vigour, required not onely some certain time to be set apart for the publique Worship of God, but at least one day in Seven: which is not onely the judge∣ment of In Gen. 2. Hom. 18. Chrysostome, and Loc. Com. Class. 2. cap. 7. Peter Martyr, and De cult. Sanct. lib. 3. cap. 11. His acce∣dt Rober∣tus Loeus in effigiati∣one ua ve∣ri Sabbatis∣mi, pag 48. Bel∣larmine, and Doctor Fulke, in his answer to the Rhemtsts, commenting upon the words of my Text, and other grave Divines; but of our pro∣found and judicious Hooker, writing purposely a∣gainst the Schismaticks of our time, so as we need not suspect him of Puritanisme: Wee are bound (saith he in the 5th Book of his Ec∣clesiasticall policy, and seventeenth Paragraph, Touching the manner of celebrating Festivall
dayes) We are bound to accompt the sanctificati∣on of one day in seven, a duty which Gods immu∣table law doth exact for ever, although with us the day be changed, in regard of a new revoluti∣on, begun by our Saviour Christ, yet the same proportion of time, the same proportion of time continueth, which was before by way of a perpetutuall homage, a perpetuall hage, never to be dispensed withall, nor remitted. Then which, I see not what can be spoken more plainly or more punctually; which is the rather to be marked, for that the Author being a man of ad∣mirable learning, and of a deep judgement, and by reason thereof making many doubts to himself, (which the ignorant by reason of their shallow and narrow capacities, hardly discern, and easily swal∣low) is notwithstanding in the point so positive and peremptory as you see. Whereunto we may adde the testimony of our Homilies, allowed to be read in our Churches by publique authority, making al∣so one day in the week by the morall part of the Commandement to be consecrated; and that not inOf the  and time of prayer. part. 1a. part, but wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and Service. And truely this our Churches resolution therein to me weighs more than the opi∣nions of many others to the contrary, though I will not censure, much lesse absolutely condemne them. My conclusion shall be, That as the tenth part, ad minimum is Gods portion for the fruits of the earth, so the seventh part of his proportion for time: and both of them not onely under the Levi∣ticall
Law but under the Gospel; the number of se∣ven is sacred, as Philo in his book de opificio mundi hath learnedly shewed; but for proof thereof I will go no further then this very book of the Revelation, wherein we read of Seven Angels, and Seven Trumpets, and Seven Vialls, and Seven Seales and Seven Stars, and Seven Candlesticks, and Seven Churches, and Seven Spi∣rits before the throne of God; all which seems to imply the number to be Mystical and sacred, and consequently most properly due to religious exer∣cises in publick, consisting in the sacred Service of allmighty God. All which notwithstanding, some such are found professig themselves Christians, as Anabaptists and , who not only deny any set time to be ap∣propriated to Gods service, by the law of Christ; but further affirme, that no such time is now by Christians living under the Gospell in any sort to bee observed: And to this end they wrest those passages of the Apostle Gal. 4. 10. Rom. 14. 5. Col. 2. 16. they wrest them I say, the only scope of the Apostle in those passages being to cry downe the Ceremomall use, or Superstitious abuse of dayes, as well among the Iewes as the Gentiles; not to make holy dayes set apart for Gods Service unlawfull; nay, it is certaine that in other places hee mkes the lawfll, and this day here spoken of in my Text in paticular, aswell by his practice as his pre∣cept: wich will appear in my second generall part which offers it selfe in the next place; namely, that te day here spoken of in my Text is that particu∣lar day, which is now by us Christians in a specill
manner set apart for the service of God: In the handling whereof wee have two things to be con∣sidered: first the severall names of this day, and then why it is termed the Lords day. This day is sometimes called the Sabboth, some∣times Sunday, sometimes the first day of the week, some∣times the Eighth day, and sometimes the Lords day, as here in my Text. The name of the Sabboth (I must confesse) in the ancient Councels or Fathers wee shall hardly find ap∣plyed to this day, unlesse withall they adde Sabba∣thum Christianorum the Sbboth of Christians; For when they speak of the Sabboth absolutely, with∣out any addition, they alwayes understand the Sa∣turday the Seventh day, the Sabboth day of the Jwes, which except it bee heedfully observed of those who are conversant in their writings, it may be an occasion of much errour and mistake. Which notwithstanding I make no question, but this day may without any just suspition of Iudaisme be cal∣led the Sabboth: and that for these Reasons. First, because our Saviour himselfe (as I conceive) hath so called it: pray that your flight be not in the winter, norMa. 24. 20. on the Sabboth day; where he speakes of the destructi∣on of Hierusilem, which fell out about forty years after his Ascention, whereas the Sabboth of the Iewes was abrogated by his resurrectio, and con∣sequently it cannot well bee understood, but of the Sabboth of Christians, the day here spoken of. My second Reason is, for that Sabbath signifying Rest, the word in regard of that signification is appliable to our day, as well as to theirs, it being a day of
Rest to us, as well a to them: True indeed it is that the Sabbath was so called a day of rest, in a double respect: First because God hime upon that day rested from the workes of the Creation; and then because they in imitation of God, and by comman∣dement from God were likewise to rest upon the same day; whereas ours cannot be called a Sabbath in respect of the first, that is Gods rest; but only in respect of the second, that is our rest. My third rea∣son is, for that our Lords day succeeded in the place of the Sabboth, and was ordained to the same gene∣rall end; as our spirituall exercises are called Sacri∣fices, because they succeed in the place of their Sa∣crifices, so may our Lords day not unfitly bee ter∣med the Sabbath, because it succeeds in the place of teir Sabboth. Secondly, this day here spoken of in my Text is sometimes called Sunday, which though it be a name imposed by the Gentiles, who knew not the true God, giving the names of the seven Planets to the seven dayes of the week; yet for distinctions ske I see not, but wee Christians may without superstiti∣on or relation to them call the dayes of the weeke by the same names that they did, as well as we do the Planets; or as God himselfe calls the stars by eathenish names, Pleades, Orion, and Arcturus with is sones, Iob 38. or as S. Lke Acts 28. ells us that the ship of Alexandria in which S. Paul ailed had the signe of Castor and Polux, heathenish Gods: yet it may not be denyed, but the primitive Christians who daily conversed among those iolatrous Gen∣tils, in destation of their Idolatry, for the most
part forbore those prophane heathenish names; the first day they usually called the Lords day, and the lastVide Hie∣ron. Epist. Hbid. quest. 4. & Ambros. S 61. the Sabbath, and those between the first and the last, feria secnda, tertia, qurta, quinta, sexta, the second, third, fourth, fifth, & sixth days of the week; though they were not so scupulous, but sometimes they were content to use the names of Sunday too, as witnesseth Eusebis in his fourth book of the life ofCap. 19. Constantine, Hunc salutarem dim (saith he, speaking of the Lords day) quem lucis vel Solis appellamus, and so it is called more then once by Iustinus Martyr, in his second Apology: And truly considering that upon this day the light was made, which being first dis∣persed was afterward gathered into the body of the Sunne, and withall that Christ the Sunne of righteousnesse (as he is called Mal. 4. 2.) rose a∣gain upon this day, I see not but that we Christias may without any just offense name it Sunday. Thirdly, it is sometimes called the first day of the week, thus was it constantly called by the Iewes, as being the beginning both of the week and of the world; thus by Moses Gen. 1. 5. thus by all the four Evangelists Math. 28. 1. Mark 16. 2. Luke 24. 1. Io. 20. 1. and again by St. Luke Acts 20. 7. and by St. Paul 1 Cor. 16. 2. nay more then so, amongst all na∣tions, that keep any account of weeks, and moneths and years, this day is accounted the first day of the week; which without doubt they borrowed either by tradition from the Patriarchs, and so from Adam, or from the writings of Moss, which many of them read. But by the way wee are here to observe, that this being the first day of the week cannot possibly
bee the seventh; one of the seven and the first and chief of the seven it is, but the seventh (if we will follow Gods account) it is not, nor cannot be so called: so that what is spoken in the fourth Com∣mandement of the Sabbath as the seventh day, I sy as tis the seventh day, cannot bee appliable to this day of ours, except we should make the first and the seventh all one. Fourthly, it i sometimes called the eighth day; for as it is the first in regard of the week following, so is it the eighth in regard of that going before. Suffi∣ciēt warā: we have for this name Ioh. 20. 26. where though wee read after eight dayes, yet by the consent of all Divines it is to bee understood of the eighh day after Christs Resurrection, which must needs be the same day of the weeke with the first day of the weeke going before: Nos in octava die, quae et pri∣maIn prolog. in Psalm. expla. est perfecti Sabbathi, festivitate laetamur, saith S. Hil∣larie: and St. Augustine, Dies octavus qui & primus, speaking of this day in his Epistle to Ianuarius, theEpist. 119. the same is both the first day and the eighth day; where he likewise tels us, that this day was not un∣known to the holy Fathers and Prophets, before the Incarnation of Christ; nam & pro octava PsalmusIdem ha∣bet Cypri. Epist. 8. Lib. 3. inscribitur, & octavo die circumcidbantur Infantes, saith hee; for both a Psalm is intituled for the eighth, and the eighth day after their brth were children circumcised. And again in his Enarration upon Psal. 89. (or the 90. as we reckon) speaking of the num∣ber of Fifteen made up of seven and eight; Quorum primus (saith he) insinuat propter Sabbathi observationem Testam. vetus, secundus Testam. novum propter Domini
resurrectionem; whereof the first by reason of the observation of the Sabbath signifies the old Testa∣ment; te second the ew Testament, by reason of our Lords Resurrection: Hinc sunt in Templo quinde.Idem ha∣bet Hilar. in praefat in salmos salmos. cim gradus, hence it is that the ascent to the Tem∣ple was by fifteee steps, that there are fifteene psalmes of degrees, that the Floud rose above the highest mountins fiften cubits, & si quius aliis lo∣cis sacratus commedatur hic numerus, and hence it is if this  number be recommended unto us, in any other places. Whereunto hee might have added, that eight persons were saved in the Arke, as Saint Peter hath piecisely observed in his first Epistle and 3. cap. and in that respect, in the second chapter of his second Epistle, doth hee call Nh the eighth person. Fifthly and lastly, and chiefly, it is called the Lords day, as here in my Text, and agin, 1 Cor. 16. 1. as Beza in his Annotations on that place tells us, accor∣ding to an ancient anuscript which himsele both saw and read: where, by the Lord no doubt is under∣stood the Lord Iesus, which was the usuall name gi∣ven him by the Apostles, both whiles he lived, and afer his deth, all other Lords bein bu Under∣lings, and all Kings but vassals in regard of him; from him they hold their Crown, and o him they mst bend their knees, and give an account of their kingdomes; To him I sy who hth on hisRevel. 19. festre and on his thigh a nae written, Kng of Kings and Lord of Lords, being in his power and Ma∣jesty, as farre above the greatest Lords on earth, as they are above the meanest of their Subjects.
Now this day is called the Lords day, or this Lords day, because to the honour and service of the Lord it was both observed, and enjoyned by his Apostles specially in memory of his resurrection, and that by speciall order from himself; of three of these, namely that to the honour of the Lord it was ob∣served by his Apostles, and specially in memory of his resurrection, no Christian I think makes any doubt; so as neither of them will need any further proof: two things then remain only to be proved: the one, that this day was not only observed by the Apostles, but by them also enjoyned to be obser∣ved by the Church: the other, that both this ob∣servation and injunction were by speciall order from the Lord himselfe. To prove that it was by the Apostles themselves enjoyned to be observed by the Church, it shall not bee requisie to vouch any expresse precept of theirs; it will be sufficient if by necessary deduction from any such precept it bee made clear; neither can wee otherwise prove many doctrinall poynts in controversie, between us and the Church of Rome. Now for such a kind of proof I would goe no fur∣ther then that precept of the Apostle 1 Cor. 16. 1. Concerning the Collection for the Saints, as I have given or∣der to the Churches of Glatia, even so do ye, upon the first day of the week let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered him. That the Collection for the poor is here enjoyned; it cannot be denyed, the words themselves proclaim it; and that this Colle∣ction was inseparably annexed to the Lords Day, because on it the Congregation was assembled; not
onely this Text, but the Ecclesiasticall Writers give plentifull testimony: from whence the conclusion in my judgement is clear and fair, That the Lords Day it self, in which such Collections were made, was consequently by them enjoyned; for where two things are inseparably united, he who enjoyns the on, cannot, but by consequent like∣wise, enjoyn the other: As when God said, Let there be light, if light cannot be ep from heat, it was in effect as much as if he had said, Let there be heat. Thus mch doth Doctor Rivet collect fromin 2• Gen. ever cit. 13 versus finem. these words of the Apostle. And thus much, it should seem. Saint Augustine, in his 251 Sermon, de tempore, gathered either  this, or some other passage of this kinde; where he teacheth us, That the Apostles not onely obsved this day, but reli∣giosa solennitate habendum sanxerunt, decreed it to be   Lous in  Sabmi pag. 47. His cusis  Apo stol,  ex  do∣minum  ran∣dum statu∣erent. kept in a solemn religious manner: from whence we may safely conclde, That at leastwise, in his judgement, it was not onely their practice, but their precept. The other point remaining to be proved, is, That both this pactice and precept of theirs, was by order from the Lord himself, and that not onely by secret inspiration, but by overt Acts. As the Sacrament is clled te Lords Supper, because it was instituted by te Lord, and that excellent Form of Prayer whic he hath left us, the Lords Prayer, becase it was coposed by the Lord; so is this Day called the Lords, because it was ordained by him. He is that Sonne of man, who is Lord even of the Sabbat;Mar. 2 27.
As he dissolved the Sabbath of the Jewes, so he appointed the Lords day of the Christians to suc∣ceed it. New Lords they say, new lawes, which in him was verified; new Sacraments, new sacri∣fices, a new Priesthood, a new Pentecost, a new Sabbath. Thus old things passed away, and al things by him became new; and if all other things belonging to his service, then surely the day too, in which this service is solemnly to be performed, that so it might be suteable to his service. This blessed day was not only foreseen, and foretold by the Psalmist, but the making of it, by the Lord. This is the day which the Lord hath made, let us rejoyce and be glad in it, Psal. 118. 24. where no doubt he prophecies of this very Lords day here mentio∣ned in my Text; and so have many of the Fathers rightly applied it: and among the rest Homl. in hoc dictum, Omnia mihi tradita sunt a patre. Athanaius, and Epist. 83. Ambrose, and De resur∣rect. serm. 5. Chrysostome; this is the day saith the great S•. Serm. de tempo. 15 . Augustine; in which our Lord was baptized in Iordan; in which he turned water into wine at a wedding feast; in which he blessed five loaves, wherewith he satisfied five thousand men; in which he rose again from the dead; In which he entred into the house where the Apostles were as∣sembled, the doors being shut; in which he sent down the holy Ghost upon them; finally, in which we expect his comming to judgement. Besides all which, Bellarmine in his third Book de cultu Sancto∣rum, and eleventh Chapter, is confident, that he was also born on the same day, which he proves by the Dominicall letter of that year, falling just upon the 25th of December. And shall we imagine
that on this day he was born, on this day baptized,To these Preroga∣tives, some , that our Savi∣our was likewise circumi sed on the Lords day, and that on the same day the star first appea∣red to the Wisemen. See  rlig. 2. 4. on this day wrought his first and greatest miracles, on this day rose again, on this day appeared to his Apostles; and lastly, on this day sent down the holy Ghost upon them (the three last of which are most evident in holy Scripture) and yet had no spe∣ciall designe for the sanctifying of this day in a spe∣ciall manner. Moreover, it may not be forgotten, that upon this day his Apostles, and in them their successors received from him their Benediction, their Mission, and Commission; Peace be unto you, there is the Benediction, Iohn 20. 19. As my Father hath sent me, so I send you, there is their Mission, vers. 21. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive the holy Ghost; whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained, there is their Commissi∣on, vers. 22. 23. And again, his disciples being as∣sembled as before (in all likelihood by his Com∣mandment) for the exercise of religious duties, up∣on the very same day of the week following, he appears to them again; as for the imparting of o∣ther mysteries unto them, so in particular for the rengthning of Thomas his faith, who at his former apparition was absent from that assembly: yea, after this again, before his Ascension he appeared unto them sundry times, by the space of forty daies,Acts 1 3. speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God; and good Divines are of opinion that he still appeared upon the same day; as it is certain that ten dayes after his Ascension, he sent down theActs 2. 1. holy Ghost the same day upon his Apostles, being
then again assembled, being the first day of the week, and the day of his Resurrection, or the Lords-day; on which he also by the Ministry of an Angel imparted these most divine Revelations to St. Iohn; All which should argue, that this indeed was the day, which he had selected and sealed for the religious Assemblies of his Church, in all future ages, even to the worlds end. Neither is this my opinion alone, but Saint Cyrill in his Exposition up∣onLib. 12. c. 58. Saint Iohns Gospel, is of the same minde; and Maldonate the Jesuite freely confesseth, that someIn Ioh. 20. v. 26. Conjecture may from thence be made, Diem Domini∣cum aliquam ex Christi voluntate originem habuisse, That the Lords day had some kinde of rise, from the will of the Lord himself: yet because he seeth the Schoolmen take another way, he professeth him∣self unwilling to forsake their Company: But had he been free to take his own course, no doubt he would easily have found therein somewhat more, then a bare Conjecture. Which I am the rather induced to beleeve, for that Ribera a Bird of the same Feather and Nest, in his Commentaries upon the words of my Text, tels us that Iustin Martyr in his second Apologie to Antoninus the Emperour teacheth, Apostolos a Christo hujus diei celebritatem accepisse, That the Apostles re∣ceived the celebrity of this day from the Lord him∣self; which he disproves not, but rather allowes; and withall addes, that the Apostles themselves de∣livered it over, and recommended it to the Church in their Constitutions, as witnesseth Clemens, Lib. 2. cap. 59. & lib. 5. cap. 9. & lib. 7. cap. 31. 37. And
herewith accords the great Athanasius in the very entrance of his Homilie De Semente; Anciently saith he, the Sabboth was in greatest request; Sed eam solennitatem Dominus in diem Dominicum transtulit, but the solemnity thereof, the Lord himself hath now put over, and conferred upon the Lords-day; and again, in another place, Octavo Sabbathum dissol∣vit:In hoc di∣ctum. Omia mibi, &c. ist, 119. And to me Saint Augustine in his Epistle to Ianuarius seemeth to fall in the same way: The Lords day, saith he, was declared by the Resur∣rection of the Lord, Et ab illo coepit habere festivitatem suam, not ab illa, but ab illo, from him it began to be made Festivall. To these Ancients might be added, of our own Divines, Doctor Fulk in his answer to the Rhemists on the words of my Text; and Master Perkins notLib. 2. cap. 17. only in his Exposition of these words, But in his Cases of Conscience; And among forraign Di∣vines, the learned Iunius as well in his Lectures p∣on Gen. 2. 3. as his notes upon Tertullian; in the for∣mer of which he saith, that this day was set apart for holy uses, Non humana traditione, sed Christi ipsius observatione & instituto, Not by any humane tradition, but by the observation and institution of ChristIn cap 16. Apol. Piscator e∣tim, Domi∣nicum diem ab ipso Do∣mio instiu∣tum, & ad sanctific∣dum mnda∣tum esse affi∣mt. in Ao. 1. 10. himslf; in the latter, Vt quem Dominus tum resurre∣ctione sui corporis, tum ordinaria Ecclesiae suae synaxi san∣ctificaverat, ut Cyrillus in Iohan. annotavit: As being the day which the Lord hath consecrated, not on∣ly by the Resurrection of his Body, but by the or∣dinary Assemblies of his Church, as Cyrillus upon Ion hath observed. The summe of all is this, That the Apostles had
not a freedome of choice left to themselves, what day they would set apart for the publique exercises of Religion, but what was foretold by the Prophets, what was shaddowed before, and under the Law; what they practised, and delivered herein, they re∣ceived from the Lord: As one of them speaks for1 Cor. 11. 23. all, in another case indeed, yet not improperly ap∣pliable to our present purpose: which being so, they doubtlesse derogate much, both from the ho∣nour of the Lords-day, and from the Lord him∣self, the Author thereof, who would make it no better then an humane ordination, or at best an Ec∣clesiasticall Constitution, framed according to the pattern of the Apostles; and consequently change∣able either by the Civill Magistrate, as some, or by the Church as others: Whereas the Primitive Christians were so constantly resolved of the im∣mutable fixednesse thereof, that they expected his return, to the generall judgement upon the sameLact. 7. . day, which himself had ordained in all succeeding ages to be kept holy: And therefore they thought they could never sufficiently grace it with the high∣est titles of preheminence, they could possibly de∣vise: which is my third generall part, and now presents it self to our view: the notable preroga∣tives I mean, and speciall priviledges of this day beyond, and above all other. As all time, so all dayes which are a part of time are of the Lords making: and as a part of time, so are they equall among themselves, as well in Dig∣nity as Duration; but in regard of the end to which, and the use for which they are set apart; so are they
distinguished each from the other; which by Syra∣cidesCa. 33.  78, 79. is well and truly exprest: why saith he, doth one day excell another, when as all the light of e∣very day in the yeer is from the Sun? whereunto he maketh answer, By the knowledge of the Lord, they were distinguished, and he altered seasons and feasts; some of them hath he made high-dayes, and hallowed them; and some of them, hath he made ordinary dayes: And surely, if any day be an high-day, it should in reason be the Lords-day. The eminency whereof, it shall not be amisse to consider comparatively in relation to other dayes: First to the Jewish Sabbath; and then to other dayes of the week, specially other Holidayes of the Christians. For the first of these, as by the Gentiles the Lords day was usually called Dies Solis, Sunday; So was the Jewish Sabbath Dies Saturni, Saturns-day, or Saturday; and how much the Sun in bignesse exceeds, and excells in brightnesse and influence, the starre by them named Saturn, so much doth the Lords-day exceed, and excell the Jewish Sabbath. Their Sabbath was instituted in memory of the Creation; our Lords-day of the Redemption of the world: Now for the Creation of the world, God only spake the word, and it was made; but for the Redemption thereof, the Eternall Word, the Sonne of God himself must become incarnate; and by the space of many yeers, both do, and suffer many things: by means of the Creation, man was intituled to the earthly paradise; by means of the Redemption, to the heavenly: by the Creation he
was made a Companion of the Angels; by redemp∣tion they are made in some sort his inferiors, being sent forth to minister for their sakes, that shall be heirs of salvation: In the Creation all the other Creatures have their interest together with man; the work of Redemption is proper to him alone: Again, the Jewish Sabboth was renewed in memory of their deliverance from the bondage of Egypt; but our Lords-day ordained to be kept holy, in me∣mory of our deliverance from the bondage of Sin and Satan, who held us under in a farre more mise∣rable slavery then that of Egypt. Moreover it is by Saint Augustine observed, that the Israelites passedSerm. de temp. 154. safely through the read Sea, not on the Sabboth, but on our Lords-day; and both by him and Origen,Super ex Hom. 7. That the Manna fell first, on the first-day of the week, but none on the Seventh: where by the Man∣na, Origen after his allegorizing manner, under∣stands the sweet dew of heavenly Doctrine, and from thence inferres, Intelligant Iudaei jam tunc prae∣latam esse dominicam nostram Iudaico Sabbatho, Let the Jews know tht even then our Lords-day was pre∣ferred before their Sabboth. Now in relation to the other dayes of the week, and to other holy-dayes; This Lords day shines a∣mong them, as doth the Dominicall Letter clod in Scarlet among the other Letters in the Calendar; or as the Sunne imparts light to all the other Stars; so doth this day, bearing the name thereof, both Light and Life to all the other dayes of the week. This day saith Eusebius is, tum vere praecipuus, tum haudDevia Contan. p. 4. 18, dubie primus, of all other dayes, as truly the prin∣cipall,
as it is undoubtedly the first. Athanasius calsIn epist. ad ubique Or∣thodox. in Hom in hoc dillum, om nia mihi tra∣dita sunt. it Diem sanctissimum, and sanctissimum festum, the most holy day, the most holy festivall, attributing unto it both the initiation of the world, and mans rege∣neration. Igatius in his Epist. to the Magnesians stiles it, Reginam & Princm dierum, the Queen and Prin∣cesse of dayes; Chrysostome, drem rgalem, a royallSerm. 5. e resurrect. day; Leo hath written purposely in commendation of it, in his 81. Epistle to Dioscorus. Saint Augustine in sundry Treatises of his, takes occasion highly to extoll it; as namely, in his 251. Sermon de tempore, having spoken of some of the most remarkable things which fell out upon this day, His & talibus indicis, saith he, Dominica dies extat insignis, By these and such like Characters is the Lords-day become renowned: And again, in his 154. Sermon of the same Book, Venerabilis est hic dies qui domin cus dies, & dies primus atque perfectus est, & dies clarus in quo visa est prima lux, This Lords day is a venerable day, The first day, a perfect and shining day, in which the light was first seen. Nay, Pererius the Jsuite in his Commentaries upon the work of the first day, having recounted no lesse then thirteen speciall Prerogatives thereof; at last he thus concludes, Haec sunt primi illius diei insignia atque ornamenta, quibus ea dies mirabiliter nobilitatur atque decoratur, These are the ensignes and ornaments of this first day, where∣with it is wonderfully ennobled, and garnished: Likewise the Hebrew Author of the Book called Sedar, Olam, Rabba, cap. 7. Recordeth many memo∣rableEx H. Wol∣phii . de Temp. lib. 1. cap. 2. things which were done upon the first day of the week: as so many types that the chief worship
of God should (under the new Testament) be cele∣brated upon this day. As that on this day the cloud of Gods Majesty first sate upon his people. Aaron and his children first executed their Priest∣hood. God first solemnly blessed his people. The Princes of his people first offered publikely unto God. The first day wherein fire descended from heaven. The certainty of these, I leave to the Author to prove; but sure I am, that the Primi∣tive Church, for more than a thousand yeers after Christ, to expresse the greatnesse of their joy upon this day, neither fasted nor kneeled: Nay, Tertullian goes further, in his Book de corona militis, cap. 3. Die dominico jejunare nefas ducimus, & de geniculis adorare, We hold it unlawfull upon the Lords Day, either to fast or to pray kneeling. And Saint Hilary in his Prologue set before his explanation of the Psalms, gives the reason thereof; ne festivitatem spiritualis hu∣jus eatudinis impedirit, lest it might hinder the joy of our Spirituall happinesse on that day. Look then what the fire is among the Elements, the Eagle a∣mong the Fowls, the Whale among the fishes, the Lion among the Beasts, Gold among the other Me∣talls, and Wheat among the other Grains; the same is the Lords Day among all the dayes of the week; this Day differing as much from the rest as doth that Wax to which the Kings great Seal is put, from ordinary Wax, or that Silver upon which the Kings Arms and Image re stamped, from Silver un∣refined, or in Bullion. And for other holy dayes, it is as farre transcen∣dent above them too, as they are beyoud other
ordinary dayes: the other holy dayes, consecrated by the authority of the Church, and amongst us re∣ligiously observed, may not unfitly be resembled to those honorable women spoken of in the 45 Psalm, Kings daughters were among thy honorable women, but the Lords Day ordained by the Lord himself, and from him derived unto us by his Apostles, is as the Queen here standing at the Kings right hand in Gold of Ophir, gloriously apparelled; the rest are as waiting-Ladies, she as the Empresse, gradiensque Deas superem net omnes: and were they all brought in∣to one Chain, the Medale of this Chain could be no other than the Lords Day. This was, doubtlesse, the generall ad constant opinion of antiquity touching ths Day but I know not how it came to passe, that after ages, by insensible degrees, much degenerating from the simplicity of those primitive times, so infinitely multiplied and magnified their holy dayes beyond all measure and reason, that the Lords Day began to be fleighted, and at last, with many, to be accounted a common holy day, nay, perchance, inferiour to some of the Saints; inso∣much that with us it had lost, not onely the ho∣nour due unto it, but the name, by the Apostles imposed upon it. Which, no doubt, a speciall oc∣casion of that thick cloud of superstition which af∣terwards over shadowed the face of the Church; and in appearance, the reducing of this day to its originall honour and name, would prove the readi∣est means to restore the Church again to her origi∣nall lustre and beauty, even in those parts where that cloud is not yet dispelled; as in all likelyhood
the preserving of that name and honour with us, would likewise serve to preserve that soundnesse of religion which now by Gods blessing we have long enjoyed under three such Princes, as the world in their severall kindes, and in succession, cannot shew the like. And so I passe to my fourth and last gene∣rall part, The duties of the Lords Day, which, in a word, is to be in the Spirit, that is in Sptrituall ex∣ercises, as Saint Iohn upon this day was. Though he were then banished into the solitary Isle of Patmos, where he had no means to converse with any Chri∣stian, much lesse to communicate with their Assem∣blies in religious duties, yet was he present with them in spirit, as Saint Paul was with the Colossians,2. 5. though absent in body, much desiring to be present with them, and joyning with them, even in his pri∣vate devotions. A good lesson for such as cannot have accesse to the publique Congregation, consi∣dering they cannot do what they would, yet to do what they may, which is religiously to observe the Lords Day in their private houses or chambers, in the ship or in the prison, if their condition be such as they cannot come to the Lords House. This is it which Saint Augustine adviseth, discoursing of theSerm. 251. duties of this day, veniat cuique possibile est & oret in conventu Ecclesiae pro peccatis suis Deum, He who pos∣sibly can come, let him come, and in the Church, let him there pray to God for the pardon of his sinnes; Qui vero hoc non possit saltem in domo sua oret, & non neg∣ligat Deo solvere votum & reddere pensum servitutis, but he who cannot come to the Church, let him pray in his house, and let him not neglect the paying of
his Vows to God, and the rendering of that service which is exacted. Now for such as have free accesse to the Congre∣gation, these spirituall exercises are either publike or private; publike, in the Lords House; private, in our own houses with our families, or in our chambers and closets, in our Gardens, or in the Fields. The exercises to be performed, are confession of our faith and our faults, absolution, thanksgiving, hum∣ble and hearty prayer, reading and expounding the sacred Oracles of God, the private readig of the Scriptures or other godly books, the administration and participation of the holy Sacraments, the sing∣ing of Divine Hymnes, meditation and conference, as well touching those things we have read and heard, as touching the wonderfull works of God in the Creation, and Government of the world: This is to be in the Spirit, specially if these duties∣be practised by us in a Spirituall manner, that is, if we perform them not faintly or formally, but at∣tentively and devoutly, as knowing that God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped by us in Spirit and Truth, withIo. 4. 24. a perfect heart, and with a willing minde, as the good King David taught his Son Solomon: Withall2 Chron. 28. 9. we must remember, that works of charity are not to be neglected on this day, they being the marks and effects of the Spirit. And that we may the better intend these Spiritu∣all works in a Spirituall manner, we are still to car∣ry in our mindes that this Day is the Lords Day, and not the devills or ours; and that not a part one∣ly, but the whole day is his, the devils day we
make it, if we employ it in sinfull acts; our own, if in the servile works of our particular callings, or in bodily recreations, which further not, but hin∣der the practice of our Spirituall duties: For sinfull acts, we must be carefull that we incurre not justly the censure of Tertullian, Siccine exprimitur per publi∣cumAol. 35. gaudium publicum dedecus? Haeccine solennes dies decent quae alios non decent? Malorum licentia pietas erit? Occasio luxurae religio deputabitur? Is our publike joy thus expressed by the publike disgrace? Shall that be thought to become an holy Day, which doth not become any day? Shall wicked licen∣tiousnesse be accounted Piety? and occasions of luxury, Religion? If wantonnesse, if drun∣kennesse, if fighting, if railing, if reviling, if swearing, if cursing be sinnes on every day, surely much more on the Lords Day. Saint Hie∣rome likewise in his Epistle to Eustochium, seems much to mislike excessive Feasting and feeding up∣on these dayes, as being the occasions of luxury, and consequently of quarrelling and wanton∣nesse; Valde absurdum est nimia saturitate velle ho∣norare Martyrem quem scias Deo placuisse jejuniis, It is most absurd to inend the honour of that Martyr with excessive Feasting, whom we know to have pleased God with Fasting; and if it can be no honour to the Martyr who lost his blood for the Lords sake, much lesle to the Lord, who redeemed the Martyr by his blood. Of servile works is that noble Constitution of LeoLeo Con∣stit. 54. the Empe. to be understood. We ordain, according.
to the true meaning of the holy Ghost, and of the Apostles thereby directed, that on the sacred Day wherein our own integrity was restored, all do rest and surcease labour; that neither Husband∣man nor other, on that day, put their hands to forbidden works; for if the Jews did so much re∣verence their Sabboth, which was but a shadow of ours, are not we which inhabite the light and truth of grace, bound to honour that day which the Lord himself hath honoured, and hath there∣in both delivered us from dishonour, and from death? Are not we bound to keep it singular and inviolable, well contenting our selves with so libe∣rall a grant of the rest, and not incroaching upon that one which God hath chosen to his own ho∣nour? Were it not wretchlesse neglect of religi∣on to make that very day common, and to think we may do with it as with the rest. Which religious Edict of his, though it were in∣deed chiefly bent against bodily labour, yet may it well be extended against such pastimes and recrea∣tions on that Day, as cannot but withdraw us from the keeping of it inviolable. That unlawfull recre∣ations may not be used on that day, no Christian, I think, will deny, since they may not be used on any dayes; so as all the doubt is touching lawfull recre∣ations, whereof some also there are, which I think no man will affirm to be lawflly used on the Lords Day, as Hawking, Hunting, and the like, which are not unlawfull in themselves, but unlaw∣full on that Day because it is the Lords Dy: And for other recreations, if bodily labour, which on
other dayes is not onely lawfnll, but necessary, be forbidden because it is the Lords Day, methinks by the same reason, even lawfull recreations should be forbidden on the same day, as tending no lesse to the violating of that Day than bodily labour; If on that Day I may nor sow nor reap, nor carry my Corn, no, not in the most uncertain and catching weather, though it carryes a fair shew of keeping those precious fruits of the earth from spoiling which God of his goodnesse hath sent me, shall I presume to use those recreations on that Day, which commonly end in the abuse of those good blssings? Manlike exercises are, doubtlesse, very requisite, but cosidering the number of other holy dayes in our Church (under favour be it spoken) I see no ne∣cessity of putting them in practice on the Lords Day, nor of ranking the Lords Day with-other ho∣ly dayes. Some reformed Churches in other parts may perchance give way to the use of them on the Lords Day, which in them is somewhat the more excusable, because they have none other holy days, though for mine own part I think it better if they had, yet that the very same Pastors of those Churches who admitted or connived at the use of such manlike exercises, as severely cryed down ef∣feminate sports on that Day, let one speak for all: If we employ the Sunday, saith Calvin, to makeIn Deut. 5. Serm. 34. good cheer, to sport our selves, to go to games and pastimes, shall God in this be honoured, is it not a mockery? Is not this an unhallowing of his Name? And if you please, to Calvin we may adde Bellarmin,
the great Champion of the Romish Church; who in his explanation of the title of the 91. Psalm, ac∣cording to their account; which is a Psalm or song for the Sabbath-day thus writes, Errant Iudaei qui otium Sabbati sibi datum esse existimant ad vacandum con∣vivis & deambulationi; The Jews erre in thinking, that the rest of the Sabboth was given them for feasting and walking abroad: wherein he seems to have followed Saint Augustine in his Enarration up∣on the same passage; who in particular there cen∣sureth them for their dancing, holding it more al∣lowable to plough, then to dance upon the Sab∣bath; Melius est arare quàm saltarc, these be his veryThe same in effect he hath in his Book, De dcem Chor∣dis, cap. 3. words; and then goes on, Illi a bono opere Vacant, ab opere nugatorio non vacant, they rest from honest works, from vain works they rest not: Et Iudaeos imitantur Christiani, saith Bellarmine; and those Christians imi∣tate the ews, who do the like. Nay Saint Augustine in another place comes fullyDe tem. Scrm. 251. home to the same point; where speaking of the Lords day, Ideo Dominicus appellatur, saith he, ut in eo a terrenis operibus, vel mundi illecebris abstinentes, tan∣tùm divinis cultibus serviamus; therefore it is called the Lords day, that abstaining from earthly labours and worldly pleasures, we may wholly intend Gods service: And again, in severall places of that Sermon, The holy Doctors of the Church decreed, to transferre all the glory of the Jewish Sabbath upon this day; That what they in figure, the same we might celebrate in Truth; Let us therefore, my brethren, observe the Lords day, and sanctifie it, as to them of old, it was given in charge, touching
the Sabbath; From evening to evening ye shall keep my Sabbaths. Let us take care that our rest be not vain, but from the evening of the Sabboth, to the even∣ing of the Lords Day, being free from all worldly businesse, Soli divino cultui vacemus, let us onely in∣tend the service of God; non foris fabulis, sed intu psalmodiae & orationibus studete, Do not spend your time in trifles, and telling of tales abroad, but in singing of Psalms and prayers at home; and do not think unus punctus diei ad Dei officium, &c. onely one little part of the day is consecrated to Gods Ser∣vice, and the residue of the day, together with the night, to your own pleasures: Thus Saint Augustine, and with him doth Saint Gregory accord, DominicoEpistol. Lib. 11. Ep 3. die à labore terreno cessandum est, atque omnimodo orationi∣bus insistendum, upon the Lords Day we are to rest from earthly labour, and wholly apply our selves to our devotions, that if any sinnes of negligence have escaped in the six dayes, they may be done a∣way by our prayers on the day of the Lords Resur∣rection. Somewhat more punctuall is Ephraim Syrus, Festivitates dominicas honorare studiosè contendite, cele∣brantesSerm. de festis, pag. 10. Edit. Colon. an 1604. eas non panegyricè sed divinè; non mundanè sed spi∣ritualiter; non instar gentilium sed Christianorum. Quare non poetarum frontes coronemus, non choraeas ducamus, non chorum exornemus: non tibis & cytharis auditum effoemi∣nemus, non mollibus vestibus induamur, nec cingulis undi∣que auro radiantibus cingamur, non commessationibus & e∣brietatibus dediti simus, verum ita relinquamus iis, quorum Deus venter est, & gloria in confusione ipsorum, Earnestly endeavour to honour the Lords holy Day, solem∣nizing it not in a pompous, but in a Divine; not in a
worldly, but in a Spirituall manner; not as the Gen∣tiles, but as Christians: let us not hang up Garlands before our doors; let us not be exercised in dan∣cing, or in the setting forth of playes; let us not effeminate our hearing with piping and harping; let us not be clad with effminate apparell, nor be girt with Girdles shining about with gold; let us not be given to gluttony and drunkennesse, but let us leave these things to them, whose God is their belly, and their glory to their shame. In the same path with these great Lights of the Church, doth Peter Martyr walk, Vnum in hebdomadaLo. com. lass 2. cap. 7. requisivit in quo reliquis operbus valedicentes uni illi tan∣tum incumberemus, he required one day in the week, in which, bidding adieu to all other works, we should onely intend his service. He who gave unto Adam a free liberty to eat of all the other trees in Paradise, rserved to himself the Tree of the know∣ledge of good and evill: which served much to ag∣gravate Adams offence, that having so large a scope to content himself withall, he would, notwithstan∣ding, fall upon the forbidden fruit; which is our case; if having all the dayes of the week save one granted to our use, we presume to intrude upon that which the Lord hath reserved to himself, for his own use. It is to this purpose worth the obser∣ving, that our Saviour, on the very Day of his Re∣surrection, which was the first day of the week, and ow the Lords Day, appeared sundry times; in the morning, at noon, and at night, thereby to shew, That not a part onely, but the whole Day was his; And again on the eighth day following, which was
likewise the Lords Day, he appeared to his Apo∣stles at night, to instruct them, and confirm their faith, thereby to teach us, that even then it ceaseth not to be the Lords Day. And truely I see not how men can effectually profit by publike hearing, who neglect private conference, and meditation after they have heard: Meditation being the concoction of our Spirituall Food, without which the soul can∣not well be nourished. They who bought and sold in atrio Templi, in the porch, or utmost part of the Temple, thereby prophaned the Temple it self and made it a den of theeves, as our Saviour censures them; and I doubt not but he is as tender of this Day, and every part thereof, as of his House, or rather more tender; his House being consecarted to him by men, but his Day, by Himself, to Himself; and besides, in the Primitive Church he was long without an House, but not without a Day from the very first infancy thereof: which hath made me to wonder, that they who are so zealous for the Lords House, and the Lords Portion, received by the hand of his Ministers, should not likewise be as zea∣lous for the religious observation of his Day, espe∣cially considering that it may give men occasion to suspect, though perchance unjustly, that they pursue their own pomp and profit, in being so hot for the one, and their own ease and pleasure in being so cold for the other. He who stands for the Lords House, and the Lords Portion, because it is the Lords, cannot but stand likewise for the Lords Day, because it is his, his Day, doubtlesse having as strong a relation to him, as either his House or his
Portion, if not a stronger: He who layes sacrilegi∣ous hands upon a part of that which is consecrated to the Lord, thereby violates the whole; and there∣fore were Ananias and his wife stricken with sud∣den death, because the kept back, not the whole, but a part of that money they had received for their Land, and was entirely de to the Lord and his Church; and if we perit men to detain from the Lord a part of his Day, let us take heed lest there∣by they be the more emboldened to detain part of his Portion, both from him and us. The people, God knows, for the most part, are of themselves apt enough to take more liberty than is fit, to take an Ell, where there is but an Inch al∣lowed them; and having once gotten the rains loose, to run away in a full carreer. And if it be observed, it will appear that more mischiefs have ensued upon publique Games on the Lords Day, than on any other day of the week; nay my self have observed more to have been drowned, who went into the River onely to wash their bodies, on the Lords Dy, than any other day beside. In Cornwall, not farre from Saint Germans, are in a fair∣plain, certain stones to be seen, which the neigh∣bouring people call the Hurlers, because they stand in that order and distance each from other, as Hur∣lers use to do; and the current tradition among the inhabitants there, is, that certain Hurlers, for the prophanation of the Lords Day in that exercise, were, by Gods Judgement, turned into those stones: which Camden calls a pious errour, and so I beleeve it to be: yet withall from thence I observe the re∣spect,
which even in regard of manlike exercises, was born to that Day, and that in the depth of po∣pery, for otherwise such a tradition could not have gotten foot and prevailed among them. Neither do I alleadge this for want of true examples in this kinde, there being many and me norable, which are recorded by others, as well of forraigne parts, as our own Country, in which (to the honour be it spoken of the reformed Religion, and our Sove∣raigne Princes, the protectors thereof) our Reve∣rend Judges have restrained themselves, and our ordinary Carryers have, by publique Authority, been restrained from travelling on the Lords Day, (though both carry with them the advantage of the publique good) to the great comfort of such as without all schismaticall humour or peevish affecta∣tion of singularity, heartily embrace both the Do∣ctrine professed, and discipline practised in the Church of England; and their hope is that other a∣buses yet remaining and tending to the prophanati∣on of that Day may in good time likewise be refor∣med, as in some forraigne reformed Churches they have lately been. Lastly, for our instruction and imitation against the prophanation of this Day, as well Generall Councells, and Provinciall Synods have bent their Canons, as Emperors, and Kings, and Common∣weals their Laws: Such were Contine the Great de vita Const. lib 4. c. 18. 19 23. (the first Christian Emperour, born in this Island) and Charles the Great, Canutus the Dane, Henry the 6th, and Edward the 6th, three of our most pious Princes, who zealously stood for the religious
observation of this Day, as Nehemiah did for the sanctifying of the Jewish Sabboth. My Conclusion shall be, That if some bodily re∣creations on the Lords Day, for the better sancti∣fying thereof, be thought requisite, yet under cor∣rection, I should conceive them more tolerable in the Paor, who that Day hath spent his spirits in a faithfull discharge of his Ministeriall Function, than in the people; and among the people, rather in Trades-men and Husband men, than in Gentle∣men, who for the most part, make every day holy∣day in following their sports; and in all with these limitations. First, That they be in their conscience fully per∣swaded that the games which they use be not onely lawfull in themselves, but also in regard of the Day; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sinne; that which IRom. 4. 23. think unlawfull, or am not perswaded in my self that it is lawfull, though in it self it be so, yet to me it is sinne; so as it is a safe rule in Divinity, Quod du∣bitas ne feceris, that which thou doubtest of, do not. The second limitation is, That our Recreations do not tend to the scandall of others; If meat make my1 Cor. 8. 13. brother offend, saith the Apostle, I will eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to offend; and yet may publique Recreations one day in the week be more easily be forborn, than meat whiles the world standeth. My third limitation is, That these Re∣creations tend to the better sanctification of the Lords Day, in the refreshing of mens spirits, Sancti∣fication being by all Divines confessed to be the principall end thereof, which being laid for a
ground, the consequence in my judgement, is una∣voidable, That all our actions on that day ought more or lesse to be directed and squared thereunto, according to that approved rule of the Schools, Tantum destinati smendum, quantum ad finem prodest, so much of the means as conduceth to the end, is to be taken, and no more. I will shut up all with that of the Evangelicall Prophet Esay, only changing thecap 48. v. 3, 14. Jewish Sabboth into the Lords Day, the Sabbath of the Christians; If thou turn away thy foot from doing thy pleasure on my holy Day, and call it a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shalt honour him, not doing thine own wayes, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thie own words: Then shalt thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the Heritage of Jacob thy father; For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. God grant that we may so truely serve the Lord by a due observation of his Day hre, that we may eternall raigne with him hereafter. Part of a Speech delivered in the Starre-Cham∣ber, against the opinion of Mr. Traske; By the Right Reverend Father in God, Lancelot, Bishop of Winchester, deceased. IT hath ever been the Churches Doctrine, that Christ made an end of all Sabboths, by his Sab∣both in the Grave, that Sabboth was the last of
them. And that the Lords Day presently came in place of it: Dominicus dies Christi resurrecti∣one declaratus est Christianis, & ex illo coepit habere festivitatem suam, saith Augustine; The Lords Day was by the resurrection of Christ decla∣red to be the Christians Day; and from that very time (of Christs Resurrection) it began to be cele∣brated, as the Christian mns festivall. These two, the Day and the Supper, have the Epithet of  Dominicum in the Scriptures, to shew Dominicum is aike to be taken in both. This for the practice. If you will have it in precept, the Apostle gives it, (and in the same word still) that against  the day of their Assemly; Every one should lay apart what God should move him to offer to the Collection for the Saints, and then offer it: which was so ever in use. That, the day of oblations. So have you it in practice and in precept both. FINIS.
