K458 13386136 99353
FOVR NEW PLAYES, viz: Tragy-Comedies. The SEEGE of VRBIN. SELINDRA. LOVE and FRIENDSHIP. PANDORA. A Comedy. Written by Sr WILLIAM KILLIGREW, Vice-Chamberlaine to Her MAIESTY. OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall, Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Ric: Davis, 1666.
WIT (like the VVorld) is so decrepid grown, It wants some Crutch, or Hint to lean upon. Onely you work alone, it may be said, Your Poëms are created, and not made. You frame the stuffe too, we but shapes and features; Our Poëms are our Children, yours, your Creatures. Iust as Gods Poem, Earth; so vast, so fair, Suspended in, not built upon the Ayre. Poys'd by it's self, (like Archimede's Dove,) Your Fancy's made t' exist, as ours to move. VVe vex the Subject that we write upon, VVhil'st all you VVrite is Emanation. Thus you retrive Old Time; for just as then The Golden Age, was but the Iron Men; So to Posteriy it may be told Our Age is Iron, but our Wits are Gold. For tell me why, the Golden Age mayn't hence Be stil'd from Wit, as then from Innocence? He that will chuse your Fancy, let him dread To wish for all your Wit, without your Head. What fan's the Ship, the Cock-boat would o're-turn, And what in you's but bright, would else-where burn. For Marcyas to be Pan were pretty fair, Too much for Pan t' usurp Apollo's Chair. T. P. SCholers, your Studies, and your Books lay by, Unlesse you could with Art and Industry Somthing produce, beyond what here is shown, By one to whom your Learning is unknown; Nature in him th' Effect of Art supplies With stories full of such varieties,
And proper Language, for all Humours fit, So wonderful for judgment, and for wit; That onely he, so aptly could Relate, VVhat his high Fancy could alone Create. R. T. On PANDORA. FOr me to praise your Play, were to dispraise; So weak a Bays, can no great Trophy raise; Yet my Respect commands me fix a Name, To you no Glory; Yet may prove my Shame. Prose, though indifferent, yet passes still, Verse, if not Excellent! most men count ill: Foyls set off Iewels, such my Lines must be, Then to be short, is no ill pollicy. I think, there is Rich Sence, and Language fit, I think, there's many turns of spritely Wit, I'me sure, you reach what was your highest end, To shew her power, on whom you now depend, VVhose Virtue hath, so blest an influence, To make him Spirituall; that more loud sence; You like Clearcus were; some thought too gay, Now chang'd; witnesse this Recantation Play. Lodowick Carlisle.
In Honoratissimi Domini GVLIELMI KILLIGRAEI, & Regiae Catharinae Majestatis Vi-Camerarii Praecla∣um, & Inculpatissimum Drama Selindra Praconium. QUòd prudens tua, quòd modesta Musa Vitavit petulantiora Scenae, Nec Lenocinium joci procacis (Quod falsò ingenium student vocari) Dum risum movet exuit Pudorem; Inculpata tua at sonant Theatra Quod virgo proba, quod stolata mater Quod purus positâ severitate Jàm post pulpita perlegat Sacerdos; Quòd jurat tibi nullus Historionum, aut Laeso numine quaeritur venustas, Nec constat populo tuum Poema Impensis animae suae ut crumenae; Quòd (sermone humili urbium relicto Vernis sordidulis & institori) Venam Nobilis Aulicumque spiras Dignum Caesaris aure cum requirens Summas Imperii levare curas; Vult ut desipiat duabus horis; Has dotes reputo tuas secundas: Sed, quòd cum veniunt ad implicata, Cum Scena haereat, & quòd impeditae Desperant animi exitum Fabellae, Quâ vates veteres Jovem vocabant Ad partes, poterit throno ut crepante Narrare ambigui dolos Theatri, Atque (ut vincula Gordiana quondam Pellaeus juvenis) molesta tollunt Infulso gladio. Undique plagâ, Tu per nescio quam modò citatam
Ex notâ tibi plebe Passionum (Ut quodam noviter reflante vento) Convertes aliò novísque tota Compages operis rotis movetur; Neglectis superisque & inferisque Per curam facilem domesticamque Affectum proprio è sinu petitum Salvas attonitos & haesitantes. Hanc Artem tibi, Killigraei, solus Tu posces, dubii hanc Strophen Theatri. T. L. The Latine Verses Translated. THat thy wise, and modest Muse, Flies the Stages Looser Use; Not Baudry VVit, does falsely Name, And to move Laughter, puts off Shame. That thy Theatres Loud Noyse, May be Virgins Chast Applause; And the stol'd Matron, grave Divine, Their Lectures done, may tend to thine! That no Actor's made profane, To debase God, to raise thy strain; And People forc'd that hear thy Play, Their Money, and their Souls to pay. That thou leav'st Affected Phrase, To the Shops to Use, and Praise; And breath'st a Noble Courtly Vain, Such as may Caesar entertain, VVhen he weari'd would lay down, The Burdens that attend a Crown, Disband his Sols severer Powers, In Mirth and Ease dissolve two Houres! These are thy Inferious Arts, These I call thy second Parts!
But when thou carriest on the Plot, And all are lost, i'th' subtle Knot, When the Scene sticks to ev'ry thought, And can to no Event be brought, When thus of Old, the Scene betray'd, Poets, call'd Gods unto their Aid; Who by Power might do the thing, Art could to no Issue bring. As the Pellaean Prince that broke, VVith a Rude and Down-right stroke. The Perplext and Fatall Noose, VVhich his skill could not Unloose! Thou do'st a Nobler Art professe, And the Coyl'd Serpent can'st no lesse Stretch out from every twisted Fold, In which he lay invove and rould. Induce a Night, and then a Day, VVrap up all in Clouds, and then display Th' easie, and the even Designe, A Plot, without a God, Divine! Let others bold pretending Penns, VVrite Acts of Gods, that know not Mens. In this to Thee, all must resigne Th'surprize o'th Scene is wholly Thine! Of Pandora's not being Approved upon the Stage as a TRAGEDY. SIr, You should rather teach our Age the way Of judging well, then thus have chang'd your Play, You had oblig'd us by imploying wit, Not to reforme Pandora, but the Pit: For as the Nightingale, without the Throng Of other Birds, alone attends her Song, While the loud Daw, his throat displaying, drawes The whole Assembly of his fellow Daws;
So must the VVriter, whose productions should Take with the vulgar, be of vulgar Mould; VVhile Nobler Fancies make a flight too high, For Common view, and lessen as they fly. Edmund Waller. TO ENVY. THou Snake that lurk'st under the Poets Bayes, Envy, confesse thy Malice to these Playes, Art thou not vext to see the Plots well lay'd, The Language pure, and every Sentence weigh'd? New Humours? Passion wrought up to that height, Men weep, and yet their grief begets Delight? All this by Nature done, which showes, the Arts Infuse themselves, where they find VVit and Parts. Out of these Premises we may infer Here will be no work for the Censurer; The wiser Critick will do better first; And for the Foolish, let him do his worst. R. Stapylton.
THE SEEGE OF URBIN. A Tragy-Comedy. Written by Sr WILLIAM KILLIGREW, Vice-chamberlaine to Her MAjESTY. OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Ric: Davis, 1666.
To the Author of the Siege of VRBIN. Sir, I Have perus'd your Playes, and in them find, Abundant Riches to adorne the mind; Beyond the pleasure of the Eares, and Eyes, Which are delighted most with Levities. Selindra's Characters so great! and good, Maintained throughout; if fully understood! Shewes, none did ever better Plot contrive, Or represent a Dead shew more alive! Pandora tells, how vertuous Women may Make vitious men, cast all their ills away; Such wanton Wit, in Ralliery, so writ! Virtue her selfe, may heare, and practise it. I judge, that by Ormasde's, you designe, To teach how Friendship's, more then Love, divine! Yet have such Characters of both exprest, You leave no Argument, to chuse the best. This Siege of Urbin, more then all does show; That you, true Images of Virtue know, And to improve the world, your skill impart, That we may learne to imitate your Art. 'Tis want of wit, and judgment in this Age, If we discerne not what adornes the Stage! When passions high, and to the life exprest! Do not raise flames in every worthy brest; When Florio with such subtile Art, beguiles Our soules concerne, to mingle teares with smiles; VVhat more can Playes afford? or we desire? VVhen to our Recreations we retire! VVe wish for lines, our reason may Command, Not such as breaks our braines, to understand. You have a noble Pen, and fancy such! To be more Eloquent, would be too much! S. T.
On the SIEGE of VRBIN. To the AUTHOR. SIr, since I had the happinesse to read The Siege of Urbin; I heare, others plead That All may see't, and plead with such successe; That now you'l wave the Stage, and grace the Presse. 'Twill much oblige the Nation, for they'l finde Your Play stampt with the Figure of your Minde; The Poëm's Noble, nothing Vulgar in't; You coyne not Bullion at the Common Mint, As wee doe, whose low soules no Art can raise: Nay ev'n when Lov's infus'd into our Playes, Slow as a Drug, that in the body lies, Our Phansy works; yours, like a Spirit, flyes, Nor does your excellence alone consist In Love's soft Parleys: you do Souldiers list, And carry on designes of Warre and State, Form'd in a Campe and Court which you create. And though new Poëts, like new Starres, appeare: Yet still you rise above their highest Sphere. 'Tis true, they write great Characters; but then, How oten speak their Great like meaner men; You make a Prince do all things like a Prince, That's Argument sufficient to evince The Dictates that from deepest Reason slow, Which learned Poets dreame but of, you know, If then, He, that has greatest latitude Of Knowledge merit most; I may conclude The aurell's yours, justly transplanted now, From off the Schollar's, to the Courtier's brow. R. Stapylton.
To his most Honoured Friend THE AVTHOR. SIr, When I read your Play methought I saw The persons Enter and go off, you draw All Parts so speaking, so to Life, that I Felt my Eares cosen'd by my well pleas'd Fye, And thought I heard the Actors, which did there At once present a Play and Theater. All passages contrived by such just Lawes As crown the best of Poëts with Applause, And challenge to your Witt the freshest Bayes Which can be gather'd from clapt Hands, and Prayse. The whole Intrique a Labyrinth, which you Through all the windings furnish with a Clue, By which the wondring Traveller is Ledde Through wayes past finding out but by your Thred. The Plot and Scenes wrapt up in such disguise▪ As when a fine Cloud darkens the bright Skies. Yet so, as this shade turnes at length to Light, And a faire Day-break issues forth of Night. The Lovers parts, which tread our Moderne Stage, Are the Reproach, and Dulnesse of our Age. Where a young Gallant fighting for his Whore With a curl'd Rivall, at a Tavern Doore, The Drawers call'd to reconcile the fray, VVith Parish Constable, do make the play. Your Fancy doth in higher Regions move, And teach great Princes princes wayes of Love. Kindling in noblest Brests the noblest fire, VVhich to fruition by great Deeds aspire. Thus your Lorenzo rais'd a generous Flame In his great Mistress by a VVarlike Fame, And made his wounds, and Dangers first obliege His Silviana rescued from a Siege. And thus your Florio did all Hearts surprize, First by her Valiant Sword, then conquering Eyes
In whose conceal'd sex you both sexes place, Mars in her Courage, Venus in her Face. Nor is't a wonder, if thus beautified Some wisht her for their Bridegroome, some their Bride. Such Marriages are onely framed by you, VVho know to he Loves priest, and Poët too. M. C. On the SIEGE of VRBIN. To the AUTHOR. MIracle of Nature, by no Arts taught; Borne beyond Learning; with such fancy fraught! That all thy Poems do the VVorld surprise, To finde such Treasure, under such disguise. Such parts, with so great modesty conceal'd, Doubles their valew, when they are reveal'd. Thy Characters of Love, and Friendship show, Thy heart's the Fountaine, whence those Virtues flow. VVe Fictions write, the Poets chiefest part! Thou paint'st thy selfe, and thy own patterne Art. E. F.
The AUTHOR to the Reader. Reader, INsteed of justifying my idle howers thus spent; or beg∣ing your applause, for what you may not like; I de∣sire you to excuse my confidence, for Printing so high Complements, from my kind Friends; who have here Poëtiz'd in praise of what I fear you will not find! Yet if no Stones be flung at me, but by those that would be really displeas'd, to be so prays'd: I have hopes to es∣cape, 'till some other kind of Marterdome be found for Your most humble Servant W. K.
The Actors Names of the Siege of Vrbin. The Duke of Urbin. Camillo. Alphonso. Corbino. Tigillo. Borosco. Longino. Fernando. Fernando. five Strangers. Luco. five Strangers. Florio. five Strangers. Pedro. five Strangers. Maluezzo. five Strangers. Silviana, the Dukes Sister. Rossina. four Ladies of quality. Mariana. four Ladies of quality. Phisora: four Ladies of quality. Floremlla. four Ladies of quality. Clara, Marianas Maid. Pages. Officers. Souldiers. Surgion. Lodovico, Duke of Ferrara. His Generall. Officers. Souldiers.
PROLOGUE. LAdies, Our Author does by me declare, Your Characters are still his chiefest care; That what he does present to Publique view, Hee'd have as Excellent, as he thinks you; If then his great respect, does make him raise A Figure rarely practic'd in our dayes? To set a Lustre on your sex, that may Your reserv'd Virtues to the World display! He hopes his Age, his fancy may excuse, If it flye low for a Romantick Muse! But if the Ladies! Florio's part approve! He feares no men, who dare pretend to love; And then, if all who love, do like his play! No matter, what the rest o'th VVorld do say.
THE FIRST SCENE IN CELESTINAS BED-CHAMBER in PISA. VVhen the Curtaine is drawn up, CELESTINA is seen sitting by a Table, in a rich Night-gown, a Scarfe over her head, holding a Dagger in her Handkercher, she puts up her Scarfe and speaks. Cele∣stina. WHat noyse was that? or did I dreame? it seem'd my Fathers voyce, to hasten me to Church! The dismall thought of that sad sound, frights my Soule, with apprehension of approaching mi∣sery! —a thousand Images of strange terrors, do in various shapes appeare, and bring all the sad stories I ever heard, of forced Marriage, afresh into my memory! — if I consent to marry him, or do at all comply! the guilt of our ensuing evills will be mine! —My heart shrinks
for fear, at these Ideas of such ills to come! that I will try to think my self into the other World.— She pulls her Scarfe over her Face and sits a while silent. —There is no other way, no remedy but this Dagger! and now the last houre for my resolve! I shame to tremble thus, yet cannot chuse! — I know one stroke, will free me from an Age of mise∣ry! to which compar'd, the paines of death will seem delightfull! — I onely fear to go, I know not where! and childishly do dread, I know not what! these be the doubts, create this shaking it; which makes me fear this unsteady hand, may misse my heart, if I strike now! —and yet I must! for I shall be another Man's to morrow! and then to kill my selfe, will invade his Right! —it must be now; I am now Mistris of my self, and if I only harm my selfe! where is the crime? Who ha's the wrong? —Why then, should selfe slaughter be a sinne? When I am dead, my Father may relent, and teach other Parents more hu∣manity; and so free many innocents, from like slavery! —if then so great a happinesse, unto my selfe accrue? and so much good to others may insue! why do I doubt to Dye? —a few thoughts more, and I am ready. She pulls down her Scarfe again; and sits silent. Melina knocks aloud at the Doore, and cryes out Melina. Help Madam, help! for Heavens sake helpe! or I am lost! Celestina frighted from her thoughts, runnes in haste to open the Doore, and leaves the Dagger on the Table. [Enter Melina.] Celestina. What frights thee thus, what danger threatned thee? Melina. Oh Madam! the Villane fled, as you approached! — Melina takes up the Dagger.] —Ha! What use have you for this? —was it for this? that I was now lock'd out. [aside] Celestina. She has deceiv'd me by a trick, and I must now dissemble. Celestina sits again, and pulls her Scarfe over her Face.
Melina. Madam, tis ominous, to celebrate your Wedding Eve in sighes! —when the Sun sets in a darke Clowd, we say the Mor∣ning will be foule. Celestina. True Melina, but if the Sunne do set in a red Skye! the same Augurs say, the Morning will prove faire. Melina. Some bright red Evenings, make us judge so! but a bloody colour'd Skye! often foreshewes some dismall accident at hand. Celestina. No more; thou hast for an hower or too, repriev'd me from the grave; —but this Handkercher will do the work, as well as that Dagger Melina! now I am resolv'd to dye! Melina. And I, as fully bent, to accompany your Ghost, unto the other World: dye when you will! Celestina. Thou hast no Argument for death! Melina. Yes Madam, I cannot part with you, my sence of your many favours, does work the same effect in me, your troubles do bring you. Celestina. To lay thy blood on my head Melina, will be cruelty, not love! and so create a sinne upon my Soule, I thought not of! Melina. 'Tis in you to prevent that evill, by preserving your self, and me, who will not live without you; have we not suck'd the same Milk, and ever since been bred together! Celestina. Did ever servant love a Mistris thus! Melina. Did ever Mistris love a servant! as you have me! more like a neer relation, then your made! Celestina. High gratitude! thy returnes, are beyond my obli∣gations. —But would'st thou have me live? and marry that Mon∣ster I abhorre. Mel. No, I would have you put the Marriage off, by a fained sicknsse, for a while! and try some lesse dangerous remedy; then Ile assist. Celest. I have twice done so, and by it more insenc'd my angry Father, who now has vowed, dead or alive, he will to morrow carry me to Church. Mel. What if he do? Celest. At the Alter then, il'e sacrifice my life; if not now. Mel. Is there no way but Death? Celest. Yes, I have a way to help my self; if thou will here in∣gage thy Faith, not to reveale, but to assist in my designe! my hard hearted Father shall not in such hast, hurry me to Church; —my thoughts are honst, and my actions shall be honourable: —say Melina, shall I trust thee? or must I die? Mel: I will ingage; so you will vow to me, not to fall by your own hand! Cele: I doe, I do: —haist now my dearest friend, fetch presently [She imbra∣ces Melina.] my Bothers two new Sutes, he made long since for this solemnity! they will fit us well: —We must be men Melina! and immediatly be gone.
Melina. Men Madam! Celest: I men, in shew! Mel: And whither then? Celestina. Nay, if you raise doubts allready! my first resolve, returnes. Melina. Will you not admit me to consult in the affaire; you now think fit to trust me with! Celest. Yes, yes, but we have no time to counsell now! —you have heard, how Ferraras hot-headed Duke, prepares an Army for a Warre with Urbin? and hopes by force to get the Princess Sil∣viana for his Wife; against her Brothers, and her own consent. Mel. I have heard such a discourse! Celest. That discourse is true Melina; —and we must now haste to URBIN in our disguise; there as Silvianas Voluntier, I'le fight; and try what my Romantick destiny will be? —a forraine enemy may give the death I seek; which my own hands tremble at! Mel: But Madam! Celest: No butts Melina, you must now obay, Make haste to shift our habits, and away. Exeunt. THE SECOND SCENE. Enter Fernando, Luco, and Maluezzo. Fern. WE have escap'd their out guards strangely; they will be round about the Town this night Luco; Luco. Will you stay the siege Sir? Fern: I had not else come hither; Maluezzo. Have you an Argument? and a concerne, worthy of such hazzard Sir. Fern: I come (led by my Fate) to seek an Argument, that may prove worthy of greater hazzard, then I shall meet with here; men who put to Sea on great designes, must not shrink at every Cloud, in apprehension that a storme is neer; but if I find no businesse worthy my danger, I can retreat at pleasure. Maluezzo. You will be ingag'd in honour, and must not stirre. Fernan: If so, I shall abide it cheerfully; Maluezzo, goe you back immediatly, while the way is open, and see all done at home, as I directed. Maluezzo. I shall be carefull Sir. Exit Maluezzo. Fernan: Luco, take you a private lodging for me, before it doe grow darke, and in this place, or on the next Rampier, you shall finde me. Exeunt severally.
Enter Florio, and Pedro. Florio. Happy, and blest occasion! for my crosse fate the best! here I may fall without the crime of my own hands, acting in my long wish'd for Death! here unknown without pitty or reproach, I may Sacrifice my loath'd life to appease my inraged Father; whose unna∣turall impositions have destroy'd me. Methinks Melina our disguise, becomes us excellently well, and this Town besiedg'd, will keep us undiscover'd while we stay; — what sayes my fellow Souldier? canst thou fight? Pedro. If my Argument to put on Breeches, were the same with yours Madam! I should like this habit, and your designe, much better then I doe; you flye the man you hate, and I leave him I love, to waite on you. Florio. I see thy Complement in its best dress, (Fidelity;) but tis now two late to sigh, or to repent; we are ingag'd past retreating and must on. Pedro. I wonder Maddam you do not shake to think what hazzards you must runne? this looks like leaping into the Sea, to avoid Ship∣wrack; the cure more desperate, then the evill you fly from. Florio. Not more desperate Melina! I cannot feare, nor fancy an evill, beyond the imbraces of that rich rotten Carcas, my unkind Fa∣ther would match me to; as if guilding a sad heart, would make it hap∣py! 'Tis easy to consent to dye, when we consider how much better 'tis to be in Heaven, then here Melina. Pedro. True Madam, if we be sure, this were the way thither! but how shall we answer at the Resurrection? for our Vira-goships? for ou own, and others blood, thus shed! if our Needles should prick our Fingers! and those small wounds fester to Gangreens! that were to dye in our own callings; but this way to fall, is a kind of self murther, and beyond my Faith to merrit Heaven, by doing mischiefe to our selves and others, who have no way offended us. Florio. I have no thought of mischiefe in my heart towards any, nor is my Nature lesse smooth then thine, but my starres have ordain'd me a Rugged Fate that I cannot subdue. Pedro. Allow all this, the meanes you still propose, are hopelesse, as the end you aime at; — How will drawn Swords look in our weak has? how soon will feeble strokes discover our faint hearts? and lay us open to reproach. Florio. Thou art mistaken Melina, 'tis courage, and not strength, that is o necessy here; when Multitudes fall on, none can observe, whose Sword does the Execution; — but thou shalt stay at home, while my dispaire, leads me, where danger strikes the greatest terror; thou know'st part of my younger dayes, led with my banish'd Father, in wilde Mountaines, there train'd for this work at hand! but my busi∣nesse is now to dye, as thine to live, 'tis not thy Valour, I ingag'd to this adventer, but thy fidelity; who after my decease, must witnesse to the World, the truth of my sad story, least our sex be scandaliz'd; —you shall not ight Melina.
Pedro. If I survive? will a relation from me, your fellow wande∣rer, have credit with the World? I fear your flight from home, and such a Romantick death, may prove eternall scandall to your Name: Innosence, is not enough to justify so bold an Act! Florio. Conceale me then; —I carry here an innosence, beyond the reach of Censure; and though I flye that moving Sepulcher at home, I have a courage, that dares meet againe my old acquaintance, the Ravening Wolfe, and hungry Bear, rather then be so buried while I live! Melina. Is all this danger, to avoid the man that you dislike? no inclination for another, you would have? Florio. Had I been so weak! as to like any! I had not found strength, for this bold adventure; —prethee sweet Melina, do not be∣tray me by thy feares, I did believe thee bold, and a fit Confident, or I had neer imparted my designe. Pedro. I must confesse, I did not fear to go at midnight in the darke, through our long entries, to meet my Lover; those joyes, were ever above the thought of shadowes, but these dangers are of a higher Na∣ture Madam, our lives, and Credits both at stake. Florio. Fye Melina, dost thou own courage, in actions void of Mode∣sty? and shrink when honour bids the hazzard! —thou makest me trem∣ble now indeed, lest some guilt of thine, should pull a crosse Fate on us. Pedro. Remove those thoughts of me, and all your feares together, for I am Arm'd with such a vertuous confidence, as will shrink at no danger, you dare look on; but will vie Perills with you, when occa∣sions call me to it. Florio. Bravely resolv'd; thus then let us in private, practice how to wave our Swords! lest we show ignorance, when we have use of She drawes with the Scabbard on. them; —Why should not Womens hearts agree with such a strength, as our Arms have to mannage this Sword? 'tis only custome, and a tender Education, makes us lesse bold, and active, then the bravest men; —the Amazons we read, have done great things, and my spirit prompts me, to an honourable death, before a wretched life, which makes me thus endeavour, to fall worthy a Noble Character, for after times to pitty, —or to praise, and wonder at! Pedro. I am now fully confirm'd Madam, and hope to see you fight like the brave Maid of Orleance, who drove the English from those parts of France, when almost all was Conquer'd, by that Warlike Nation! — — So that in after Ages, your Renowne, May out-shine hers, that sav'd the Gallique Crowne! Florio. If France do that bould Virgins vallor own! Why should not we, now make that wonder none? Enter: towards them:— —Fernando muffled in a gray Cloake, behind him five Banditee, who seize on his Cloake; he drawes and fights, till Florio and Pedro rescue him, and beate off the Theeves: he returnes, starts as he im∣braces Florio.
Fernando. To what Angels Face, and Heroes Arme, do I owe my Life? or has great Mars put Venus figure on? my amazement is beyond the sence of my deliverance; — what are you Sir? Florio: A stranger, here but now ariv'd. Fern. Are not you hurt? Florio: I feel none Sir; pray who were those assaulted you? Fern: Banditee, who in such times of Warre, stand in corners to take Clokes! Perd. If this be all the danger, our drawn Swords will bring us? I shall To Florio aside. neer be out. Enter Luco. Luco: Are these Enemies Sir? Fern: They are my good Angells Luco, from Heaven sent to guard me; — have you taken lodgings? Luco: I have. Fern: But I must first attend you to your house Sir, lest these To Florio. Villains return upon you: Florio: We yet have none, but were inquiring where to lodge, when you came by us. Luco: The house that I now came from has Roome for all. Fern: Pray let us lodg together, that I may finde some way to serve you, who have ingaged me so highly. Florio: We shall gladly be obliged, as you desire, and will wate on you. Fern: By your daring courage, I judge you come to serve the Duke, against this insulting Enemy, as I doe. Florio: We seek imployment; Fern: Have you an addresse to any in this Court? Florio: We have none, but come to serve as Volanteers: Fern: My purpose is the same, wee may do well to make our first visits presently to Court, and shew our intents to serve the Duke, if you approve it; let us see our Lodgings, and then goe. Florio: I shall be wholly guided by you Sir. Fern: Shew the house Luco. — —Methinks that face has in it something more! Aside▪ Then in my Life I ever saw before. Exeunt. Enter Duke with Camillo, Lords and Officers. Duke: Has the Enemy taken spade in hand Camillo? Cam: Yes Sir, and is allready breaking ground: Duke: Wee'l entertaine 'um at break of day, with a sharp Sally, to give them an assay of what courages they are to meet with, let our Troopes be ready by day break. Camillo: All shall be ready Sir; but methinks the night were fitter for our Sally. Duke: I like not Sallying in the Darke, 'tis subject to great mi∣stakes,
and such accidents, as often makes the best designes uncertaine; No Camillo, the Sunne shall see, and shew the vigour we charge with, 'twill raise our Hearts to higher actions, then a dull shade is worthy of! Our glitring Swords, and our inraged Eyes, Will shew how much we do their Warre dispise! And 'mongst their Souldiers such amazement sing, They shall not flye, the Ruine that we bring. Enter the Princess to them, with Rossina, and Phylora at one doore, At the other Enter an Officer with the foure Strangers, Fer∣nando, Florio, Luco, and Pedro a little after. Duke: Take courage Silviana, this Warre will not prove so terri∣ble, as your feares suggest! Princess. My apprehension Sir, is not more, then does become my Sex; when Nations are at stake, and my interest must be decided by the hazzards of a Warre; —is it not time to sigh? and pray, I and to tremble at the thought of such an evill! though my innosence, and your valour, may be Crown'd with Victory, it must be purchas'd by the blood of Loyall Subjects. Duke: Let them who force the Warre, shake at the event! and an∣swer for the evills. Officer: These Gentlemen new come to Town, desire the Honour They salute the Duke. to kiss your Highnesse hand. Duke: You have chosen an ill time, to visit URBIN Gentlemen; when the Alarums, and hazzards of a besiedged Town, allowes no houres for entertainment, or for rest. Fern: To hazzard, wee come hither Sir; —honour'd Trophies gain'd in so just a Warre! are glorious invitation to virtuous minds, and fill our hearts with sure Predictions of a good successe. Duke: You Prophesie like a friend, and I have Faith for what you say, —do these youths belong to you? Fern: No Sir, I met them but an hour since, where they sav'd my life, by rescuing me from five or six Banditee, —they come to serve you in this Warre. Duke: Your looks invite me to inquire your Countrey, and qua∣lities, that I may finde a fit imployment for such worthy persons, who set honour at so high a rate. Fern: My name is Fernando, and his Florio, my ambition Sir, is not above a Volunteere, I understand not to Command; — but Florio I confess looks like somewhat more then he is pleas'd to own. Duke: My fancy does concurre with yours, — and I shall study to welcome both, as well as this disturb'd time permits me; this occa∣sion makes us wink at such Banditee for the present, who are bold on all attempts, and in this Warre may be of use; but I should not have judg'd this faire youth fit to mannage Arms! Fern: Your Highnesse will have other thoughts, when you see Florio in the field! the Enemy will find him man enough! Duke: What part of Italy is so happy? as to have bred such early vertue▪
Florio: I am of Pisa Sir; my businesse is to see the World, and im∣prove my knowledge by my Travels. Fern: Of PISA Florio! know you any of note there? Florio: All Sir. Fern: Pray Sir, let us two fight in the same Troope, that we may emulate each others actions, in your service. Duke: The contest will not be equall, —your looks will strike more terror in an Enemy, then Gentle Florios Sword can doe; I will prevaile with this young Souldier, (if I can)! to secure the Ladies, while we Sally, his courage will abate their feares, who apprehend more danger then is cause for. Florio: Sir, I shall curse my soft faint looks, if they belye my heart, that covets to get honour by my Sword, as much as he, that can frown Speaks in Anger. most!—I will either sally this night with Fernando, or quit the Town be∣fore I sleep. Duke: This storme which I have rais'd is more bewitching lovely, then thy calme gentle looks were.— The Duke imbraces Florio. —If you have yours, and I have my desire; Let me again imbrace what I admire! Pedro. I passe for no body all this while! but if my good Sword hold! [aside.] I'le doe; I know not what! Rossina: The Dukes in love Madam, and talks like one of us, to this Adonis. Princess. They look great, as if they would do service, worthy my brothers highest complements. Enter to them Camillo the Generall. Camillo. We are all ready for the Sally Sir; I wish your High∣nesse would reserve your self for the next occasion, we shall have work enough of this kind; the Enemie is strong. Duke. I will not be diverted, but my selfe will lead you on; —here Camillo, —let these strangers charge in your Troop, next to your self; they appeare to be of quality, and no doubt have courage to merrit what honours we can give 'um. Camillo: They shall be my care Sir. Duke: Call for my Armes, 'tis time that we make ready.— — Retire, lost your feares Silviana may Our best displease, and doubting men dismay. Exit Duke and Traine. Princess. I have a heavinesse about my heart Rossina, which I cannot remove! Rossina. Your Highnesse too much apprehension of the Dukes dan∣ger, looks like doubting those powers, which protect Princes in all just causes. Princess. I cannot contradict you, nor can I be lesse concern'd, be∣cause this Warre is on my account, though I be guiltlesse, the prou'd Prince of Ferrara demands our Principallity in Dowre, by which he shewes to have but small esteem of me; the Dukedome must be in∣tayled
on me, and my Brother tyed from a second Marriage? thus his ambition, not his love, makes Warre, for the inlarging his Do∣minions! Rossina: Pray Madam be pleas'd to retire into the Castle, the Duke is now on sallying: As they are going off they meet Mariana, and Phylora, comming in haste. Prin: Whiter so fast Mariana? why so frighted my Phylora? Filora. We came from the Tower next to the Port, Madam. Princess. And from thence, what saw you? to beget this Terror! Philora. We saw the Duke all in Armour, riding before his Troops, with so much terror, and such a dust! that we durst stay no longer, but ranne trembling down, to be neer your Highnesse in this danger. Prin: So then our own Troops, and their dust, have conquer'd you, stout Souldiers! I thought by your amazed looks, the Enemy had been entering of our Ports. —Let me have notice when my Brother does returne. Exeunt. An alarum sounded a farre off, some Skirmishes, then the Duke of URBIN worsted, two Lords slaine by him, and himself in dan∣ger, Retreats? and is rescued by the Strangers; Exeunt. Florio and Pedro must not fight on the Stage through the whole play. And then Reenter the Duke with the four Strangers followed by Camillo, and officers with Carbino, and Borosco two old Lords. Duke: Are Petruchio, and Morosino both Dead? Camillo: Both slaine Sir. Duke: They shall have solemne Funerals: who did deserve more honour, then I can give their Memories; —I saw 'em fall, and hopeing to relieve 'em, had lost my self, if brave Fernando, with young Florio, had not come timely in to save me: —I owe my life to you Gentle∣men, and must declare, this great successe is wholly due unto your Valours; 'twas you that Rallyed us when routed; twas you that forc'd the enemy to his first retreat, and you have brought us off with honour, when all was desperate! Fern: You over value our endeavours Sir; 'twas our good fate to come in timely, but your owne valours wonne the day. Duke: This humility looks greater then your actions; — Fernando, I intreat you take Command of all our Horse, in place of slaine Pe∣truchio, —and have the same suit to Florio, that he will command my Guards in place of Morosino fall'n. Fern: Your Highnesse has great Commanders here more worthy of this Honour, —I have such ingagements on me, that I can accept of no imployment, longer then this Seedge lasts. Florio: You over load me Sir, with a charge too great for my years to undertake. Duke. Your Officers will ease you of all the painfull part; though I yet know you not: — —My purpose is, to shew how much I prize That vertue, which appeares through your disguise.
[Enter to them the Princess and Ladies, She runs to the Duke.] Prin: My prayers are heard, and you are safe return'd! She runs to meet the Duke. Duke. I owe my life Silviana, and you your thanks to these Gallant men, —Fernando has shew'd us how to command, and how to fight, and taught all the offices of a great Souldier. Fern: Your complements are such Sir; as I dare not Answer, be∣cause I must not own them: Duke. Here I present you Silviana, with this Ages wonder! such The Duke takes Florio by the Hand. Youth, such Beauty, and such a Courage! —as sends Thunder from his Arme, with such lightning from those bright Eyes as did amaze the Enemy in fight; and will in Peace with smiles subdue as many. Princess. If your discourse were not of Warre, I should believe you did describe a Mistrisse rather then a man. Duke. You have said truer then you think Silviana; for I shall court Florio, as Mistriss of all the Joyes that I can fancy, and love him! like some devine substance, I have no name for! Florio. You make me blush so much Sir, that I must hide my selfe. He is going. Duke. Stay Florio, and I will talke no more thus; but by my favours judge hereafter, at what rate I value such a Miracle of Nature, in shew more fit for Venus, then the rough discipline of Mars; Florio shall be my bosome friend, my surest guide to Vertue, and Renown! Florio. I am wearied Sir, and beg your permission to retire a while. Duke. Take your own time Florio. Exit Florio. Prin: Brother, is this Rallery? or do you designe to set up your young favourite, for the Court Idoll? if so brave a man, will allow such lattery? we will all adore him too: —But suppose some Lady should gaine an interest in Florio's heart? how will you beare such a partner in his friendship? Duke. What you but jest of, is my reall wish, that fair Rossina, or some other Lady could lay such fetters on him, as might keep him ever here; —And if my favour can invite any to this Victory on Florio, I will make his Fortune suitable to Hers, who ere she be! Rossina. I do submit to try my Fortune, but how must I proceed? I shall never learne to Wooe Sir. Prin: You shall have our assistance Rossina. Rossina. If you can perswade him to love, leave the rest to me. Duke. If Rossina be serious! she shall want no assistance; —but Fernando can do more then all, if he will joyne! —we may hope success! Fern: I shall be willing to Endeavour as you desire, and doubt not [aside.] but Florio will imbrace such advancement, as you designe him; —I While he speaks this the Duke whis∣pers with Sil∣viana. wish it hartily, least the Dukes dotage preferre him to his Sister, who I fear may look on Florio, with some concerne, before I gaine an inte∣rest: —Silvianas Eyes have struck me through, Fame was short in her Relation. Duke. If it be not Rossinas good Fate to get his Love? I invite you Ladies all, to try the Magick of your severall Beauties, to ingage
him so by love, that he may live here with us. Princess. What all at once? the poore man will be smother'd with Ladies hearts; —you'l fright him from all our Sex Sir; pray let Rossina try her single Fortune first. Duke. Let us retyre and order this affaire Within, though it seem slight, 'tis worth our care. Exeunt Duke. Exeunt Duke and Princess: Remaines Camillo, Borosco, and Corbino. Camillo. The Duke is growne so fond of Florio, he regards none of us. Corbino. 'Tis two true, I wish we did know how to help our selves! Borosco. Methinks it were an easy work, to raise such jealousies be∣tween Florio and Fernando, as might make them destroy each other, and save us the labour. —I have put fancies in bold Fernando's Head, to make him Envy Florios interest in the Duke, and cast out words, as if his ayme were Silviana, and as if the Duke comply'd. Corbino. I shall take my time to second what you say; but let us consult farther, you Camillo, have the greatest losse of the Dukes sa∣vour, and if I observe you right, have envy, and power enough, to exe∣cute your Revenge: we must not great things attempt without good advice. — —Though our designe want neither skill, nor Wit; Being ill, it will aske power to mannage it. Camillo: I shall contribute what I can, to crush these strangers, ere they grow too strong for us to grapple with; but let us first advise the Duke, if our counsells do not prevale?— —Such Vipers must be smother'd in the Nest, Least they in time do blast our Interest.— —See, the Duke returnes; Corbino, speak you first, and we will second what you say. Enter Duke, and Servants. Corbino. Sir, wee have had a serious debate concerning the stran∣gers, and your favours to them; which they have bravely merrited! but yet Sir, some of your best Subjects have apprehension, that your Vallew may grow lesse for them, and they become remisse thereon. Borosco. He speaks my sense Sir; I would not live to see you loose your peoples hearts, by such neglect of them! Duke. What is your opinion Camillo? do I over vallew the bene∣fits receiv'd? from these new men! Camillo. I do believe you do Sir; and have begot a censure by it, I could wish were off againe. Duke. Of what kind Camillo. Camil. Of too much contempt of our own Nation, with a kind of Adoration! for the Strangers; as if they alone defended URBIN!
and by their Swords only! you expected Victorie! This Sir in duty, wee offer to your serious thoughts; who have Commands, our selves too high, to envie any honours, you can place on them. Duke. I did look on their merrits I confesse, above my recompence! and by my favours, hoped to raise their noble hearts to higher actions in this Warre: But I shall be more cautious, then to discontent my Loyall Subjects, who grudge such benefit, as I bestow on gallant men, that saved my Life! Camillo. Has what I said, offended Sir? Duke. No, no, 'tis your love of me, and care of my prosperity! Exeunt. SECOND ACT. Enter: — [Fernando, Florio, with Luco and Pedro.] Fern: NOble Florio, wee have had no time since we first met, to congratulate our good Fortunes here. Florio. It multiplies my happinesse, that you ap∣prove the Dukes kindnesse to me Sir. Fern: 'Tis somewhat extravagant I confesse; —such violent affecti∣ons seldome last, Florio. Florio. I could wish his favour somewhat lesse, lest it raise great mens envy on me. Fern: 'Tis well weigh'd, for I observe Camillo, with other Lords, look displeas'd at our advancement, pray observe them better, least I mistake. Florio. I see it too, and have endeavour'd what I can, to gaine their loves. Fern: That is wisely done, but you may secure your interest here, by marrying into some great Family; by whose power, and Allyes, you will be look'd on as a Native, or at least be able to contest with any, that shall designe against you. Florio. What you mention, was proffer'd me last night, with old Corbino's wealthy Daughter Mariana, and an houre after, I was advis'd to treat with Camillo, for his faire Neece Rossina. Fern: Which do you incline most too? Florio. They are Beauties both, and seem equally indow'd with Vertues, fit for their great Births; but I am preingaged, and can com∣ply with neither. Fern: So young, and so constant! is a wonder! (I see Borosco [aside.] guesses right, Silviana is his designe!) I here the Duke intends to wooe you for Rossina, and I hope you wisely will consider, what wealth, and honours will be propos'd with her; and not in a Romantick gal∣lantry,
preferre some slight promise made in your own Country, be∣fore so great advancement. Florio. I shall never entertaine a thought, that may change my fix'd heart, from its first Center, to gaine this Dukedome by it. [aside.] Fern. I do not like this ('tis the Princess!) may I know if your heart inhabit here? is any Lady of this Court, so happy? to gaine an interest in Florio. Florio. No Lady here Sir; I assure you, but by my observations, I find you are not free from a growing passion, (allow me but so much) and I shall soon guesse, that Silviana can be only worthy of Fernandos [He starts.] heart: —Why do you start? —why so amaz'd Sir? can you doubt to trust a person? you professe to value, as you have done me. Fernando. Remove but one doubt, and I am thine for ever; — does not your own desire that way, raise your jealousie of me? and make you enquire, what you fear to finde. Florio. By all that's good, — I have no wish for Silviana, but will serve Fernando with all my interest; pray Sir believe and try me. Fern. I do believe, and will trust thee with my heart; I love the Princess, and would gladly make some tryall towards my designe to gaine her; which is the true cause of my ingaging in this Warre: — and now Florio, I assure you my quality is such, as she may own my love, for I am— Florio. Hold Sir, I will know no argument but Fernandos worth, to ingage me to serve him. Fern. You are my good Angell hither sent. To guard and guide me in my Banishment. [They imbrace.] Enter:— An Officer to Fernando. Officer. My Lord, the Councell of Warre stay till you come to u'm. Fern. I follow, —Florio I have much to say when we meet next.] Exit Fernando. Enter.— Duke and Lords to Florio. Duke. Why Florio, do you absent your self so much? is Fernando a better friend then I? who dote more on thee, then Lovers on their Mistris Eyes, when their kind hearts comply. Florio. Though Fernando be a Noble Friend he has but a second place in my heart, — your favours are above the reach of any o∣ther person in the World! Duke. Now you flatter me, — I can allow you to entertaine a bo∣some Friend, of the other Sex before me, but no man Florio, must be my Rivall, this jealousie speaks my esteem, that willingly would have thee ever in my sight, as the best object to fix my heart on, that I may Emulate thy Vertues. Florio. May my ingratitude be highly punished, when I do value man or Woman, more then I do you Sir. [Embraces Florio.]
Duke. I have lov'd, or have believ'd so! and yet this Friendship [aside.] makes me doubt it now; unlesse Friendship be a mightier power then Love! But we find no shrines set up, nor any Altars burning Insence to this unknown Deity: The Antients sure were ignorant of this most excellent Divine Humanity! (call'd Friendship,) something is here about my Heart, I never found before; and of great vallew sure! My Sister else, would not have jealous feares to loose it; The ex∣cellent Fernando, has his dislikes too! and many of my greatest Sub∣jects cannot hide their Envy at my smiles on Florio! There must be something more then I discerne in this new kind of passion, which I have no name for! but an impulsive Friendship, which I cannot, nay I dare not wish were lesse; Florios person is clad in so rich Vir∣tues, as delights my Eyes, and captivates my heart, beyond all the beautious Women I have seen! so that while Florios virtues lead me on, I cannot doubt my fate, nor slack my admiration! [Enter to them, the Princess, and Ladies.] Duke. You look displeas'd Silviana, and something pale of late! Princess. I want your wonted kindnesse Sir; how can my looks be cheerfull? when Florio like a sullen Cloud, does interpose between the Sunne, that us'd to shine on me? Duke. You chide me kindly Silviana; and in returne, I wish Florio were a Prince, that I might part with him to you, and by so rich a gift, expresse my vallue of you both. Princess. My wish reaches onely to enjoy your conversation as be∣fore; I have no designe to rob you of your Soules delight in Florio, but do not like that he alone, should have you to himselfe, while I, and all the World do seem neglected! by which you suffer more then you discerne. Duke. Suffer Silviana! is it a Crime to vallue Virtue? or to be gratefull to the man has sav'd my life! my favours duely weighed, do not yet reach his merrit. Princess. I undervalue not his worth Sir; but grudge he should in∣grosse you to himselfe. Duke. Your judgment, by this jealousie, is Eclips'd; else you would with me discerne the inviting Arguments for such a friendship, as I desire to fix here! 'tis Friendship Silviana, a word so often us'd, and so little understood! that we loose the highest happinesse this World affords, not knowing how to improve so Divine a Vertue! 'tis unity of Soules, the Saints enjoy above, and take delight to see us practise here on Earth! 'tis Florios Vertue I admire, his rich heart I seek, a Treasure of more worth, then all the glittering honours, I can ever heap on him. Florio. What answer can I make to this? but blushes; let my blu∣shes Sir, speak for the heart you prize so much, too much! Duke. Come Silviana, if you will smile on him for my sake, he shall not rob you of my converse, pray let him kisse your hand.
Enter:— [Fernando in discontent, the Princess goes to Florio, and he kisses her hand. Princess. I will Sir; for I have a full esteeme of his great Vertue; — Florio merrits much, but not all your heart Sir; I claime a Sisters part; — Florio if I can serve you here? you may imploy me to my Brother boldly. Florio. Madam, I am many times surpriz'd by the Dukes favours, so much too high for me to own, that I do wish 'um lesse. Princess. That is beyond my desire Sir, I would not lessen his favour to you, but would participate my Brothers love. [aside.] Fernando. This is worse still! the Duke sets him on to court his Sister! but Florio is, I hope, too Noble to wrong me, that trust him; —and yet the Princess is a high Temptation, I must prevent the evill To the Duke I foresee, or I am lost! —The Enemies approaches do come on a pace Sir, wee must divert them with more frequent Sallyes, or they will lodge under our Walls, within few dayes. Duke. I intend this night, my self to Sally, and with all my power, to fall on their last work. Fern: That will be too much Sir; I dare undertake with a small party, to destroy all they have yet done. Princess. Pray brother leave this Sally to your Officers, and not on all occasions hazzard your own person; —may you not relie on Fer∣nando for his Conduct? Duke. It shall now be so, but you would never have me fight Silviana. Fern: Madam, you honour me so much, that I tremble at what I undertook; —I can encounter all the hazzards of a Warre, with lesse concerne; lest by an ill successe, I lessen your opinion of my conduct: — but yet thus Arm'd with your commands! it were a crime to doubt! —Great Sir; I begge the sole command this night. Duke. You shall Fernando, and I will rest secure, when so great skill, and courage meet with such a Noble soule, 'tis to be trusted, as my self were present. [The Duke presents him.] Fern: I begg the honour Sir to kiss the Princes hand, for this great favour done me. Duke. My thanks to Silviana for this value of my friend. Princess. Fernando has allready shew'd he needs no additions Sir. Fernan. I can have no addition, beyond your Highnesse good opi∣nion.— [Exeunt Duke, Prin∣cess, and Traine.] — My hearts ingaged by Silvianas Eyes, To waste it selfe in dayly Sacrifice; With smother'd sighes my doubt full state bemoane, Untill the Priest, and Alter make us one. Exit
Enter: — Camillo with Longino and the discontented Lords. Camillo. These Mushrums are grown steeple high allready!— to perswade the Duke against them, were to advance them higher. Longino. I differ in opinion from you all, these strangers come to fight for us, and you envy those civilities, the Duke affords them. Camillo: Is it so necessary; to have a favourite Longino? and he a stranger too! Longino. You talke as if we were Princess, and our Master at our di∣spose, he must heare, see, and like only what agrees, with our fancies, or our appetites does please, and so would make the Duke, the onely slave in his Dominions! not allow him the freedome of a friend, which is the highest humane consolation; unhappy men! whose malice, and ill nature, participate th curse of Hell, while you remaine on Earth; never discerning, or at least not relishing those Angelicall delights, which vertuous hearts enjoy, by loving, and obliging one ano∣ther in great Courts; and seldome happy those Princes, who permit detractors neer them. Camillo. You are too severe Longino, wee have no Traiterous thoughts, but set a true value on our Prince his favour, which wee feare to loose. Longino. I fear you have Malitious hearts, and then, I am not fit for your converse, that grumble at what you ought to thank Heaven for: —take heed that your ingratitudes, do not make our Lambe, put on his Lions skinne; and fright you into better manners. Ex: Lon: Corbino. We must not be so free before Longino, he has a graine or two of simple honesty, too much for us! —now he is gone, wee may proceede; —my Letter will destroy Fernando, if you approve it, and he gone, yong Florio will want skill, to order his affaires against us all I say let us down with Fernando first. Borosco. Let us see this Letter you so much confide in. [The Forged LETTER as from the Enemy.] FErnando, wee wonder you so long delay, what you so boldly un∣dertook, we know you have credit any night you please, to set open the South Port, next our new worke, and let us in! your reward is ready for you. Yours L.L. Camillo. This no doubt will raise a jealousie, but from whom must this be sent? by whom brought hither? and how found? Corbino. I'le say the Trumpet which came this morning to fetch a passe for a Herauld, about the interview, did loose it, I found it, read it, and my selfe will shew it to the Duke; who can disprove this? —
Camillo. Though I like not this shallow plott thus lay'd, I will your Councells with a better ayd. Exeunt. Enterance, Florio sitting, and Pedro standing by, as in Florios lodging. Florio. I am intangl'd Melina, in such snares, as I shall neer get out of. Pedro. Pray Madam speak that I may understand; —your snares, and intanglements, be Riddles to me; —love is love, and may be call'd so. Florio. Love Melina! is there such affinity between love, and hate? as thou canst not distinguish them, in me! Pedro. I allow you to hate the old foole you fled from; but me∣thinks the Dukes favours, with his so great merrit, might produce affection from the same Root, that affords you hate to one who has no merrit. Florio. Thy Argument may justifie a gratitude, fit for a Vestall Virgin to profess; but love (as I have heard) is of another nature, full of fine fancies, and such gay delights, as will neer comply with my de∣signe to Dye. Pedro. True Madam, but if you were so happy, as to finde an object fit to change your hate, to love; it would convert your thoughts from Death, and be a good Argument to live. Florio. Where canst thou fancy such an object Melina? fit to re∣store my thoughts to Joy, or life! Pedro. The Dukes love, deserves a Multiply'd returne of kindnesse from you. Florio. Canst thou believe his friendship to me as a man? can have any value for a woman wanderer? though no degree of love, have ha∣bitation in my heart, my Judgment, and Religion, might perswade me to own so great a blessing; if the Gods should send so strange deli∣verance! so wonderful a change of Fate! for my unworthynesse. Pedro. I like well these Judicious thought, and will hope your Mal∣lady may in time finde a cure, good natures slow with gratitude, and both together, fill the World with love; it is, or it will be Love Ma∣dam, though you yet discerne it not. Florio. The Gods defend our Sex, from such a president in me! a Woman to love first! would be a Prodigie. Pedro: All this I allow, so you will love the Duke, if he love you first. Florio. If thou dost think it possible, that I can be in danger of such a slavery as love? for heavens sake shew me a quick remedy; For all the stories I have read, present that passion, worse then hate; and in all Ages, has produc'd examples, to deterre our Sex from Love; though I am yet safe, the Duke is somewhat more then other men; — Give me an Antidote Melina, that I may be strong against the Duk's assault, if he make any! lest I find here a double invitation to the grave.
Pedro. You shall be provided Madam. Florio. He has a soule so full of Gallantry, so rich in Vertue, and so great renowne! I tremble at my second thoughts of thy discourse; and would not for the World ingage my freedome, on the hazzard of so high contest! if thou hast a remedy against Love? shew it now, that I may doubly Arme, against so great an Enemie! Pedro. I have a sure one Madam, that which cured me, and does cure all the World! 'tis the onely approv'd remedy. Florio. And shall I have it? if I stand in need! Pedro. Yes, if you please to Love him, that Loves you; and this is a remedy that seldome failes to cure by fruition. Florio. Thou art wanton merry, and talk'st thou carest not what, to make me so; can having what we wish most, lessen its value? Pedro. 'Tis but too plaine, by having our wish, we come to know, that our desires in love, had rais'd our fancy above what we can ever finde; This knowledge doth so check the wing of fancy, and desire, (that love) as a thing once past his height, must naturally decline; and fade; such is the generall frailty of all Creatures, to have the like cer∣taine period of decay; This makes some of our Sages, studied in the point, now teach, that vertuous transparent friendship, is a greater, and more durable felicity then love; but I believe you Madam have your wish allready, to the first part of this opinion, you are belov'd, where you love; and will in time judge of the whole argument, by your own experience. Florio. If Love be not Friendship too! 'twere a sad Fate to Love, but I am so farre from having what you wish me, this way Melina, that my dispaire, is my unhappinesse; —can the Duke love me a Woman? as now a man, when he shall finde his favourite Florio, such a counterfite! will it not beget suspitions of my credit? and all thoe glorious actions I have done, become my scandall? —Then if his dou∣tage should passe by all these just exceptions! may he not think my quality unfit to be his Wife? —These thoughts fill my fancy with such doubts Melina! that when I consider my condition, it makes me desperate. Pedro. And gives me hopes of better dayes, Madam! when the Duke shall know you a Lady of the same blood with Princes; and shall inquire the true cause of your disguise, he will be more in love then now; — pray let me informe him, and try your destiny. Florio. No Melina, no, I do conjure thee by thy first vow, and now by all my interest, not to discover me; for if I outlive this Siege, I will returne, and take a holy habit on me, lest my sex suffer by my folly, and the World, think I came co seeke a man, rather then avoide one. Pedro. Pray Madam. — Florio. Hold, I will here no Argument against my resolve; obey me, or you will destroy me; Love, thus I blow thee off! Death is my businesse here. Pedro. Though I do not approve what you think fit, I know I must to your command submit.
[Enter: the Duke to them.] Duke. Florio, I observe you love to be retyr'd of late, and I who seek your company, can seldome have it. Florio. My heart has no joy like pleasing you Sir; and my retire∣ments are most imploy'd, in studying how to shew my gratitude, that [Embraces Florio.] you may not repent the Honours you heap so fast on me. Duke. That's kindly said: —I heare Florio that Camillo proffers to settle a great Fortune on his Neece the Faire Rossina, if you can love her, which I do wish, that I may not fear to loose, what I see so much delight in! Florio. 'Tis an honour I cannot accept Sir, because my heart is pre∣ingaged unto another, so fix'd! that nothing lesse then Death, can ere dissolve it! Duke. 'Tis a cleare answer; but to me so harsh, I dare not inquire further; —and yet I must, or by my doubts shall suffer more! —Does the Person you love so much, live here? or may she be brought to dwell with us. Florio. The last of these is not impossible, and yet there is great difficulties to effect it; —pray Sir leave me to my own endea∣vours, and I may bring what you desire to passe, for your favours have so farre ingag'd me, that my Soule labours to contrive, how I may live ever in your sight; believe me Sir, I know no Joyes on Earth, be∣yond your favours to me. [aside.] Duke. Thou dost revive me Florio, —he (looks so great! that I could wish his fancy were fix'd on Silviana;) —may I yet know your quality? I have some reason to inquire, what may concerne your hap∣pinesse, and mine. Florio. Your Highnesse does forget your promise, not to presse, what does concerne me not to reveale. Duke. You chide me handsomely, — I onely had a suddaine thought, where to finde a fit match for my dear Sister Silviana. Florio. I can fit her Sir, with such a man, as all the Ladies of the Court will envy! —'tis Fernando, whose quality I know is greater then appeares. Duke. Thou hast dash'd all my hopes at once, I did wish you Florio, would have thought my Sister worthy of your selfe. Florio. And much too worthy Sir, I sweare by all my hopes, my heart is preingag'd where onely Death can seperate. Enter to them: The Princess and Ladies. Duke. You come Silviana aptly, to decide a difference between me and Florio, I was inviteing him to offer up his heart to you, — but he preferres your happynesse so much above his own, that he recom∣mends Fernando before himself. Florio. I Madam, and do assure your Highnesse, that Fernandos Birth does equall his great actions, and will be worthy your best thoughts.
Duke. Why thus conceald then? Florio. He is resolv'd by services to lay some obligations on you Sir; before he do reveale himselfe, as also to let the Princess see, what for her sake he ventures, ere he speak of Love. Enter to them: Corbino, Borosco, who gave the Duke an open Letter. Carbino. I found this letter at the Port Sir; as it dropt from the Enemies trumpet. Duke. To Fernando! give it him! Corbino. Pray read it first. Duke. Why should I read his letter? 'tis not handsome. Borosco. Such Ceremony in a besiedg'd Towne, may prove Prejudi∣tiall, pray Sir read it. Duke. Who open'd it? Corbino. I did Sir; when I saw an Enemy loose it; 'twas my duty to see the inside. [Duke reads it.] Duke: This is the Enemies designe, and was lost on purpose to be found, to make us jealous of so brave a man, that he may beat them no more; —Burne it, and say nothing, Fernando has given testimony of his Truth, beyond the reach of scandall. Florio. Does any dare to question Fernandos truth Sir? Corbino. Pray Sir, let Florio give his judgment on the letter! then burne it. [Florio reads and smiles.] Florio. This is easy to discipher, this comes not from the Campe, I suspect a neerer plot! Fernando and my selfe, are much envyed for your favour Sir. Borosco. Does your Lordship reflect on me, for such a guilt? Florio. If I did, you should soon know it. Corbino. Pray Sir; let not sine words deceive you, but consider Aside to the Duke. well all circumstances, and then judge if Fernando may not probably be sent hither by the Enemy, wee know not who he is, nor whence he comes! have no caution for his Faith; why may not he at the next Sal∣ly doe? what that Letter does invite! 'tis my duty Sir to advise you to send him out of the Towne, before the evill be too great to re∣medy. Duke. Your Zeale unto your Country Corbino, makes you too bold, to charge a seeming guilt, upon a Person of his Worth; groun∣ded onely from a letter let fall'n on purpose to abuse us; suppose they should Write the like to you! — I shall think how to finde this mischiefe out, and if within our own Walls, so base an Act be prov'd▪ it shall be severely punish'd. Enter Fernando to them. Duke. Fernando, you shall this night Sally, with what force you please.
Florio. Not 'till he has clear'd himself Sir, — read this Fernando. [He reads it.] Fernando. This is a light trick Sir; the Enemy that Writ this; is within our Walls; my name is not Fernando. Corbino. If a disguis'd person! there is more cause of jealousy, then I saw before. Florio. Then raise a double Jealousy, for my Name is not Florio; — when strangers would be conceal'd, we change our Names, — not to be hid from you wee dwell with; but from those at home, who may pursue! —Fernando and I are a like guilty Sir. Duke. I am not apt for Jealousies, nor can I see so foule a guilt in Fernandos face! —Sir, though Prudence might justify your restraint, I am above feare this way, — be still free, and command in chiefe; this night the Sally shall be wholly as you order it. [Offers to goe out.] Fernando. This considence would make a Traitor honest; but Sir, to secure your great Lords fear of me, I will retire, till I can Write an answer to the Enemy, such as will soone assure my Innosence; —but yet on second thoughts; I have a better way! — you will trust me Sir you say! Duke. I doe. Fernando. Then will I this night by my Sally, give them such an answer, as that letter does deserve: and if the guilt be within your own Walls! I shall make them blush at my returne, for aspersing of my innosence. Florio. I will be Hostage Sir till his returne, and suffer Death if Fernando do prove false. Duke. Fernando cannot by this Sally, more Confirme me, then I am assur'd before. Exeunt. THIRD ACT. A cry within, the Courts on Fire; Then Enter some of the Guard. 1 Guard. Where is this Fire? 2 Guard. 'Tis in Lord Corbinos Lodgings. 3 Guard. Knock, knock lowder. Enter Servants, and Mariana at the Window. Mariana. Fire, fire, come up and help, 'tis in my Fathers closet, the Fire breaks out there. [A noise within.]
Enter: — Duke, Princess, Rossina, Florio, and Traine under the Window. Duke. From whence is the Mischiefe? Borosco. 'Tis in Corbinos lodging Sir; I have sent after him▪ Mariana above with men and maids, throwing goods out of the Window. Mariana. The great danger is now over Sir; Duke. Pull down the next wall, that it passe no further. Mariana. My Lord Borosco, pray set some to guard our goods. She throwes down Baggs of Money, he heapes them up. Borosco. Have not our Enemies at home done this? to divert us in the time of sally, what newes from Fernando? Duke. He is but now sallyed, hark the Alarum is begun. Borosco. And the Court on Fire at the same time! 'twere good to double all the guards, there may be more danger in this Fire, then yet appeares. Duke. The guards are strong enough, send more hands to quench the Fire. [Enter Florio.] Florio. They have master'd the great slame Sir, but not yet quench'd the Fire. Mariana throwes down Baggs and Boxes one Box opens and out fails Papers. Duke. Looke to his Papers, put them in againe, — What's here? The Duke takes up a Paper. a direction to Fernando! see Florio! Florio. 'Tis a soul coppy of the forg'd Letter from the Enemy, 'tis the same hand Sir; now you see our jealousies are just. Duke. I shame to see so great a villany. While they compare the Hana Enter Corbino in haste. Corbino. My Closet burnt! and all my goods distroy'd! Oh un∣happy man! Duke. It had been well thou hadst thy self been burnt in it, look here vile wretch! what this fire has brought to our hands! —thou may'st well tremble at such a crime, for I will make thee an example, to terrify this Nation from like villany! — you of the Guard, devide all this Treasure among your selves, for your paines, in quenching of the Fire; —and Florio, see this wretch a close Prisoner; that Fernando may behold what punishment, such treachery shall find from me.
Corbino. Pardon great Sir, losse of your wonted favour, begot this envy in me, I beg your mercy Sir, Duke▪ Such mercy as so base a crime deserves, expect: —while Fer∣nando sheds his Blood for us, you stamp a brand of Treason on so cleare a merit! — — So great a mischiefe, with so base intent; No villaine but Corbino could invent, —away with him. [Enter Officer.] Duke. What newes from the Port? Officer. Fernando has slighted their last work Sir; and beaten them out of their new Trenches, he pursu'd so farre, that their whole Camp is now in Armes, while your Troopes retire in safety. Fernando is by this time alighted at the Court. Duke. Fernando has made good his undertaking, let us meet him with our discovery, to welcome his returne; —what will you do Silviana. Princess. I shall attend, that you may see I can To vertue bow, though not adore the man! Exeunt. Enter: — Clara, Marianas Mayde, at one Doore, and Pedro at the other. Clara. Pedro, where is the Duke gone? where the Princess? and where be all our goods? —I saw you under the window, when I threw down my red Cabinet; pray where be they all? Pedro. The Duke, and Princess, are gone to meet Fernando, but be∣fore he went, the Duke gave the Plunder of all the Traytor Corbinos goods, unto his Guards, who quenched the Fire. Clara. If my Lord be twenty Traytors! I am none, all my goods were thrown down with his, (but that Red Cabinet, Pedro!) doest thou know which of the Guard took that? Pedro. You are concern'd as if your Portion lay within that little compasse! —were all your Jewels there Clara? Clara. The greatest Treasure I have, is there, Letters Pedro, Letters of Love, from a Gentleman, that— Pedro. That, what? that has, or would do something, you are a∣sham'd to own! is't not so or so? Clara. Neither Pedro, there is nothing in any Letters, I shall blush at. Pedro. That may be too! —but say; are you so farre gone? as to admit of no other Suitor? Clara. Leave this fooling Pedro, he seeks me an honourable way. Pedro. Which of the honourable wayes? sweet Clara! Clara. Marriage. Pedro. Then I am safe, and may be merry without danger. Clara. Now you have talk'd me out of my conserne for my Cabi∣net, pray informe me who Florio is! and how it happens! that he has no affection, for any of our Ladies!
Pedro. If you will direct me to a Conjurer! I shall inquire, what Florio does impart to none; —Come Clara, let us not trouble our heads, with what your Lady, or my Lord thinks! but let us be merry when we meet. [He takes her Hand.] Clara. Keep your distance good Pedro, and then be as merry as you please! my credit is not in the Cabinet, as you suppose! nor yet am I at your dispose. Pedro. Why so coy bright Beauty? my approach is civell. Clara. I can neither by your looks, nor language discerne that! Pedro. If you were not ingaged unto the letter man! I should have shew'n my esteem of your perfections, in a more serious way Clara, I can now have no designe, but mirth, since you declare for a pretender, whose lines you lay up as Reliques! Clara. You did mistake me Pedro, I only said, that a Gentleman did seek, but I told you not, that he had found my heart, which is yet as free as yours. Pedro. I am catch'd! and must come quickly off: —dear Clara, I [aside.] would advise you, not to cast off a Gentleman, who truly loves you on vaine hopes of others liking! Clara. You are doubly deceiv'd now Pedro; I have no designe on your sweet Face, your Lord, and you, will be both secure in UR∣BIN, from being ravish'd by our Ladies, or their Servants! if you can direct! who has my lost Cabinet; I'le thank ye; if not! Adiew good Pedro. Pedro. I am glad I am thus freed. Exeunt severally. Enter Duke, and Traine; who meet from the other Doore Fernando and Officers: a Crye without of Ioy, from the People. Duke. Fernando, we bring you joyfull hearts, instead of such Tri∣umphall ornaments, as your high Actions merrit. Fernando. You honour me too much Sir, but if the Princess own my indevours! I may hope the scandall of that letter, sticks not on me. Duke. Wee have found the foul coppy of that forg'd Letter, in Corbinos Closet, and the Author of it, shall ere night, suffer as he deserves! Fernando. Pray Sir forgive him, as I do, his designe has done you good, I had not venter'd full so farre, but to wipe off that scandall; — and now Sir, for Marianas sake, I beg that you will pardon her old Father. Duke. She shall have all his Lands immediatly, but I must deterre others from the like horrid actions; —if I had believ'd him! and im∣prison'd you; what a mischiefe might that Barbarous beast have ledde me to! Princes who pardon such crimes, will neer be free from the like Vipers, who devoure the good Names of the innocent, 'tis our work to cherish truth, and vertue, and to banish such Monsters as Cor∣bino, from the converse of men: he is condemn'd to the Dungeon
while he lives! 'tis fit that you retire Fernando. [Exeunt Duke and Traine.] [Florio and Fernando stay.] Florio. Now they are gone, I will congratulate your victory, with some good hopes, that Silviana may comply. Fern. Florio is my good Angell still; yet I must pitty Thee. Vnhappie Youth, expos'd ino a crow'd Of Beauties, where thou freely art allow'd To looke, and chuse! invited to enjoy A full variety! in hope to cloye. Or ix thy fancies, which by Nature grow, Beyond the power of satisfying so! Flo. If Youth, of Beauty must be still afraid▪ Why were those Glorious Objects ever made? Beauty to Age, is like a painted Fire, Warmes not; though it create a faint desire, That mocks the appetite of Old mens Eyes, With Youthfull wishes, but neer satisfies; Cause Age repines, much oftner then recants Past follyes; still lamenting what it wants! Fern. If brightest Beauties cannot youth reclaime! Nor raise an Old mans fancy to a flame; By such experience taught, we may conclude, Our Passions, doe our Iudgments still delude; Which leads us on to Idolize a Face, Without inquiring the intrincique grace! Florio take heed, when Lovers soare too high, They seldome finde a lucky Destiny. Flo. My fortune, and my fate in love, will neere Be worth my care, nor worthy of your feare; I will within impart what I have done, And shew, how Silviana may be wonne; [Florio imbraces him.] Exeunt. Enter: — Camillo and Borosco with three Officers. Camillo. Corbino is got o at Fernandos intercession, and wee are safe. Borosco. Safe indeed, and freed from all imployment in the State, these strangers are now ix'd, unlesse you Camillo help us to re∣move u'm! Camillo. I have away to do it, if you Gentlemen will joyne, to free your selves, from this forraigne yoake. [All.] Wee▪l live, and dye with great Camillo. Camillo. Thus then fellow Souldiers, at the next generall sally, we will ingage our two young Leaders, into the midst of the Enemies, and then retreat so suddenly, they shall be cut in pieces, ere they see their danger. Borosco. Good, very good; but when will this Sally be?
Camillo. Suddenly I hope, for since Fernandos returne, my scouts bring newes, that the Enemies whole forces are drawn up, to counte∣nance their men, while they repaire the works Fernando slighted; so that when he has slept a little, I will set Florio on Fire, to seek their own destruction; by begging the command my self, that he and Fernando may take rest, which will inflame them to goe with us, as private men. Borosco. Loose no time then, for while such mischiefe cooles, VVe may be 'taine in our own traps, like sooles. Exeunt. Enter the Princess with Rossina, Philora, and Floremella. Princess. How faires Rossina? does Florio yet approach? Rossina. He has no time yet Madam, and I am not in hste. Princess. He loves but little, that cannot sin e a time to shew it. Philora: The love of such young men, is like stubble set on Fire; which gives so short a heate it warm's not. Princess. What is your opinion of Fernando's gravity? Philora. He lookes of late, so much concern'd, with his great Offi∣ces▪ that such inconsiderable things as wee, are not worth his thought, and is preingag'd to, I believe. Floremella. 'Twere well if any of us, could get one of these con∣stant Lovers, to change our breed! —our young Gallants, doe throw their Hearts at Ladies eas so fast; we cannot take them up, before we finde them tumbling at an others fet. Princess. A very good state Argument Floremella. — —Ift come to voting! thou shalt have my voice For both, or either of them, at thy choice. [Enter Florio to them.] Florio. Pray Madam, let these Ladies stand a little off, that I may impart an aaie of consequence. Princess. Rossina pray go not away, you are out of hearing now. Florio. 'Tis time Madam to let you know, that Fernando loves, and is of quality fit for you to own:  his respect so great, he presumes not yet to begge the honour of one visit, nor will own his quality, untill this warre be over, that his actions, may parallel his greatnesse; and yet for your sake Madam, is become a volunteere. Princess. I am oblig'd my Lord to you, that think me worthy of the man, you honour most! but I shall admit no courtships, from the greatest Prince in a disguise; nor is it fit for me to guesse at, what he de∣signes to hide. Florio. My businesse now, is onely to invite your Highnesse, to look on Fernandos actions favourably, and when his merrit has rais'd such a value of him, in your heart, as you could wish he were a Prince! I here ingage m honour, you shall finde him such. Princess. I have no wishes of that Nature Florio, nor do I fancy such a Romance; but who ere he be! that wares such vertue in so bright a case! he merrits my civillity. Exeunt.
THE SCENE CHANGES. Enter at one side Duke, Camillo, and Officers, at the other side Enter Florio a little after. Duke. What you have urg'd Camillo, I approve; and you shall sally with what power you please, since we have men enough, our frequent skirmishes, will weary their new Souldiers. Florio. Another sally Sir so soone! Duke. Camillo undertakes it with his Brigade alone; you, and Fer∣nando shall both rest. Florio. Pray Sir lay no commands on us to stay at home, when great Camillo sallyes; I know Fernando, will be more troubled then my selfe, our businesse here is to gaine experience, and we must loose no opportunity to learne. Camillo. Will Lord Florio allow us Natives, no time to shew our conduct? and our courage, to serve our Prince? without his assistance; as if he coveted, the sole glory of the Warre. Florio. You do mistake me my Lord, my businesse is to learne; I have no thought to Eclips your glorious actions, which I desire to im∣metate; and with your permission, do begg the Dukes leave, that Fer∣nando, and my selfe, may ight as Volunteeres, only to observe how you command! Duke. By no meanes Florio. Florio. I must not be deny'd Sir; for I allready suffer by my not sallying last, your people say, I have got honours, and offices enough, to keep me from farther hazzards: and this will be Fernandos fate too; if he goe not with Camillo! Sir, wee are resolv'd to be in every sally, which if you deny! our credits will call us to aske your passe, that so we may returne to our Countries, with our honours safe. Duke. If I cannot intreat! nor yet command your stay; I do un∣willingly consent; —Camillo, they are in your care. Florio. Wee will both waite on your Lordship. [Exeunt Duke and Florio.] Camillo. Was not this well design'd Borosco? I knew how to in∣flame young Florio so, as to presse on, to both their ruines: —we must charge home at first, they once ingaged, we will retreat, and leave them to a sure destruction. Borosco. His fancy of Volunteeres, gives oppertunity to place them both in our first Ranks, without jealousie. Camillo. And by them, I will place a score of my boldest men, with direction, that they suffer not the strangers to advance a foot before them, for the honour of our Nation: — You Borosco, shall stand with the Reserve, just without the Port, and my Order is, not to move till I send for you; which shall be too late to rescue our fine Gallants; I have given Orders out allready for a present sally; —wee must make haste; —
Before it do grow dark, that no mistake Our thus well order'd plot, may useless make; A mischiefe well design'd, we count halfe done, Before the active part, be yet begun. Exeunt. Enter from one side Duke and Lords: Enter on the other side Borosco. Duke. Is Camillo yet gone out? Borosco. They are, and my Troopes are drawing forth! Duke. Though I hope Camillo will have no need of your Reserve; yet be vigilant Borosco: be vigilant as you will answer it with your life! I have by much intreaty, prevail'd with Florio to stay with me. Borosco. I shall observe my orders, I have the Generalls di∣rection Sir. Duke. And mine! go now, lest you be stay'd for! —Longino, Exit Boros draw all my horse guards from the market place, immediatly unto the Port, but go not out, till I give you Orders; I will be ready too.— —Accidents in Warre, do too often show, That no experience, can all harmes foreknow. Tigillo. This is the strongest sally Sir you ever made, and yet you apprehend it most! Duke. I do indeed, take more care now, then formerly, because I now know the value of those I venture; besides a slight mishap to us beseig'd, may fright our friends abroad, from sending in their promised aydes: —I have intelligence Tigillo, of some Treacherous designe upon the strangers lives; Camillo envies them, but if any Plot to their prejudice appeare, Camillos life shall answer it. Exeunt. [Enter Longino with an Officer.] Longino. Never was sally thus trebly order'd! —we may thanke Florio for all this providence, and to say truth, he does deserve it; from the Duke, and us; though I feare Camillo loves him not! —hark, they are at it now, —this is my Post. Officer. All is not well, the discontented Lords, had private, and late meetings. Longino. The Duke has Spyes on them. Enter the Duke and Florio with his Traine: Tigillo meets him from the other Doore. Tigillo. Camillo does retreat Sir; on the first charge retreates! and hath left a small party ingag'd in ight! Duke. Longino. Longino. Sir. Duke. Leade my guards out, and bid Borosco advance with speed, or he shall Dye for his delay! Longino. I shall Sir. Exit Longino. Duke. This looks like a designe as full of mischiefe! as Camillos heart of envy; it makes me tremble, to think what danger, brave Fer∣nando may be in.
[Enter an Officer.] Officer. Camillo retreates Sir; in great haste, without a stroke re∣treates: nor will Borosco stirre, Longino cannot make him move; Fer∣nando is ingag'd past hope of rescue. Florio. Fernando is betray'd Sir: we must be quick, or he is lost! Duke. If Camillo still retreat! the designe is plaine; and time for me to hazzard now? Camillo dyes for this base Act, —This is the plot, this the treachery! death, and confusion fall on Camillo. —my Horse, my Horse. Exeunt. THE SCENE CHANGES. Enter the Duke, Florio, and Traine: Camillo and his men meet them at the Port. Duke. Where is Fernando? Camillo: Lost by his own rashnesse. Duke. Or by your base retreat, without a stroake, destroy'd! there's a reward for Treachery, or Cowardize, which you please! faces about! [Kills him.] —Tigillo, I command thee on thy life, to kill Borosco at the head of all his Troops, and lead his men after me: there mischiefe is too evident! Exeunt Duke and Traine. [Manet two Lords and by Camillo.] Camillo. I have my due, that did ill execute, what I so well design'd! our Retreate was too suddaine; not to ingage at all, made our designe [Dyes.] too plaine! — 1 Lord. This confession will please the Duke. 2 Lord. The noyse growes low'd my Lord, from the Tower, we may see what is doing in the Camp. A Charge afarre off, not low'd then a Retreat: Then Enter Duke, Florio, Longino, Tigillo and Officers. Duke. We came too late, to rescue brave Fernando! Tigillo. Borosco is dead Sir; as you commanded. Duke. I will reward thy courage, and thy faith Tigillo. —a thou∣sand curses follow those Traitors to their graves, death cannot expiate their villanies; —But we must now consider how to redeeme our Gallant friend! Florio. By a quick Sally, give them no time to breath; but with all your strength, fall on their head Quarters; and fetch him off by a strong hand: —give me the conduct Sir; and if I faile, Ile fall in the attempt.
Duke. This suits with Florios gallantry, and friendship to Fernando, but if your successe, prove short of your designe? he, and wee may so be lost:—I rather think to ransome him for Gold. [Enter a Souldier taken with Fernando.] Souldier. Fernando Sir is well, and by the Enemy well us'd, he has a small guard, and a great Tent, in the head Quarter, I got the word, and so escap'd. Exit Duke and Traine. Duke. Let us consult within. Florio. Stay Souldier, have you the word? Souldier. I have Sir; 'tis Ferrara. Florio. Dare you be my guide this night, to fetch Fernando off? if I with a few more, do hazzard to his Tent? which you seem to know! Souldier. Yes Sir, I dare dye in such good company! Florio. No more, take that purse, and attend me at my Lodging; I'le suddainly be there. Exeunt severally. The SCENE changes to a Camp, and in a great Tent — appeares the Duke of Ferrara with Fernando and Officers. Ferrara. Be not dejected Sir; such accidents in Warre, are frequent, and the bravest men most subject to your misfortune. Fernando. To be your prisoner Sir, is not my trouble, but to be betraid! so basely forsaken by Camillo and the rest, without a stroake! lookes like a Trechery, you understand not! —it must be so; Flo∣rio was too easily perswaded to abide at home! —there, there was the designe, for my captivity! that in my absence, he may be the man! —what is my ransome Sir; name the summe, and I'le procure it; — and returne like a consuming flame amongst 'um. Ferrara. No summe, no Ransome, for if I understand you right! the young favourite Florio has betray'd you, he jealous that your ser∣vices, might out-shine his pretences to the Princess Silviana, and make voyd the Dukes solicitations on his behalfe; (for thus my Camp dis∣courses) to my amaze and wonder! that the fond Duke should reject me; and chuse so unknown a man, as Florio! but if his designe be, to raise a private Gentleman unto his Dukedome? —'tis great injustice to chuse Florio, before you; — (I hope this angry man, will doe my businesse!) [aside.] Fernando. The Dukes doatage is so great on Florio, that he knowes no joy like his advancement! —But Florios falshood, calls my revenge▪ to cut off all his hopes that way, for if Silviana do consent, to Crown his aspiring thoughts! this hand, shall at the Alter, stabbe him to the heart. Ferrara. You are free Sir; and this moment may depart; all Cere∣mony lay'd aside, I take my leave; loose no time Sir in such affaires,
delayes are dangerous! Francisco, — command the Captain of the watch, to attend Fernando to the Citty gate. I wish you happinesse. Fernando. I accept your favour to depart, but am not yet resolv'd to what place. Ferrara. By all meanes returne to URBIN Sir; now you are free! —Let not Florio boast, so strange a Victory! Exit Ferrara. Fernando sits sadly by a Table a while silent. Fernando. I understand all your kindnesse Duke, but did not think, I had appear'd so tame! so meane! to remove Florio, for his pretence; Camillos treachery, was from a just envy, because he lost that favour, which I gain'd; —I can excuse him, and Borosco, on the same account, but Florio to comply! and the ungratefull Duke! —they merit my revenge.— —If guilty both! it is decreed; The Duke, and Florio both shall bleed. VVhile Fernando set silent Enter Florio alone, the rest stand at Doore Fernando starts up and drawes. Fernando. Treason, treason. [Florio drawes and sides with Fernando.] Florio. Guard thee Fernando, Ile dye by thee: but where is the Enemy? I see no danger! Fernando. Thou art my danger, what mischiefe brings thee hither in disguise! Fer: steps from Florio. Florio. Mischiefe Fernando! have you no better welcome for a friend. Fern: For such a Friend! that dar'd to sleep at home, when I was lost. Florio. Oh barbarous! you know the Dukes commands, and im∣portunities were such! as I could not refuse to stay; and you consen∣ted too; yea I have blush'd ever since, and come now by a greater haz∣zard, to wipe off that shame, which I could not prevent. Fernando. You rather come with this excuse, to invite me to a se∣cond trust, by which you, and the rest, may some more certaine way destroy me; but to such faithlesse friends, I shall returne no more. Florio. Does this hazzard, and my try'd friendship, merit such lan∣guage? the Duke too, is well repay'd, for his severe justice on Camillo, who himself, with his own hand slew, for his base Treachery to you: —and on his command, Borosco fell, by young Tigillos Sword: —what expiation do you seeke? what satisfaction for Camillos crime, can you demand? if all this be argument for so unworthy a distrust? how can innocence be justifyed? —Pray Sir take more time to judge of this, and now trust your selfe with me: I have the word, and can securely passe, I have a bold party too, who stand ready at the Port, to favour our Retreate.
Fernando. I need them not, I have my freedome, and have taken leave, can passe whither and when I please, but my Judgment on all this, I cannot suddenly summe up, and therefore will not goe. Florio. What testimony can you wish? what assurance have? be∣yond this voluntary hazzard of my life, to lead you to the Princess Silviana; from whom, you may inquire my friendship, and my Faith! if this be an abuse! you have then a cause to show your courage, and may call me to account! but if all this convince you not! leave me here a Prisoner, in your place; and so revenge those wrongs you onely dreame of. Fernando. No, to betray, is worse then to be betray'd! I scorne to act a treachery that I so much condemne in others; —I am now re∣solv'd to goe, and to suspend all further thoughts of jealousy or discon∣tent: —and if my passion for the Princess, hath mis-led me into unworthy thoughts of you, or of the Duke; I shall gladly do any pen∣nance you'l inflict. Florio. Your own sence, for your mistake, will prove a sharper pen∣nance, then we can wish. Fernando. Though I have Arguments for my distrust, Yet Florio, and the Duke may both be just! The End of the third Act. THE FOURTH ACT. Enter the Duke, leaning on Florio's shoulder, follow'd by Fernando, Longino, Tigillo, Lords, and Officers. Duke. TO what strange hight Florio! will thy daring heart aspire? at what point of honour rest! that I may rejoyce thy dangers past, without new feares for more ensuing ha∣zards comming on. Florio. The Gods directed what I did, and friendship could expect no lesse, Fernando would have done much more for me Sir. Duke. I do believ't, but yet methinks, your large soule might af∣ford some roome for me, so much a friend! as to be consider'd in my concerne for all the dangers you are in. Florio. Such a presumptuous thought in me, had been a crime, when great Fernando's life and fortune was at stake, against a compliment! Duke. I yield, Florio must ever conquer. Be Generall Fernando, and you Longino, Command the Horse; —Tigillo take presently the Citty Keyes from young Camillo, and be you Governor of URBIN; he shall know, that obedience to his Prince, is above his duty to a Fa∣ther;
—if any can make cleare proofe of more conspirators? they shall have all their lands, and goods for their reward; —now Fernando! did I apprehend with cause? were not my private cautions of Camillo, worthy your best Providence? Fernando. I could not guess at Camillos mischiefe I confess; so great a mallice! from a gallant man, I never met before; but when Envy, and Revenge (Ambitions twin children) doe wedd their Pa∣rents cause, no reason can so naturall a rage withhold, nor any limits such unbridled fury bound! when the high hopes, that all their fancies aym'd at, were cut off, by those honours heap'd on us. This makes me reflect with some compassion, on your severity to persons of their worth, who had no crimes, but what grew from too much val∣lew of your favour Sir; I wish that our successes had been lesse, or your rewards not full so much! Though narrow hearted Princes of∣ten blush at merits beyond their wills to recompence, yet some great soules like yours, too often overvallew, and reward such services as ours, when a kind mention, with a smile, would amply satisfie: pardon Sir my sorrow for the losse of those two great men, who fell on my account, that shortly must resigne all the envyed Offices I hold; and thereby shew how small an Argument their hasty Envy took for such a ruine as they design'd on me; which in few dayes might have been diverted; for this Siege ended, I must be gone Sir, as I have frequent∣ly to you, and them, declared in publike; and now to leave so many mournes, where I have deserved so well! will very much eclips my memory when I am gone. Duke. I have no argument but their crime, to justify their punish∣ment; though your clemency might have spared them; a lesse seve∣rity would not become me. 1 Lord. Camillo at his death, confess'd his guilt▪ and exclaim'd a∣gainst his own too hasty a retreat. Duke. We know too much of their conspiracy. Exeunt. Enter the Princess with Philora, and Ladies in her Chamber. Princess. I wonder why my brother stayes thus long, from see∣ing me. Philora. He has had but little time to order his affaires; Camillo, and Borosco being both dead, their commands are of great consequence. [Ent: Tigil:] Princess. I have not heard of the like villany! —what newes Tigillo? how does my brother? Tigillo: Well Madam, but much troubled for Camillos wickednesse, against those he so much loves; he sent me to excuse his visit to your Highnesse, untill he have dispatch'd some great affaires, that do require his presence. Princess. Are the two strangers well? Tigillo. Not both Madam, Fernando has some hurts: but nothing dangerous. Princess. Is not my brother much pleas'd to have his Florio safe return'd?
Tigillo. He is indeed, somewhat fonder then I could wish, but can your Highnesse fancy a fitter subject? for so high a concerne; who ere beheld a Nobler object? for a Prince's favour? Princess. I do not know so fit a man, to make his favourite as Florio; but to dote so much on him, as to consider none of us! takes from my Brothers Judgment, and lessens our love to him, I am glad to see him pleas'd, but to see him lost in admiration of a man! is not well; — Rossina come,— —Let us retyre, untill the Duke appeares, To raise our hopes, or satisfy our feares. Exeunt. As they are going off Enter a Servant. Servant. Madam, there is an Officer without, who desires accesse to your Highnesse, he has a Paper in his hand, he sayes of great concerne! and must himselfe deliver it. Exit servant. Silviana. Admit him, —Tigillo, pray stay in the next Roome. Exit Tigillo. [The Ladies stand off.] [Enter Officer.] Officer. Madam, I come from the Enemy, sent by the Duke of Fer∣rara, to mingle with your Troopes, which sallyed last; —amongst whom, I got into the Towne, thus in private, to excuse to you alone, the mischiefes by this Warre, brought on your People. He offers her a Letter, she refuses it. Silviana. No, 'tis beyond excuse Sir: but why this to me in pri∣vate? if from Ferrara sent! why not in publique to the Duke. Officer. 'Tis not his purpose Madam, to humble himselfe unto your [Hee kneels.] Brother, though Ferrara do desire thus to lay himself at Silvianas feet (to shew what love can doe!) his courage is too high, to stoope before the greatest Prince on Earth. [He rises.] Silviana. Tell your high hearted Master then, my brothers inte∣rest and mine, are so mingled▪ that neither his force, nor subtlest Art, can ere devide us; tell him I despise his Love, who with an Iron rodd does wooe; — his former Menaces became him better, then this flat∣tery; Ile heare no more. [Offers to goe out.] Officer: Then give Judgment Madam ere you go, on the guilty per∣son you despise; for if my love cannot prevaile! to excuse what I have done; Let me by your doome fall; —Ferrara is at your mercy. [Discovers himselfe.] Silviana. Sir; Your excuse is bolder then your Crime, thus to sur∣prize me in disguise, is as offensive as your Warre; and works the same effect in me, who see through all your designes, but can discerne no love! —'tis our Dukedome you expect, and so much labour for, not me.
Ferrara. This Warre, and my disguise, are both the effects of Love Madam, and at worst, can be look'd on but as tryalls, whether by your brothers, or your own aversion, I have been rejected! —I ledde my Army hither, to remove his constraint on you, (as I suppose) and now freely offer up my selfe a sacrifice, to your dislike, if by that I fall neg∣lected! such is the power of Love, it makes the greatest dangers, most delightfull! Silviana: Such Romances take not me, your first approaches, and all your Treaties were accompanied with such unreasonable demands, and such Rude threats; as shew'd you were a man of Blood; — no Characters of gentle love appear'd; — I remember also the Succession was your maine Article: that must be setled, or you would not have me! by which you bound my Brother from a second Marriage, and would take me, as an appendix to the Crowne! and through all this! I must now discerne your unvisible love! — no Sir, though the Princi∣pallity must be my beauties foyle, to raise esteem in you: I can set a value on my self, above the Dukedome you ayme at. Ferrara. Madam: Though I come hither, lifted high, on the delightfull wings of hope; dispaire must now be my Reserve, for my Retreate: yet thus by your scornes, arm'd for your Revenge; I shall rather smile, then shrinke at your Brothers malice: after this repulse from you! and shall glory here to fall, Lov's Martyr, at your feet. Silviana. You shall be safe from all harmes here Sir, —I will secure your safe returne, though I answer not your hope, you shall not suffer Enter Tigil: by this rash visit; —Tigillo, pray see this Officer safe convey'd to his Campe. Ferrara. No Madam, now I have put off that clowd, which did secure my passage hither, (by which my undertaking is perform'd,) to put it on againe, may looke like feare! as if I valued safety, at a higher rate then Honour? I will therefore with an open face, — —Now I have kneel'd at Silvianas feet, Pass on, through all the dangers I can meet. Silviana. My endeavours, and my wishes, do concurre for your security, but if you suffer ought, by your own rash choice: I shall take care that you have no pretence, to lay a blemish on my inno∣cence: —Tigillo waite on the Duke as I direct: —I will answer it to my Brother. Exit Princess and Ladies. Tigillo. I shall not doubt to do, what you command Madam. Ferrara: I am sad to think Tigillo, on those evills, which Silviana compells me in honour, now to Act.— — For since no submission, can make her relent, VVe are oblig'd to fight, though we repent. Exeunt. Enter Florio as in his Chamber sitting sadly, Pedro by. Pedro. Madam, What want you? will you think your selfe into the other World?
Florio. I wish I were so happy! no Melina, I am doom'd to more disasters here. Pedro. Pray impart the trouble of your minde, that I may argue on your griefes, a little to divert you. Florio. Thou wilt raise my distemper higher, by thy discourse! but yet I'le try; —I was thinking Melina, how much better it had been to have stay'd at home, and sufferd all my Fathers anger; —still saying no to his unjust commands; I might so have shew'd a much more be∣comming courage, by such sufferings, then thus by lying them; —for had he forc'd me to the Church! (so often threatned!) he could not there compell me to comply; — I might at worst, have dyed on that account, with honour! —as now with infamy! Pedro. If you pursue these thoughts! they will distract you; 'tis childish to look back, when you must pursue, the Fortune your first thoughts have led you to! —does not the Dukes love, grow higher and higher still? —why then do you create evills in your fancy? be∣yond what can happen! Florio. Oh Melina! had I not better dye? then ever own my selfe a Woman! when the Duke shall finde the favourite he dotes on, to be a transform'd wanderer! how will he hate himselfe, and me, for placing such a scorne on his great Name for ever: —I love, and ho∣nour him so much! I dare not seek the happinesse I wish, but must undiscover'd dye; —to save my reputation, and his Fame. Pedro. These are waking dreames Madam. Florio. And then, if Fernando, should discover me! how will his ho∣nour be concern'd? what vengeance will his just anger finde out for me? —there is but one way Melina, besides Death. Pedro. May I be trusted with it? you have made me Sadder then I look'd for. Florio. The Siege ended, Ile returne, and take a Cloyster; where I will wash away my shame, in Penetentiall Teares; —and if I dye before▪ I do conjure thee Melina, to conceale my sex; I have adventur'd what I can, to get an honourable death, and 'twill not be; which makes me apprehend, some sadder Fortune does attend me. Pedro. Madam: I have thus farre against my judgment, and my in∣terest, been wholly govern'd by you; but now I see you will destroy your selfe, I am resolv'd to let Fernando, or the Duke know your con∣dition, to prevent a greater evill. Florio. How Melina! wilt thou betray my trust? and prove a Traytor at the last! thou dar'st not do so great a villany! Pedro. Rather then see you ruin'd, I will do any thing! —what crymes? what guilt frights you into this dispaire? I will no longer be accessary to your destruction, now I can bring you off with honour. She offers to goe off, Florio rises and steps be∣tween Melina and the Dore, and drawes. Florio. Stay Melina, —so, now 'tis my fault, if you discover me, by all my hopes▪ 'le kll thee instantly, unlesse thou dost now sweare, not to reveale me; speak quickly: —for when thou art dead, I will by my own hand dye by thee.
[offers at her.] Pedro. Hold, and I will, —by this I swear, as you desire.— —But that I do a greater mischiefe feare, Your threatned death, should not have made me sweare. Enter the Duke who drawes and offers at Pedro. Florio steps in. Duke. False villaine, to lift thy hand against thy Lord! [Florio steps between.] Florio. I did assault him Sir, in my unjust fury. Duke. Florio has no unjust fury, Pedro must be faulty! Florio. By truths selfe I sweare he is not: the fault was only mine, [Embraces.] and Pedro has made me see my error: —look Sir, we are one againe. Duke. I do believe it now, —But what then has caus'd this great di∣stemper in you Florio? —am not I yet worthy to be trusted with your concernes? Florio. How can I expresse more value of your favours? then I have Sir, I wish not to live an houre beyond them, by all that's good, I do speak Truth. Duke. I know not how to urge a trust, you are resolv'd against: but I plainly see, you have a troubled heart, —say Pedro, what is that afflicts your Lord? is it within my reach? Pedro. Had you come a minute sooner Sir? you might have known, but now I have sworn. Florio. Pedro no more:—Great Sir, I do confesse I have a grief, which I do shame to own, least you should despise, what you now seem pleas'd with: for my heart knowes no griefe, but doubts to hold your favour! Duke. You can have no interest, that I will not make mine: Speak Florio, is it Silviana? Florio. No Sir, but what ere it be, I will in time orecome it, and ap∣peare before you with a cheerfull face againe: I beg you will no more inquire it, for I am well already; your kindness cures all the evills, ever can belong to me. Duke. And do I appeare so slight a man? that you can feare my favours cannot last! which still increase! you wrong me much, by so unjust a jealousie. Florio. No Sir, 'tis my own unworthinesse, that frights me; lest I in time, appeare uncapable of these honours you allow me: I finde the stock of credit I have gain'd, begins to fayle so fast! that my distracti∣ons make me giddy, on the thought of a senister Fate. Duke. No more of this it troubles me. —I am now going to my Sister, whom I have not seen since my last sally: shall I have your com∣pany? [The Duke imbraces him.] Florio. I attend you Sir. THE SCENE CHANGES. [They go off, and Reenter at the Princes Chamber with her.] Duke. I have had so much to do Silviana, I could not get free before: and am now come to beg your assistance, in an affaire of mine. Prin. Of what nature Sir: your looks shew trouble in your minde. Duke. My trouble is for Florio, who has some hidden discontent, that will I feare take him from us! —and I have hopes, that you may finde, what he will not reveale to me.
Princess. Do you take me for a wise Woman brother? such as deale by Magick; how is it possible? that I should know Florios heart? if hee'l conseale it! Duke. I onely wish you would inquire; —he may say more to you, then me. Princess. I obey you Sir: —pray my Lord be pleas'd to satisfy the Duke, by telling me, what those troubles are, he so much apprehends; and if the cure do lye within my reach, you shall command my best en∣deavours to serve you. Florio. I dare not dally with such Excellence; —one great trouble is, lest Fernando, (my deere friend,) should perish, by your neglects Madam. Princess. You see brother, he has no concerne of his own worth naming; he dotes on Fernando, more then you on him. Florio. I never can expresse more gratitude unto the Duke, and you Madam, then by recommending Fernando to your thoughts, what can be fancyed in a man? more then we all see in him? Princess. Birth to equall mine! Florio. Does that onely hinder? Princess. I cannot yet resolve you. Florio. I beg Sir, that you will obtaine me the Prince's leave, to bring Fernando to kiss her hand. Duke. I shall not deny your suite Florio, as you do mine; —Sister, pray admit his visit, when I appoint the time. Princess. You have my consent my Lord, when the Duke ap∣proves it? Flo. Madam, I prize this favour you allow, More then wreath'd Lawrels, on Fernando's brow. Florio kisses her hand and leades her off not seeing Fernando Enter. Enter Fernando who seeing this returnes in anger. Fernando. This is a dagger at my heart, Florio is false, and I too tame! Fernando going back. Duke. Fernando stay. Fernando. I beg your pardon Sir, for interrupting of your pri∣vacies. Duke. We have done, and were now parting: —What newes from the Enemy? Fernando. Our out guards have taine a Prisoner, who sayes, on some intelligence from Ferrara, they are resolv'd to storme us, as their last hope, and do prepare for it with speed. Duke. We will be ready for 'um; — Our VValls are strong, and men so brave within! Exeunt. Omnes. To startle at their storming, were a sinne.
[Enter Florio and Pedro.] Florio. I have got leave to bring Fernando to the Princess, on a private visit; but where to finde him, I know not! — 'tis some hap∣pinesse to do a friend that courtesy, which none can do for me. Pedro. Yes, I could do more for you, if you'l permit me? 'tis strange that so much wit and courage, should produce such folly, and such feares! —I finde my judgment, is worth twenty such as yours, and I must be bound by oath, to make no use of it. Florio. Pray leave dscoursing, and finde out Fernando; I would speak with him; —make hast, my heart growes light to think what joyes I bring Fernando. Exit Pedro. [Enter Fernando to him.] Florio. Oh Sir; I have sent to seek you! Fernando. And too soon have found me, thou grear dissembler! Florio. What meanes Fernando, by this injurious language to his friend? Fernando. I have no Eares to let in thy bewitching charmes a se∣cond time! Florio. Was ever Injury like this? what have I done, to loose your favour? Fernando. Thou Courtest the Princess, against thy faith given, and my trust; I have no words for such a Treachery as thine! those flat∣tering Eyes, and thy false Tongue, shall nere deceive me more. Florio. Can Fernandos great Soule, admit so meane a thought? of such a Faith as mine to serve him! Fernando. I have no time to talke, — Death is due for such a Trea∣chery as thine, were this place sit to throw my fury on Thee! Florio. You lessen your own worth Sir, by raising groundlesse jea∣lousies on me; did not my love, and innocence forbid! I would by silence seem to own the guilt you fancy, and with open Armes, now meet the Death you threaten; and I so often wish for! —But I am more your servant then you discerne, and dare not comply, to bring so great an evill, as shedding innocent blood! on Prince Lorenzos head! Fernando. Ha! dost thou know me? Florio. Yes Sir; or I would not shun death proffer'd from your hand! which I have by many hazards sought! though not on this ac∣count! —yet I can shew great Lorenzo, a better Argument then his unjust jealousie, to sheath his sword here! for I have (too confident of my intrinsick Vertue,) contracted such high guilts, your Highness never can forgive! (yet Silviana shall be yours.) Fernando. Though I understand thee not, thou hast said enough, to raise my wonder, above my anger! 'till I know more! Florio. Have you never seen a Face like mine at Pisa? Fernando. Not that I remember, or did ever know! Florio. Nor shall do now! —on second thoughts, your unknown Enemy, calls for Death Sir; I have wrong'd you much! and my selfe much more. [Florio opens his Armes.]
Fernando. No, thou hast charm'd me by some Magick spell, I dare not touch thee, —who art thou? Florio. You should never know, if by any hand but yours, I could by death have been conceal'd! —can you not yet call to minde your unfortunate Cousin Celestina, in this face? —have my crimes, alter'd me so much? Fernando. Celestina as a man! do all the wonders I have seen! can it be? Florio. Too true Sir: —pray let your Sword now do, what I have [Sh kneels.] so often sought from the Enemye! —I would dye Sir; 'twas my busi∣nesse here, and 'tis high time that I were dead, this place, this hour is fit for such a sacrifice to wrong'd Innocence; for I have defam'd Inno∣sence; rais'd a scandall on the name of Vertue! —the honour of your grear Family is concern'd in my disguise; if I survive this scandall I have rais'd? your Lenity will be condemn'd, as if you had comply'd! and so the great Name of Florence will be howted at! —but when I am dead, you may conceale my Name, and not participate my shame; who do now appeare so strange a Monster to my selfe! that I shall blush to death, if your Sword prevent me not. [He Imbraces and Raises her.] Fernando. Is lovely Celestina then! my envyed Rivall, for the faire Silviana. Florio. You have no Rivall Sir; the Princess sent me now to bring you to her, on a private visit: —do you believe me yet? Fernando. As an Angell sent from Heaven; I believe thee! but thy good newes cannot stay these Teares, for thy selfe now shed: —poore Celestina; I have heard thy sadd story, and thy ill natur'd Fathers Ty∣ranny, thou fled'st from; — all thy friends have mourn'd for thee as dead, or so lost! as never to be found againe! Florio. I am not so happy Sir! Fernando. Nor I so miserable to loose so great a friend; —how shall I devide my heart? between Silviana, and Celestina; to thee I owe my life twice sav'd, and all my interest in Silviana, by thy helpe gain'd: —all that I have, my being and my bliss, I must derive from thee; my deer, deer, Celestina. Celestina. This kindnesse is more comfort, then I did ever hope to finde on Earth! I wish that I coiuld die, thus happy, before the Duke does finde his Florio is a counterfeite! —I feare.— — His honour will ingage him to dispise, A wandring Woman, in so strange disguise. Fernando. Lay by thy feares, and put on such a hope as will become thy Vertue, and thy Birth; this Romance will end well, the fond Dukes friendship, will soon turne to love, when he shall see a possibility that Florio may be his! dost thou love him? Florio. I have not dar'd to entertaine a thought, that might lead me to hopes of such a happinesse on Earth. Fernando. Let that hope, take its first rise now from my Endea∣vours; for when I see my time to unmaske us both, i'le do it for thy
advantage Celestina; —but why did you thus long conceale your selfe from me? Florio. Feare to offend you Sir; which was my quarrel with Melina, who thretn'd to discover me to you, when the Duke found our Swords drawne. Fernando. Is Pedro Melina too! —where get you such manly hearts? and vigour to act such wonders! Florio. Alas Sir, I did but draw my Sword, and wave it 'bout my head, my weak blowes, were only in search of death; but it seemes the powers above, propitious to my innocence, have turn'd the rugged Fate I sought, into glorious Trophies I deserve not; discontent at first, then dispaire, threw me into all the dangers I could finde: — but this discovery, has reduc'd me to a Woman, I can now tremble at my own shadow, my courage is quite gone, and I now shake, to thinke, what I have done! Fernando. You must hold up your Character, till I see time to owne you, and to declare my selfe; which shall be suddenly, my deare Celestina, thou shall't be my good Angell still; —wee'l visit the Princess, and first reveale our selves to her; — trust me to mannage your interest with the Duke, as you have mine with Silviania; wee must now prepare for the great Interview:—which the Enemie so much desires; —take courage Celestina, — —Where Beauties force, with vertue does combine, They cannot fayle to prosper a designe. Exeunt. THE FIFTH ACT. Enter Clara, and Pedro severally, in great hast. Clara. DEare Pedro, take care of me, they say we shall be storm'd, and sack'd! pray what is sack'd? Pedro. All the Mayds above fifteen years old, by the Enemy found in Towne, must be put in Sacks, and thrown into the River. Clara. This is a short warning, to provide against so great an Evill! but I hope you may finde favour to preserve me, sweet Pedro take me to thy care. Pedro. I shall do my best for thee, if I fall not in the Assault! a good Day pretty one. [Offers to go, she holds him.] Clara. Why in such haste? Pedro. I am commmanded to attend the Interview, and must be gone.
Clara. I understand not what that is! Pedro. Why, 'tis a Committee of Inspection, on the Princess Silviana. Clara. You confound me Pedro, with hard words, is it any thing about the Sacks? and the River! I am so afraid! I know not what to doe! Pedro. Take courage Clara, I will preserve you, as my friend: I shall be missed, if I stay longer now! Clara. Thank ye deare Pedro; —but I will hide my selfe how ever! —This young white liver'd Boy may courage lack! To keep me from the River, and the Sack. Exeunt severally. [An Interview.] Enter At one Doore the Duke of URBIN, with Fernando, Florio, Lords, Officers, and Guards, who range on that side. Enter The Duke of Ferrara, with Lords, and Officers who range on the other side. Enter The Princess Silviana, with all the Ladies, who stand under the SCENE, between the Rowes of Men. Urbin. What be your demands Lodovico? what is the Argument of this Parlye, you have desir'd. Ferrara. Silviana is my Argument, whom you detaine more like a Prisoner, then a Sister you ought to love, and honour, by matching with some Prince, fitter for her Birth, and Beauty, then a Nunnery! which your thrifty kindnesse, would perswade her to. Urbin. And you bring us this Warre, with your advise, to teach us better purposes! Ferrara. I do! lest my councels prevaile not; —I have at a di∣stance profess'd love, and treated long in vaine, which brings me now in Person, to demand Silviana from captivity. Urbin. Is it her Person, or my Dukedome? you expect? which invites you to this insolent way of Wooeing? Ferrara. 'Tis both, and what both our Parents did designe, when we were Children, in case you left no issue Male. Urbin. Silviana is now of Age to please her selfe, and if she desire it; I may treat farther on fit Termes. Ferrara. Madam: I have wav'd the common way of wooing, to appeare before you with such an Army, as will justifie my love, great as my selfe! and worthy of your best favours; which I feare your bro∣ther does obstruct.
Silviana. I never heard 'till now, that love, and terror, did inhabit in one brest; fright me you may, but winne me never, by the desolation you have made; a lover by such bloody Characters set off, is what ever I shall flye from.— Urbin. Now Sir, does this shew my compulsion for a Nunnery? Ferrara. I see she has her lesson perfect, you all comply, to send me home with scornes! yet I must lay before you, the evills of a Towne taken by assault, where fire, and sword, do often without limits sway! which is my last argument, and what I hope; will invite Fernando (who knowes the accidents of Warre,) to mediate such a Peace, as will divert the desolation that may follow. Fernando. 'Twill not become me, to advise against the interest of the Prince I serve; — For if my intelligence be true! your Citty of Ferrara, is, or will soon be; in more danger of the Fire, and Sword you mention, then Urbin at present is: —'twere an Infamy irreparable, to suffer the Princess Silviana, to be ravish'd from her brothers Arms, by one she is so much averse to! —such force Sir, can have no pretence to love! [to the Duke] Ferrara. Are you of that opinion too? —Sir; this confirmes what I have heard, and what in my Camp so freely is discours'd! that your great Generall, is an ambitious Lover; — But if Silviana can submit to so meane approaches! I shall scorne the competition, though in my just anger, I lay this Citty Levell with the Earth. Fernando. The meane Generall you slight so much, has never yet presum'd to look with confidence, on the faire Princess Eyes; so farre from daring to pretend, or own that love you so boldly guesse at! that my adresses are yet cloathed in the humble habit of a Servant; to be Silvianas Souldier, I account more honour, then to be Ferraras Duke.— Ferrara. This insolence, I shall in few Houres correct. Fernando. You judge amiss, and will in few houres finde, this hand can crush Ferrara into Ayre! — —When every drop of Blood in Urbin shed, Shall be repair'd with a Ferrarians head. — But that I dare not do any thing that looks like ingratitude, for those favours I received, when I was Prisoner in your Campe; though I know the freedome, which you gave was on designe that my inra∣ged Revenge, might open you a way to your pretence for the Faire Princess: —yet benefits receiv'd must be own'd, as they appeare unto the World! and on that account, I can forget these reproaches, thrown out against you know not who! and aske your pardon for my too hasty, harsh reply, and imbrace you as my friend, I, and serve you too! in any way, that will not prejudice my Faith, ingag'd unto this Princess. Ferrara. This calme language is more insolent, then your pretence! which I scorne alike; Arme you for defence, lest we give Lawes to your high courages; — Madam, I have no wish so ill, for your con∣tempt of me, but I can sorrow to see you fall so low, as this Souldi∣ers love.
Fernando. Madam, Thus often urg'd; I beg your leave to chal∣lenge this great Prince, to a single Combat in your sight, then judge by our successe, whether Fate approves of my humility, or of his insolent [Pats off his Perriwig.] demands! —see Lodovico, your Rivall is your equall, and my Army now, by my command is at Ferraras gates: —yet Ile take no advantage of my power, (so much more then yours!) but with my single sword, will justify my love to Silviana, does transend all your pretences; and yet before we fight, I once more proffer you my friendship, with a faithfull heart. Ferrara. Lorenzo Duke of Florence! who we thought in France: I accept the Combat, and with my Sword will justify my claime, a∣gainst so brave an Enemy. Urbin. This combat I must not allow here; — Lodovico, if you reject the Duke of Florence friendship! and contemne mine: you may retire in safety, but if you please to storme us: we are prepar'd to smile, when you frown most. Ferrara. Those frownes you slight so may prove Fatall unto Vrbin. Exit Ferrara. Urbin. Why have you made such hazzards, in this disguise Sir. Lorenzo. My Fathers sudden death call'd me in hast from France, where I heard of this Warre thretning you: —I shall informe you at more leasure, how I became concern'd for Silviana, which brought me in this disguise to her rescue. Urbin. How can I returne this obligation! to a Prince, so much greater then my selfe? Lorenzo. One smile from Silviana, will be a full recompence for all my service; on that foundation, I shall raise high hopes, that she ap∣proves my love. Silviana. Smiles are but slight expressions of a gratefull heart Sir; but if you can build the Noble structure of true love? on such uncer∣tainties! I must consider of so weighty a concerne, before I smile: — Love is a History, so many wayes describ'd, I do not know a harder riddle to expound, then what Love is. Lorenzo. Love is indeed a Mystery, full of such strange varieties, that all the World endeavours to fix it, according to their own fancies; so absolutely contradictory in most men, that some think lov's Centrick happinesse, will neer be found; though all pretend to have it. But Ma∣dam I am guided by those Rules, that Heav'n directs my worship unto it; — my whole heart is wholly yours, and my unforc'd Marriage is the undoubted Testimony of that truth; all meaner passions which we in gaytye call love, deserves a meaner name; —when I lay my life, and for∣tune at your Feet, and set my Crown upon your head, I have no better arguments for Love. Silviana. Nor I a thought that contradicts what you have said Sir; but dare not rashly answer your desires, lest it suit not with the esteem you have of me. Vrbin. No more of this now Silviana, —we must prepare for an as∣sault; — 'tis their last hope! Lorenzo, whom will you appoint for General? Lorenzo. Who but Silvianas Souldier! can pretend to that honour Sir; give me your Orders as before.
[Loren: reads the Orders.] Urbin. I obey, — this Paper does order every man his Post, by which you see I have had thoughts of this before. Lorenzo. I wish Sir, you would change Florios Post, and give him the charge to guard the Castle, where the Princess may be by him se∣cur'd, from all accidents. Duke. I thank you for this care, it shall be so. Florio. How have I deserv'd this from you Sir? Loren. You have enough deserv'd my care Florio, and I who know the Duke would account your losse, (next to his Town) the greatest do justify my councell, to have you as safe as honour will allow. Duke. Lorenzo is my friend. Florio. But not mine, give me leave then, as I ought, to lead my guards where your selfe fights in person Sir, and I will be content to change my Post. Lorenzo. Let it be as he desires Sir; yet I must againe advise you to secure Florio next your selfe, he may prove worthy of all your care, and of your highest favour Sir. Duke. He is allready so, but you speak in a misterious tone me∣thinks! Lorenzo. This assault, I conceive will be their last attempt, and I would gladly prevent a mischiefe that may trouble you; — I know Florios worth now, —get my Arms Luco. Luco. They are ready Sir. Exeunt Lorenzo, and Luco. Duke. Lorenzos words, and his behavior show, Something of Florio, more then I yet know. [Enter Town-Officers to the Duke.] 1 Officer. Sir? by the severall noyses in the Campe, 'tis evident they make ready for an assault! 2 Officer. We have faire warning to defend our selves, our men are mad to be upon the Wall. Duke. Lead them presently unto their Ports, as great Lorenzo shall direct: 'Twas bravely done to give us warning, and to keep his word, shewes mettle Gentlemen! —where is Prince Lorenzo? and where Florio gone? 1 Officer. We met them just now Sir, in the Lobby, which joynes to the Princess Lodgings. Duke. This is no fit time for complements, —go to your severall commands, I shall be with you suddenly. Exeunt severally. Enter Lorenzo, Florio with the Princess in her Chamber, the Ladies stand off. Florio. Madam Lorenzo beggs the honour to kiss your hand, before the assault begins, that as your Souldier he may fight this day. Princess. Forenzos merit, justly may expect what I can serve him in. Loren. Madam; I seek not yet a favour beyond your owning of me for your Souldier, —I suppose my actions, and my looks, have better shew'd, then now my language can, how much I love!
Princess. It did not become me to inquire more of you Sir, then you were willing to reveale, yet Florio long since did let fall words, to make me know your quality, did equall mine; and I only wonder'd why you thought not fit to trust me with it. Lorenzo. Because I would first know your opinion of me Madam, else my Name, not I, might have wooed for me, and if thus I had been rejected! I might have retyr'd in my disguise, without a pnblique scorne, of being refus'd; which Ferraras prow'd Duke, would have much rejoyc'd at; but if you Madam will so farre honour me, as to allow your Souldier now to kiss your hand, on his hope of future hap∣pinesse, I have no doubt of our successe. Princess. Yes, and shall have my prayers for your Protection. Lorenzo. May your happinesse, equall your vertues Madam, I must hasten to the Walls. [He kisses her Hand.] Florio. When I have brought the Princess to her lodgings, I will finde out the Duke, and follow you. Princess. You shall go now Florio, this is no time for Ceremony, my brother is unsafe, when you are from him.— —Heaven guard the Innocent, and only smight, The bould invadors, of anothers Right. Exeunt severally. [An Alarum farre off.] Enter Officers they meet the Duke, who enters at the other Dore. Officer. The enemy comes on so fast Sir, you can hardly reach your Posts in time. Duke. I come, —Lorenzo is by this time on the Walls, haste every man unto his Post. [Enter Florio.] Duke. I was sending for you Florio, —call for my Armes, and bring those I bespoke for Florio too, we will put on our Armes together, and fight neer to one another; —make hast. Enter with Armes for both, they speak as they are Arming, Florios Armes are like those of Pallas. Flor. Let me retyre to the other Room Sir; and put mine on there. Duke. No, I will have you Arme here, that I may see how my fancy sits you! Florio. I feare Sir, that this may look like such a presumption, as I dare not own; — to be thus habitted, will raise a Censure on me. Duke. On my head let the Censure fall, 'tis my will; —make more haste, lest we be miss'd! Florio. I am at your dispose Sir. Duke. Be vigilant, but not over bold; let judgment guide thy [The Duke Armes as he speaks.] courage Florio, that no blow fall in vaine; —reserve thy greatest vi∣gour, 'till some eminent occasion call for such reliefe, as may be worthy of thy hazzard.
Florio. I shall observe all your directions Sir, my chiefe businesse is, to guard your Person; which if I do not! let the Gods turne from me, when I call on them. [He looks on Florio with wonder.] Duke. I shall be safe in thy care I know, —methinks this Coppy, does equall the best Originall, I ever saw presenting Pallas; stand off a while, that now Pigmalion like, I may adore the figure I have made; —though nature bravely had her part perform'd before, yet Art, and fancy I perceive, may such additions give, as will natures best work∣manship set off. Florio. You make me blush so much Sir, that I shall forget to frown, when I shake my javelin at the Enemy. Duk. Thy smiles will make that weapon useless, on all that do behold thee; —though we to Dieties alone our Temples build, and shrines set up, if Florio be this day, as prosperous as before! I will for him a Golden Statue make, that after ages our Palladium may extoll, above that unfortunate, fam'd Patroness of Troy. [An Alarum within.] Florio. Hark Sir; we may be wish'd for, while we dally here. Duke. Come then, the Victory must sure be ours, —the Enemy will sooner charge a flaming Cloud, then Florio in this dresse! Exeunt. [Enter the Princess; with Phylora and Floremella.] Princess. The assaults begun Phylora, and my brother not yet there! Philora. Lorenzo orders all, and we are sate by his great courage, and his skill in Arms; and yet by this noyse round the Towne, it seems the Walls are every where attach'd. Princess. 'Tis so Philora, and we are a lost prey, to their greater num∣bers, the Temple is a fitter place for us. Philora. The Gods are every where, and our good wishes are re∣ceiv'd as prayers. Princess. That shout was from the Enemy, now I dispaire! Philora. Your feares create mistakes Madam; that shout was neere us, it must be from our own men! that joyfull noyse was victory to us, it can be nothing lesse then victory! where is that courage sled? you had the other day! when I was frighted without cause. Princess. A Towne thus storm'd! has somewhat more of terror in it, then all the former sallyes had; my heart shrinks now with appre∣hension, and dismay. [Enter an Officer.] Officer. Madam, The day is ours, the Enemy is quite beaten off, and the great Duke of Florence, with Longino in the head of all our Horse, is now sallyed on the Reare of the Retreating Enemy. Princess. My thanks to Heav'n for our successe, —the severall noy∣ses from the Walls, created such variety of feares, that I was much dis∣may'd till you came in. Officer. There was argument enough for apprehension Madam▪ for the Wall was gain'd, and the Duke your Brother, sore opprest with multitudes, was beaten off; and fall'n amid'st the press, where his high
courage, rather tyr'd, then vanquish'd, had been lost; if the all conque∣ring Florio, with his guards, had not come timely in to his reliefe; who with such vigour, and such force renew'd the fight, that the amaz'd Ene∣my, ran headlong from the Walls againe, and struck such terror in the rest of their assailing friends, that altogether sled, in great confusion to their Campe. Princess. All this I do rejoyce at; but methinks those shouts of joy, are chang'd into a dismall silence on the suddaine! why do not the streets ring, with acclamations for our Victory? good Heav'n preserve the Duke, I have some apprehension that he may be hurt. Officer. No hurt appear'd at my departure, only Florio was beaten down, by an accidentall shot, at randome from the slying Enemie; after which, I saw him stand; though but weakly. Princess. Let us retyre Phylora, till my brother does arive. Exeunt. Enter the Duke with others his Shirt bloody, bearing in Florio, neere dead, they set him in a Chayre, with Pedro, helping to dresse him. Duke. A Surgeon, a Surgeon, my Dukedome for a Surgeon! —gently, gently set him downe, Florios death strikes deep! friendship I finde takes faster hold on hearts then love! —poore youth, he slew quick as lightning to my rescue, and as I fell, (oppress'd by Multi∣tudes;) he scatter'd them like frighted Birds, at an approaching storme; —and thus by saving me, has lost himselfe; by an accidentall shot from the beaten flying Enemy! —but sure the Gods will not permit, that so great vertue from the World be taine, lest offended Nature into its first Chaos shrinke.— —Through suddaine horror, and a just disdaine, To hold the World up, after Florio slaine. [Enter Surgeons.] Duke. Now Surgeon shew your skill, while I powre out my prayers to Heav'n for his recovery. [He leanes against the Wall and weeps.] [Enter Silviana, and Philora, with Ladies.] Duke. Oh Silviana! I am undone, —Florio is slaine, friendship is ravishd from the earth! and all my joyes sled with it! —speak Surge∣on does he live? Surgeon. Here is life Sir, but little hope of long continuance, unlesse what we apply, do suddenly shew better signes. Duke. By what unknown crymes have I provok'd Heav'n? when vertue is thus punish'd! thus to shew me Paradice, and cast me into Hell, is more then Nature can submit to, and not repine. Enter Lorenzo, and Longino with the Duke of Ferrara prisoner, and his Officers prisoners. Lor. We bring you joy Sir; and a full viory, with this great prisoner. Urbin. Here is no roome for joy Lorenzo, I am destroy'd by victo∣ry! see where Death in Triumph sits! prowder of that prey, then for all the Heroes in past Ages fall'n.
Lorenzo. Ha! Florio slaine! how could this happen after I was gone! and the day wonne! — I may now curse my selfe, for not pre∣venting this, —how short are those glittering joyes we so much la∣bour for! when all the glories we have gain'd, are in a moment turn'd into heart breaking griefes! —I am undone too! [Lorenzo weeps over Florios head.] Urbin. He receiv'd this wound in rescuing me; —can bold Lorenzo weep? and be so much concern'd for me? —is he as great in sorrow? as in Armes? —will he outfight? and now outweep me too! ye [Duke leanes over Florios Head on the other side.] powers Above! if ever you heare prayers from a sad heart sent. —Let Florios soule and mine expyre together; —Oh Lorenzo! you cannot fancy what I feele! the losse of such a friend, is unsupportable; Lorenzo. Alas Sir, your sorrowes will go higher yet! when you know who Florio is! —I have a greater losse in Florio, then you dis∣cerne, or can pretend to! which will no longer now be hid: —hold Surgeon, —and let the Ladies help to undresse her, she is a Lady, and my neer relation Sir, who loves you more, then you love Florio. [He starts from the Chayre.] Duke. A Woman Lorenzo! Oh do not mock me with a hope to make this losse beyond Mortallity to beare: a Woman! let me gaze on this dying wonder; 'till my Eyes drop out, —(and lov's me, as I do Florio!) that is impossible! —this is a fatall blow indeed! —Oh Sister! now your help! —Surgeon if she live, thou shalt be, what∣ever I can make thee great: work, worke, apply the rarest remedies, —some help from Heav'n, or I am lost! a Woman! Florio a Woman! and in my rescue dye! and love me too! Oh this is much, too much to know, and to outlive. [He lies on the ground.] Surgeon. Pray Sir, a little patience, her Eyes have some small moti∣on now, —Ladies your help is usefull here. [The Duke rises.] Duke. Gently deere Silviana, kind Philora gently, every touch she suffers, grates on my heart; —Florio thy love was not well mannag'd; — the more I think, the more I am amaz'd! — give her life, or strike me dead! a Woman! Lorenzo. I Sir, a Woman, and of Noblest birth! [The Duke kneels and holds her Hand.] Duke. I value not her birth, 'tis Vertue thus adorn'd, that I adore! [He kneeles and hold her head.] — blest figure of those shapes which do inhabit Heav'n, — she looks up Silviana! and may live! runne good Alphonso, runne. Alphonso. Whither Sir; and why! Duke. Fetch my Mothers Diadem, and Royall Robe, flye now Al∣phonso Exit Alpho: flye! — I have a thousand thoughts at once; what Triumphs I will make, what Trophies raise! if my Faire Saint survive; — but if she dye! these glitring fancies will be drench'd in Blood, Lorenzo! I will swimme in blood, to overtake her Ghost, when ever she departs. Surgeon. Now she is drest, pray give her leave to rest a little. Loren. My Prophetique soule foresaw some mighty evill towards, when I desir'd that Florio might not fight to day. Duke. One word of Woman, had prevented all; —to conceale her Sex Lorenzo, was as cruell, as unkinde; that known; she had been safe, and I most happy. Lorenzo. I now wish that I had broke my Oath to Celestina, and run all hazzards by it.
Duke. Now I understand those her misterious vow's, so often made to me; which I then took for gratitude; —how blinde was love! —ra∣ther how powerfull is thy Deity, Oh love! what mighty things do those by thee inspir'd produce? when the weak hands of this soft sex, can raise such Emulation in the bravest men! —and can outdoe us too! in what they undertake: —how strangely dull was I, that did not all this while by sympathetick Love, her Sex discerne, through this dis∣guise? Enter Alphonso with Crowne and Robes, the Duke puts them on Florio as he slumbers. Duke. Helpe me Lorenzo to put on these Robes, — so, — now Sir, you shall see that I do credit what you have said; — and in assurance of her love to mee, here in the sight of Heav'n, I take this Lady to my Wife; thus she shall live, or thus dye my Dutches; — Silviana, — [He looks at Florio ear∣nestly.] Our victory does yet so dismall show, No ruine could have caus'd a greater woe. —My heart, my heart Lorenzo, shrinks away so fast, that I shall fall; —how dull were we Silviana? to think such beauty could belong to man! [Leanes on Alphonso.] Princess. Or such courage be in Woman found! Duke. Lorenzo, I am distracted with so many wonders breaking out at once! that my shatred heart, can yet finde no joy to entertaine so great a Guest as you; nor inquire what accident did bring you hither? Lorenzo: Fame of Silvianas Vertues, brought me hither Sir; where I unlook'd for, met, poore Celestina, my unhappy Cousin, who — —Did, from her Fathers rigid kindnesse flye, Led by her starres, to this sad Destiny. [The Duke imbraces him and weeps.] Princess. Did ever any Age such mischiefe know? Or two such courages such sorrow show? Duke. If Celestina live? Urbin shall shine in Triumphs, to speak Lorenzos welcome: —but if she Dye, I have no life that I can call a mi∣nute mine; I must not, will not, cannot survive so great a losse! Princess. She wakes, she wakes! and looks up cheerfull. [The Duke kneels and holds her hand.] Duke. Flye to the Temples, and rich insence burne, proclaime a publique Feast throughout the Towne; let all the holy Orders in Pro∣cession go, make solemne vow's to Heav'n, for Celestinas life! —Now let the Citty, there Devotions pay, For Victory; and keep this Holliday! [Celestina wakes, speaks faintly.] Celestina. Is this a vision? or is it reall what I see? these Robes I understand not, —the Duke kneeling! the Princess, and Lorenzo wee∣ping! — I do either dreame! or I am dead! — why all this to me? Duke. To the Dutchess of URBIN, this is due; Heav'n Celestina has heard my prayers, and will I hope, preserve your life, to raise my dispairing soule, above the World, if you consent? Triumphant love, with such resplendant Rayes adorn'd, will change these sullen Clouds, into a glorious shine, throughout my Land; and every heart rejoyce at our Felicities.
Celestina. Lorenzo then, has made himselfe, and me known to you Sir; —which does beget such shame, as makes my soule retyre, from what it most joyes in: —can you value such a counterfeit as I? Duke. Can I be thankfull! for the greatest blessing, men have on Earth? all had been well, if Lorenzo had declar'd you sooner! Celestina. My businesse was to dye unknown, lest my disguise, should raise a scandall on my Name for ever! Lorenzo knew me not till yesterday. Duke. This disguise Celestina, has by mistakes brought all this evill on us; let us no more mention it; but implore Heav'n for your recovery. Lorenzo. How will you dispose of your great prisoner Sir. Urbin. As my friend, now Celestina lives! these Arms shall be your only bonds, while you are with us; — I owe all the felicities I now [to Ferrara] enjoy, to you Sir, —I had neer seen Florio, nor found Lorenzo here, without this Warre: And if Lodovico can submit? to what the Gods have thus decree'd; we may be ever friends; but I shall impose no Rules for you to follow, who are as free here, as at Ferrara; for I intend a Jubilee to all, who will participate my joyes. Lodovico. Though my success, affords no argument for joy, I can acknowledg your civilities; and must submit unto those powers, who order our designes, according to their wills, not ours. Lorenzo. I have a heart to serve Lodovico too; if it may be receiv'd! Lodovico. Since victory has decided our contest, 'twere uselesse to hold up such animosity, as can afford no remedy; I shall therefore strive to regulate my heart, unto my Fortune. Duke. Wee must now begg your pardon Sir, and yours Silviana, our high transports, for these strange accident, have too long diverted our respects for you Sir. Lorenzo. If Silviana do yet dare to own me? little Ceremony wil be needfull here. Princess. If I had not long since seen through your disguise! some∣what of greater worth, then your low Equipage allow'd; you had not found so quick a passage to my heart. Duke. 'Tis my part to joyne your hands, now you avow your hearts united: I wish you as much joy Sir, as you have help'd me to, by Ce∣lestinas Love. Loren. I can have none beyond, what I rejoyce to see you have Sir. Duke. How is it Celestina? does your heart with your health com∣ply? to make me happy? Celestina. Yes Sir, now all my doubts are vanish'd, I have time to look back on my dispaires, with pleasure; and to rejoyce, and wonder at your love! so much beyond my merit, or my hope! Duke. Though habits sexes often may devide, They could not Celestinas vertues hide; VVhich gave such Lustre to young Florios name, It raisd my wonder! and begot this lame. Which ever must admire that blest disguise, When Florio shew'd me Celestinas Eyes. Thus mighty Love Triumph'd, in friendship drest, Though his Magnetick Vertue, seem'd supprest. FINIS.
THE EPILOGVE To the SIEGE of VRBIN. EPILOGUES we know, if well fitted! may Either excuse, or else set off the Play! But our Fantastick Author does believe, His Doublet may be wor'ne without a sleeve! He will no Epilogue allow; the Pit He sayes, of late, hath surfeted of Wit; [poynts to the Pit.] And therefore has this new rigg'd Pinnace Launc'd Into these Deeps; and now too farre advanc'd Without a Rudder: Yet if friends! you may With gentle Gales this guidlesse Barke convey Through all its dangers, to the wished Port; And so prove Pilots of the noblest sort.
SELINDRA. A Tragy-Comedy. Written by Sr WILLIAM KILLIGREW. OXFORD, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Ric: Davis, 1666.
The Actors Names of Selindra. LAscares, Emperour of Greece. Phillocles, Lascares his Son. Ordella, Lascares his Daughter. Secropius, Lascares his Favourite. Cleonel, Secropius his Son. Selindra, A great Lady Attending Ordella, and supposed Daughter of Periander; but is Astella, Princess of Hun∣gary. Periander, A great Lord of Ciprus. Three Ladies Attending Ordella. Antillacus, Generall of Greece. Armanthus, General of the Horse. Antenor, Great Lords of Greece. Gillon, Great Lords of Greece. Officers. Guards. Servants. Pages. Trebello, King of Hungary. These appear not. Barzanes, his Eldest Son. These appear not. Pollinesso, Trebello's youngest Son. Astella, His onely Daughter. Orsanes, Generall of Hungary. Lords. Officers. Pollidor, Hungarians. Tennedor, Hungarians. Tecknor, Hungarians. Titius, Hungarians. Servants. Hungarians.
SCENE Is the Emperors Palace at Bizantium. The FIRST ACT. Enter two Lords, Antenor and Gillon. Ante: THis Rumor through the Town of Prince Phillocles being Crowned King of Hun∣gary is beyond cregit! Gillon: Who is Author of this dis∣course? Ante: It has no Author, a Packet to the Emperor is brought by the com∣mon Post, who only said, the last Post told him so. Gillon: And that last post, might hear it from another; — What does the Emperor declare? Ante: We shall know now, his Letters are in his hand. Enter Lascares Emperor of Greece, with Cecropius, Cleonell, and Guards. Empe: Have you yet Learnt Cecropius, from whence this Rumour comes concerning Hungary? Cecro: I can by no means find the Author Sir; yet the whole Town is full of it, 'tis in all mens mouths that Prince Phillocles is Crown'd King of Hungary, yet none know why they say it? Emp: It cannot be, these Letters are but three dayes old, in which Antillacus only mentions Phillocles return'd to Belgrade, having cha∣sed the Germanes home: — Enter the Princess Ordella, Selindra, and Ladies to them. Emp: Daughter, I sent for you to partake the Newes these Let∣ters bring; they speak Phillocles his Victories over the bold Germanes,
by which we gather, he will be shortly here; —We will welcome his returne Ordella, with a solemne Triumph, to raise his great thoughts to higher Actions; —To this end I sent for you, to think of some new way to entertain the Princess Astella, who no doubt your Bro∣ther will bring with him. Or. Sir, I am so pleas'd to hear my Brother's well; I cannot yet enjoy his Conquest. Emp: Cecropius, be it your care to see these Triumphs ordered for Phillocles, as they were for me, when I return'd Victorious out of Asia; And Cleonel thy charge is to Summon all our Young Nobility, unto a Royal Turnament, and be thy self the Glory of our Court. Cle: You make me blush Sir. Cecro: It shall be as you direct Sir; but how soon does the Prince write his motion will be this way? Emp: My Letters are from our General Antillachus in hast; who by the next, doth promise a full relation. Or: Have you no Letters from my Brother Sir? Empe: Not yet Ordella; which I much wonder at? He kisses the Emperors Hand. Enter Armanthus in Mourning. —What newes Armanthus? Arman: Sir, the Prince sent me before, to give you notice of his approach. Emp: His approach! how near? Arman: He is about a League behind Sir. Emp: Is this habit, and thy sad looks, the signes of Victory? are Phillocles and you alone return'd? Is all lost Armanthus? Arman: Your Army is safe Sir, the Germanes have quitted Hun∣gary as you have heard, and that Crown also has been offred unto Phillocles. Emp: And by him received I hear; why then is this sad shew? why such sorrowes in thy face? while we were ordering Triumps to receive Phillocles, thou hast surpriz'd us with such sadness, as be∣comes ruined States onely. Arman: 'Tis for no lesse a losse I mourn Sir, for by your Victo∣ries, so sad a fate is befallen Hungary, that all Noble Hearts will feel some sorrow for it, though they merrited no less! Emp: Make me know it. Arman: When we had freed Hungary from the Germane Warre, and while the brave Prince Pollinesso, with Phillocles was Conquering, and returning from the Germane Confines back to Belgrade, the old King Trebellio, and his Eldest Son Barzanes, repented the Conditions made with your Majesty, for the re-delivery of Moldavia; they forgot the benefit received by our Grecian Swords, and prepare to send home Phillocles, loaden with Scorns, instead of Trophies. Emp: Strange insolence! and as high a perjury as ever provok'd Heaven! what followed! how did Pollinesso bear himself? Arman: The Young Prince Pollinesso was a firm Friend to Phillo∣cles, and endeavour'd what he could, to divert his Fathers, and his Bro∣thers wicked purposes.
Emp: I'le make the whole Nation shrink under my just Anger. Arman: It will not need Sir, for as they securely sought to seize on Prince Phillocles (who lodged in the same Castle with them) it so pleas'd the gods, that he by a quick securing of himself, the same night the Plot was laid, did accidentally occasion all their ruines, though he intended no harm unto their persons. Emp: Their ruines! are they dead? all dead! Arman: They are Sir, and their crimes, not worthy of that sorrow the Prince has for them, had not the innocent Pollinesso fallen with them! Emp: By what accident fell he? Arman: Pollinesso to do Phillocles Service, was that fatall night con∣ceal'd, where he in a by-Room, might discover his Fathers wicked Councells, unto which he was never call'd, by reason of his avowed love to Phillocles; So that when we from the Princes Lodgings sur∣priz'd the Castle Gate, the Alarum rouz'd the Hungarians from their close Couucil, and discovered Pollinesso where he stood hid, who being in that amaze, compell'd by his Father and Barzanes, to fly with them unto a little Postern Gate, (to us unknown) that led unto the River, where all entering a small Fisher Boat, they hasted down the stream to their own Camp, which they found newly destroy'd by our Army: (a mischief they designed that night on us;) frighted by this ruine, they all return into their Boat, and by a suddain wind that arose, were all drown'd in the rough Danube. Emp: Why had not Pollinesso notice of your purpose? Arman: We had no time, nor could we come where he stood Con∣ceal'd, if Phillocles had delay'd, he had been lost; and then, our designe being only to seize on Trebellio, and Barzanes persons; we could ap∣prehend no danger towards Pollinesso. Ordel: Where is Astella? how did she escape? how does she bear her Father and her brothers losse? how does she look on Phillocles? and how become the Crown, and Throne, now they are her own? Arman: After this sad accident, Phillocles was inform'd that Astella was convey'd away before the Warre, on purpose to abuse him; but where conceal'd, none knew but those who were with Trabellio drown'd. Emp: But how has Phillocles despos'd the Affairs of Hungary? Arman: The Hungarians much amaz'd at Astellas absence; did urge Phillocles to accept the Crown, as by the hand of Heaven thrown on him, but he without delay, delivered up the sole power and trust unto Orfanes, and five more, untill Astella might be found; and then by the consent of all, he did command Antillacus in his return with the Army, to take possession of Moldavia, which by a double right is now again rejoyn'd unto your Empire Sir. Emp: My Sonne has been two quick, in ordering so great affaires! Enter Prince Phillocles, and Lords in mourning; with Servants he kneels and rises. He kneels and rises. Emp: Phillocles, the gods are just, they have blest thy undertakings,
which thou shouldst not grieve, but thank them for, they have sa∣ved me a labour too, in punishing those ingratefull perjur'd Princes. Phil: Had not Pollinesso fallen, I had not cast away a sigh for all the rest, for him, my whole Life spent in sorrow, is not enough, he was as Noble, as the others were unworthy; he and I, contracted such a Friendship, you would have thought but one heart had given life to both. Emp: Thou hast done ill Phillocles, so rashly to dispose so great Affaires without my Councell; I hear you have given away a King∣dome, in a Complement. Phil: Sir, what I have done, will not abate my interest there; I have also made a promise to search for Astella, in our Neighbour Islands, where 'tis most like she is concealed. Emp: That will be near as great a folly as the other: to what pur∣pose will you run such a bazzard? rather meet our Army, and return with it to Belgrade, there let Astella find you securing her interest, in her absence. Phil: I cannot with my Honour do it Sir, Astella may then be∣lieve, I sought the Ruine of her Family, to gain the Crown on my self. Emp: What if she do? you may at leisure inform her of the Truth; —I do Command you, to lay by your further thought of this fond Journey, to search for Astella; is this a time to act Romances in? when the whole whole World is in Combustion round us; think better on it Phillocles. Ordel. I hope my Brother will not throw himself on dangers, with∣out a good Argument to justifie his Actions; this new Journey, gives me new fears for you. Phillocles Embraces his Sister Ordel∣la, and leads her out after the Emperor. Phil: I shall consider ere I go Ordella, and at your Lodgings this night, expresse my joy to see you. Exeunt omnes. Onely Selin∣dra stayes and sits in a Chair. Sel: Oh! Oh! Cleonel re∣turns. Cle: Selindra weeping! — has the sad tale of Hungary, drawn these tears from your fair Eyes Madam? Sel: Good my Lord, spare me a while, I am not sit for Court∣ship now. Cle: I cannot with Honour leave you in the power of such an Ene∣my, as your sorrow is. Sel: You cannot deliver me from a greater then your self this time. Cle: That is not kindly said Selindra, scarce Civil, if you consider my long Love, and my Respects. Sl: My Lord, you know I ever shun'd your Love, and as much as in me lay, avoided those respects, you now upbraid me with. Cle: I do confesse you have, tis therefore I now come, to presse you to declare, if I may ever hope to gain more favour from you; my sute is present Marriage, may I hope for such happinesse at last, if not now! Sel: As I never have, so I shall never give you cause to think it. Cle: So Fair, so Innocent, so Gentle, and so severe! I never saw be∣fore; but I shall hope to find you in a better humour, at some other time Selindra; your Father interrupts me now. Exit Cleonel.
Enter Periander to Selindra. Sel: Unhappy day that I was born, and more unhappy this, that I She Weeps. have liv'd to hear such mischief on. Oh Periander! my Father, and my Brothers are all Dead, Murther'd by Phillocles, Betray'd, and Slain by Phillocles; Pollinesso's dead, my onely comfort is for ever gone, and yet I live to tell it! Peri: Madam the Crown of Hungary is now yours, and Phillocles but the Instrument sent by the gods to punish your Parents crimes; their perjury pull'd this Judgment on their own heads. Sel: It does not become you my Lord to tell me so, nor yet to think it, if you consider Lascare's covetous nature, and Phillocles ambi∣tious spirit, you might with me, see all this was design'd to ruine my Family, and so to get the Crown unto themselves; but I shall soon revenge it on dissembling Phillocles, and bring such a Ruine into Greece, as no time shall parallel; —here to Pollinesso Ghost, I vow Phillocles his Life, if ever I can safely reach it! Peri: Madam take heed, least you like them, do pull a second mis∣chief on your self; Phillocles you see is Noble, he leaves the Crown She kneeles. to you, when offer'd him by all your Subjects; he lov'd Pollinesso! you have no Argument against Phillocles, he Laments him, as much as you can. Sel: I Periander, and in sorrow seeks me too; no doubt, but he would gladly have me in his power to murther. Per: I cannot think so; but Madam you should now consider where you are, and in whose power; in my opinion, you must keep this disguise, with all the Art you can; and lay by your sorrow for a while, not practice any thing towards revenge, nor by a look discover such a thought, untill I can go to Belgrade, there make Orsanes, and the rest, know that you live; that we may find some way to fetch you home with safety; where you may with security prosecute your re∣venge. Sel: I shall take your advice my Lord, now you comply in my re∣venge, and study to disguise my grief till your return, but can admit no thoughts, but my revenge on Phillocles; Pollinesso my dear Brother, I will Celebrate thy Funerals, in such a manner! as shall speak my Love to thee; and hate to him that murther'd thee— —No Roman Pile, e're made so great a flame; I'le Sacrifice this Empire, to thy Name. Per: Madam, this passion will piscover, and destroy you in spight Weeps. of my Endeavours. Sel: I have now done my Lord, indeed I have. Peri: I can have no Faith Madam, unlesse you will now promise in presence of our gods, to hide this anger, and not to discover your self till my return, unlesse some Eminent necessity require, for you will be lost, when known unto Lascares. Sel: I do ingage as you desire, and shall—
Enter Ordella to them with Ladies. Or: In tears Selindra! what cause hast thou to weep? Per: My present departure for Ciprus, makes her thus Childish. Or: Will your stay there be long my Lord? Per: Not many dayes Madam. Or: Come Selindra, thou shalt go with me, i'le divert these Tears, by shewing thee my griefes, which thou wilt be Concern'd for, if thou dost love me! Exeunt Omnes THE SCEENE CHANGES. Re-enter Ordella, and Selindra, in Ordella's Chamber. Sel: Madam, I am very sensible of your Greif, and do not approve of the Prince his journey, to search for Astella. Or. You must not only not approve it Selindra, but with me con∣demn it, as a rash, and hazzardous undertaking; besides the folly of seeking one he never saw, one that he hath no ingagement to! What madnesse will it be for Phillocles, to put himself within her power? before he knowes how she resents her Friends deaths? for if there were such affection between Astella and Pollinesso, (as is said) the sight of Phillocles, must needs raise a passion in her, such as may destroy my (aside) Brother, before his innocence can appear; —(How's this? can these Tears fall for her Fathers absence a few dayes? or is it for what I utter? Selindra Weeps. I hope she is not so much concern'd for Phillocles;) —Selindra I do take it ill, that you thus lament your Fathers absence, who runnes no hazzard? above my sorrow, for my Brothers dangerous Journey, in search of Astella. Sel: Madam my tears were re-call'd by your Highnesse sighes, by your trouble for the Prince his Journey, your favours have been such to me, that I were unworthy, if I should not weep, as well as smile with you. (aside) Or: 'Tis handsomly put off, —I thank thee Selindra, and do so little doubt thy Love, that I do beg thy best Arguments to assist me, that we together may convince my Brother, and prevail with him to stay. Sel: Madam, I shall obey your commands; and observe your di∣rections, as farre as will become me: but I do fear, the Prince will condemn me of much rudenesse, if I shall interpose my vain opinions, against his purposes; good Madam, do not put me to do, what hereaf∣ter you will blame me for. Or: Fear it not Selindra, I love thee better, then to throw away thy credit so! —see where my brother comes. Enter Phillocles, Ordella meets him kindly, yet sadly too. Selindra aside. Sel: I have a hard taske on me! (to complement the man I hate to death.
Phil: Why so sad my deer Sister; your looks speak a sorrow through your smiles! Ordel: Can you aske? and know your self to be the cause of it, can Phillocles be in danger? and Ordella, not be sad! can you think smiles would become my face? when my heart shrinks to think of your rash journey, to seek Astella you know not where; I can no more put off my feares, then my affection for you. Phil: Dearest Ordella, let not a mistaken cause of fear for me, beget such a trouble in you; there is no danger in my purpos'd Journey, I shall onely search the Grecian Isles, where none dares do me harme, you know I am engag'd in honour to performe, what I have so pub∣liquely declar'd, and I am sure you love my Honour, equall with my Person. Ordel: I do so, and could I see the necessity you urge, to search for Astella, my passion should submit to your reason, and that I may not flatter my own affection, I shall now submit unto Selindra's opinion, who has no reason to be partiall to either of our arguments; I pre∣thee good Selindra, speak freely, what thou thinks't of my brothers Journey. Selin: Truly Sir, if I may judg! the Princess tells you what you should better consider of, then I think you yet have; not that I do ap∣prehend any dangerous hazzards in the Journey, as she does, nor can I finde any arguments fit to perswade you from attempting dangers, when your Honour calls you to them; give me leave Sir, only to aske, how your Honour is concerned to make this search? why do you in∣tend so great a trouble to your self? from whence is this value of A∣stella? who you never saw; why does your Highness seek a Woman that has never oblidged you? nor you her, but by the ruine of her Fa∣mily, incens'd her. Phil: 'Tis true that I have never seen, nor oblig'd Astella in parti∣cular; but I have by many hazards of my life endeavour'd both; the Fame of her Excelling Beauty, and greater Vertue, begot in me a desire to serve her, and her whole Family, which I did faithfully, in freeing Hungarie from the Germane yoak: 'twas an unhappy Fate befell her Parents, by themselves pull'd on them, not by me intended; in which sad losse, I beare so great a share, that I have no peace within, untill I have made my Innocence unto Astellas self appear, that she may see, that I had no design to hurt the Princes persons, nor to Conquer Hungarie. Selin: What you have bravely done in that Warre, deserves a Tro∣phie, and from Astella no lesse value, when she shall be well enformed of all that past there; 'till then Sir, the Princess thinks it not fit for you to Visit Astella, because we often see Great Princes Vertues, does not answer the report Fame gives them. Ordel: Most true, Selindra, my heart presages a Ruine if you goe; could I lay by my affection to you, and put on Astellas cause, I would undertake to confute those Arguments, you so much trust in: Methinks I see you kneeling, and the inraged Astella deaf to all you say, swel∣ling with anger, for brave Pollinesso's losse, and ready to sacrifice your Life! come Selindra if ever I have deserved love from thee! shew it
now by assisting me my own way, by thy best Language: do thou stand forth, and as Astella, receives my over-confident Brother, spare him not Selindra, but suppose you had a Brother as dear to you, as Polli∣nesso [She pulls Selindra to Act Astella: She stands be∣fore the Chaire of State.] was to her, and that beloved Brother, by Phillocles his rash at∣tempt, sent to his untimely grave: let loose some Teares, to accompa∣ny those I have shed, and for my sake, put on a look so mixt with Ma∣jesty, Grief, and Anger, as may present her Part thou play'st: (I, that look will do it.) Sel: Madam, You see my ready Obedience to your Commands; but will the Prince permit such boldnesse? Phil: Yes Selindra, since nothing else will satisfie my Sister, I am content for once, to beare a part in this Childs play, —on conditi∣on Ordella, that you put off your sadnesse, if I prevaile! Ordella. I shall, so you will stay at home, if she do get the better of you! [He turns to Selindra and sees her looks angry—] Phil: Content: —can Selindra frown in jest? methinks she looks as if she would do it to the life Ordella? Sel: Yes Phillocles, I can frown when I have just cause! and will make thee repent this rash attempt to visit me, thou hast beyond my hope, put thy self into my power to punish. Phil: How that angry Cloud spreads! Can those bright lights suffer an Eclips, and not portend some fatall Ruine? what if they do! shall I shake at Thunder, that cannot reach me? be concern'd for an unjust anger! no, not though the gods did threat: —But Astella will not nourish a thought mis-be-coming her Vertue, nor so much lessen her great name, by a mistaken passion, to harm a man, whose endea∣vours were to serve her. Selin: A mistaken Passion Phillocles! are not my Father and my Brothers dead? though not by thy hand butchered, yet by thy at∣tempts they fell; is not the glory of our name extinguish'd? the ho∣nour of men fall'n? all lost in Pollinesso's death! Phil: Astellas self is not more free, then I was, from intending evill to her friends; they forc'd me to secure my self; by which they were all lost, their Plots, and Perjuries, pull'd this Ruine on them: onely Polli∣nesso was not Guilty, he would not comply with fierce Barzanes envi∣ous designes, nor with his Fathers blacker purposes; Pollinesso was a witnesse of my hazards in that Warre, and did partake an equall share in them, and in the Victory; we often seal'd our vowes of Amity, in our best blouds together, which did beget so mutual a Love, that our Soules moved ever one way; I would rather have Dyed with Polli∣nesso, then live thus to lament his losse; by these unfained Teares I would. Sel: Thou speakst a Language so pleasing to my Eares, that I could wish my vow to Sacrifice thee to my Brothers Ghost, had never past my Lips, for I can see, and value all thy Noble actions; and judge the guilt of my own friends that fell, and can beare the losse of all, but Pol∣linesso! —he you say dyed Innocent, free from the other Crimes, full of Honour, rich in Vertue, in the Blossome of his Age, my onely Joy fell: —and you, my onely hate, shall dye so too! your Worth, your Youth, and your Innocence, will make
my oblation acceptable to those powers I have vowed you too; —vain man, canst thou think Pollinesso's ghost will be appeased with words? or teares! if thou wert ever worthy my brothers love, shew it now, in couragious dying to his memory, for by all our gods thou dyest; — a guard there! [She is interrupted by Ordella.] Ordella. 'Tis bravely done Selindra, thou madest me start, and shake to see thee look, and hear thee speak, with such awfull majesty! —how is it Brother? how do you think Astellas selfe will receive you? when one so unconcern'd, can use you thus! do you yield yet? have we the better argument? [Philocles and Selindra stand both amazed.] Phil: Yes you have. Ordel: You'l stay then! Phil: I think I shall. Ordel: My deer, deer Selindra, let me kisse thee, thou hast oblidged me beyond my power to gratifie, beyond my expression to acknow∣ledg; —the Emperor, and the whole Empire shall thank thee for Phillocles his safety; —come my brother, let us now finde my Fa∣ther; this change will please him. Exeunt ambo. Selin. How near lost was I, on his fresh mention of Pollinesso's death! how dangerous a work did I undertake; and how happily brought off, by the Princess Ordellas timely interruption! —I thought my selfe within my strengths at Belgrade, and Phillocles in my power to punish; I must no more of these games, 'tis my disguise preserves my life, and I do care only to live to be reveng'd on Phillocles, the Author of all my sorrowes. —Oh! but the Princess Ordella sits too neer my heart, to suffer that; she is my friend; if I destroy her beloved brother! I wound her to death; at lest give her the same intollerable grief for Phillocles, I now suffer for Pollinesso. — Oh! horrid ingratitude! Oh miserable Astella! my Obligations to Ardella, do infringe my vowes to Heaven: —ye gods, direct me so; that these differing passions may not distract me; I would do, what should become me best, and please you most, though my own life, in the attempt be lost. Exit Selindra. THE SECOND ACT. [Enter Emperor, Cecropius and Cleonel.] Emp: WHat think you Cecropious, of Phillocles his Love? Cecr. Mighty Sir, what you have said, was my thought, when I first heard of the Prince his stay, and had been now my Councel, as the best way to secure his Interest in Hungary, by which Astella must submit unto the will of him, that has allready woon hearts of all her people.
Cleon: Sir, you know I have long lov'd, and long sought Selindra's Love; and Lovers Eyes are quick to discover the like looks in o∣thers; 'tis my duty (as well as my own Concern) to tell your Maje∣stie, that I have observed Selindra's good looks, to be the Orators, that have put off the Prince his journey, not his kinde sisters importunity, and when your own observation, shall informe you better, your Majesty will finde this, no causelesse jealousie in me. Cecropious. What he tells you Sir, is the whisper of the Court, but I look on it slightly, the Prince may have a minde to a Wench, and Se∣lindra is a pretty one; but Sir, in my opinion, you should take no notice of such youthfull passages; the Prince cannot think her a fit Wife, and then, no matter who is his Mistress. Emp: Cecropious I do think it worthy my care, to prevent an evill; the Crown of Hungary can be no way mine, but by Astella; we see Se∣lindra is rich in Beauty, and more rich in Virtue; if not by Birth great enough to be his Wife; she is too good, to be his wanton Mistress; Phil∣locles is young, and young men are apt to be in Love! He is as gallant, as great, and if his affection should meet a repulse, (as 'tis most like from Selindra;) these sparks we now see, may grow to such a flame, as neither we, nor he can quench: I will observe him, and set spies on them, [Aside.] some of my own spies, Cleonell may be jealous without a cause! I will sift Ordella too! Enter Phillocles to them, in rich cloathes, with Or∣della, Selindra, Lords, Ladies, and train, all fine. Emp: Daughter, you have wrought a good work on your brother; thy Interest I see, has prevail'd, beyond my intreaty, or my Command, I thank thee for it Ordella, and am glad Phillocles, to find that your Eares are open unto reason, indeed the journey would not have suited with your other great actions; I like well hy gallant spirit; but I like not to hazzard a Kingdome for a Complement. Phillocles. Sir, I do thus low beg pardon for my first disobedience [She kneels.] to your commands, and do confesse, my sister wrought my consent to stay; yet I must tell you Sir; 'twas because her Arguments complyed with your commands, nor was your command her least Argument. Emp: Thus let me imbrace the greatest comfort of my life, thou [He holds their Armes under his, and walks as he speaks.] shalt set ever next my heart; —give me thy hand Ordella, and thine Phillocles; What wealth is there beyond these? what joyes beyond those I feel? thus supported! I am the envy of Princes; may all the blessings Heaven can bestow, fall on you both for this love, and this obedience to your old dying Father; —tell me Phillocles: how stands the affires of Hungary? I have had late intelligence, that some Com∣motions do appeare there; if so? since you have thus discreetly laid aside the search of Astella, in my judgment, 'twill be next best, that you repaire to Belgrade with your Army, there by your presence, to keep the people in Obedience, untill Astella be found; we know the Hungarians are a busie headed people Phillocles. Phil. Sir, I have left the Government of that State, in those hands
that will neglect no meanes to invite Astella home; they love her Sir; and do want no power to secure the Kingdome for her; my presence at Belgrade, would rather deterre Astella, then invite her home, and may be justly thought, I meant to force, what I yet doubt to sue for: In my opinion Sir, I ought to hear more from thence, before I stirre that way, but my opinion, and my will, shall submit to your Commands. Emp: Thou art still on thy Complements, but my gray Haires are not convinc'd by such Arguments, think better on what I propose, though I do not command, but onely wish it; while I instruct your [Phillocles and the rest goe off.] sister with my reasons, that she, and you may consult together. [He whispers with Ordella.] Ordel. I shall obey you Sir, and weigh well what you have said, I shall not be wanting in my care for Selindra, nor in my love unto my Brother. Emp: I am satisfied Ordella, and do only wonder why he will not lead the Army into Hungary! where such apparent need is of his pre∣sence. Ordella. He will go, if you will have him Sir. Emp: I will think further on it a day or two. This while Cleonel Courts Selindra, she shewes dislike to him. Emp: Cleonel I see loses no time, in the Warre he makes, ply her hard young man, those knit browes do often prove the Cipher to a smiling heart, and yet Cleonel I must tell you, that I approve not this whining way of Wooing; most Women like to be approach'd with such Alacrity, as shewes the mettle men are made of; where is thy heart young man? Cle. Mighty Sir, one frown from bright Selindras Eyes, has power to shake me into Attomes, to unman me quite! Emp: I think so, and must my selfe Wooe for thee, how is it faire [He speaks to Selindra.] one, that you neglect such honour? and such Wealth, as Cleonel brings with him? he is a man in my Eye worthy the greatest subject of my Empire: —Or is it the nice Lovers part you thus do act in Publique, while your united hearts delight in private? say Selindra, when shall our Court flourish in triumphs for your Wedding? —while Ordella provides Ornaments for you, it shall be my care to set forth Cleonel like himselfe, and fit for such a Mistresse: —tell me when Selindra, when shall this jolly time be? come I must presse you for my Friend. Selin: I am very sensible of this Honour you now do me Sir, yet cannot chuse but wonder why your Majesty thinks fit to presse me to a publique Answer. Emp: You have delayed it long enough, 'tis a good time to de∣clare now. Selin: I obey Sir, and do confesse that I have ever had a true value of Cleonels worth; I have also observed your favour to hm, and do be∣lieve that he may make the best of Women happy; but yet I think
not fit to entertain his Love, I have more Noble thoughts, then to in∣courage him with hopes, of what I never can afford him, such a returne, as his merit may justly expect from one more worthy then my self; I must declare that my purpose is not to marry, but to attend the Prin∣cess so long, as that honour may be permitted, and her Highnesse favour shall continue to me. Emp: May all thy wishes be ever on thee, happy will that man be, that gets such a Treasure, as this fair Cabinet containes: I am vanquish'd Cleonel, and I advise thee to teare this Serpent from thy heart, before it be too big for thee to graspe;—(observe you this Ordella?) —Phillocles are thy thoughts yet for Belgrade? Phillo. They shall be Sir, if you Command it. Exeunt Lascares, Cecropius, and Cleonel. Phillo: Ordella can you guess, why my Father does now urge my absence? that so late inforc'd my stay? Ordel: Does not the Affaires of Hungary require you there? Phillo. No Ordella, I should not then wonder at his pressing me to goe! [Enter Messenger.] Messen: Madam, the Emperor calls for you. Ordel: I'le o're take him presently; —I have much to say to you Brother, pray stay my returne: good Selindra entertaine him in my Chamber, with Cleonels last Melancholly Song, I like so well. [Phillocles and Selindra sit within the Scene.] THE SONG: Cloris we see the offended Gods, At first do shew, and shake their Rodds, That they may rather threat, then strike, So we foregoe, what they dislike: These faulty streams, shall flow no more Above their banks, as heretofore: Nor swelling tempest from my breast, Henceforth thy Virgin cares molest: All shall be fashion'd to thy will, So thou wilt let me Love thee still: My Lips shall not a word let go, That may offend to tell thee so: But to dissemble, or deny That I do Love thee were a lye, Would staine my soule: 'twill prove a spot, To look as if I Lov'd thee not.
Philo. This charity becomes you Madam, and Cleonels lines I see are smiled on, though himself be not, but why did you with such seve∣rity, in publique disclaime his interest, and seem to reject a man so wor∣thy, when the Emperor himself woed for him? Selin. 'Tis the Princess Ordellas pleasure, that I should learn his Song Sir, and not my fancy to the maker of it, though his love, and re∣spects, may challenge a greater complement from me, for I shall ever acknowledg obligations to Cleonel, yet not think fit to treat a Marriage in my Fathers absence, by whom I shall be wholly rul'd in that matter, if he think fit to make that choice for me, I must submit. Philo. Give me leave Madam so farre to interest my selfe in your Affaires, as to aske if your thoughts for Cleonel be such, that you will Phillocles takes her Hand, she shewes dislike. not admit the like profession from another; For though my Father cannot match him in his Dominions, I believe that I can find you a Servant, as faithfull, and as full of Love; one every way as worthy your favours, one that will outbid Cleonel, to gaine Selindra, do but— [He offers to kiss her Hand.] Selin: I beg your Highnesse pardon, for some time. Exit Seli: Phil: Thus to leave me while I was speaking to her, is a scorne I look'd not for; —Selindra was not wont to be so rude, nor I so foolish, sure my looks and Language rendred me Ridiculous, so slight, that she blush'd for me, which to hide she thus withdrew, leaving me to wonder at my self, that am of late become, what I want a Name for; —If this be Love, and this the effects of Love, I'le teare the Monster from my heart, and be my self againe, before it grow too mighty for me; —my hands cannot reach it, no force can touch it, 'tis a subtile foe, not to be compell'd; 'tis reason onely must prevaile; —Selindra loves, and dis∣sembles her affection to Cleonel, neglecting me; —how unworthy then am I, that seek to separate united hearts; how fond, to Covet what ano∣ther does enjoy; how much am I now fall'n below my self, by this passion? [He throwes himself on the Couch sadly.] [Enter Ordella and Selindra.] Ordel: When went my brother hence Selindra? Selin: He sits there Madam. Ordel: My Father I fear has too much cause for what he said; Prethee leave us a while Selindra, and let none disturb us. [Ordella goes to Phillocles, he starts at her approach.] Phillo: Oh Selindra! Ordella. She is not here, why do you stare thus on me? are you not well? Phillo: Onely a little dull for want of sleep Ordella; but why sent the Emperor for you in such haste!
Ordel: To tell me that Phillocles does love Selindra, and to enquire my thoughts of it; I answered boldly, that you were too Noble to dishonour Selindra, and too wise to neglect Astella and a Crown, for such an idle fancy; —I have confirm'd him that you have not such a thought, because I saw him troubled at it; —but what is this that thus distracts you? Phil: Ha! what sayes my dearest Sister? Ordel: Ye Gods defend that I be not mistaken; Brother what have you done with your self, since I went hence? Phillo: My head is full of the Affaires of Hungary, I was contriving how I should secure Astella in her Throne, and thinking of a thousand other things; but why did my Father send for thee? Ordel: This is very strange, I told you why, and you regard me not, it was about Selindra. Phillo: About Selindra; prethee Ordella let us talke of something else, —thou weepest! Ordel. How can I chuse but weepe! to see you thus distracted, and all my hopes of future joyes dying in me? —Phillocles has left to love me, he dares not trust me with his heart! he Loves, and by dissem∣bling seeks to hide his love from me, that can dye for him. Phillo: I am guilty Ordella, thy charms o'recome me, and I do sub∣mit to thy severest judgment, I do love Selindra, and would do more then thou canst fancy, to gaine her Love; now my heart lyes open, thou wilt find the wound is deep Ordella, touch it gently my dear Sister. Ordel: 'Twill not be cured then Phillocles, I must launce it to the quick, and you must indure to hear, that Cleonel, and she, have been long contracted, and onely do disguise their Loves, because Cecropius seeks Selindra for himself, 'tis only untill her Fathers return, they thus dissemble it. Phil: Contracted Ordella! thou hast blasted all my hopes, destroy'd me in the twinckling of an Eye, the Gods have not a greater curse in store to throw upon me, is this thy cure? I shall sink under the burthen of this remedy! fare-well Ordella, fare-well for ever! for I am undone for ever! [Phillocles going out in haste turns back.] Orde: Stay Phillocles, I can cure thee yet; I'le stroke thy wound, and try how that will work, they are not contracted, that I ever heard, it was my pure affection that thus abus'd your Ears: by my Fathers command, I was in the bud to crush your love, which by their pretended Contract, I thought best to do: can my Brother pardon my Zeale to serve him this way? and yet trust my love. Phil: I can do both Ordella, now thou hast restored me to life againe; come let us sit, that I may at large declare my purpose concerning Se∣lindra, — do you remember Ordella, that day you made Selindra act Astella? how I was then convinc'd, and overcome by her; how she spake then! and with what Majesty she appear'd! Methought then, if Selindra were not borne a Queen, yet she was design'd to be one! from the hour I lov'd her, (and you the occasion of my love,) I have since observed her strictly, and well weighed all her perfections, and considered Cleonels hopelesse suit to gain her: if she can afford me love Ordella; I would wade deep in blood, —it would look like vanity, to
tell thee how great things I would do to win a value from her. Ordel: When I consider Selindra's Beauty, and her worth, I cannot blame your admiration of her, truly Brother, I do wish your desires upon you, but know not how I can comply, or how to serve you this way? Phil: I have weighed all kinds of Arguments Ordella, and do allow them to be good worldly thoughts, fit for Princes that have no other heaven on Earth then their Wealth, and their Dominions! — I tell thee Ordella to be Emperour of all the World! is poverthy, without Selindra! if thou lovest me, thou wilt use thy interest to perswade her to cast off all thoughts for Cleonel, and receive me, who she yet shuns▪ —now my Sister, speak comfort to my soule; that must languish untill you ingage for me. [Ordella sits silent a while and he staring on her.] Ordel: I have been thus long silent Phillocles, to consider how I might comply with your desires, and not break my Fathers trust, do but shew me an honourable way, and I will serve you with the same Zeal you wish it; but if I should consent? how can you avoid Cleonel? or how disguise your love from my Father? Phill: Wee'l think of twenty wayes to blinde the old mans eyes, and as for Cleonel, I will so overload him with Wealth, and Honours, that he shall gladly give up his interest in Selindra, (if he have any!) but if he refuse! I will become his Rivall publiquely, I will either carr the faire prize, or loose my self Ordella; say now, will you strain a Coplement with my Fathers trust to save thy brothers life and honour▪ Ordella. Pardon me heaven! if I offend by varying from my thers trust, to save my Brothers life and Honour! Phillocles now I am yours, imploy me like a Sister that you love, put me not to use ar∣tifices unworthy of that value, the World now holds me at. Phil By all our Gods, I'le rather perish, then permit thee to act any thing unworthily: Dearest Ordella loose no time to make known my affection to Selindra, while I seek Cleonel, to make him mine. Ord: Since no argument can prevaile against your passion, I am con∣tent to be directed by you. Phill: Thou wilt make me happy then Ordella! beyond all the State arguments. — —The greatest Polititian can invent, Or brightest messenger from Heaven's sent. [Leads her off.] [Enter Cleonel.] Cleo. This falls out well for my designes upon Selindra, the Prince his absence, will give me opportunity to effect, what his presence might prevent, for 'tis now most evident that Selindra slights my Professions in hope of Phillocles, who is become my Rival; by subtil∣ties I must therefore compasse, what my power and credit cannot reach: the Prince is too mighty for me, to contest with? but this new
[Enter Phil∣locles.] Warre, will do my work, —see where he comes, how full of thoughts he is of late! this love transformes us all. Phil: I'le share the Empire with him if he consent! if he will not! I'le force my way. — [He sees Cleonel.] Cleo: Sir, The Emperour sent me to signify unto you the Newes from Belgrade, that Astella is arriv'd there, and is rejected by those you left to govern; 'tis his pleasure Sir, that you prepare to march, with all possible speed to her reliefe. Phil: I have just now received an express from thence, which in∣form me of a Faction there, that did hope to have set up a Counterfeit Astella, but those Tumults are allayed, the plot being discover'd, all the partakers fled the Country; I therefore hold it fit to hear again from thence, before I stirre: but if my Father will needs have his Ar∣my march into Hungary, I shall advise him to conferre the honour of that Warre, Cleonell on you. Cle. On me Sir, I am neither worthy, nor capable of so great a charge; your Highnesse does me much honour in this thought, but I must not presume to accept the favour, lest the Emperor do think me so vaine to seek it. Phillo: Why Cleonel? thy forward youth promises great things, and I know the Emperor will be pleas'd to see me joyn to heap ho∣nours on thy deserving head; I will undertake it with my Father, and shall not doubt to say, thou wilt deserve the sole Command of all our Forces. [Aside.] Cleon: If the Emperor consent, I am cozen'd; your Highnesse does  load me with your Favours, I shall not live to expresse my Grati∣tude, much less to merrit such honours. Phill: I tell thee Cleonel, 'tis in thy power to lay an Obligation on me, such an Obligation Cleonel, as half my Empire cannot recom∣pence; — Say, may I hope such kindnesse from thee? but if it be not in thy heart, do not flatter me into a hope of what I shall not find. Cle: Sir as you are my Prince, my duty binds me to serve you with the hazzard of my life, and fortunes. Phil I thank thee for thy Love, as I do all that will like thee, say, and do as much, but I would have ingagements unto thee, beyond the com∣mon complement of other Subjects. Cle: Your many favours Sir, have so much obliged me beyond all others, that your commands (what ere they be) shall make me happy. Phil: Take heed Cleonel, do not ingage too fast; for I shall demand, what thou hold'st dearer then thy life; darest thou hear me now? Cle: Speak boldly Sir, I am yours, and all that's mine is so; I hope [speaks aside] he will discover his love to me. Phil: Thou art indeed my fate, or I am thine, — I would have thee give up to me, thy interest in Selindra, dissolve all ingagements, be∣tween her and you: —my dearest friend; thus thou mayest bequeath [Phillocles Embraces him.] an Empire to me, that I prize farre above this I am born to, —start not at it, for I will wear thee in my bosome, thou shalt be the greatest, and the richest man in Greece! Cleon: Without Selindra! Phil: I, without Selindra!
Cleo: What is all Greece worth? without Selindra! good Sir, give me leave a little to consider on this matter; — sure he has solicited [Aside.] Selindra for himself, and receiv'd a repulse; —it may well be, that she has express'd to him, some value of me, beyond what I my self can yet discern; he would not else thus rashly, nay thus madly tempt me! 'tis so: — Sir, do I mistake, or you did demand, that I should give my in∣terest in Selindra, up to you! Phil. Thou doest not mistake, 'tis only that can make me happy. Cleo: And onely that I cannot grant, I can no more consent to part with the hope of such a happinesse, then with my interest in Heaven; pray Sir, finde some other way to try my Faith. Phil: The Gods cannot give thee a means to oblige me another way, themselves cannot blesse me with a gift, that I can prize beyond Selindra! Cleo: And you would have me debauch this young Lady, for your private pleasure? Phil: By all that's Holy, I would marry her. Cleo: Marry her! what shall then become of Hungary, and Astella? Phill: Thou shalt have that Crown, and her; I'le woe her for thee, I'le fight that Conquest o're again, and give it thee, if she refuse! Cleo: Will you get the Emperors coment, to this exchange? Phill: Yes, or I will do it without him. Cleo: (All this shall to the Emperor,) but if you can do neither? this [Aside.] inestinable jewel you would have me throw away. Phill: Will it be thrown away, if placed on me? Cleo: I might have put my words into a Courtlier phrase I do con∣fesse; but I can never mould my heart to such a forme, as shall consent to make my tongue bettay it: I swear by all that's good, I never can relinquish my interest in Selindra; I do prize my weak hopes there, above all the Wealth, and Honours, you can lay down to purchase it. Phil: He has abus'd me all this while; to get the secret out, which shall now consume him; since he will not consent, this base treachery, shall be my first step to climb unto Selindra▪ [Phillocles stands silent musing.] Cleo: I shall now perswade Lascares to believe, that the Prince loves Selindra: —while he is musing, I'le steale off, lest a tempest do fall [Aside.] on me. [Cleonel is goeing out.] Phil: Stay Cleonel, I have more to say; I have considered my rash suit, and cannot with Justice, quarrel with thee, for not parting with such a Treasure as Selindra is; but I must call thee to account for thy late smiles, and false fawning on me, and for thy base treacherous kind∣nesse, by which thou hast betray'd me to reveale a secret, too great to trust thee with: —Thus I lay by my greatnesse, and as a private in∣jured man, I draw my Sword to kill thee. Cleo: But I must not lift up mine against my Prince, I have been ever taught to draw my Sword in your defence, and shall be as glad to
serve you with it, as I should be proud to use it in this cause against any other man; I dare scarce shew it you Sir. [He drawes.] Phil: I have now made my self thy equal, by my rivalship in love; either defend thy self, or by heaven I'le kill thee. They fight, Phillocles hurts and disarms Cleonel; as the Emperor comes in, Phillocles throwes Cle∣onel his sword, and goes out. [Enter the Emperor, Cecropius, and Attendants.] Emp: What insolence is this, so near us? Cleonel this posture does not become you, in this place. Cleo: You will pardon it Sir, when you shall know I only drew to save my life, not to offend the Prince, who swelling with rage, came like a ruine on me, because I would not quit my interest in Selindra unto him, to be his wife Sir. Emp. Is this true Cleonel? Cleo: You'l find it true Sir, I could have had Astella, and her Crown for my consent; 'tis some pleasure to deny another, what I cannot get my self. Emp: He has not hurt thee? Cleo: Not much Sir, you came in just as he fell on me. Emp: This must be timely cared for; Cecropius send presently and fetch Selindra to your Lodgings, this night she shall be your charge, to morrow let her be sent back to Ciprus to her Father; and be you sure Cecropius, that Phillocles do neither see her, nor send to her this night. [Enter Ordella, Selindra, with Ladies.] Cecro: She is here Sir, with the Princess. Ordel: Where is my Brother Sir? Emp: He is gone hence hurt Ordella, (I wish he were else) fighting forsooth for Love! you now see what mischiefe your fondnesse to Se∣lindra, has produc'd; your Brothers life endangered, and the Empire tottering: Cecropius take Selindra to your care, as I commanded, let her be sent home, attended as befits her quality: — Ordella come you with me. All goes off but Cecropius, Cleonel and Selindra. [Exit Cle∣onel and har∣kens at the Scene.] Cecro. Leave us a while Cleonel, — Madam, you now see the evils I foretold, are come to passe, these young fiery spirits, will never submit to suffer either to enjoy you: do but consider how happy you may be, by being mine, though I am not so young; yet many men of my years have made young Ladies happy: of my love, you have had long tryal, my Power, my Honours, and my Wealth, will prove as pleasant, as the
smooth chin of Cleonel: — Phillocles his Wife you cannot be, his Mistriss I hope you scorne to be; much may be said Lady, on this argument, but the time allowes it not, to morrow early you must to Sea, unlesse you will blesse me, by being mine. Cleo: Is it even so my good Father? I shall shew you a trick for [He peeps in] your trick, if my skill faile not! Selin: My Lord, I must now give you the same answer I have ever done, that I can never have affection for you. Cecro: No matter, few old mens wives have any. Sel: My Lord, I do submit unto the Emperours commands, pray let me be sent away. Cecro: 'Tis my humble love, begets this contempt! —I must try [Aside.] her another way; — Madam, you know the Emperours humour well, and you have heard how eagerly he covets to joyne Hungary to Greece, by Phillocles his match with Astella, and how much he abhorres his love to you, is evident: The truth is Selindra, you are this night by his command, to be ravished by my Son Cleonel, to that end sent thi∣ther, which will allay the gallant Prince his appetite to marry you, and remove all further feares of that matter: 'Tis yet in your own power Madam by obliging me, to prevent Cleonels force, who for un∣dertaking so base an act, ought to be dispis'd. Sel: Ravish'd, I'le rather dye, then suffer Cleonel, or yield to be your Wife, the Gods will not permit such wickednesse! Cec: Please you to retire unto your Lodging Lady: —There is no [He leads her in and re∣turnes.] way to winne this foolish Girle, I am angerd even to hate her, yet can∣not chuse but love her; — but why should I loose this opportunity? I may now do, what I only invented for Cleonel, —I shall curse my self when she is gone, and when no possibility is left, wish it had been so: it shall be; — if when I have ravish'd her, she can consent, I'le marry her, if she will not, I'le poyson her, and being dead at Sea, hire the Marriners to throw her over-board, I will about it while my Blood is high!— — Venus propitious be to my designe: I'le offer Insence onely at thy Shrine. THE THIRD ACT. [Enter Phillocles.] Phill. GIven to Cecropius custody! that is to Cleonels embraces; I must see her: — is Cecropious, or Cleonel within? Serv: They are Sir. [He knocks at Cecropius's Lodgings, and enter three servants with swords.] Philo: Is Selindra yet at rest? Serv: Yes Sir, long since.
Phill: Is it so late? I do believe you do mistake, and she is not; [Phillocles offers to enter, and they stop him.] —what means this rudenesse? Serv: The Emperor has given command, that neither your high∣nesse, nor any from you, should visit Selindra; besides Sir, all within are now at rest. Phil: My Fathers command! this is some designe from Cleonel: [A noyse within.] —are they all at rest say you? —whence then is this noyse I hear? Serv: We know not Sir. [This way the noyse is.] Phill: Hark, the same noyse againe, 'tis within —stand by, — Vil∣lains give way, or I shall force my passage through your hearts, — by [Goes out and returnes.] Heaven 'tis a Womans voice! —it is Selindra's voice! she calls for help too! Selin: Help, oh help! murther, murther. [He hearkens at the Scene.] Phillocles Enters, breaks open a Doore within, and Cecropious is seen strugling with Selindra, Phil∣locles takes Cecropious by the Coller, and as he of∣fers to kill him, Cleonel Enters, and holds his Sword at Selindra's brest. Cleo: By my Fathers soule, I will strike with thee Phillocles. Phillocles. Thou darest not be so barbarously base, to harme such innocence! Here they look at one another in this posture a while, then Phillocles throws by Cecropius, and runs at Cleonel; he quits Selindra, and meets Phillocles; while they sight, the others run out & raise the Court. Enter the Emperor, with Train and Guard, who part them. Emp: Phillocles, I have thus long winked at your follies, hoping that my mildnesse would have begot a better temper in you, but I now see your sore requires a Corisive: go to your Lodgings, and as you value my displeasure, move not from thence without my leave; — you of the Guard, wait upon the Prince, and let him not stirre out, as you [Exit Phillo∣cles with the Guard.] will answer it to me, —Cecropius, let all leave us but your self; —and now informe me of this Fray, and how he came hither, against my Command. [Exeunt omnes.] Cecro: Mighty Sir, the Prince forced my servants from the Door, and found me threatning Selindra; and frighting of her, as if I meant a Rape, which I only fain'd; intending to take off Phillocles his affection that way, by which he might apply his thoughts towards Astella, for if the Prince should marry Selindra! how can Hungary be yours? this Sir, is the truth. Emp: I wish thou hadst done, what thou onely talkest of, for this young man, will ruine all my hopes of Hungary, if we do not prevent
him! —it must be poyson Cecropius; I see no lesse will do it; Selindra [Cleonel peeps in.] must dye, and that presently. Cecro: And shall Sir, if you so direct; by to morrow night it shall be done. Emp: Be it so then, 'twill be the least evil; and the onely way to se∣cure all the rest; let her be poysoned. Exeunt ambo▪ [Enter Cleonel.] Cleo: Poyson her, my curiosity was to good purpose at this time; was ever gray haires so wicked? how to prevent this mischief I know not; —Selindra will never credit it from me; yet I will urge her hard, and if I do get belief, and by this means bring my designs to pass! I shall finde Doores too strong for Phillocles to force: —Love and Venus guide me. Cleonel goes out and returns Selindra flying before him, with a knife drawn, which she holds at her brest. Sel: Hold Cleonel, if thou presumest to touch me, this Knife shall be my rescue. Cleo. Will this distance, with my obedience, and my humility re∣move [He steps back and kneels.] your fears? —by Selindra's self I swear, my only businesse is to save that life you threaten; —does my heart and my looks so ill agree? that you can fear harm from me! Selin: Art not thou Cecropius's Son? and does not his wilde blood, runne in thy vaines? Cleo. No Madam, I am no whit allied unto Cecropius the Ravisher; he was a Man when he made me, and is now become a Monster; such as I dread to see Selindra under his Roof. Sel: My Lord, that posture does neither become you, nor me,—pray [He rises and comes towards her.] come no nearer! Cleo: You will pardon my approach when you shall know the cause of this unseasonable Visit; I have by accident o're heard the Emperor, give my Father order to poyson you, and he is providing to do it, this next night. Selin. I am glad to hear they are grown so mercifull, death is lesse dreadful then his Rape, — but how can I credit this from you? and how avoid it, if I do? Cleo: Can Selindra believe, my love could ere conceale such a mis∣chief? or that I will omit any endeavour, to preserve her from it? Selin. Were not Cleonel a kin to the Ravisher; I might believe he would detect a Poysoner. Cleo: If I tell you a false word, may suddain plagues seize on me, and if you please to make me the blest Instrument of your escape; the Ho∣nour will be ample recompence for any hazzard I shall runne: I have Madam, a strong Castle within the Forrest, about a League from hence, thither I can convey you first, and then whither you please.
Selin: Pray my Lord leave me a few minutes, that I may consider [Exit Cleo∣nel.] this great concern: —'tis very like, that he who would have ravish'd, may consent to poyson twenty such as I, rather then loose his hopes of Hungary: — I like well to fly from this near death, but I like not to trust my self to Cleonel; there may be more danger at his Castle, then in the death I would fly from; if I discover my self unto Ordella! she will solicite me for Phillocles (who I must ever hate) this will prove more desperate then all the rest: — I must trust Cleonel, though [She calls Cleonel.] he be of a fiery Spirit, his honour was never yet tainted: —I will look gently on him, and ingage him if I can to be true to me: —My Lord, I [He Enters] have weighed my dangers, and your councel to avoid them, and I will trust my self to you, so you will swear to carry me directly unto Bel∣grad, (and not to your Castle) I have friends in Hungary, who will protect me, and there I shall have time to consider of your hazzards for me. Cleo: By our House-hold gods I swear to do it, by this fair hand, I will observe my Oath, and what ever else you shall command me: —though it be late, we must this night depart, you must make ready, while I take order for my Servants, and my Horses. Selin: May I not see the Princess e're I go? will not to morrow night be time enough? Cleo: To morrow night brings death, beyond all power to hinder; we should be going while we talk: —Let no fears disturb you Ma∣dam, I can command the opening of the ports at any hour; all shall be according to your wish. Selin: Heaven grant it Cleonel; — —When I remember the strict vow you made, It were Impiety to be afraid. [Exeunt severally▪] [Enter Phillocles, and Guard.] Phil: Let the Boy only stay, and sing the Song I like. The SONG. Come, come, thou glorious object of my sight, Oh my Ioy! my Life, my only Delight! May this glad minute be Blest to Eternitie. See how the glimmering Tapors of the Skie, Do gaze, and wonder at our Constancy. How they crowd to behold! What our armes do infold! How all do envy our Feliceties! And grudg the Triumphs of Selindras Eyes:
How Cynthia seeks to shroud Her Cressent, in you Cloud! Where sad Night puts her sable mantle on, Thy light mistaking, hasteth to be gone; Her Gloomy shades give way, As at the approach of day; And all the Planets shrink, in doubt to be Eclipsed by a brighter Deity. Look, Oh look! How the small Lights do fall, And Adore, VVhat before The heavens have not show'n! Nor their God-heads known: Such a faith! Such a Love! As may move Mighty Iove From above To descend; and remain, Amongst Mortals again. Phill: Enough boy begon. Enter Ordella, to visit him as in her Chamber, the Guard at the Doore ap∣pearing. Phill: Thou art welcome Ordella, let us sit, and talk sadly. Ordel: My coming is to divert this sadness which you too much indulge. Phill: Does not my sorrow become me Ordella? canst thou wish me merry, when thou considerest my Condition? who is there now in Greece more scorn'd then Phillocles? Ordel: Who more honour'd? thy Victories shine bright upon thee, thy Vertues are unparallel'd, thy self ador'd by thy own Subject, and by other Nations coveted; let not my brother provoke the gods, by his ingratitude. Phil: Thou art mistaken my dear Sister, I am not that Phillocles thou meanest; not he that chased the Germanes out of Hungary, I am one that Cleonel dares Rival, and with a single Arme, can check my force; a poore contemn'd prisoner I am, a man with half a soul thou seest; do I not become my Goale? Ordell: I am sad my self to hear you talk thus; — but, my Brother, your affaires do require your present Counsel; pray let us consider how Selindra may be secur'd from farther danger. [Phillocles starts up hastily.]
Phill: Is Selindra in danger? speak Ordella, what danger? who dares threaten her? Ordel: You mistake me Brother, I was about to tell you that n my opinion, she will be safe at Ciprus, and do think fit when she takes leave of me, to let her know your love, and resolution to marry her, which will soon dash Cleonels hopes; this I could not yet do, by reason she was so suddainly committed to Cecropius; —your looks do fright me, and your unquiet thoughts, will ruine you. Phil: Thou art my only comfort, thou shalt still direct, and I'le obey, prithee Ordella chide me when I do amiss; methinks thy looks speak good successe; I do approve her absence for a while at Ciprus, because you like it, and I will have patience too, because you say 'tis fit. Ordello. Patience will become you best, and best suit with your affaires. Phil: Thou Councell'st well Ordella, but canst not fancy what a bro∣ken heart endures; — my whole soul labours under the burden of my Love, and to that is added her neglects more weighty, and to this double load, my Fathers unjust anger falls up on me, as if I were not sinking fast enough before! Ordel: My Fathers anger will be soon over. Phil: I wish it not Ordella, may his fierce anger urge him on to my destruction, it will be handsomer to fall so, then to perish by Selindra's scorns. Ordel: You raise imaginary evils that are not; I am confident Se∣lindra has no thought for Cleonel, nor can I doubt but she will meet your love, with as bright a flame as yours is. Phi: Oh! that I could suffer such a hope, or such a thought pos∣sesse me; I would then meet my Fathers frowns, and blow away his thunder; did Selindra love me! I would wage a second War with heaven, to gain her, and be more proud to fall her Martyr in so high attempt! then sit next to Jove, with her neglects upon me. [Enter Antenor.] Ante: Madam, the Emperor sent me to see if Selindra were here with you. Ordel: What means my Father by this? Is she not a Prisoner with Cecropius? Ante: She was, but is now missing, at which Cecropius is halfe madde. [Enter Antillacus to them.] Antil: Madam, I come to let you know that by day-break Cleo∣nel, with Selindra past the Ports, and about two hours after, were met on that way, that leads to his Castle. Phil: Let them that love me follow me. Phillocles snatches Antillacus his Sword and runnes at his Guard who give way.
As Phillocles goes out, he meets Lascares. and Cecropius, and wounds Cecropius in the Arme. Emp. Traytor, Villain: — stay all; I do command you stay Antilla∣chus: — See the Court-Gates lock'd, that none go after him; — Cecro∣pius do you retire and look to your hurt, he meant it at thy heart old Man; may thy Sons good Sword revenge it on him, if they meet, and he fall under it. Ordel: Oh Sir! Let not your curses follow my Brother, he has Af∣flictions enough without them. Emp: Peace Ordella, thy tendernesse doth too much nourish thy Bro∣thers follies, I would rather he should not be, then be thus Eeminate; I have fought many Battles, and done great things to settle this Em∣pire; and think you it will be kept, and Govern'd by a heart with a Dart in it. Ordell: Good Sir, let not my Brothers single errour put from your memory all his great Actions, if you would speak mildly to him of his Love, I do believe your Arguments may move him more, then all this rigour can; he has a Noble Spirit, such as you did like, and I know he loves you Sir. Emp: Let me know when he returnes. Exeunt Emperor. Ordell: Are any gone after Phillocles? Enter to Ordella, Armanthus, Gillon Ladies. Arman: Yes Madam, we think Antillacus is gone with Antenor. Ordel: But can they overtake him time enough, before he reaches Cleonel? Gillon. No doubt they may▪ [Enter to them Antillacus, and Antenor.] Ordell: Not yet gone Antillacus? Antil: Madam, all the Court-Gates, are by the Emperors expresse command lock'd up, and Guards set, that no man now can passe. Ordel: Is it not madnesse to hazzard him alone against Cleonel and his company? My Lords, do you mean to give obedience to this rash command? and suffer Phillocles to perish thus; when my Fathers anger is allay'd, hee'l curse your modesty, if not punish it, in case my Brother do miscarry. Antil: Madam, we have no way to follow the Prince, unlesse your selfe command the Guards to let us passe. Ordel: Come then with me; I will stand my Fathers anger when it goes highest, rather then let my Brother fall thus neglected. Exeunt omnes.
[Enter Phlllocles.] Phlllo: Those at the Castle, do not hear of Cleonel, nor expect him there; sure Antillacus did mistake them, or I him, which way now to take I know not: —'Tis strange Antillacus and Antenor stay so long, I must not quit this Road, untill they come: —Hark I hear men and Horses within the Wood, my businesse is to search every where: Love guide me to her Rescue, or my Death. [Exit Phillocles.] Enter Cleonel, leading Selindra, followed by four Servants. Cleo: How is it now Madam? your Spirits seem to be return'd, are you yet strong enough to ride on? we have rested long. Selin: I hope I am, 'twas the blow which the bough gave my head, makes me thus ill, the bushes kept me from the ground, so that my fall could not hurt me. Cleo. The day is farre spent Madam, and we shall be no sooner mist, then follow'd; pray let us to horse, there is a place near, where we may rest for one night secure. Selin: My head growes diszey with this little motion, I fear I can∣not sit upon my Horse yet; —methinks you might hide me here in these thick bushes untill night, and when 'tis dark, find some better means to carry me away. Cleo: 'Twill not be safe to stay longer, so near our Enemies. [Enter Phillocles.] Phil: 'Tis Cleonel; —turne this way Traytor: Cleonel holds up Selindra, and sends his men to Phillocles. Cleo: Take the Prince without harme, if you can. Phil: Am I not worthy thy own Sword Ravisher? [They Fight.] Phillocles runnes desperately among the men, passes them, and comes up to Cleonel, they all incompasse him, fighting: Selindra runnes amongst them and parts 'um Selin: I beg your patience Sir; —and do command thine Cleonel, but here me speak, I do conjure you both, —Phillocles, brave Prince,
look on me with pitty, and on Cleonel with justice; my life being sought several wayes by Lascares, and Cecropius, I have endeavour'd to preserve by flight; you must therefore look on Cleonel as trusted, and imployed by me, being ingaged by Oath to carry me to Belgrade, to my Friends there. Phil: Thou art betray'd Selindra, lost for ever; this is not the way to Belgrade, you are now within a mile of his Castle, this way leads to no other place; —thou persidious Villain, canst thou smile at such a treachery? Cleo. Yes Phillocles, and will be my own carver now, I must be first serv'd here: —do you two carry her to Horse, I'le soon o're take you. [He delivers Selindra to two of his men.] Selin: To Horse Cleonel; —I'le rather dye, then stir a foot that way. Cleo: Force her to Horse, we have no time to talk. Phil: Force her! thou cursed slave, I'le sacrifice thee ere she goes. Cleonel and his two Men sight with Phillo∣cles, while the other two force off Selindra: — Selin: The gods preserve the Prince; help, help, murther, treason, treason: — Exeunt with Selindra. Vpon her cryes, enter six Travelors, Pollidor the Chief. Poll: Let some help those that cry, let others search the Wood, I'le towards the clashing Swords; —how's this! three to one! Pollidor runs at Cleonel and diverts him, just as Phillocles had kill'd one man, at which in∣stant the other man hurts Phillocles in the back, and seeing this rescue, he runs into the VVood; Phillocles runs after him that fled, be∣lieving it had been Cleonel, whom he could not see, because Pollidor having run Cleonel through the heart, was fallen himself upon him, who being by Cleonel run into the throat, lay al∣so as dead covering Cleonel. Enter to them the rest of the Travelors, with Selindra very weak, who when they see Polli∣dor dead, do let Selindra fall, who lies on the ground while they take up Pollidor, and dress his wounds. Tene: Curs'd be that Woman, accurs'd our Fate to loose our prince [They dress him as they talke.]
Teck: Now the blood issues at the wound, it may prove not mortall. Titi. The blood only choak'd him as he lay, you see his Eyes look chearfully. [Kneels.] Tene: Ye Gods, if any do take care of Hungary, look down on Polli∣nesso, and restore him to us. Selin: What's that he said? —was it Pollinesso that he named? [She looks up:] Titius. The King will live, thanks to heaven for his deliverance. Selin: They call him King too; Pollinesso's name, gives me Strength; —but that face is none of mine, and yet that name makes that face love∣ly to me; —How I fool my self with vain hopes, of what cannot be! [She lies down againe sadly.] Ten: How is it Sir? your looks are lively, and your wound, though it did at first seem desperate, is not very dangerous. Polli: My tongue moves heavily, and painfully, losse of blood makes me faint too; —how shall I travell with these wounds? —my stay here will be very dangerous, and my Journey to Belgrade, too long for one so weak as I am. Ten: The same Gods that have preserv'd you to this day, will not let you fall thus. [He faints and slumbers.] Selin: They talke of Belgrade too; who can this be? —give me way, that I may gaze on this wonder. She rises, crowds in amongst them, and stares on Pollidor. Tene: Away wild Woman, thou Author of this mischief. Selin: He looks up again! those Eyes are mine, I know 'um now! [She offers to imbrace him.] Tene: Throw her off, teare her away, she disturbs him, sure she is madde. [Yhey pull her from him.] Selin: 'Tis you are mad, 'tis you that love him not; why do you haile me thus? whither will you dragge me? did you not call him Pollnesso. Titi. Yes. Selin: King Pollinesso! Titi: I think we did. Selin: That name is mine, those wounds are mine then! [She offers to go to him, but they hold her off.] Titi: I wish they were. Selin: And so do I with all my heart, pray let me go to him, I can heal him with my tears; —I'le suck his wounds well, for I have heard wounds have been cur'd so.
Tene: How comes his name in her mouth. Teck: 'Twas not well done of us, to name him as we did, best to strangle her, lest she discover us. Titi. Shall I shoot her in the head? though the Act be horrid, 'tis better she perish, then all wee. Teck: Let us first hear what she will say to him, we shall have time enough to kill her after. Selin: I pray who are all you? Tene: We are the hurt mans servants Lady, pray who are you? by whom we have receiv'd such dammage. Selin: If my Eyes deceive me not, I may be happy; but am yet, the most miserable, accurs'd Woman living. Titi: I think so too.— [Aside.] Polli: What Woman is that weeps so? Tene: 'Tis she you rescued Sir. Polli: Did I rescue her? —losse of blood makes my Eyes dazzle, and my fancy work even to a lightnesse; that Face brings to my me∣mory something that I have known: —why does she weep? and why do you hold her so rudely Tenedor. [Pollidor and Selindra both look earnestly at each other.] Selin. In charity to me Sir, though they know it not, for had they sooner let me know that Pollinesso liv'd! my suddain joy had slain me: Polli: What is this she sayes? Titi: She is a Witch Sir I think. Selin: Does not my Brother know me yet? have my sorrowes wrought such a change, that Pollinesso should not know me? Polli: Oh! my Astella, pardon my dull sight; for I am very weak. [He faints.] Selin: Would I had dyed, rather then be rescued at this rate, so joy∣ful, and so sad a day I have not seen before. Teck. He does but slumber Madam, and 'tis good he should do so. Selin: But slumber say you, it looks so like death! that I would dye to see it! Tene: Madam, the Joy will out-live the sorrow of this day, the Prin∣ce's hurt is without danger; —can your goodnesse pardon the rude words which my selfe, and these Lords in our distraction speake? Selin: Alas my Lord, I was not sensible of what you sayd, my mind was so o're-loaden with my griefs, and so intent on Pollinesso! that I heard you not; Now while my Brother takes this rest, pray make me know how he escaped, when my Father and Barzanes fell, and why he has been thus long conceal'd. Tene: Madam, in that sad day, Pollinesso in vain attempting to save his Father, was with my self, and these you see here, cast on a sandy bank, from whence by good swimming we got to shoar, and have been since disguised for fear of Lascares, in several Princes Courts soliciting for aid, to force the Grecians to quit their stolen possession of Hungary; when in the midst of Pollinesso's preparation, he hears that Phillocles had resign'd the Crown to be preserv'd for you; This made us lay
aside all further preparation for a Warre, and thus disguis'd to passe this way to Belgrade: It seems by destiny directed to your recsue. Selin: I shall find some fitter time for my own story, 'twere good that we removed my Brother, —he wakes: —how are you Sir, has this repose refresht you? Polli: I am something better then I was Astella, and shall soon be well, now I may look on thee. Selin: And I most happy! my brother you must give us leave to remove you to some place of rest, and safety, and you must be still conceal'd; which these new wounds, with your Perriwig will be dis∣guise enough. Polli: I shall be directed by you. Sel: You must also a little counterfeit your voice, lest you be re∣member'd by it; for should Lascares know who were in his power, all his hopes of Hungary would vanish, untill he saw you dead; I am call'd Selindra here. Poll: Who were those Robbers? and how came you amongst them? Selin: 'Twas Cleonel, who did beguile me, after he had sworn to car∣ry me to Belgrade, was conveying me to his own Castle. Pol: Was not Cleonel Cecropins's son? and will not his death, be our ruine if we stay here? Sel: My interest in the Princess Ordella, will secure you, and his guilt was such a crime, as can expect no justice from the Law to touch you; besides the rescue you brought the Prince, will merrit a reward, —but where is Phillocles? where is the Prince! we are all lost indeed, if he be fallen: I have been so much distracted, that I mist him not till now! Tecknor. What Prince mean you Madam? Selin: Prince Phillocles! 'twas he my brother rescued; runne, look, search about the Wood, for heaven sake search; —unfortunate Astella, and unworthy, that could thus long forget him; now Polliness lives! I have no hate to Phillocles; methinks his vertues now look gloriously upon him — but how shall I look on Ordella? if her beloved brother have lost his life, to save my honour! Pol: Was it Phillocles that I found fighting with Cleonel and his two men? Selin: 'Twas he. Polli: 'Tis strange I knew him not, but I now remember as I came in, he did persue the man that fled into the Wood, — (let some looke that way,) Selindra I must glory in my wounds, that have sav'd thee from false Cleonel, and relieved Phillocles, who my soul thirsts to see, next thy self most dear to me. Sel: And mine trembles at his absence. Enter Phillocles to them bloody, and weary, leaning on his Sword; he calls before he is seen to Enter. Phil: Selindra, Selindra, is Selindra safe? —has she any mercy yet for Phillocles?
Selin: She is safe and happy too, now she sees you alive Sir; my heart is so much disturb'd by my fears and joyes, that I know not how to ex∣presse she goes kind∣ly to him. my gratitude: good Sir, let these strangers dress your Wounds, they have shewed much skill on this hurt man. Phil: My Wounds are but slight scratches when Selindra smiles; my joyes are much more dangerous then my Wounds. Selin: My life Sir, and my honour you have saved, I must look on you with devotion! pray be pleas'd to own these our Redeemers, and give them some assurance of your Protection, they fear Cleonel's death may by Cecropius's power with the Emperor, prove their destruction. Phill: I will be their security, Selindras Redeemers shall command my life; of what Country are they? Tene: Hungarians Sir, Men that since the late Warre, have sought Fortunes in Forraign Lands, and now on private Affaires, were retur∣ning home. [Selindra brings Phillocles to Pollidor.] Phillo: Unto you Sir, I have a great Obligation, such as my whole Life shall express my Zeale to serve you, for by you Selindra lives. Polli: Sir, I am rewarded much above my merrit, and shall bless the occasion that gave me power to serve you. [Enter Antillacus and Antenor.] Antilla: Sir, the Emperour's much inraged at Cecropius's hurt you gave him, and at your departure, staid us till now; — Is this Cleonels, or your own blood Sir? Phillo: 'Tis neither, Cleonel fell by that Noble hand, whose timely ayd deliver'd Selindra from a Rape, and me from death; My Arme Antillacus, is grown weak of late, and thy good Sword so dull, it will do nothing in my hand. Ante: But Sir, how comes it that you thus neglect your Wounds. Phillo: I have businesse of more weight to think on, now Selindra smiles: —Antenor, pray haste you back unto Ordella, and desire her to be the first relator of Cleonels death, bid her tell my Father of his horrid Treachery, and let her magnifie these strangers sent by the gods to save the innocent, and to chastise the perjur'd Ravisher; make haste Antenor, and tell Ordella that I am in Paradice! Ante: She will be glad to hear that you are well Sir. Phillo: Well Antenor, why thou art well, and so is he, and he, we are all well; but I am blest with all my heart can wish for; tell my Sister the gentle, and the fair Selindra smiles, and let her think the rest! —I am all Ayre, Antillacus pray thee help me to rub my Wounds, a little smart may let me know that I am mortall. [Exit An∣tenor.] Antill: If I mistake not Sir, you'l finde smart enough in your Fa∣thers rage, when he hears of Cleonels death. Phil: Some anger will do well Antillacus, to allay this joy with∣in me. Selin: I have some fears too, lest Cecropius's malice may ruine us, you know his power Sir.
Phill: Let not my Divinest Mistris have so mean a thought of my power to serve her, let not a sad look appear on this day, that you have dain'd to smile on Phillocles: Madam, 'tis time that we were moving towards the Town, with our wounded Friend; how must I call him? Selin: I think they call him Pollidor; Sir, though my confidence in you be equal to the value you are pleas'd to set on me, I cannot chuse but fear Lascares's anger, when I think on Cleonel. Phil: Believe me Selindra, I will rather dye, then let them suffer. [He leads off Selindra, the rest take up Pollidor.] Phil: Thus let us march in Triumph to the Town, Aloud proclaiming Pollidor's renown; While the Arched Heaven do Ecco its content, To see Selindra freed from Ravishment. Exeunt Omnes. THE FOURTH ACT. Enter Emperor, Ordella, Cecropius, Antenor, and Servants. Cecrop: SIr, I beg the due Execution of our Lawes on Murderers. Ordel: And I Sir, beg mercy for those that have sav'd my Brothers life. Emp: I may not hearken to thy suit Ordella, the Lawes must be in∣violable, to pardon such a Murther, would pull down Vengeance on my own head, on thine too, on all our Family. [She weeps.] Cecro. When you remember Cleonels faith, and his many services, I hope Sir you will not deny me Justice. Emp. Cecropius you shall have Justice; — go you Antenor, and command the Provost of the City that he seize Selindra, and her fellow Murtherers, let them be all close Prisoners in the black Tower; by to morrow this time, shall their bloods be shed, as they shed Cleonels. Ordel: Did you say Selindra should be Prisoner Sir. Emp: I did. Ordel: Good Sir, call back Antenor till you have heard me speak. Emp: I may not Ordella. Ordel: Who can forbid you to be Merciful? and just? you break the Lawes of Hospitality in this; Selindra is a stranger, she is innocent, and cannot suffer justly; Cleonel was full of horrid guilt, and was cut off by a just hand; —the Travellers too, have saved Phillocles his life; good Sir, let not Cecropius malice, perswade you to do, what you will blush to think on after.
Emp: They shall have Justice, and a Legal Tryall. Ordel: Oh Sir! where is your wonted mercy? whither is that good∣nesse fled? how have I lost your favour? that cannot with my Tears, nor Prayers prevale on your mistaken anger. [Enter Phillocles, Antillacus and Armanthus.] Phill: Is it your Majesties Command, that Selindra should be a Prisoner? Emp: Must I aske your leave? Phil: Though not my leave Sir, I cannot chuse but wonder at such rigour! Emp: You have leave to wonder on. Phill: Thus low Sir, I do humbly beg Selindra's Inlargement, and an equall Tryal for those that rescued us; — [He kneels.] Emp: Selindra as chief accessary must abide the Sentence of the Law, in this case of Cleonel: —Phillocles thy mean Love has drown'd all my Favours, and Eclip'st all thy former actions; from this time I shall study to forget thee, unlesse thou wilt forget Selindra, and lead the Army to relieve Astella. Phill: I shall obey you Sir in this, and all things else, so you will be pleas'd to send Selindra safe to Ciprus, and set those innocent men free, that saved my life. Emp: Degenerate fool, I shall cure this disease in thee; Cecropius send presently for the Judges, Command them by virtue of this my Signet, to put the Lawes in present Execution, upon thy Sons Murthe∣rers; let the rigour of the Law passe on them all. Phil: Ye Gods, to what purpose are men innocent? why is virtue prays'd, and taught us? —Good Sir, consider how you do murther these innocents, with a shew of Law, and a pretence of Justice. Emp: How dare you talke thus? Phil: You make me desperate Sir. Emp: Do not raise my temper higher, lest I cut thee off, as if thou wer't no part of me; — they shall dye. Phill: Had the Gods so pleas'd, I wish my self the meanest of your Subject, for I am now a slave unto your passions, and must inherit the curse that's due to all your guilts, such as I shake to think on; 'Tis you Sir, that have murthered Cleonel, 'twas your poyson that Selindra fled from; by your confining me, you gave Cecropius first, and Cleonel next, the power to become Ravishers; pray let the Law take notice of this! — It may free innocent persons. Emp: Who am I? Is this Gallant my Son, or my Soveraigne? Phil: Sir I do see fire, and fury in your Eyes, and am prepar'd to meet it, 'tis better to dye with those are Noble, then to live thus neglected; by my hand two of Cleonels men fell, 'tis I am guilty of that sin of res∣cuing Selindra from a Rape: let your Justice, and your Lawes, grow famous by my blood, 'twill please Cecropius well; by all our Gods I▪le not out-live those innocents. Emp: Tis fit to take thee at thy word.
The Emperor Draws and Runs at Phillocles to kill him, Ordella steps between. Phil: It will become your own hand best. Ordel: Have you another Son Sir, when you have slain my Brother? [Phillocles is going out.] Emper: Antenor, call in my Guard, and carry Phillocles to the New Castle; see that he be safe, and close there, as you will answer it with your life; —I shall not trust you in the Army now Sir. [Here all in∣tercede.] Ordel: Pray Sir re-call this severe command, my Brother has no dan∣ger in him, you saw he did not avoid death, when your hand offer'd it. Emp: Antenor, I will be obeyed; —by Heaven he dyes that dares dispute my Will. [Spaks aside] Phill: If I go to Prison? Selindra dyes, there is none can help her, [He kneels.] and then, I shall have time hereafter, to lament her sad fate; Sir, I aske your pardon for the harsh words I utter'd, I did believe those truths might touch you, and move compassion towards those you threaten so much rigour too: but I now see your anger has decreed them dead, and that you have the same thought for me; my last sute is, that since we may not live, we may dye together: I shall submit to any kind of Death Sir; But I have vowed to be no more confin'd. Emp: You of the Guard seize on him. [As the Guard comes toward him he draws.] Phil: Against Imprisonment, I shall endeavour what I can; com∣mand my death Sir, and I will welcome it. [Opens his Armes.] Emp: Kill him; —Kill the Traytor; —dares none stirre to do it? Is my breath grown so weak? Ile try my own strength then. The Emperor snatches a Partizan from one of the Guard, and wounds Phillocles in the breast slightly, Phillocles holding down his Sword opens his arms and receives the wound, they search his wound, set him in a Chair, while the Emperor stands amaz'd at what he had done. Ordell. Oh, my Brother's slain! how cruel, and unnaturall a deed is this? [Enter Cecropius.] Cecro: The Surgeons say the Chiefe prisoner will not Live till Morning; I beg Sir, that the sentence may passe on the rest. The Emperor gives Cecropius no answer, only points to Phillocles, lets fall the Partizan till then in his hand, and Exit with Cecropius.
Antil: 'Twas well the Emperors age did not permit his force to act his will, the wound has not past the bone Madam, 'tis but a slight cut in the flesh. Arman: 'Tis time that you hasten to the Army, for while Cecropius holds his power, you cannot be safe here. Ordell: He advises well Brother, untill my Father be dispossest of this evill spirit that reignes in him, I wish you away too. Phil: I think it must be so; the Souldiers I hope have not forgot their love to me; —My Dear Sister, pray will you ore-take my Father lest in this sit he slay all our Friends; say that Selindra did sly wil∣lingly with Cleonel, and that she regards not my Love, say any thing to gaine a little time, untill I may do something to relieve them. Ordel: I shall do my best: — Ordella at the Door meets the Emperor with Selindra in his hand, and Pollidor led in, he delivers Selindra to Ordella, and points to them to set Pollidor by Phillocles, then goes out with Cecropius and Servants. Ordell: What means my Father by this dumb shew? Polli: Where are we now Tenedor? Tene: Truly Sir, I know not, but I see Friends here. Polli: Who are they? Tene: Those that brought you in, were the Emperor, and Cecropius; you know Prince Phillocles, that whispers with Selindra, that other sure is the Princess Ordella. Polli: Is that the Princess Ordella? Phill: Your presence Madam gives me strength, and your kind looks, give life unto my drooping spirits. Selin: How miserable am I Sir, that am the occasion of all these evils. Phil: Your own sufferings are the onely evills to be lamented, I could curse my self, that brings such troubles on you; —but Madam we forget to comfort this Gallant man, by whose Sword we enjoy our Lives: —Sir, can you pardon me that undertook so much, and can so little serve you? Polli: It was an injury Sir, to think I would receive my life, ransom'd by your death. Phill: By my wound Pollidor, I have appeas'd my Fathers Rage; by thy wounds Selindra Lives, and through all these Clouds, I see the Tempest ceasing; —cannot Selindra speak to him? Selin: I have a heart as full of Gratitude as yours Sir, but not yet any means to shew it; I shall make it my businesse to serve him. Phill. Has my Dear Sister no complement for Pollidor? by whose valour she enjoyes Selindra, and me. Ordel: Yes Phillocles, I am studying how to expresse it, for you two have left nothing for me to say: Sir, I can only thank you o're again for my Brothers, and my Friends preservation, by which you have ob∣liged me, and the whole Empire, and do deserve some publique Ho∣nour, and high Recompence.
Polli: What honour, or what recompence can outweigh this you now heap on me? Madam, if what I have done, be a service that you will own, I have no wish beyond it; I shall ever on this day keep a solemn Feast unto the Gods, that did direct my course that way, and gave me power to become as happy here, as in Elizium. Phill: Let those Lodgings next to mime, be made ready for Pollidor, I will not trust him farther from me; — Antillacus, go you with as lit∣tle noyse as may be to the Army, and let the Souldiers know, that I will suddainly be with them; some lead out Pollidor. [Exeunt Omnes.] [Enter the Emperor and Cecropius.] Cecro: 'Twas not revenge, for Cleonel, made me presse your Maje∣sty to do Justice on his Murtherers, but to cut off Selindra, by which Phillocles might have no hindrance to gain Astella; —But Sir, since you have freed the Prisoners, and are content, the Prince shall marry Selindra, I have done; if you Sir, can lay by all thoughts of Astella; and that Crown, I shall soon forget a private losse. Emp: I must laugh Cecropius to see how thou art abus'd by my feigned shew of kindnesse, which I only did, to heal the wound I gave; had I another Son, by whom I might gaine Hungary, Phillocles had found my Force, answerable to my Anger; but I confesse I did relent, upon a suddain thought, which made me strike so feebly at him, for now to loose Phillocles, were to throw Hungary away, and to destroy Selin∣dra, were by another kind of stroak to destroy Phillocles. Cecro: What other way have you Sir? that I cannot yet fancy. Emp: A sure one Cecropius, away that cannot faile, I will give loose reins to my Sons Love, let him run on, and Joy in his beloved Selin∣dra, whose sweets once had, and his young appetite allayed, (as most violent passions soonest are) then 'twill be best to take away Selindra by a Poyson; then it may be done without suspition, while I urge on the Marriage, joyne in all the Nuptiall Jollities, and put on such plea∣sing looks, as shall make thee doubt my purpose, though thou know∣est my heart. Cecro: I see not yet how this can get Astella, or that Crown. Emp: Thou art grown so dull of late, that thou seest nothing; while this joy lasts, Astella may be found, and then Selindra dying, what can hinder Phillocles from getting Astella? Cecro: I do submit Sir, and must applaud your purpose, 'tis a design I do confesse, much above my reach, and the first mischief I have come short in. Exeuut ambo. Pollidor seen in his Chamber, Enter to him Phillocles and Ordella, and Selindra, the servants go off. Phil: You look chearfully to day Pollidor, we may hope to see you abroad shortly.
Polli: I believe I might venture now Sir, though my Surgeons be not of my mind; but Sir, how do you find the good old Emperor dispos'd. Phil: I like not my Fathers smiles Pollidor, his suddain starts into such extreams, make me apprehend more danger in his kindnesse, then his rage; so that to prevent all further evils, I have a purpose to re∣paire unto the Army; and 'tis Ordella's wish, as well as mine, that Se∣lindra would trust her self with me there. Polli: That may secure you both, but will not Selindra's honour suffer? Ordel: Now that Selindra's interest, and his are become one, I see no reason she should fear to go, nor indeed any scruple why their Marriage may not be privatly, and presently dispatch'd, for while the businesse lingers thus, they give hopes to such Endeavours as would divert it, and do runne daily hazzards, by staying here. Phillo: Ordella argues what my soul wishes, but Selindra's looks do not consent to make me so soon happy. Selin: Sir, my loooks do be-lye my heart, if they shew ought that would delay a happinesse to you, for I have none beyond yours: — But Sir, above all other reasons, Pollidor (not being yet able to attend you) if he be left behind, will hardly escape Cecropius's fury? Phil: Most true Selindra, he will be in danger, I shall therefore attend his recovery; without him I will not move; nor will I put a thought in act without thy Councel. Ordel: You have both said well, but in my judgment, this is no fit time for such Complements, when your lives are daily sought. Polli: If you be resolv'd to attend my recovery, I shall propose a sudden fancy of mine, to that purpose, which may secure us: Phill: Speak it Pollidor. Polli: Suppose Selindra do ask the Princess leave to return to Cy∣prus, and give out that she only expects, her Fathers coming to convey her thither. —Sir, you may court Selindra publikely while she stayes, and she seem to neglect your love, and put on a shew of kindnesse unto me, as in gratitude for my hazzards in her redemption, I will also coun∣terfeit affection to Selindra, and give out, that I am of better quality then I seem: This Sir, if well manag'd, will be ground enough, to deceive their best Spies, and for some time secure us all. Phillocles. I approve your thought Pollidor, and if Selindra can un∣dertake her part, doubt not me, I'le put on such a seeming jealousie, as shall puzzle the old Fox Cecropius himself. Selindra. I shall easily observe my directions, and soon learn to be civil to a man, I owe so much to! Phillo: Come Ordella, while they practise love, we will reconcile us to the Emperor, and try to bring him on a present visit to Pollidor, be∣fore this sit of his good nature leave him. Ordel: Selindra we must find you sitting in a more familiar way with Pollidor, then ordinary conversation does allow. [Exeunt Phillocles and Ordella.]
Selindra. I shall obey you Madam: — Now they are gone, we may enjoy our selves, this happy design of yours, will afford us many houres of freedome. Pollidor. My soul is joyed to look on thee Astella! Selin: And my happinesse too great to be exprest by words! that you live! makes this Earth a Paradice to me; my heart can scarce make roome for Phillocles, it is so full of Pollinesso! Polli: I am all thine Astella. [She embraces him.] [Enter to them Tenedor, Tecknor, and others.] Tenedor. Is it time Sir, that you retir'd to rest, you spend your spi∣rits, by so much discourse, which does retard your cure. Teck: You should neglect no means Sir, for your recovery, lest by a long stay here, some accident unlook'd for, may make you known. Tenedor. I wonder Phillocles does not call to mind that he has seen you. Pollidor. He believes me dead, as all others do; but I shall observe the best rules for my recovery however: — Now Astella we have time to hear how you were conveyed from Belgrade, pray make me know how you came hither! Selin: That same night that you departed to the Army, and our first Embassadors went towards Greece, to implore Lascares's aid against the Germanes, I was by my Fathers own hand deliver'd unto Peri∣ander, whom I was to call Father; and by him was brought to Ci∣prus, where the Plague then raging, he transports me with his Family to this Town. Pollidor. How came you into the Court then? Selin: On the first Feast-day, I went with Periander to the Temple, that I might see the Emperor, and the Printess Ordella, where the Prin∣cess casting her Eyes on me, found mine so fixed on her, that I could not remove them, but blush'd, and still look'd on her; by what power led, I know not; but she took a fancy to have me live with her, which Periander durst shew no dislike to: thus was I, to my great joy, call'd to Court, where I became a Companion to the Princess: within a short time Cleonel had affection for me, which did not free me from old Ce∣cropius dotage: of which, with Prince Phillocles his worthy love, you shall know hereafter, for I have now held you too long from your repose. Pollidor. Dearest Astella thy words are balsome to my wounds. Exeunt Lords. [Pollidor and Selindra embrace.] Enter Emperor, Phillocles, Ordella, Cecropius, and Traine, and see them Embracing. Phillocles. Your Majesty will not think this honour too much for Pollidor, when you shall know he is of better quality then he seems; — ha! what do I see? [They embrace and rise disturb'd.]
Emp: That which should teach thee to have nobler thoughts Phil∣loces, think on this surprize. Phil: How they are disturb'd! Ordel: They do it rarely well. [aside.] Emp: Sir, I am now come to excuse the imprisonment you had, and to give you thanks for my sons life; I shall now endeavour to recom∣pence your merit, rather then trouble you with words. Poll: Great Sir, this honour, with the many other favours I receiv'd, do shame me to think that you allow me a merrit I cannot own, but if the Gods do give me life, my onely businesse shall be to seek occasions to serve you and yours. Emp: I shall contribute what I can to your health, and will please my selfe, with the expectation of great things from you. While they talk, the Emperor observes Phillocles courting Selindra, and she neglecting him; the Em∣peror observes Pollidor to be troubled at their Court∣ship, and is pleased at it. Poll: Sir, you oblige me beyond words, to utter my sense of your fa∣vours. Emp: My purpose is to give you a kind welcome, and a respect sui∣table to your worth, and quality: —fair Maid, I know not well how [He goes to Selindra.] to frame my discourse to you, whom I have so ill treated; but I shall no more disturb your joyes, I do now make it my suit, that you will defer your return to Ciprus, I shall lay my commands on Ordella, to deny you her consent to go. Selin: Sir, The favours and honours I have received here, are farre beyond the ills you mention; and my happinesse such, in the Princesse Ordella's love, that I lament the thoughts of my departure, but when I consider the mischiefes past, and foresee worse like to follow, 'twere madnesse not to fly them; when my Father is return'd, I shall renew my suit, to have the Princess leave, to leave this place, and until then, make it my care, to tend this hurt man, my redeemer! to whom I owe my life and honour! Emp: Selindra, if I can adde any thing unto thy happinesse, I shall do it gladly, for thou art something more, then ever I have found in Wo∣man. Exeunt Emperor and Cecropius. Phill: What thanks do we owe Pollidor for this disguise! it takes Ordella, beyond our hopes; did you observe how my Father eyed us, while he talked to Pollidor? Ordella. Yes, and do believe Cecropius and he are gone to compare their notes, for that Fox was very vigilant. Phill: Selindra, let us enjoy this blest minute. Phillocles leads Selindra to the Couch, and Ordella goes to Pollidor. Ordel: Sir, While the two Lovers whisper, pray oblige me with the knowledge of the occasion of your coming into these parts, by which we have received so great an obligation; and if you please? to passe this
time with the relation of your own story, unlesse with your selfe, you would conceale it. Poll: Madam, My story is not worthy your eares, nor my self this honour: —yet I have a story, —such as will make me blush to ut∣ter, though no crime do belong to it: —nor am I what I seem, and yet not fit to appear other, —but Madam, your commands are too high ho∣nours to be neglected, my own resolutions shall give way, and my nea∣rest concernes submit to your will. Ord: I perceive you are disturb'd at my curiosity to know, what I believe you would conceal; it may be you have vowed not to discover; truly Sir, for want of what to say, I onely said it. Poll: Madam, I was surpriz'd by your approach, which made my tongue appeare lesse ready then my heart to obey you; your com∣mands, Madam, are sufficient to dissolve any vowes of mine, and since you will vouchsafe to hear, I shall relate. [Phillocles and Selindra come to them.] Phill: How are you Sir? Methinks your Eyes do shew some an∣guish in your wounds, do we not trouble you? Here Phillocles and Selindra interrupt Pollidor, which puts him into some passion, for he now began to love Ordella. Ord: We have done ill to stay thus long, Selindra 'tis your fault, you should have directed better. Poll: No Madam, my houre to rest is not so precisely to be kept, nor have I any pains upon me, as the Prince thinks; my wounds heal the faster for your company. Ord: You are civil Sir. Poll: Madam, the Prince's kindnesse, and his care, is not at this time necessary: —pray Sir, if your occasions call you not, do not go yet. Phill: Pollidor we know your civility is great, out discretion must not be the lesse, I see you are disturb'd, and know your pains are great upon you; make no reply, wee'l soon visit you againe; come Ordella, let us leave Selindra to her charge; good rest unto my friend, all joyes unto my Mistriss. Exeunt Phillocles and Ordella Poll: Beshrew your kindnesse at this time, —how like Tantalus was I? Selin: What mean you by this passion brother? shall I call the Surgeons? Poll: No Selindra, they have no skill in my disease. Selin: You speak, and look, as if you wanted sleep, pray retire to rest. Poll: Rest Selindra! where can I find rest? Phillocles has taken all rest from me! did you not observe how the Princess came to me? and how she threw her favours on me! when in the height of all my joy, your approach destroyed me. Selin: If this be all! I must smile, to hear you sigh brother.
Poll: All Selindra! doest thou mock me? are thy own flames so weak? thou smilest at mine! Selind: I cannot chuse but smile, when I rejoyce to see my wishes fall so fast upon me: you love the Princess, and she will love you, she must, she shall, nay, I doubt she does already! and have some fear, the work will be too easie, if I undertake it. Poll: Now thou mockest me more, then thou didst before! prithee Selindra be serious, and do not play with what torments me. Selin: What can be more serious? then to make a marriage be∣tween so great a Princess, and the King of Hungary? pray where can she make a better choice? or who can better plead your suit then I? Look to your wounds brother, leave this affair to me. Exit: Poll: My best wishes do attend thee, she has rais'd in me such doubt∣full hopes, that they begin to vanish with her, and such fears to lose what I never had, do throng so fast upon me, that on the sudden I am orewhelm'd,— —With doubts, with joyes, with fears, so strangely mixt! My heart is Hell, untill my hopes be fixt. THE FIFTH ACT. [Enter Selindra pensive, Cecropius meets her.] Cecro: GOod day unto the bright Selindra? Selin: May your Lordship find many such. [She is going out] Cecro: Why do you sly me, Madam? I come in dilligence to make known to you, what concerns you more, then any other businesse can, towards which you make such haste from me. Selin: I fled not from your Lordship, nor did I perceive, that you had ought to say to me; what is your pleasure now? Cecro: My businesse is, to preserve you from a certain ruine, and to set you above the reach of mischiefe, as high in honour, as you are in beauty, and in vertue. Selind: I were much unworthy such a favour, and not Mistress of any virtue, if I should not return a befitting gratitude. Cecro: Know then Selindra, you are design'd unto your grave; your wedding robe, will prove your winding sheet, if I prevent it not; the Emperor puts on this shew of kindnesse, onely to destroy you with lesse noise; he does consent that Phillocles by a present marriage, should satisfie his appetite; after which you shall be poysoned, that the Prince may have no object between him and Astella: This by all our Grecian Gods is true, and this I have consented to. Selin: Can there be such a wickedness 'mongst men!
Cecro: Can you doubt it, that have seen so much? or can you think Lascares will consider such a life as yours, when it does interpose be∣tween the Crown of Hungary and him? Selin: If this be so, how can I avoid it? shall I think you will be∣tray the Emperors trust, to oblige me! Cecro: Madam, if you would please to look on your faithfull servant with equal Eyes, and on your dangers with judicious thoughts, you'l see that Phillocles his love brings death; —and Pollidor methinks, should not have gain'd an interest where Phillocles pretends. Selin: My Lord, I must confesse what you have said, is worthy my most serious thoughts, —but my Lord, 'tis not fit that I treat farther in this affaire, until my Father doth return; if you please to move him in it, my obedience shall follow his will. Cecro: Of his consent I make no doubt, my best Mistriss; joyes, and greatnesse do attend Selindra when she smiles on me! [She suffers him to kisse her Hand.] Selind: But how can you secure your self, and me from Phillocles? will not his rage, raise a revenge as ruinous, as this you would have me fly from? Cecro: Good Madam, let not so mean a thought remain with you; I have Lascares Scepter in my hand, and all the Frontier Towns in my Command; the Souldiers too, since Phillocles forsook them, are be∣come mine; if my fair Mistress would by one kind look confirme my joyes, it would encourage me to let her see, at what a rate I value her. Selin: I blush to think that I have smil'd so much, upon so short ac∣quaintance, Pray Heaven you have not a design, to destroy me this way! Cecro: Can you think I will destroy my souls onely joy? to remove all such fears, I will now put my life into your hands. Selin: How my Lord! your life? Cecro: You have heard, Madam, how the Hungarian Army marches towards Grecce, it does so: drawn in by me, to my aid they come, to assist me to get Selindra, and to set Lascares Crown upon her head! if she will deserve it? —we are interrupted now, —think on me, and thou shalt wear this Imperial Crown, Selindra, within few howers. Exit Cecropius. [Enter to her Phillocles, and Ordella.] Phil: What has caus'd thy clouded brow Selindra? has that viper vext thee? Selin: He has frighted me, and will anger us all, if he be not preven∣ted; such horrid mischiefes he has in love to me reveal'd, as I shake to think on. Ordella. To what tune runne they? Selin. To several tunes, some to Love, some to private blood-shed, others to publick Warre, and in summe to ruine all that's good; —The
Emperor will permit our marriage Sir, and after poyson me, that you may have leisure to gaine Astella; but above all, Cecropius treachery must be lookt to; He has call'd in the Hungarian Army, to make me his by force: he talked of a Crown too, that I should weare, if I would comply with him, and at that word you interrupted us: good Sir, make it a little more your businesse to prevent these Devils, and their de∣signes. Phill: There is danger in this, worthy our best care, Selindra, I see our stay here, will still occasion new designs on us. Ordel: And you too late, I fear, will find my counsel good, why may not I have credit to protect Pollidor in your absence? Phill: I think you may, but yet 'tis not fit to hazzard such a friend, to the fury of that Monster Cecropius; besides, Selindra is now enga∣ged in honour, to stay for him. elin: Truly Sir, I think I am in honour bound, not rashly to throw away a man, that has preserv'd us both; but Sir, when you shall con∣sider that his wounds do now permit him to walk abroad, a few dayes more, will get him strength to ride with us: during which time, I can se∣cure all by dissembling a little kindnesse to Cecropius, by which, I shall also discover his treaty with the Hungarians. Ordel: Pollidor is much oblig'd to you Selindra, I like well this noble humour in you. Phill: It does become her, my dear Sister, it shall be my care to look after Cecropius now, and if necessity require, I will remove him speedily; I must leave you for some houres Ordella, to attend my Father; Fare∣wel, my bright Mistriss; pray let your care continue unto Pollidor, and let not fall your kindnesse to Cecropius, he may confesse to you, what no tortures can draw from him. Exit Phillocles. Selind: It does concern me Sir. Ord: It does indeed, Selindra, thy gratitude to Pollidor, looks han∣somely; methinks as he recovers health, he growes comely, he seems to me, as if he were above the ordinary rank of men, I dare say he has a Noble Soule. Selin: Madam, you judge right, did you converse as I do daily with him, you should wonder at such worth; methinks I see greatness in his looks, and do observe that he holds in that lustre, with more advan∣tage, then others shew it forth: Ord: He is sure some great Prince disguis'd, Selindra! and a happy man he is, that has found one that can discover his conceal'd perfections to the life! [Enter Tenedor to Selindra.] Tened: Madam, my Master is now awake, and begs the favour of a visit. Exit Tenedor. Selin: I shall follow your Lordship, when I have brought the Prin∣cess to her Chamber. Ord: Is he a Lord too, Selindra? elin: Did I call him Lord, Madam? Ord: Ask when you see him next, go Selindra; this Ceremony to
me is needlesse, I shall find the way alone; 'tis fitter that you attend your charge, Pollidors wounds will not heal out of thy fight, Selindra: —I cannot chuse but wonder what kind of entertainment you can find, for so many houres, with so great a stranger, as Pollidor! [speaks aside] Selin: Sure she is jealous, and I have been too free in praising him; —Pollidor and I, do spend more houres discoursing of Ordella's beauties, then of all other matters; he admires your perfections, Madam; his other wounds are slight, compar'd with those, he received from your eyes: for— Ordel: Hold, Selindra, I delight not in such saucy thoughts from Pollidor, nor does it become you to heare, much less to relate them unto me: I do feare Selindra, you hope by this invention, to dazle my Eyes, that I may not discover your own affection to this Pollidor; take heed you fall not from that vertue you are valued for, if you do deceive my trust, or Phillocles his love! you will be neither worthy his anger, nor my pitty. Selin: Let me fall under the weight of both your angers, when I de∣serve ill from either of you, your jealousie afflicts me Madam. [She weeps.] Ordell: I hear my Brother coming, retire, that he may not see thy tears, and meet me in the Garden after supper, then I will hear more of this, and till then, suspend my Jndgment of thee. Exit Selindra. [Enter Phillocles.] Phil: Why went Selindra weeping out? and what troubles you my Dear Sister? Ordel. I am not troubld now Sir: pray how did you find my Father? in what temper is he? Phill: Well Ordella, all is safe yet; but I cannot be satisfied untill you tell me why Selindra weeps; — your silence will beget doubts more troublesome, then the knowledge can be. Ordel: 'Twas nothing but an Argument that fell between us. Phil: That Argument Ordella, if thou lov'st my peace, that Ar∣gument! Ordel: I may wrong Selindra by it, and trouble you without a cause, when I am certainly informed, you shall be so, till then, pray do not urge me farther. Phil: I am so weak a man in thy esteem, thou darest not trust me with my self; Ordella, thy discourse will disturb me much, unless thou lettest me know the whole matter. Ordel: My unwillingnesse to tell you, is now become the onely cause I feare to do it, for I was questioning Selindra onely, about her frequent visits to Pollidor, which it seems I put into such Language, as made her weep; this on my credit is the truth, are you now satisfied? Phil: I am satisfied that we have the same thoughts, your judgement on this matter, confirms my Observations, which till now, took no hold on me; —If she prove false, thus I can blow her off; —But Polli∣dor, shall pay deare for his Treachery.
Enter to them Pollidor, very weak in Rich Cloaths; a staff in his hand. Polli. Madam, 'tis fit that I visit you before the Temple, and pay my first vowes at your shrine, offering up a Life devoted to your Service. Ordel: You owe your health Sir, next to the Gods, unto Selindra's care, such a gratitude I have not seen before, nor such a zeale as hers, to serve you. Polli: My obligations to Selindra, I must rank after the Honours I have received from you Madam: —Pray Sir, how does the Empe∣ror, [He turns to Phillocles.] and Cecropius, take this fained love between Selindra and me? how does it work with them? Phill: Since Selindra dwelt with you, the whole Court believes it is a mutuall Love; onely my Sister and my self, have other thoughts. Polli: (Those last words came coldly out, I must remove this jea∣lousie;) I am glad Sir that you are secur'd by it, and I am joy'd to have a hand in any thing, that shall conduce to serve you, I do professe my Medicines have not so much wrought my cure, as the joy I have to see such unparalleld Virtues, and Affections meet, as is yours, and the good Selindra's; day day she tires her tongue in praising Phillocles, and stiil growes fresh, by talking of you Sir; I cannot wish you greater happinesse on Earth, then you will have with her, may it last while you last, and may Eternall Curses light on those that wish it less. Phil: I thank you Sir, and will hope to prosper, as you pray for me, and next to Selindra, and my Sister, place you by my heart. Polli: You Honour me too much, and will make me proud, I must take my leave Sir, my strength is not yet enough confirm'd, to stay long abroad. Exit Pollidor. Phil: The Gods go with thee, thou Man of Honour. Ordel: What think you Brother of this Complement? Phil: I think him really, what he seems. Ordel: I wish I could do so too, but when I call to mind that Selindra unto me, did talk just thus of Pollidor, as he now discours'd to you of her, methinks it looks like a designe. Phil: Does Pollidor presume to pretend to you? Ordel: So Selindra would have me think, which indeed was the main cause of my anger, and her Tears. Phill: I am not willing to be jealous, nor yet so fond, as not to be sensible, when there is just cause; Ordella let us smooth our browes, and observe them farther, such a guilt cannot be long hid, and untill we be confirm'd by some better proof, 'tis unworthy in us to suspect them, on our surmises only, since what they do, is by our direction. Ordel: 'Tis not my nature to judg ill of any, and I hope Selindra will deserve better; I am converted, and now we are thus secure, why may not you go to the Army, and leave Selindra with me; Pollidor in your absence, may Court her in publick, which will confirm my Father in his mistake, when he sees me dislike it. Phill: I like it well Ordella: what will you do this Evening?
Ordel: I have some businesse for a while; Selindra after supper, will meet me in the Garden, pray come to us there. Phil: Bid your Boy attend us with his Lute then, it may so happen that I must take leave this night, for I hear that the Hungarian Army comes on apace. [Enter Antenor to them.] Ante: The Emperor sends you word Sir, that Cecropius has deliver'd all the Frontier Towns to the Hungarians, and himself advances in the head of that Army towards us. Phil: Dispatch a Post unto Antillacus, bid him advance towards the Traytor, I will this night set forth, and by day break shall reach him. Ante: Sir, Antillacus retreats before the Enemy, his men fewer in Number, are so disheartned by Cecropius's revolt, they dare not look on the Hungarians. Phil: Let the Page call Pollidor, to my Sisters Chamber presently, we will take leave there, and depart immediatly; Come Ordella, this is somewhat quicker work then I expected; bid my servants make what hast they can, to meet me here at my return. Exit omnes. [Enter Periander with a Lady, as in Ordella's Chamber.] Lady. My Lord, since you went hence, the Court has been in daily Tumults about Phillocles his Love unto your Daughter. Perian: Is Selindra so much in favour with the Gods, as to be look'd on by Prince Phillocles? Lady. The Prince seeks no other Heaven but her, and as the World thinks she neglects him, and Loves one Pollidor. Perian: Madam, I cannot raise my Faith to what you say, nor can I joy in such a blessing, untill I know the Emperor does approve it; pray Madam, where may I find Selindra? Lady. She is now with the Princess in the Garden, I shall let her know your Lordship is return'd. [Exit Lady.] Perian: You obliege me Madam; —though I have been long ab∣sent, I have not been Idle, nor could I well have made more haste hither, cousidering how many great Affairs I have dispatch'd, since I went hence. [Enter Selindra to him.] Selin: Oh Sir! you are welcome, I have with some trouble, and some fear expected your Returne. Peri: Madam, I stay'd the longer, by reason of those Tumults I found at Belgrade, a false Astella was set up by Euticus, and his faction, but so soon as I made known, that you liv'd, both sides laid down their Arguments, though not their Armes, which I advis'd as the best means to bring you home in safety. Selin: But why does our Army enter Greece.
Perian: That's the riddle Madam, the old Fox Cecropius gave no∣tice to the Hungarians, that the Emperor purpos'd in his own person to invade them, since Phillocles had refus'd it, and would by a conquest joyn that Crown to his Empire; he insinuates also, that if the Hunga∣rians would assist him in his design, he would make the Emperor unable to harme them, by delivering up all the Frontier Towns into their hands. Selin: And what is his design? Perian: Onely by their power, to force the Emperor to deliver you, and one Pollidor up to him: This I perswaded Orsanes, and the rest to hearken too, and my long stay was to see the Towns deliver'd to Orsa∣nes, which is done, and Cecropius fooll'd by his vaine hopes, Marches in the head of your Army, which comes on apace, only to receive your Commands Madam. Selin: The Gods reward you, for I never can; —but here is Newes Periander, beyond what you tell; Pollinesso Lives, lives here under the name of Pollidor; and see where he comes; —Oh! my Brother we [Enter Polli∣dor.] are happy above our wish; this is Periander, who has so much obli∣ged me. Polli: I hope I shall live to thank you Sir. Peri: Sir, I am rewarded in the good I have done, if my services do prove such in your esteem. Selin: My Brother, you must dispatch Periander back unto the Ar∣my, to give Orsanes and the rest, notice that you live; —Cecropius has rendred all the Towns, and comes on demanding to have me deliver'd to his lust. Poll: Wee shall order him at leisure, our care to informe Orsanes, must indeed be speedy; —Periander, though I cannot command, I may intreat you that know our Affaires, to return unto Orsanes, and give him notice, that I intend this night, to set forth with Phillocles, and will come over to him, with my first opportunity; bid him march fairly through the Country, and take heed that Antillacus ingage him not to fight, till I Arrive; if you ride hard; you may be back with us, be∣fore we part from hence, for I hear Cecropius is not far off. Peri: By my speed Sir, judge my Zeal to serve you. Poll: As you passe by my Lodgings, pray send all my servants to attend me in the next Room, from hence we shall take Horse this Eve∣ning; —Now Astella, methinks the Gods do smile on Hungary, and [Exit Peri∣ander.] on us; if Ordella would be gracious! Pollinesso were most happy; How does my Love prosper, Astella? Selin: I can make no certain Judgment on it yet. Poll: Canst thou not procure me one smile before we part? Selin: 'Twill not be possible, if you depart this night; I could wish we had more time, because I now propose some pleasure in my woeing for you; methinks the storms that I have rais'd, look merrily, now the calm is certain, and so nigh, I have so light a heart, that I could play with dangers, if any were within my reach. [They sit.] To them Enter Phillocles, and Ordella, who stand unseen behind them, sitting on the Couch.
Poll: Let me Embrace and Kisse thee, my Dear, Dear Selindra; thou art so great a Joy unto my Soul, that I lament to part one minute from thee; when we meet next, we shall Embrace more freely. Embraces. Selin: That you must go from me, grieves me; must you needs go with Phillocles? may you not stay one day longer with me? [She weeps.] Poll. I dare not, do not weep thus, thy Tears will prove ill Omens, and I become a superstitious fool, to fear I know not why! Selin: How can I chuse but lament to part with, what is dearer to me then my life; pray do not go this night, bestow this night on me. Polli: I swear thou makest me sad, prethee speak more chearfully, and dry thy Eyes, least Phillocles perceive thy Tears, and Ordella do discover us, and so unmask us both, before we be prepar'd. Selin: No matter for their jealousie, are not we above the reach of malice now? Phillocles drawes, and offering to strike, is held by Ordella. Polli: Not yet Selindra, we may be ere-long, till then, 'tis not good to provoke any, it is by your advice to, that we should be still disguis'd. Selin: Yes, and 'tis my opinion still; but when Phillocles is gone who can discover us? Phil: The Gods, who will not suffer such impiety to be longer hid, let me loose Ordella, and I will cut these twisted Monsters into Atomes that their united Souls, may so expire together. [The Women part and hold them.] Polli: Why thus inraged Sir? Phil: Canst thou ask false man? we have heard and seen, all that has past between ye. Poll: It may be so, and yet be mistaken, in all you have heard, and seen too; —Sir, if you will have a little patience, you shall see your mi∣stake, and be sorry for this injurious Language, when you know to whom you speak. Phillocles offers to runne at him, but is held by Ordella. Selin: Good Madam, perswade the Prince to hear us, and there will be no cause to fight. Ordel: Thou worst of Women, how dares thy lips move to∣wards me? Selin: For Heavens sake Madam hear us, you will too late repent this rashnesse else; we are both as innocent, as you can wish. Ordel: Brother you may do well to hear them, and revenge at lea∣sure; pray lay by this anger for a while, and take it up again, when you see cause; they are in your power to punish, as you please. Phill: I thank thee Ordella, they are so; —I am tame, and now you may say on.
Poll: Sir, if you have heard; and seen what past between us, I do confess you have reason for your anger, and our fondnesse doth deserve blame, but not death; 'tis true, that we have negligently shew'd, what we might better have conceal'd; necessity therefore now compells us to discover what we yet meant not to do, that our Innocency may no longer suffer. Phil: Your Innocence! Exit Phillocles. Polli: Madam, the Prince his absence, gives me opportunity to begge your pardon for Selindra, and my self, who have too long hid our affecti∣ons from you, and our selves also; for she is my Sister, and will ere long, appear worthy Phillocles his best thoughts, and I do hope my self, when I shall dare to be my self, may have leave to say, my life is vowed to serve you. Ordel: Sir, you are mistaken, I am not to be deceved by this slight trick; — you would gaine time to escape my brothers vengeance. Polli: No Madam, you will shortly see, I am above it; and if— [Enter Phillocles with a Guard.] Phillo: Seize on that Traytor. [Pollidor steps to the other Door, and calls alone.] Poll: Tenedor, Periander, Tecknor, Treason; —what means this mad∣nesse [They enter, and both par∣ties stand ran∣ged on either side.] Phillocles? a reasonable man should hear another speak; if I do not satisfie all your doubts, you shall find that I dare meet your fury; and shall raise stormes as high, as you can wish to see. Phil: Pray unfold this mistery, I do attend you. Pollidor leads Selindra to Phillocles who steps back from her.— Polli: Let this pledge speak for us both, for I can have no other in∣terest, then to give her up into your Armes Sir, send your Guards off, and this riddle shall be as easie, and as pleasant, as it now looks harsh, [Phillocles steps back.] —Phillocles will blush, when he shall know from whom he slyes, and by whose hand offer'd to him. Phil: I understand you not, nor do I care; —hark, what noyse is this? Enter the Emperor, with his Train, and his Guard, swords drawn, crying, Arme, Arme, as they enter. Emp: What's this? a Warre within his owne Walls; Phillo∣cles is this a time for private brawls? when the Hungarians are at your Gates? Phill: I am ready to depart Sir; and shall send them back, much faster then they now come on; I beg your pardon Sir, for my neglect. [Enter Gillon.] Emp: What Newes brings Gillon?
Gill. Antillacus sends you word Sir, that you must prepare to receive him with the Army, under the Town Walls, his souldiers have so many pannick fears, he dares not lead them out, to face the Enemy, he also wishes that Prince Phillocles would draw out the Court Regiments, to hearten his dejected men. Emp: I think 'twere better to receive them within the Walls, untill their shame, do out-face their fears; Tell Antillacus, my old Armes are on, and that I will my self strike the Traytor in the face. Phil: Hast back good Gillon, and tell Antillacus; if he can defend his Camp till I Arrive, I wish him not to move this way; my looks will send those ungratefull people home, if not, I have a flame within me, will consume them all. —I beg your pardon Sir, for my neglect. Emp: Repaire it by your speedy succour, I shall take present order for what the Town can afford us. Exit the Emp: Phil: Ordella, I have a Warre within, that will consume me. Orde: I hope this great Affair will divert your thoughts, and remove your trouble. Phil: For some few dayes it may; —farewell my Dear Sister; —and when I return, you shall hear from me Sir. [To Pollidor.] [Phillocles is going out.] Polli: I shall not stay behind you Sir, my wounds is not so ill, are to keep me from waiting on you; when this hurry, and your anger is over, I hope you will be at leasure to hear me out, and be pleas'd rather to finde you can be mistaken, then me guilty. Phil: I will by no means suffer it, 'twill be no charity, to permit you to hazzard Selindra's interest, by new dangers. Polli: Sir, your scornes, shall have no more power to stay me, then your anger has, I will along. Phil: But you shall not; I do suspect you will betray me to your Country-men, and dare not trust you with me. Pol: All this will not do, I know you do not doubt me that way? and I do swear, unlesse you break the bonds of Hospitality, (and do im∣prison me) I will along. Phil: And I will rather do it, then have your company, if you de∣sist not. Poll: Phillocles will not so much blemish his great Name! imprison me that sav'd your life; —me, that am vowed to stand, or fall with you; — Sir, I must chide you now, you do too long hold up a causelesse an∣ger, you know not why; too long neglect the great Affair that calls you hence; — I will stay no longer for you, but go do the work, be∣fore you come. [Pollidor is going off.] Phill: Stay Pollidor, thou hast confounded all my reason, such a mix∣ture of Noblenesse, nee'r met with such a Treachery till now; though I do know thee false, and do resolve with my own hand to Kill thee; I will trust thee this way, and do now intreat thee to stay till to mor∣row, that my Father comes. Poll: I Obey.
Phil: Oh! my dear Sister, once more farewell, I am now fall'n from Paradice to Hell. Ordel: The Gods go with you, and your action bless, While I retire, and pray for your successe. [Exeunt all but Pollidor and Selindra.] Poll: We will be gone Selindra, and face Phillocles, in the head of our own Army; —what newes Periander? [Enter Periander.] Peri: Sir, I am come to fetch you to your Army, I can convey you thither, before you are mist here. Selin: We are ready now, how farre off is the Army? Peri: You may hear their Drums Madam, at the City Gates. Poll: Come, let us hasten to our Troops: — When instruments of Warre, from Warre release, 'Tis a good Omen, to a happy peace. Exeunt. Enter at one Doore the Emperor, Phillocles, Antillacus, Armanthus, Gillon, and the Grecian Army. Enter at the other Door Cecropius, Orsanes, and other Lords with the Hungarian Army. Emp: Thou art a bold ill man Cecropius, thou art ungratefull to thy Country, and my trust. Cecro: Sir, I have but hid my gratitude under this old Armor, which is onely now put on, to obtain what my prayers could not, — I demand justice Sir, for Cleonels blood, which you have hitherto denied me, in fa∣vour to his Murtherers. Emp: This fained modesty, is more impudent, then thy Armes are, thou knowest I was more eager then thy self, to do justice on those that slew thy Son, and thou seest clearly, our Lawes cannot touch them for his fall. Cecro: Was not Cleonel slain by Pollidor? and was not Selindra accessary? and does not our Lawes condemn such Murtherers to Dye? Emp: No, thou knowest they do not, thou knowest thy Son was by a just hand punish'd, and that Pollidor deserves prayse and reward. Phil: Good Sir, spend no more breath on this vile man, the slave is not worthy your anger: — Foolish Hungarians, ingratefull perjur'd peo∣ple: — Orsanes, I did not look for this from you; —but my sword shall speak my vengeance. [Offers to Charge.] Orsan: Prince Phillocles has not in Grcece a more faithful servant then Orsanes; Pray Sir lay by this passion but a few minutes, and you shall see that I have labour'd hard, to bring your own desires, to their wish'd ends: — and Cecropius the main Agent in it all! Phil: Why do your Actions, and your words so disagree? Orsanes knowes our Grecian hearts cannot be compell'd, when we have time to draw our Swords.
Orsan: Great Sir, your actions, have enought declar'd your worth unto the World, and to our Nation most; which we shall ever own, though now by some necessity compell'd, we do appear as enemies, in the behalf of this good man, who has ingag'd us to deliver up a Lady call'd Selindra, and one Pollidor, to his hands, which he by strong argu∣ments assur'd us, would be for your, and for our future happinesse: this done, we are all at Phillocles command. Phil: Those two you mention, are of late become unworthy of my thoughts; yet your engagement was barbarous, to undertake you know not what: sound the charge. [A shout within.] Orsan: Hold Phillocles, I have entertain'd you with discourse thus long, only till I might hear that shout behind us: —hark, hark, Sir! Now the time is come, for us to keep our Oaths made to Cecropius, and to manifest our love to Phillocles, —make way there for the King. The Hungarian Army opens, and through them enter Pollinesso crown'd, leading in Astella; Orsanes delivers them both unto Cecropius. Phill: What Riddle's this? what wonders do I see? [Takes her Hand.] Cecro: Take away that shadow of a King, to present death Orsanes; and now Selindra you are once more at my dispose: and you Sir, that think you can command the World! shall find this weak old Arm, can justifie my title here. Orsan: Have I now perform'd my oath unto the great Cecropius? Cecro: You have. Orsan: I must then set this Lady free, from the danger of our Swords. — [A shout of joy.] [He delivers Astella to Pollinesso, and kneels.] Orsan: Long live the King of Hungary. Cecro: I am betrayed. Phill: Pollidor! and Selindra! why is he crown'd! Emp: They are confederates with Cecropius, on which design they have thus long liv'd amongst us. Poll: Orsanes, lay that Monster, at his Masters feet; there to re∣ceive a Doom worthy his treachery, and ingratitude. [They deliver up Cecropius.] Phill: Pollidor, what mean these misteries? Poll: All respects to Phillocles. Phil: How comes Selindra then with thee? and that Crown upon thy head? I tell thee Pollidor, if Selindra can neglect me, I can con∣temn her; and not envy thee that mis-becoming Crown thou wearest, which I will tear from off thy swelling browes, and trample on it, when 'tis mine by a second conquest. [Pollidor leads Selindra to Phillocles, and he retires.]
Poll. —Will Phillocles forsake the List? fly from such a foe! send for the Princess Ordella then, that we may meet on equall termes. Phil: You are merry Sir, my gentle temper I see, begets contempt from your great courage. Poll: No Sir, you are mistaken still, I am your servant, and do value Phillocles, more then he can contemne me: —Orsanes, bring my Stan∣dard hither: —carry this, and my Crown, unto the Princess Ordella; lay [Gives him his Crown.] them at her feet, and if she dains to take them up, tell her your King, with his whole people, do wait on her Commands. Phil: I understand not what these Riddles mean! Poll: If Phillocles be yet at leasure to hear me speak, I shall soon re∣move this wonder? Phil: If Pollidor prove worthy, I shall not trust my Eyes nor Ears for ever. Poll: But when Prince Phillocles shall know that Pollinesso speaks, he will believe no hand has more right, to deliver up Astella into his Arms, then I: Do you not know me yet Sir? He pulls off his Perriwig and patch from his Eye. Phil: Nor yet know my self! — Antillacus, do I wake? or is this a Phantosm that I think I see? [Phillocles stands amaz'd.] Ant: 'Tis as strange to me, Sir! Emp: While my Sons wonder lasts, let me imbrace you Sir, and ob∣taine both yours, and Astellas pardon, and chide you both in the same breath; why did you suffer us to walk so long in this unhappy dark∣nesse? and runne so many hazzards, which this light would have a∣voided. Poll: There was no other way to obtain this light, while Cecropius eclips'd your glory Sir. Phil. Does Pollinesso live? can he forget my crimes? and forgive my blindnesse! Pol: Can Phillocles pardon my concealment? by which he was so blinded? [They embrace.] Phill: There is but one happinesse on earth beyond holding Polli∣nesso thus! Poll: To me too, there can be onely one above it! —and that is Ordellas leave to love her: —but Sir, have you no room for Selindra in your heart? [Points to Selindra.] Phil: I dare not look that way: I dare not have a hope so high, as pardon from her. —I am so full of guilt, that I dare not live longer to think of my unworthinesse. [Offers to draw.] Selind: What have I done Sir, that you should be thus cruel to me! will you not look on me? [Enter Ordella and Orsanes.] Phil: I shall blush to death, if you speak thus again! Ast: Will Phillocles turn from me ever? Phil: Yes Madam, as asham'd to look on you; I have a guilt within, that takes my manhood from me! —shall I dare to think you can for∣give my unworthy jealousie?
Ast: If you can forgive me that provok'd you to it? I can meet you thus. Phil: And I, fall as low as Earth will let me, to receive your pardon. [They embrace:] [He throwes himself at her Feet.] Ord. I am so much amaz'd at what I see, that I know not which way to turne me! Emp: This way, Ordella, if you will by me, be guided to felicity? —this is Pollinesso's wish too, if I mistake not! [The Emperor leads Ordella to Pollinesso.] Polli: 'Tis my ambition Sir, my highest hope on this side Heaven. Ord: And my honour, that Pollinesso has such thoughts for me; but Sir, 'twill ask some time for me to raise my wishes to such a value of your worth, that we may meet on equal termes. Phil: Pollinesso's merit, and his worth is such, that when he sayes he Loves; —'tis argument enough to gaine the greatest Queen: — Ordella, the Gods smile upon us now: —and you, Sir, I hope concurre with Heaven in our Felicities. Emp: My prayers and my blessings shall not be wanting: let Polli∣nesso give sentence on Cecropius, before we go unto the Temple. Poll: Let him live for ever banish'd from this happy Climate, which he has so long polluted with his venimous breath. Emp: Antillacus see it done. Exit with Cecropius. Ast: Madam, can you pardon my disguise? Ord: I cannot well tell what to answer! to find Selindra worthy, is a concerne greater then Astella can be to me; and that you now are Astella, does not more raise my wonder, then that you were Selindra, does confirme my love, and my respects to you, Madam. Ast: I have a heart too full of joy to keep this distance any longer? [The two Ladies embrace.] Phi: We now loose time, that might be better spent, In sacrificing for this blest event! Emp. Lead on then to the Temple, and proclaime A publick feast, in bright Astellas name; While we do march in a triumphant state, That all the City may participate Our joyes, now Phillocles captivity Is chang'd into a triple Victory. FINIS.
LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP, A Tragy-Comedy. Written by Sr WILLIAM KILLIGREW, Vice-Chamberlane to Her MAIESTY. OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Ric: Davis, 1666.
The Actors Names of Ormasdes. Cleandra, Queen of Cihera. Ormasdes, Her General, a Prince of Greece. Old Titus, Admiral; Young Titus, his Son. Cleobulus, Great Lords of Citherea. Nearcus, Great Lords of Citherea. Chiron. Great Lords of Citherea. Ladies attending the Queen. Servants to Ormasdes. Doctors. Guards. Nearcus his Servants. Embassador, from Valeriana King of Treconia. Mariana, his Sister. Cleon, Embassador servants. Erillos. Embassador servants. Ladies to Mariana. Other Servants to the Embassador. Pages. Surgeons.
LOVE and FRIENDSHIP. THE SCENE In the Island of Citherea. THE FIRST ACT. [Enter Menetius, and Nearcus; A Messenger meets them.] Mess: MY Lords, the Queen sends me to let you know That she is safe, and her whole Fleet se∣cure. Mene: The Queens safety, is welcome Newes to all, Though from the Castle top, we saw the fight; None could so clearly the success discern; As to rejoyce for her security, Till you arriv'd. Near: 'Twas bold, and bravely done, with lesse numbers To assault so great a Fleet, so near home! I wonder how they got Intelligence? So just, to know the Queens return from Greece. Mess: To Assault us, was farre from their design; They fell by chance amongst our Ships ith' night, As they were passing by; found us secure, And unprepar'd for such an accident: So we together Sail'd, 'till day appear'd; Then our great Admirall, and his brave Son, With their two Squadrons, did begin the Fight: —The Queens Ship was attaqued on every side, In which, Ormasdes by the Gods was plac'd,
That by his hand, Cleandra might be freed, As by a Miracle! her dangers such! And his Achievements so beyond them all! That my Relation, 'would Romance appear, To tell you, how he acted every where. Men: I hope this accident, will now perswade The Queen, that she no more such journies make: Great Princes to such visits are not bound, Where Complements do so great danger bring. Near: Though Cleandra's visit, may not admit Of a State Argument to justifie A danger; —She had reason to return Some high respect, unto the Grecian Court, Where she so long, in so great splendor liv'd, Before she had this Citherean Crown: Nor was it now amiss to shew the Power, And Glory, of so great a Fleet, as Greece Nee'r saw before! by which, our renew'd League, Will be more valu'd, and our Nation fear'd. Mene: I have no Argument for a dispute; —This visit past, she needs no other make; But Sir, how comes Ormasdes here again? What great Affair, occasions his return? Near: How can the Grecian Empire so long spare, So great a Captain? and so much belov'd. Messen: That happy Emperor; who has no Warre, Did give Ormasdes liberty once more, To grant Cleandra's sute, for his return, That he may now confirm, what he has wonne, Lest his late Trophies in the Zelnian Warre, Be tumbled down! for we may doubt! those Kings Who border Zelnia, will not long indure Such losse; as will Cleandra's Crown secure. Though her great Ancestor that Kingdome won, And left it to his most unhappy Son; Who all those Princes Tributaries made. That in Affection call'd him to their Aide. Mene: Harke Nearcus, harke how the People shout! As if the Queen were now, come near the shore; Pray Sir, command the Guards advance with speed, Unto the Port; Nearcus, I do fear, The Queen may land, while we are triling here. Exit. Enter Cleandra Queen of Citherea, Ormasdes a Prince of Greece. Her Generall with his Arme in a Scarfe, Old Titus Admiral, Young Titus, Lords, Ladies, and Traine. Admi: The Gods have given you a full Victory, And all your Fleet will be in Port, by Noon.
Queen: I have thank'd the Gods, Titus, and do see Yours, and your Sons merits, in this great work: But have not words that can expresse my thanks To brave Ormasdes, for preserving me; Had you seen my danger, when the bold Turks With assured Victory, my Cabin forc't! And how by his hand, from that Ruine freed! You would with me admire, if not adore The force which Rescued, with so great a Power! My fear, my wonder, and my joy, so mixt, I had no time for any thought betwixt My danger, and my safe deliverance, Which did the price of that great work inhance! The bloody Trophies of Ormasdes Sword; Surpas'd what Mars to Hector did afford. [Ormasdes faints, and leans on Young Titus.] Adm: He faints, this remove to Land, makes him weak; — How do you Sir? Ormas: My soul, Titus, shrunk away, much asham'd, To hear my service by Cleandra fam'd, Too much for any modest man to own, That my weak Arm, should rescue her alone! Queen. I am amaz'd, thus suddainly to find The Gods so cruel, who have been so kind! Thus to Eclips the joyes they freely gave, Shews they repent the mercy, which did save; Ormasdes death, will now so dismall be, I cannot sacrifice for Victory. Unlesse the Fates this mischief do divert! It will our Triumphs, into Tears convert. Y. Tit: His wounds shew not the danger you conceive; Madam, you Prophesie so great an ill, The Fates themselves, will tremble to fulfill. Ormas: I am well Madam, only blush to hear, That my slight wounds, should be so much your care; If great Cleandra, do mean Acts admire, Brave men, will not to high Attempts aspire. Enter to them, Nearcus, Cleobulus, and Ci∣thareans, they Kiss Cleandras hand, a noyse of joy within from the People. Cleo: Madam, the publick joy for your return, Does shew how much we did your absence mourn. Qu: My Peoples joy brings me great happinesse, And your love, my Lords, my true value has: But still I must your gratitudes direct Unto Ormasdes, by whose powerfull hand, Cleandra was preserv'd, and now restor'd. Ormas: Madam, you reward my small endeavors done,
With praise above, the merit of a man! Queen. I can afford Ormasdes as much Worth, And Honour, as the Antient Heroes had, So he will me such gratitude allow, As sutes with my great benefits receiv'd; — — What Fleet Nearcus, lies within our Port? Near: 'Tis from Treconia Madam, here's Arriv'd A brave Embassador, from that great King, Who here has long expected your return; His Equipage is Rich, and with him shines, A Lady he calls Sister; hither come, To wonder at the Glories of your Court, While we do all admire, their Princely Port! Qu: He shall have present Audience, to excuse His long attendance; give him a respect: Beyond the reach, or thought of a neglect; [Exit Nea:] —Do you Nearcus, bring him to us now; — — Cleobulus, what newes from Zelnia? Cl: The frontiers have been frequently attaqu'd, Since you went hence, but no great dammage done. Ormas: I beg the honour Madam to chastise Those haughty Rebels, for their Insolence. Qu: The whole World knowes, Ormasdes can command The fortune of a Warre; why then should you? As if your Name were yet obscure! desire New dangers? But you covet a Renown, Beyond the value of the Zelnian Crown; Else, you'd secure my People from their fear, By your consent to be my Vice-Roy there. Or: Such proffer'd gifts from Princes, are not us'd To be neglected, and much lesse refus'd! But I must not your Majesty permit, To load me with an honour so unfit! As will Eclips the merit you allow, When gifts shine brighter, then my Actions do. Qu: Is there no way Ormasdes to remove These niceties? must I for ever own Your benefits? and make you no return! How little do I seem to your great Eye? Who scorn I should your service gratifie. Ormas: I have in Greece, all my relations left, To serve you Madam, and am hither come, With a sixt zeal to wish, and to obey, What ever you command! and only fear My inclination may my tongue direct, To beg what you'l deny: though I affect. Qu: Though I your sute dislike, I will consent, And from your happinesse, raise my content. Or: With your permission Madam, I would beg Leave to retire unto the little Lodge,
Within the Forrest, half a League from hence, Where after all my Travels, I may find Ease for my body, and refresh my mind, With the soft solace of a private life, Free from Affairs, and Courts Eternal strife. Qu: This is farre beyond my fears Ormasdes! 'Tis no wonder you my favours slight! When you do our society dislike. But I will not your purpose now oppose, Though I your counsels, and your friendship lose; Who in debates can speak, in fight command, And order all, that in disorder stand, — —Can nothing alter your desire from this? Ormas: Not, unlesse troubles be preferr'd to bliss. Queen. Ormasdes, it shall be as you desire, And freely, when you please, you may retire. Ormas: Though I a while absent my self from Court, I shall be ready to lay by my Books, When you do call me to put Armour on, Stories tell, that great men the like have done. Queen▪ Though I know no example, I believe What e're Ormasdes shall make choice to do, May be a president, that will ingage Brave men to follow, in the future Age. Ormas: Your Majesty in this, has given me more content Then all the favours proffer'd me before. Exit Ormasdes. Y. Tit: Is this his humour? or some fancy grown From passion for some Love, to us unknown; Queen. No, Titus, he has ever been observ'd, A great contemner of Amores, and does True friendship more esteem, then idle love. Y. Tit: The more like now to be so much concern'd, When touch'd; our mortal bodies are so frail, That we may love, and know not what we aile! VVhy, does your Majesty think friendship can VVith as much force as love, transport a Man? Queen. Not to such frensies, as wild brains Create, VVhen fancy cannot change the course of Fate— —VVhen love to Faces with the Face decay, A virtuous Friendship will for ever sway. — —I wish you, Titus, when he first retires, To try how farre your Friendship can prevail, To get the secret from Ormasdes soul; 'Tis for his good, that he his griefs impart▪ True friendship will allow a little Art, VVhen the design does nothing more import, But bringing of Ormasdes back to Court. Tit: I shall be joy'd, and happy if I can Bring back to Court! so Excellent a Man.
[Enter an Officer and Ormasdes.] Officer. The Embassador attends your Majesty. Queen. Admit Him. [The Queen sits.] [Enter Embassador, and his Train.] Embas: Madam, my Master, the Treconian King, Salutes you in these Letters, and by me, Congratulates your Zelnian Victorie; But does lament, that he no share acquir'd, In that great Conquest, he so much desir'd: He was ambitious, Madam, to command In that near Warre, and not as neuter stand. When strangers merits do such Triumphs claime, While he to you unknown, sat still with shame. But since Ormasdes conduct, and his skill, With such high Valour, has fulfill'd your will. He envies not so great a Souldiers praise, But would have shar'd in his Triumphant Bayes. Qu: If I had known Valeriana's mind, He might my thanks have shar'd, and not repin'd. Emb. I have commission also, to propose A League between your Kingdomes, and your selves, Such, as new Conquer'd Zelnia will secure, That Cithereas peace, may long endure.— —Your Beauty Madam, more then Crowns invite, Valerianus wishes to unite Your hearts; and then, your Scepters may Be double fixt, when both do love obey. He begs, that he in person may appear, To plead his love, and treat this great affair. Queen: Valerianus friendship I approve, But never shall consent to treat of Love; 'Twould raise my dead Lords Ashes in his Urn, If I should to a second Lover turn? Your great Kings proffer'd League, I do imbrace, With fit Affection, and a chearfull face: — Declaring to the World, how I respect, His person, though I must his sute reject. Emb: I shall acquaint my Master, — and beg leave I may your Majesties commands receive, Without the Ceremonies that belong, To a State audience, in a formal throng. Queen. You shall have free accesse, as you desire, And now my Lord, I must a Sutor be, That your faire Sister will in Court appear! Who, I am told, is come to visit me. Emb: That, Madam, should have been my next request,
That you, my dearest Sister, would permit, To kiss your hand, who does attend without. Queen. Will you, Ormasdes, please to bring her in? And make my excuse, who did not know She was so neer. Exit Ormas: If you had brought her to the Audience! She should have been as welcome as you wish. Emb: Though all the World adore Cleandras Name! On the faint notions of a Common Fame: I now can testify! and will declare, Your virtues, to your beauties equall are. Queen. Your compliments require not a reply, You over-valew my civilitie. [Enter Ormasdes, with Mariana.] Qu: You do me, and my Country, honour more, Then any Lady ever did before. Mar: I have done my self a favour Madam, And 'tis your Majesty that honours me; The fame of Citherea I confesse, May Princes hither bring, but my address, Is to Cleandras self, that I might see, The virtue fam'd for such Divinitie. Qu: Madam, if you such flatteries throw out, You will your welcome spoil, and make me doubt You rather come to mock, then to admire! On such another word? I shall retire. Mari: I can be silent Madam, while I live, But must speak truth, when you this freedome give. Qu: We then will change our argument, and place, Lest I do chide, whom I intend to grace. Exeunt all but Nearcus and Cleobulus. Cleob: Did you observe, with what forc'd modesty The Embassador supprest his anger? When his Masters sute, so briskly was denied. Near: Yes, and how suddain his sad looks changed, When bright Cleandra did so soon admit His private visits; as if himself were struck! And did no further presse his Masters sute. Cle. I have other thoughts, that made me believe, The Lady he calls Sister, is his Love. Near: Such things have been, and Mariana may His Mistris be; whose beauty in my Eye, Does farre surpasse Cleandras Majesty. And now you put these thoughts into my head, I did observe Marianus Eyes and his, Did a long practiz'd silent language shew, While they by turns did entertain the Queen. Cleob: But I had second thoughts, led me to think,
I did sometimes perceive Marianas Eyes, On brave Ormasds fixt; and seem'd to take Such a survey, as Purchasers do make. Near: I doubt Mariana has not an estate, To purchase him, at great Cleandras rate. Cleo: Let us observe them better next, and see If it be Art; or their simplicitie. Exeunt. [Enter Embassador and Mariana.] Emb: I have undone my self, Mariana! For now beyond resistance I do love; And find Cleandr will by her neglects, Dash all my hopes, and turn from my respects. Mari: There does not a just cause to me appear, For such a doubt; much lesse to raise dispair: Because Cleandr runs not at first sight, Into the Arms, of such a wandring Knight. Though your State Arguments, cannot procure To Treat; she may but a short Siege indure, When as your self, a King you do appear! The Castle may be won, by love, or fear. Emb: No Mariana, I have heard, and seen Too much, the brave Ormasdes stands between Me, and my happiness, his retirement Is to cloke their close Love, and to prevent Pretenders; or such scandal, as would rise, If openly in Court, without disguise! Such unproportion'd love should ere be known, Which shewes they dare not their affections own. Mar: What need such dissembling? to hide that love, Which all the Cithereans do approve; And publickly do pray, his great Renown, Might be rewarded with Cleandra's Crown. To publick fame, I therefore credit give, They not in love, but in true friendship live. Emb: Such friendship between man, and woman, may 'Mongst silly people make a holy-day. No Callenders of mine, shall ere admit Of a Red Letter, for a counterfet. Mar: The Gods defend, Brother. Emb: Why, Mariana? what is your concern? To blush, because we do their crimes discern! Can you believe, that a Platonick flame, Has power to Canonize Cleandras Name? Mar: I blush for you, who now so boldly dare, Against the person that you love! declare. Emb: Your words, and looks, do not at all agree, But shame for your Ormasdes infamie.
He is the man in Marianas Eye, Whose blushes would his vices justifie. Mari: Though I his virtues honour, and admire The glorious Actions of his life, my heart Is not in any danger to be lost. Emb: When a heart is so well lost, Mariana! 'Twill soon be found, I did believe my own, As fast fixt as yours, yet at first sight Of the fair Queen, 'twas from its center forc'd. Mari: I, Brother, your businesse was to lose it. Emb: But the blind Deity considers not Our purposes, he wounds at randome still; — —I wish thou wouldst ingeniously confesse, If in thy thoughts Ormasdes be not grown The handsomest, and gallantest of men; Whose famous actions, in our western World, May well excuse thy wonder, and thy Love; — I wish thy beauties could his heart ingage, That I might have no Rival for the Queen. Mari: To oblige my dear brother, I will try, What may be done, for your security. Emb: Thy whole life, never can oblige me more▪ —Ormasdes is a great Prince in Greece, And I for thee, will make him greater yet, By my additions in Treconia; If you can think him worthy of your Love? —Our forces joyn'd, may double conquest gain; When sever'd, both indeavours may prove vain. Mar: While you talk thus, I had as good confesse: What you so much believe, and do allow, I gladly would obtain, if I knew how. Emb: That was well said, let us to Councel then — Suppose  Court the Queen in my own shape▪ Mar: I think 'tis best that you do first inquire, How farre the subtle Queen does stand ingaged Unto Ormasdes, that you may not kneel To her, if she unto another bow? Emb: It will not be amisse, that I inquire, Of some great man in power, who I may bribe:— Such as Cleandra's trust does most admit, To plead my Masters cause, and argue it: — —What if I first Ormasdes self do try? 'Twill search his love, and his fidelity. Mari: I am not fit to judge, nor can advise; But will with prayers assist your enterprize. Emb: I'le visit him, and if he guilty be, I shall confound his great securitie. Mari: I fear you sooner will your self destroy, Then by your furious passions him anoy. Emb: Will you go with me to Ormasdes Lodge?
Lest I disturb his solitary Soul, And with my rude breath, harm the man you love. Mari: I'de rather be the subject of your mirth, Then great Ormasdes should such rage discern, As from your Arguments will soon arise. Emb: No, I'le approach him with my gentle looks, As calme, and smooth, as virgins when they smile, Such as our tender yielding hearts beguile; But if Ormasdes do a lover prove! He will my hopes and fears to anger move; — —Soone quench these Flames, or make them brighter burne! Do you attend the Queen 'till my return. Exeunt severally. Enter Ormasdes, a Book in his hand, as talking to Young Titus. Orma: I never liv'd till now, you think me dead— Does my dear friend believe, what I have said? Y. Titus. Sir, if the friendship you allow, be more Then an Airie name? you will now permit, That I as freely speak, as I do love. Orm: Titus friendship would have honored Cato, And now my self am prouder of advise. From Titus, then for all my victories. Tit: Thus then Cleandra thinks, and so do I, This lonenesse will your sorrowes multiply▪ Passions conceal'd, do nourish discontent, But if reveal'd, much mischief may prevent: 'Tis my ambition to obtain this trust, If great Ormasdes thinks I dare be just! Ormas: By all our▪ I know no discontent, Nor has my quiet brest a passion in't.— Titus. Hold Ormasdes, hear me out; who now come To let you know, that I, and many more Who love you, do believe that you repine, Because Cleandra is so much reserv'd; And dare not own the passion that you have. —If this be your trouble, trust it to me; And you shall soon perceive, what I can do, In satisfaction to your highest wish: —I do so farre incourage, and assure, What I have mentioned; Is the Nations hope; Who pray that great Cleandra may comply In all, that will Ormasdes satisfie. Thus my affection, has my heart exprest, And I expect an answer I may trust. Ormas: What you have uttered, Titus; I believe, And scorn to think such friendship can deceive. By the same sacred tye, I you conjure, To credit me, who seriously do vow.
I only chose this solitary life, To ease my body, and repose my mind; I have no passion, nor do grief sustain, Nor have a wish beyond Cleandras smile, And Titus friendship; which I'le near beguile. Titus. Sir, I am bound to credit what you say, And shall no more endeavour by discourse, To alter such well grounded purposes: But must we never hope for your return To Court? where you with the same freedome may Enjoy, what private houres you can desire, And not thus put the World so wholly off; Which surely was, with all its glories made, For use of man, and its felicities To be by us injoyed, without a crime. Ormas: Yes, Titus, but we vain men mistake, And from our fickle Infancy propose, Glittering felicities we never find, For as we grow up to the injoyments, Of what riper years bring with them, we see That our desires do daily higher grow, And our fruitions, but foundations lay, T' entertain our busie brains, a new way: So that we seldome contentation have, In what we do possess; but forward look, And only find some pleasure in the way, Towards the end we aime at; which obtain'd, Brings not those real joyes, we did expect; Only affords some relsh which invites Our Idle fancies, to seek new delights; —How unhappy then, is our best happinesse? When no fruitions, can our fond hearts bless. Still subject to unsatisfied desires, That from quench'd Ashes, does beget new Fires. Thus all our Appetites, do make us slaves, And from our Cradles, lead us to our graves. Y. Titus. Have the Gods only given us active souls? And no objects, fit for them to fix on? Orma: To think on those Gods, will afford our hearts, A full variety, of lasting joyes; With which our earthly fancies cannot mix, When on Coelestial happinesse we fix. Titus. I shall e're long this argument revive, And shew, how you are buried alive! Where is that valour, and that virtue gone? Whither that courage fled? I doated on. Though you can passion, and desire sustain, You must not quit the Court, as if disdain Of all the glories that a Court can give, Could not perswade you there again to live▪
—I must now leave you to attend the Queen;— Exit Titus. Ormas: A clearer virtue I have never seen. Exeunt omnes severally. Enter the Queen, Embassador, Mariana, Old Titus, and Traine. Emb: Madam, shall I return without a hope? No gratious answer to my Masters sute! Queen: Mr Lord, I fully have declar'd, that way. Embass: Never to marry Madam! Queen: 'Tis my opinion now. Emb. Will you permit my Master to appear? Whose person may bring Arguments to prove It necessary to allow his Love. Queen. By no means my Lord, I shall not admit His visit, if he come on that affair! But must against his coming now declare: Emb: How can you, Madam, thus declare against A person, and a passion you see not? Or prejudge, what you will think hereafter! His presence, may change this severity. Queen. I have consider'd all that can be said, Urge it no more. [The Embassador stands concern'd.] Exit Queen and Train. Mar: Brother, — Sir, —what do you ail? what strange looks Do you put on? you will be discovered! Emba: I, Mariana, 'tis now my businesse, To try if this Scene changing, may not change Cleandra's stubborn heart; when she shall see This borrow'd habit thrown away, if then She scorn my Love, I will break off the League, And in my own Right will a Warre declare, For her so lately conquer'd Zelnian Crown, And there will try, if her conceal'd Gallant, The great Ormasdes, may once more be drawn From Sanctuary, to defend her Right, From my just rage; — I will now visit him. Mari: This humour is not fit for complement. Emb: Fear not, Mariana, I'le not wrangle now, My businesse is to bribe that mighty man, And make him plead my cause to the fair Queen, — But if I find him rotten at the heart! I shall unmask him, spite of all his Art. Mari: That is what I fear. Exeunt.
THE SECOND ACT. Enter the Embassador, with Ormasdes, who holds a Book in his hand, they sit on Chairs by a Table. Ormas: YOur Lordship by this visit, honours me; Emb: My visit brings you businesse of the State, You must not take it for a Complement. Ormas: What is your businesse then? Emb: I have observed, Ormasdes, the Queens sence Is yours, in her Affairs of Consequence, She moves by you; this brings me to consult My Masters Marriage, for a full result! For I conceive Valerianus Name Of so great Credit! and so high a Fame! That our two Nations, by our Princes joyn'd; Though our surrounding neighbors were combind, Our Territories would be safe, and we Should thank the Gods for such Tranquilitie. But when a Lady Rules, they may presume, And their Rebellious Principles assume; If great Ormasdes shall be call'd away, And fair Cleandra left alone to sway. Ormas: I know Sir, that Cleandra does esteem The stout Treconians friendship, as she ought; And I know she honours your brave young King, Whose martial Acts, have gain'd him through the World, A character so noble, and so great! That she with joy this proffer'd League, does treat▪ Onely dislikes the Marriage you propose, On good State Arguments, as I suppose, In judgment, and affection to her Son, She will not raise a Rival to his Crown. And for her angry Neighbors, she believes The Zelnian Warre, has so much wisdome taught, They will not suddainly, unurg'd, provoke, A Queen, so powerfull, and so fortunate. Emb: Suppose Valcrianus take offence? And look on this neglect, as an affront! Because he onely did propose this League, To introduce his sute, which he conceives, Will both our Nations equally advance; But if laid by with scorn I suppose he then, Do joyn with your old Enemies? and claim His Fathers Title to the Zelnian Crown; What may the hazzards, and the issue be? If a new warre, dispute your Victorie?
Ormas: I will not Prophecy the sad event, That so unjust a Warre may justly bring Upon so Gallant, and so wise a King! Emb: Suppose then, that I have his Commission? To lay by the Treaty of this new League, Untill the Marriage be agreed unto; And if deny'd! I must Proclaim his Right To Zelnia; and your late Conquest bring, To a new question, with a Powerfull King. Ormas: If Valerianus be so fixt, we must No hazards fear, in Warrs that are so just. Emb. Your great successes have high thoughts begot, Above your Conquest, which I value not? But wish such evils as we now foresee, May be avoided by our industry; For 'twill become your Wisdome, and your Trust, T'advise Cleandra to this happy Match; Wherein if you prevail, I have full power, Now to conferre on you, the first, and best Of our Treconian Principalities. Ormas: You do me wrong, and are in this unjust, To think that I will break Cleandra's trust, Which I do value 'bove your Masters Crown! And therefore boldly will advise the Queen Not to admit it his suit, on Arguments Which must an evil consequence produce, To her Sons Right, if she Comply, And by it, lessen her own Dignity. Emb: If my imployment, anger did allow, And my own Honour would permit, to strike A Book-man! this rude language, I'de correct. Orm: If the Queens honour were not more concern'd! In a respect to your imployment due; You soon should find, how little I do value you! The Book-man would not from your Master take This Insolence; but for Cleandras sake I do forbear; pray visit me no more. Emb: Fear it not; when Valerianas knowes How little worth, Cleandras honour is! He will this League, and her Alliance scorn; Who puts Ormasdes into this Disguise, To hide her Lover, from her Peoples Eyes? Ormas: This is beyond sufferance. [Ormasdes grapples with the Embassador. [Enter the Queen, Y. Titus, and Train, who part them.] Queen. Hold, Ormasdes, I heard his Insolence— —Sir, you have leave to go aboard your Fleet,
Where you only can be safe; begon then, Without reply be gone; for if't be known! What you have said! my People may revenge My wrong, before your Master do me right.— Exit Emb: in anger. —Ormasdes you must in this, my will obey, Your wonted judgment must your passion sway: While I by a quick Warre, with Fire and Sword, Require such Justice as he must afford. Ormas: Madam, the Conduct of that Warre I beg. Queen. If you this passion will lay by till then! You shall: But no more of this anger now; I came to take the Ayre this Afternoon, But will deferre it, 'till another day. — Pray be pacifi'd, you shall not stir out; I do intreat, and do command you stay. Titus stay you, 'till this heat be over. Exit Queen and Train. Ormas: Titus, my friend; I have a flame within, That will consume my heart, if you help not! Y. Titus. Do you doubt my assistance, to serve you, In any way you can prescribe a friend? Or: I'le rather thank thee for't, then doubt thy love, Th' Embassador can this night hardly reach Coriola! where we, in a swift Boat By break of day, to morrow may Arrive; If some hours hence! we in the dark, imbark! Y. Titus: I guesse your purpose, and I will obey; Yet I would gladly have an Argument, To justifie what you intend to do; Lest Forreign Princes should condemne our State, That Lawes of Nations rashly violate; And so Cleandras honour, suffer more, Then by his Insolence, she did before. Ormas: How can he justifie those words he spoke? His rude language, the Law of Nations broke. For when a Publick Minister puts off That Sacred shadow, which should him protect; And dares in such vil'd language give affronts, To a much greater Monarch then his own! That minute, his Commission did expire; When he his Cloak of Majesty laid by; And like a Ruffen, talk'd so lavishly. Y. Titus. This I confesse, is reason for revenge, But if the World our Action not approve? Pray think, what we shall urge for our excuse, In case we can no president produce? Ormas: A president Titus! where will he show, That Nations do Embassadors allow To be so barbarously base, as he? When he dares make his Act, a president!
I will another shew, and kill him for't. In the first Age, no presidents, were known, And in ours, this shall be my Creation: 'Tis not Cleandras work, nor is it thine; The glory or the shame is onely mine. Titus my heart would break, if I permit That man to brag, as he will do at home; How he has brav'd Ormasdes to his face! And on Cleandra thrown so foul disgrace. Y. Titus. Since I your resolution cannot change, Pray name the place, and hour, and I'le not faile. Ormas: Some three houres hence, wee'l at the Ferry meet, Where a swift well-man'd Boat, you must provide, My motion may some jealousie beget, Of what we do intend; and must perform; If our best speed, can but this Mad-man reach? I shall his fury, better manners teach. Exeunt. [Enter Cleandra, Mariana, Old Titus, Cleob: and Ladies.] Queen. Madam, you are now got so near my heart, That I am sad to think that we must part. Mariana. And I too soon do find, that I too late Am now involved in my Brothers Fate. We leave our hearts behind, though we now fly, This place by our impulsive Destiny. My soul has not a wish, can send me hence, If I could stay on any just pretence. Queen. Why may you not stay here Mariana? And let him go, we will a friendship make, Such as thy virtue justly may expect, And my affection give, if here you'l live? Mari: I am unhappy Madam, who must be At his dispose, has done you injurie, So great! that I must suffer while I live. Queen. Rather then you shall suffer, I'le forgive. Mar: Your pardon is, beyond your power, I fear, Unlesse you will admit his Master here? Queen. His pardon then is farre beyond my reach, If for his King, his own concern be such! And yours, so much for him; I must consent To part with both; yet I could be content, To see him for your sake, I and forget, What he so rashly has against me said, Thy tears for him, have satisfaction made. Mar: My brother is already on his way, And has ordered Boats for me to follow, Where I expect to find his rage too high, To hearken to such mercy, as I bring, Unlesse Cleandra will admit his King▪
Queen. I have not seen such uselesse rage before; Whom but himself can his mad fury harm? Mar: It is a Riddle I dare not expound. Queen. Dare not Mariana? am I so low In your esteem? you dare not let me know, What you dare do? this secret I confesse, Has onely power to make me love thee lesse. Mari: I cannot, I have sworn not yet to say What 'tis, to him I'me doubly tied t' obey: But since your goodnesse, can so soon forgive, So great a Crime, I'le try to bring him back, And if I can prevail, for his consent, I'le shew the cause of his distemperment. — Queen. You have his pardon, and may now persue, Your own design, to bring him back with you; But if he chuse to go, and set you free, Your self shall be much welcomer to me. Mar: Your words incourage me to take no leave, But cherish hopes which may my heart deceive, With present thoughts, rather to smile then mourn, As a good Omen to my quick return. Queen. You Nearcus, shall conduct Mariana To Coriola, and at your own house, As you passe by; pray treat her as my friend. Near: I shall be carefull in it, Madam. Exeunt Nearcus and Mariana. Queen: I love her, and am somewhat more concern'd To part with her; then I can make you see! Adm. She has by her behaviour, gain'd esteem From all the Court, and from the Nation too. Queen. I wonder Titus none of you lament, When so great Beauty from the Court is sent! Admi: Your Majesty has shew'd enough for all. Queen. I do mean Love, Titus, and did expect Her beauty, should have fir'd a hundred hearts! And by the powerfull charms of her bright Eyes, O're-ruled our Citherean Destinies. Adm: My heart, Madam, has been so often burnt, There is no substance left, that can take fire; Indeed I wonder how the rest have scap'd! Cleob: Nearcus, and my self, had other thoughts Of this great beauty, which did secure us; We do Mariana for his Mistris take, Few Sisters Travel for a Brothers sake! Queen. How Cleobulus! have you any ground For this? to justifie so vile a thought▪ Cle: Onely the freedome, which they daily us'd, With this new way, for Men who have no Wives, To carry Sisters into Forraign Courts! Queen: Though not in use, it does not sure deserve,
A censure so severe! such Innocence, In Mariana, did to me appear, That I should sooner judge her good, if bad, Then blemish such perfections by a thought It cannot be! so Insolent a Guilt! He durst not own! nor such a scandall raise, On his own name! and on his Country too! I command you to suppresse this thing, I am asham'd a Cithereans heart, Should entertain a thought of such a Crime! We bring our own Worth in question then, When we asperse the Worth of other men. Cle: They were but thoughts, as rashly then tane up, As now thrown out; with no design to wrong The Innocent; I wish her virtue may Our thoughts convince, and she be justified. Queen. Keep firm there my Lord, for all those who live Near Princes Eares, should weigh how they let fall A word that may a Womans Honour blast; If I were apt to credit your report? And on your ground lesse jealousie affront Such virtue! what a sin were it in you? To make me guilty of so great a Crime! Cleobulus. I am sorry for my rash opinion, Since it offends your Majesty so much! Queen. It is the bane of Courts, when we permit Those near us, to asperse the Innocent; If our strict Lawes for petty theft, gives Death? How much a greater punishment is due For robbing a good name? a sin so vil'd, And so unknown! no punishment was made By way of Prophesie, for crimes to come! If I did think this malice from your heart, I would for ever banish you my Court. Cleob: Your Majesty does raise your anger now, Above my guilt; which had no mischief in't. Queen. I am no farther angry with you now, But take occasion to declare my sence, Against all such, as defame Innocence. 'Tis a Prince his chief businesse to be Just, The Gods impose on us no higher Trust! We have no petty faults, to answer for, Universal Justice, is our great work, And those who shall divert it, to destroy The Fame, or Fortune of an Enemy, Deserves to be thrown off with Infamy. Exit Queen and Ladies. [Remains the Admiral and Cleobulus.] Adm: I have not seen the Queen in such a heat!
You have offended her some other way? Cleob: Not that I know of, in this kind ever! Adm: What Devil, made you talk thus to her now? You knowing that she is so good her self, She makes a doubt, that any of her Sex Can do amisse! and 'tis great Noblenesse! Cleo: There is a kind of pixe Divel, dwells In many Courts, that haunts our idle heads, And prompts us, when we know not what to say; To entertain great Princes with reports Of others, so to please, and passe the time; This foolish spirit, I think, entred me. Adm: You gave Cleandra cause, for your reproof, For how can Princes judge Malice from Mirth? When cunningly thrown out, with specious shewes, Of probabilities; when those aspers'd, Are never call'd to answer for themselves, The Queen did excellently well, to chide You, whom she Loves; that none may ere presume The like hereafter! for if Princes be Born Credulous? Malicious persons may Defame a Nation, if they please, this way. Cleob: I know I was to blame, but from this day, I'le hold my peace, 'till I know what to say. Exeunt. Enter Nearcus, with Mariana and Servants at his House, in their way to Coriola. Mari: Where are we now my Lord? this house stands well Near: It is my poor habitation, Madam; Here I must treat you, by the Queens command, 'Tis the mid-way unto Coriola. Mar: 'Tis a Noble, and a most pleasant Seat; Has it no Mistris, Sir? Are you single? Nearcus. I am only that way, happy Madam; Mariana. You have a Mistris then? or do you call It happinesse? that you as yet, have none? Near: Will you please Madam, to view the garden? The rest of the Traine stay looking on the Pictures, and see them not go out. Exit Nearcus with Mariana. 1. Lady. That piece methinks, does look as if it liv'd. 2 Lady. I do preferre that smiling Figure first; Whose hand is it, my Lord? Lord. I have not skill enough to know the hands, Though I love Pictures: —pray observe the next, Is not this sleeping Venus rarely done? See how that Cupid in the Tree, stands off! 2 Lady. 'Tis rare indeed, that Satyr, and the rest Of the whole piece, is excellently good!
1 Lady. Let us look into the next Room, my Lord. Lord. This way they went, and this way must return. [They go out and returne hastily.] Lord: The Doors are lock'd, and we can passe no way. 1 Lady. Is this by accident? or on command? Lord. Let us attend a while, and we shall see From the next Chamber window, where they be. Exeunt. [Enter Nearcus with Mariana in the Garden.] Mar: I have no Argument for further talk, And now am weary grown, with this long walk; Where is the beauty? you so much admire! Your praises have in me rais'd some desire, To see this wonder of our Sex! that I, May judge your skill, and with your choice comply. [Nearcus locks the Doore, and kneels.] Near: She is here already, oh she is here! A brighter beauty, never can appear! Mar: Why d'ye lock the Door, my Lord? why kneel To me! you make my heart some tremblings feel By this surprise; and I do doubtfull stand, What of kind Treachery, you have in hand! It looks! —yet, like a Lionness betray'd Into the Toyles; I scorn to be afraid. Near: I have no Argument for either now, But a distracted heart; that knowes not how T'excuse, what I have done! —'tis love, has brought Me to this Precipice, and too late taught, That I from hence, shall head-long tumble down, If you disdain to save; oh do not frown! Rather take this, and while you may, prevent Offers his Sword. Your own near ruine, and my rash intent; — —That angry look, and those enraged Eyes, Pierce like quick Lightning, from the stormy skies; They melt my heart, and make me trembling stand, To beg what Love, and Nature may command. Mariana. Love! do the Cithereans by such Arts! Such force! and treachery! winne Ladies hearts? Fie, fie Nearcus, this does not agree With Love! nor with Cleandras trust to thee; I shame to find such ills! and blush to chide: —Repent, and I thy infamy will hide; Oh! 'tis the basest of all crimes to be Justly condemn'd, for infidelity; And with a treachery, my trust beguile, Beyond the story of the Crocodile. Near: What dares not love attempt? when it goes high, Like mine? your ships are ready, oh too nigh!
The wind is fair; and I, no time but this, To woe; no other means to reach my bliss! The Queens command, and my desires here meet, To throw my life, and fortune, at your feet; That by this desperate course, you now may see, Your love, or scorn, I make my destinie. Mar: Nearcus, how would you prevaile my dreams! Instruct me not, to answer such extreams! Near: I would have you Mistris of me, and mine, Before we part, made so, by vowes Divine: Mar: 'Tis a short warning, to a work so great! Is this Cleandras Love? and this your Treat, To strangers? do you think my lips, my heart Does hold so loose? as at first sight, to part With it to you? what do you find in me, So slight? that looks like so much levitie. Near: If you'l afford more time? I will proceed With caution, and respect! and shall take heed How I offend; if you'l resolve to stay, Or to comply, my passion will obey. —If not! I must this desperate course persue, And trust my ruine or successe to you —Who does in desperate attempts ingage, Can seldome at first sight, th'event presage: —Love led me on, and reason comes too late, Now to retreat; this Fortune, is my Fate. Mar: Your language, and your looks, do rather threat, Then woe; which does in me such scorn beget, As to an Enemy, that does invade, —That Innocence, you have bereft of aid; And boldly dare impose on a free heart, What should be won by Love, not such base Art! Near: Give me but time to woe! and I will fear, And tremble in your sight; with zeal appear, And the same duty, I approach the Gods, When my offences, make me fear their Rods! It is not I, (as your affairs do stand) But high necessity, makes me command; That all the remnant of my life, you may Triumph! for my ambition's to obey. Mar: Think you by force, that I shall ere think fit, To yield my self to such a counterfeit? I am not born unto so mean a Fate, As to submit unto the man, I hate: Nor will I be thus frighted, to comply With so contemptable a destiny. Near: I must confesse, I can by no disguise Lessen, or hide the guilt, of this surprize; But by some greater crime, more amply shew, That a distracted passion may soon know,
To act such evills, as I fear to think; But do not set me in dispair thus sink; Speak so, as that I may some hope retain, And you'l restore me to my self again. Mar: Stand by vil'd man, and let me passe, who waits? Near: None within call; that now can help! the fates Themselves have not the power to set you free, Nor can you hope for safety; but from me! No storm at Sea, nor in it ships on Fire; Creates more terrors then my wild desire Brings me! here is a Tempest in this brest, Above all them; since raging Love possest My heart, I am become a walking storm; Reason and Virtue, are both wrack'd, no form Observ'd, while this confusion bears the sway, None knowes to govern; but must all obey, If we cannot resist; then to cry no, Is madnesse, when we must to ruine go! Mar: I have no power, but must my brothers will Obey; I must his mind, not yours fullfill; Lest his great pride, and anger may destroy, What you'd preserve, and frustrate all your joy. Near: If my high birth, and quality do prove Lesse then your own, I will expect no love; But hazzard all my hopes, on his consent, Let his denial sign my punishment. Mar: If your birth equal mine, and he consent To joyn our hands! I have no argument Against your hopes; but must be Mistris still, Of my own heart; not part with my free-will; Yet now Nearcus, I do promise you, What truth and honour dictates, I will do. Near: Unlesse you both do ere you go comply,— You shall soon see, that I know how to dye. Mar: Pray call my servants down, that I may see Your truth, and find my self at Liberty. [He calls at the Door.] Near: Now Madam, that my life's at your dispose, Your self secure, I humbly do propose, You will before the Gods, confirm by vow, What you have freely promis'd to me now. Mar: By all those powers, I'le keep my promise made, And never fail to own, what I have said. Near: It is enough, a kiss of your fair hand, Must satisfie the Man, you may command; Nearcus has no soul, cannot be blest, Untill his love, with love you do invest. [Enter Servants, and all go off together.]
THE THIRD ACT. Enter the Embassador, as at Coriola, with Cleon, Erillos, and Train. Embass: THis Piazzo Cleon, is Magnificent; I have not seen any so Beautifull! Cle: It shews the Princes Treasure, and their minds, Are alike great, who can so soon Erect, So vast a City, which in every part, Deserves to be as much admir'd, as this! Embass: We may walk through it, ere my Sister comes! Erillos. You may, the River side is your best view. Cleon: There is a Boat now coming to the shore. Erillos. Those who land, seem to be of Quality! Embass: I see no Woman yet with them appear! They are very brave, and come towards us! Do any of you know, who these may be? Cleon: Young Titus landed first, but as I think It is Ormasdes, who now leads the Troop: Embass: If so! I must expect some angry words, From the offended Queen. Enter Ormasdes, and Y. Titus, with Servants, who come up close to the Embassador without any respect. Embass: What means this kind of rudenesse Gentlemen? Ormas: It speaks my businesse, who am hither come, To scourge that pride, you so much glory in. And with this hand, that insolence chastise, Which boldly durst indeavour to defame, By base surmises, great Cleandras Name.— —Titus, I beg as you love my Honour, He turns to Titus. If I do fall! let none come in to help! —Sir, you shall have fair play, that we may see, To the Embass: How Insolence, and Courage do agree! Titus makes roome. Emb: I shall soon satisfie the doubt you make; To his followers. — Stand off; he dyes that stirs to my relief; Or by a word let fall, does make me known! They fight, Ormasdes hurts and disarms him. [Enter Mariana, and servants, who run in and part them.] Mar: Ormasdes hold; it is a King you wound! It is Valerianus you fight with.
Ormas: My self a Prince of Greece, of the same blood With our great Emperor, will justifie What I have done; and to the World declare, If any man do wrong me in disguise! I do his Titles, and himselfe despise. Exit Ormasdes, Titus, and Train. Mar: Oh Gods! my prophetick soul, did long since Fore-see this Evil! oh let not— King. Hold Valeriana; there are no Gods! Nor shall one Altar in my Kingdome stand, To honour those we foolishly call Gods! I will Erect new Temples unto Chance, Which giddily, thus governs us below. Valer: Take heed Sir, lest you do provoke those powers! (You now despise!) to punish your contempt! King. I will not own those Gods, those empty names, Who cannot shelter us from publick shames! Valer: The Gods be just, and you are much to blame, 'Twas not Ormasdes, who the King ore-came: It was his Virtue conquer'd your offence, Your guilt gave Victory to Innosence. King. Will you become my Judge? will you condemne My life, and Honour? A fit Sacrifice, To your belov'd Ormasdes fatall Sword; Fool, from this hour, I do thy blood disclaim, And will forget I ever knew thy Name; —Erillos, let my goods be sent aboard, I will not stay a minute longer here, Then my necessity compells me to. Valer: I have prevail'd with the much injur'd Queen, To lay her anger by, and to forgive Those rash words you spoke, and have her leave To bring you to her sight again, with hopes She may her inclinations change, when known! Your fury did proceed from Love alone. King. My love is vanish'd, and my heart too full Of my revenge, to think of my return; Till I can pull Cleandra from her Throne! I hope Ormasdes will take care of you, Who plead his cause, and are to love, so true! Men: Sir, though your wounds be slight, if you remove! So soon? we cannot answer for your life. King. I'le rather dye at Sea, then live on shore, Make haste good Cleon; lead me to my Boat. Cleon: Will you leave the Princess, in a strange land? Thus unkindly cast her off; for ever? Because her Love did argue for your good! King. And thee, that dares so boldly her excuse, Who does my honour, and her own abuse. [The Princess sounds.]
Cleon: Look Sir, she dyes! your unkindnesse kills her. King. She cannot do her self and me more right, Then to dye now! but she cannot depart, While great Ormasdes, Triumphs in her heart! — — See how his Name, her fainting soul revives! She recovers. Lead on, or I shall laugh to see her dye! That can raise Trophies for my infamy. Exit King and Train. Valer: What cruelty is this? to leave me here! Who love him better, then he loves himself; —You'l be all ruin'd, if you stay with me! Cleon: What we have said, has ruin'd us enough, If his unruly rage, can reach so farre? Mene. I think 'twere best that you return to Court, And do Cleandra's proffer'd friendship try, I have all your Brothers Jewels here, Which will defray your charges while you stay. Valeriana. 'Tis a plentifull provision for us; But where is young Nearcus, all this while? Cleon: He has not yet appear'd, since we Arriv'd. Enter to them Ormasdes, Young Titus, Nearcus, and Servants, Ormasdes stands off. Near: Madam, can you forgive, what I have done? And own the Author of so great a crime? Who saw not then a Princess in disguise, But was captiv'd by Mariana's Eyes! Valer: My Lord, I do forgive, and shall forget, So you repent! and I will serve you too, With all my power, and interest in the Queen. Near: If that be all, would I had guilty been, Of greater crimes, then my good natur'd sin. Y. Titus. Madam, we hear your Brother is unkind, But by Cleandra's favours you may find, Some means to reconcile you unto him. Valer: I am most happy in Cleandra's love. Y. Titus. Will you permit Ormasdes in your Boat? Or shall he seek some other passage home? Mar: I could have wish'd Ormasdes lesse concern'd, Or that his courage had not been so great; But cannot quarrel him on this account; He was oblig'd to right Cleandra's wrongs; And must in Justice be applauded for't. Ormas: Madam, I thank the Gods for my successe, And now with the same breath, can humbly beg, That you'l forgive, what they so late approv'd! Val: Sir, it will not become me, his Sister, —Now to congratulate your Victory, Who have just cause, to mourn my Brothers Fate; From whence my own misfortunes, have their date:
Ormas: Madam, shall we attend you to your Boat? Valer: Let Titus order all, as he thinks fit! I am ready now for my remove. Exeunt. Titus leads off Valeriana, the rest follow. [Enter Cleobulus and Chyron.] Chy: The Queen is troubled, and her Guards are sent With speed, Ormasdes Quarrel to prevent: Cleob: She must secure th' Embassadors return, Lest all our Neighbour Nations do complain, And say, we give occasion for a Warre; Which the Treconians claim cannot pretend, Nor the rejected Marriage justifie. Chyron: Valerianus has an antient claim To Zelnia, which may beget a Warre! If the Treconians do a quarrel seek? There wants no title to a Prince provok'd. Cleob: Ormasdes will rejoyce, to see that day! Chy: He is our Nations Darling, and deserves, Cleandras favour; but methinks he looks As if his heart were higher then his head! Cleo: I have been lately chid for jugling looks, And dare not say, what I believe, I see. [Enter to them Cleandra, Old Titus, and Ladies.] Queen. You tell such wonders from Coriola. That I want faith for them! how comes this Newes? Adm: Madam, a Messenger but not Arriv'd, Saw the Combate done, and heard Nearcus say, They would attend Valerianas back, Unto your Majesty; (whereas the wonder?) Princes have been in forreign Courts disguis'd! Qu: But have you ever such strange humours found? A Prince, where Vice and Virtue is so mixt! Adm: No, I have not, nor such a president! As now Ormasdes gives us to correct Such impudence, as near before was known. Queen. If I were not concern'd, I should approve, What he has done, though now I must not own? Adm: For publique thanks on his behalf, I move.— —Why should we thus, our honest thoughts disguise? When Virtuous Actions Virtue justifies. Queen. Had not Ormasdes stir'd! by Armes I might Compel his Master to have done me right. Adm: By Warre, thousands of guiltlesse persons might Have suffer'd, for one mans over-sight. Queen. You have reason Titus, and I shall Judge
Ormasdes Act, as he deserves from me; Who with my Nation, am so much oblig'd, I must approve, whatever he will own! —Let the young Princess lodgings be prepar'd, Fit for my Friend, and Sister to a King. [Enter to them, Valeriana, Y. Titus, Nearcus, and Servants.] Queen. You are welcome Madam, and I am glad To have you on these termes; do not weep To part with, what your virtue could not keep! Val: I am happy, by my unhappinesse, For by your favour Madam, I may find Some remedy, for my afflicted mind. Queen. Be sure, what Citherea can afford, Is yours; and all Cleandra does command, With me rejoyce, to see you safe return'd; —But where is Ormasdes? I must chide him. Near: He is retir'd Madam to avoid your sight. Y. Titus. Ormasdes thinks it duty, and respect, Not to appear at Court, till you direct! Queen. Pray fetch him hither now; I hope you can Exit Tit: With me forgive so Excellent a man! Whose passion never does his reason sway, But followes on, when virtue leads the way. Valer: I have no anger to Ormasdes, since Young Titus did my Brothers crime relate, I hope this letting blood, will do him good, When this affront at home is understood! Queen. Your Justice, and your Charity is great, And I do see no reason but you may Admit Ormasdes in my company; I am inform'd, he has a slight hurt too! Valeriana. My furious Brother will be glad indeed! That brave Ormasdes, by his hand does bleed. This accident, if you'l be pleas'd to call My Brother back? may reconcile us all. Queen. I never shall consent to his desires, Though I my anger, and revenge remove, In complement to you, whom I do love. [Enter to them Ormasdes, and Young Titus.] Ormas: Madam, if doing Justice, have displeas'd! I do repent, and now your pardon beg. Queen. Since his great insolence, and your revenge, No Age can parallel! both must submit To such a censure as the World thinks fit. Ormas: Your pardon Madam, is not all my sute, I beg your interest to obtain like grace
From this sad Lady! my wole Soul is vext, To see such innocence, so much perplext. Queen. I can now secure you there Ormasdes, She does discreetly Judge, what you have done, Was, what a man of honour could not shun. —Is not this truth Valeriana? speak? Valer: stands surpris'd. Val: Yes Madam, I do think, I did say so! She sighes and weeps. Qu: What suddain change is this? can your soft heart, Conceal a thought of ill? towards the man You have excus'd? and seem'd to smile upon! Near: She does love Ormasdes, and I am lost. Valer: weeps. Qu: Pray leave us, all with-draw! to the next Room:— Exeunt. —What have I said? that can disturb you thus? Impart your griefs, and I will share in them. Val: I dare not shew 'um with an open Face! Qu: And why, you cannot have a guilt so great, That I cannot forgive; speak it freely. Valer: Has not my face, my guilty heart betray'd? Queen. I understand you not! Valer: — I am safe then, and may my sorrow hide. Aside. Queen. Madam, what means this talking to your self? While I stand by neglected! is your trust So great? that you can doubt I will be just? Valer: I doubt my self great Queen, and fear not you; Aside: She's jealous of me, and my thoughts too true! She loves Ormasdes, and most unhappy I, Am forc'd to smile on my own Tragedy; I know no way to hide my broken heart, Unlesse I do immediately depart! — —Madam, I beg your Pardon, and your Passe, I must begon, lest I too late alass! By my distempers here, deserve your blame, And raise my memory, eternall shame. Queen. You are not well sure, this distracted talk, Requires Physitians to consult, I'le send; — Vale: Oh no! there needs no more consult for this, You only can restore me unto bliss! Queen. And can you doubt, that I will not? Valer: I ear so! Queen: What I can do, be you assur'd, I will. Valer: What I desire, may be more priz'd by you, Then is the Citherean Diadem! —Will you know now? and if not grant! forgive? For I am desperate on the suddain grown. And am resolv'd to make my weaknesse known. Queen: Speak it aloud, or in my bosome breath. Imbraces her. The troubles of thy soul, let not a thought Be hid, but freely shew, how much you trust My love, and you shall find me kind, and just. Valer: Do not you Madam, value Ormasdes
Person? and his service above all mens? Queen. Yes, I do. Valer: You are Just, and Worthy; —and I am— Valer: faints. Queen. Help, help, some help there! Enter Ormasdes, Titus, Nearcus, and Ladies, who take up Valeriana. Nearcus. 'Tis love, upon my life! Aside. Queen. Leave us again, the dangers over now; Ormas: I beg your permission to retyre. Queen. My best wishes still attend Ormasdes. Exit Ormasdes, with the rest. Valer: What can I say, t'excuse what I have done? Queen. Speak plainly your full thoughts, and I'm your friend; But if you longer dally with my love! You will my friendship, unto anger move. Valer: I know you have discover'd by my words, That your esteem of him, you boldly own, Becomes the ground of my distraction; Queen. You love him then! that look declares it now! And so do I, or I would nee'r consent, To give him unto you; if this cure grow Within my reach! Ormasdes shall be yours. Valer: Is not your Majesty ingag'd to him? Queen. Indeed, I am not so in Love with him, But I can second your desires; and will With all my power endeavour to perswade Ormasdes, that he meet with open Armes, So great a blessing, by the Gods design'd; Though I must part with what I value most, Your passion never shall by me be crost. Valer: Madam, your kindnesse to me flowes so fast, That I am now in danger to be lost, By my abundant joy for this successe You give, of unexpected happinesse. Queen. Remove these sullen clouds, from thy fair Eyes, And be thy self again, for I will shew Ormasdes suddainly, how great a bliss, The Heav'ns prepare to Crown his Virtue with. Valer: The Gods reward you with your highest wish! That you may never want, what you desire, My spirits fail so fast! I must retire. Exit. Her Maids lead her off, leaning on them, and shewing much weakness. Queen. Do so; what's this. I have so rashly done! Thrown off Ormasdes I depended on! Must I perswade him quit that interest here, VVhich for my sake, he purchased so dear! —How ill shall I repay his service past? If I advise, this banishment at last;
What a rash promise, has my pitty made? By thus proposing my improper Ay'd! Though by the secret charms of Sympathy, Her passion won my reason to comply; I must on this imployment Titus use, My Honour will my active part excuse. —But if his Arguments should not prevail? And by my nicety, the businesse fail? —If she should perish so? and I repent Too late, that ill! which I may yet prevent; —I must about it then, and loose no time, Lest my nice complements do prove a crime! —My faith is past, and I will now proceed, Though brave Ormasdes do condemn the Deed. Exit with Train. Enter Nearcus, with Valeriana in her Chamber, her Ladies stand off, but go not out. Near: Madam, my desperate State, and high transport, You may complain of, though not blame me for't; Your Eyes, like bright misguiding Fires, betray My wandring soul, and make me loose my way. 'Tis now too late, to see that I am lost, Led by those guides, to this obdurate coast, Where neither Rocks appear, nor crossing Tides; Yet this expected safety, ruine hides! —But I must claim you by a solemn vow, Made in the sight of Heav'n; and am come now, To prove my Birth, which you will not deny, Is with your own of equall Quality; These are such Arguments, for your consent, I cannot think, you dare your vowes repent. Vale: It cannot well be thought, and much lesse said, That I repent a promise, never made; How could such hasty words, strict vowes appear? Which my surprise, then made me speak in fear! When you to seize me, stretch'd those Lions paws, And threatn'd 'gainst all Hospitable Lawes! Worse then Death to me; what might I not do? To get from such a Monstrous Beast as you! Near: Did my humility such danger threat? Or my submission, with such horror treat! Were it even so, as you your self have said! I might my own conditions, then have made. Valer: Did you not all my Servants first exclude? And me into a lonenesse so delude, As that no rescue could be had! to free Me from your Trayterous Captivitie.
When you with humble looks, strong fetters laid, And words let fall, which made my soul afraid; And caus'd me use some little Art, to gain Your trust, that I my freedome might obtain. Near: 'Tis true indeed, and you reproach me well, Or else you might another story tell! For I confesse, I did too much! to prove The humble passion of a gentle Love; And much too little, now to justifie My high affections, or my fact denie. Had I with vigour, my first step persu'd, You might have wish'd my vows, with yours renew'd. Valer: You talk, as now, I at your mercy were; As if you still might threat; and I must fear! But I shall make you know your self, and me, If you proceed not with more modesty! And shall soon let Cleandra understand, How well you treated me! on her command. Near: Though I do shake, and tremble at your frown, Cleandras anger, cannot bow me down. For if my suffering no compassion move, Nor your past vowes, make you regard my Love! You shall then see, how little I esteem This Life, you will not with a smile redeem! Valer: I am not thus ingratefull as you say, So I may be secur'd another way; —I did not threat, till you aspers'd my Name, By this false promise, you unjustly claim. For though your Birth flow from a Noble Spring, 'Tis something lesse, then Daughter to a King. And more, I must the secret now impart, That brave Ormasdes long since, had my heart. Near: Madam, I have no Plea beyond my Love, If that, do of too mean a value prove! Think how your honour stands ingag'd by vow, And that my All, depends upon it now! Yet here I do before the Gods professe, To quit my Title, if my Birth be lesse! Val: From Nearcus, the Gods will me protect, Who boldly must a subjects claim, reject. Near: Which I am not; but a Prince Nobly born, As is Cleandra! though you now do scorn The Man, who lay'd his greatnesse at your feet, Without a thought, of Royalty to meet! Your Virtue, and your Beauty did engage My heart to Love; and did create that rage, You now so much condemn; and make me shame I did no more, who was so much to blame! Val: You do amaze me! knows Cleandra this? Near: She yet does not, but must do, when I plead!
My Title to Valerianas Bed. For Madam, you can onely now be mine, Made so by humane Lawes, and by Divine. Val: What ere you are! I do much scorn to think Of being compell'd, and will strong poyson drink, Rather then be by such a trick betray'd, Or of your scandalous reports, afraid; Your first attempt was base; and now as vain Your hopes are; you are a Prince! I do disdain To have a thought for him, who poorly can, Demand, what's given to another man. I must this Injury at last reveal, And to the Queen, for Justice now appeal. Near: I am content, then let Cleandra judge. Val: I'le hear no more. Exit with Ladies. Near: What a strange heat I feel, that alwayes burn, Yet do not waste, cannot to Ashes turn! But like a Fire-flaming Statue stand, To warn the World, not to approach this Land; Ye Gods! how cruel is your doom? that she Melts not; but should an Icie Mountain be, Of power to kindle such tormenting Fires, Where her own frozen heart, has no desires. Exit▪ THE FOURTH ACT. Enter Cleandra, with Ormasdes, the Lords, and Ladies stand off. Queen: I Shall allow your Argument for War, If the Treconian do provoke so far! But how shall I, Valeriana free? From her fierce Brothers great barbaritie; And how Estate her in her Mothers Land! If her mad Brother, should that right withstand! Though she do now desire but what's her own, If he should dye; She must Ascend that Throne. Ormas: I have heard so, and that, by my rash Act, She suffers, which makes me repent the Fact! Queen. Her virtues, do her beauty far excell, And in my judgment, have no parallel; What is your thought? will not the man be blest? Whom Gods with such felicities invest! Ormas: I doubt not Madam, her perfections may In hearts of Men; above her Scepter sway. Queen. She has wonne me, to a concern so high, As if my own, were the same Destiny
With hers; my thoughts do labor where to treat A Marriage, with some Prince, worthy so great A Queen; can you Ormasdes find me one To recommend? will Greece afford us none? Ormas: Madam, if Citherea can produce None fit! for Greece, there will need no excuse; — Queen. I think so too, unlesse Ormasdes will Himself, thus my prophetick foul fulfill: That does such glories, and such joyes foresee, As may indure unto Eternitie.— Ormas: Me Madam! does your Majesty think me A man, worthy of so great Felicitie? Alas I am too old, now to begin To Love! you may as soon learn me to spin; — My Sword, and Armor, into Needles turn, As teach my Age, in Youthfull flames to burn. Queen. 'Tis you Ormasdes, are the man so blest, Her love to you, she has to me confest; And me in honour has ingag'd to try, If I can now perswade you to comply. Ormas: Madam, I hope you do not thus abuse Your servant, cause my nature does refuse, Such correspondence with your Sex, as might Ingage a braver Man; Oh do not fight Against my weaknesse! that must now confesse, I never unto Lady made addresse; And onely chose this solitary place, That I might here some quiet thoughts imbrace. —Sure Madam, you mistake; how can it be? That she should covet such Antipothy! —Can the good Gods to her be so unkind? To let such excellence, become so blind? Queen. Think you her self knowes? what her self desires? Or that she has no sence, of those quick fires, That do consume her! can you doubt such Love? Which through dispair, did then so mortal prove! That but to name Ormasdes, she did Dye, 'Till you appear'd, to change that destiny; —And when you all retir'd, she did confesse, Her life depended on her good successe; Your Glorious Acts, had raised so loud a Fame, That she was first in love with your great Name! Which brought her hither, with a full intent, To Judge, and Justifie, that Argument. Ormas: Madam, I must believe what you avow, And do so farre your Argument allow, That it has rais'd in me, a greater Warre, Then I was ever in; and am so farre From slighting this affair, that I descry, My certain Ruine, by this Victory.
The Gods cannot afford lesse punishment, If I refuse to hear! and if consent! I'm lost to all my joyes on Earth; for Fae Has not in store, nor can the Gods create An evill, I fear more, then to deny, What you command; though a sad Destiny; —Can nothing lesse then my destruction? save This Excellence? from an untimely Grave! Queen. If I could see this danger you foretell? Ormasdes harmes should make no other well! Though Valeriana do my pitty move, Ormasdes friendship, is before her Love In my esteem; but if this match unite Your hearts? it will our Children then invite, To imitate our friendship, and so ye Fast knots, for everlasting Amitie. Ormas: My mind can move my body any way, But my hard heart, will not my will obey; My utmost power, my soul to mourn shall teach, 'Cause my Affection, is beyond my reach! Queen. If you oppose not, but your Ear will lend, I doubt not, but the Gods your heart will bend This way, and your good nature in short time, Will make you wish for, what you judge my crime▪ Ormas: Although I cannot wish, and must not chuse, I would not Madam willingly refuse, What you advise; but boldly meet my Fate; That no one thought, may a vain fear Create, Lest you should judge my slacknesse for neglect, Because I graspe not, what I cann't affect. Queen: Can you such pleasure take, in this disguise? Be thus retir'd? and all that's good despise, When offer'd! do you fear? or scorn to meet This Excellence now fallen at your feet! —Is your great heart Ormasdes, onely made For dangerous attempts? shall it be said? This Parragon of all our Sex! now dyes, Because Ormasdes, does her Love despise! Ormas: No Madam, I do suffer more, then she Does for her self! hers is my miserie; I dare not virtue, with vain hopes abuse, I cannot love; and therefore do refuse To dally with so bright a Saint, whose Shrine, Compels all hearts to bow before't, but mine; I am not capable of Love; not blest That way! my heart's with other flames possest. Queen. All flames you feel, would vanish, did you see Valeriana in such misery; As she endures! now fetching her last breath, Enquiring your health, neglecting her own death.
Thus my compassion has her sorrowes learn'd, I weep her Tears, while you stand unconcern'd! Ormas: Madam, your passion does my pitty move, Though my dull heart cannot consent to Love; My resolution is now fixt; I'le try My self to vanquish, or her Martyr Dye! —I swear, I did not hear that she was ill, And now it does my soul with horror fill, For her concern; no danger is so great, But I will rather dye in't then, retreat. Queen. 'Tis bravely said, but dare you try the effect, Of one short visit? after such neglect! Ormas: Thus provok'd! if your Majesty stands by! I will not such a visit now deny. Queen. You speak, and look, as if you meant to fright, Much rather, then revive her by your sight! Ormas: Madam, to Complement, I have no skill, Nor can be pleas'd, if lov'd against my will! Yet sensible, and civil, I can be, Though it do prove unfortunate to me. Queen. When shall I bring this comfort? to revive Her fainting soul; if she be still alive. Ormas: Is she really so weak; so soon grown Thus ill? I have no skill, in this unknown Mystery of love! but will boldly try, What I can do, for her recovery. Queen. High passions do weak bodies sooner bring To the Graves mouth, then any other thing; Her despairs, are of a much longer date, Though suddain sicknesse do break out thus late; —When I your humour, did a first reherse, And shew'd, how your whole life had been averse To Love; she sigh'd, and presently grew pale, Despair that minute, made her spirits fail; And so transported by her fancy, fell, As if my doubts, had rung her passing bell. Orm: Though I cannot speak, nor do yet know how To look; I'm ready to attend you now! Queen. I fear so suddain, and so great a joy! As your approach; may equally destroy! Let me her heart prepare, that by degrees, She may but hope retain, before she see The comfort, that your visit brings; and then Ormasdes may ere long, prove best of Men. Ormas: Madam, I do my self to you submit, Pray order me in all, as you think fit. Queen. You shall then stand unseen, while I do tell This welcome story, which will make her well: And then by what you'l see, you may observe, How my true friendship will from both deserve!
Who have no wish beyond Ormasdes good, When time shall make me rightly understood. Ormas: Madam, I have now no more to say, But that I will your Majesty obey. Queen. You shall not stirre Ormasdes till I send. Exit Queen and Traine. [Enter to him Nearous.] Ormas: Did you not meet Cleandra going out? Near: Yes, but I have businesse of importance, Pray let us withdraw, and be more private. Ormas: Come this way then: — They go out, and Re-entey. Ormas: Why have you drawn me to this inner Room? Is the secret, of so piercing quality? That fewer Walls then these, cannot contain't! Near: It is my Lord of a high nature grown, I must impart it to your self alone; —You and I must kill one another now; Ormas: May not I live? though you are pleas'd to dye? Near: No Sir, since 'tis decreed that I must die. I am resolv'd to have you Company. —There's a Sword, the same with mine, defend you. Ormas: Hold a while▪ — —May not I know the cause of this hatred? Near: I have no hatred, yet endeavour must, That we together may revert to dust. Though you by chance have rob'd me of my right —I'de not out-live Ormasdes, if I might! Ormas. From whence does this strange kindnesse to me grow? Say, for I will not fight, untill I know! Near: This then, will teach you to defend your self: Runs at him; he puts his Sword by, and holds him. Ormas: I shall call my Servants, unlesse you now show The cause of this distracted fury? Near: I will: — Lets him go. —Valeriana's my Quarrel; She throwes neglects on me, and dotes on you. Ormas: You are mistaken sure, and much abus'd! It is not possible! — She dotes on me! Who never courted Lady in my life! Near: By all that's good, she told me so her self. Ormas: This must be some design, beyond my reach! But if true? from whence does my guilt arise? Who never heard of your pretence, 'till now! Nor have a serious thought for hers, to me; If such a folly, do her heart possesse; Am I to answer for her guiltinesse? Near: I do accuse you, of no guilt at all; But joy to think, if by my hand you fall;
It will Create in her such miserie, As will adorn my death with Victorie. Ormas: If such revenge, and malice you intend, Where is the Love, that you so much pretend? Near: Wee'l talk of that, as our two souls expire; She flatter'd me with hopes, that blew my Fire, She threw out vowes to marry me, and now In hope of you, disowns that holy vow. Ormas: Made vowes to marry you! and yet love me! Pray shew me how, this story does agree? I swear, I never had a thought of Love To Lady in my life; and will now quit The interest you pretend, rather then fight— For such imaginary Dreams, as this. Near: You must Fight. Nearcus offers at him: he rings a Bell. Enter Servants. Ormas: No, disarm him, — so, now leave us alone,— Exeunt. —Nearcus, I have lov'd you, and shall still, If you'l permit! what does this story mean? Near: By Hea—Valeriana did ingage To marry me; if my Birth equal'd hers! But now repents, in hope to marry you. Ormas: This story growes stranger, and stranger still, Does your Birth equal hers? on which you ground Your Title, and on which her vow was made. Near: It does, Ormasdes, and did hers exceed, When I first urg'd that sacred Vow she made; She but a Subject, unto me appear'd. Ormas: And are you other now? Near: Yes, have you not heard that Prince Orontes, Brother to our late King, had a young Son Call'd Leonatus, who by sad mishap, Fencing with the Prince, hurt him in the Eye, Of which hurt he dyed; and the King inrag'd, Made vowes to Sacrifice the Murtherer; As if the mischief, purposely were done! In order to his own Succession; — — (After Cleandra;) who was then married, To a young Prince in Greece, and setl'd there. Orm: I'ave often heard the Queen, with sighs lament Her Brothers losse, by that sad accident: And say, she pittied Leonatus death, As innocent! for that unhappy youth, She heard, was drown'd, endeavouring to escape Her Fathers Vengeance, he unjustly vow'd. Near: She was mis-inform'd, my Lord, he yet lives; 'Twas by this fatall hand, her brother fell; And I accurs'd, that have thus long surviv'd! To fall a mis-becoming Sacrifice, To Love; by a disdainfull Ladies Eyes▪
After so long concealment, and so safe! By Old Nearcus, put in this disguise, Bred as his Son; but now, I life despise; And call to have that Justice on me done, Which I have us'd much industry to shun. Ormas: You tell me wonders, of a different kind, Of which I shall enquire; and if I find Valeriana stands ingag'd to you? And all this story of your self prove True! I will my best endeavors soon imploy, This grosse mistake of me, to rectifie. Near: If my addresse, do find no good successe! The businesse of my life, shall be to dye, And whether by your hand, or by command From our great Queen? it is the same to me, The Princess must my life, or death decree. Ormas. I shall conceal your Name, untill I see, I may reveal it with securitie; And in few hours, if my desires succeed! You shall from all your doubts, and fears be freed. Near: You will oblige me ever, if you do! Exit Near: Ormas: My hour is come, to wait upon the Queen, Unto Valeriana, where this Newes, I hope will bring me off, from the first Rock: — —By Valeriana to be thus lov'd! And by Cleandra, for another woo'd! And by Nearcus kill'd, I know not why! To me is a new kind of Misterie. Exit. Enter Valeriana, brought in very weak, lying on a Couch, with Physitians, and Servants; She speaks very faintly. Valer: Is not the Queen return'd to Court yet? Lady. No, Madam. Valer: I wish she were; my heart dissolves so fast! That I do find, I shall few minutes last. She faints. Doctor. Your fancy does your weaknesse much increase, This passion, is the worst of your disease. Enter Queen, and Ormasdes, she sets him to stand unseen. Doctor. Oh Madam! you are much wish'd for here. Queen. Let all withdraw, I must be private now, Onely do you Ormasdes, stand unseen; — —How is it with my friend? Val: I'm glad that you are come to close my Eyes, My spirits waste so fast, that I must dye! Queen: I hope not yet Valeriana.
Val: A lasse Madam, I had not liv'd till now, But for the joy my broken heart conceives, In hopes to hear Ormasdes is grown well, Before I leave this World. Queen. 'Twas the distemper of an Ague fit, And he is now so farre from being sick, That he without, begs leave to visit you. Val: Me, did you say? to visit me Madam! Will Ormasdes visit me? is it so? Queen. Yes, he's without, and does by me desire You will admit him; —Why are you silent? Now my endeavours prosper to your wish! Val: Does wise Cleandra think it will be sit? That I in such a passion leave this World! As I shall do, if I see Ormasdes! — — I shame to think that he should see me dye, Yet cannot chuse, but wish it hartily! Queen. Shall I call him in then? why do you doubt? Val. Oh Madam, I dare not see him; must not! You have said something, to bring him hither! Makes me fear to see him; it must not be! Queen. Pray see him, and let this great crime, be mine; His presence, may your troubl'd heart revive. Val: He cannot Madam, for 'tis now too late! I do feel here, the heavy hand of Death, Is crushing me to Ayre. She faints in the Queens Arms. Queen. Ormasdes your help! she dies, she dies! He drawes, and proffers to kill himself. Ormas: By all our Gods, I will dye with her then! Queen. She lives again! Ormasdes your help now; — He flings away his Sword and helps. — So, let her head lye a little from us. He kneels, and holds her hand. Ormas: For Heav'n sake Madam, tell what I must say? Or what now must do? is she not dead still? Queen. Does not her hand inform you, that she lives? Is it not warme? Ormas: Oh yes! 'tis warm, but I, who never dar'd Thus boldly touch a Ladies hand till now; Understand not how to use it, as I ought! He kisses her Hand. Queen: There needs no other kindnesse, then you shew, — How is it now Valeriana? Val: Well Madam, too well, I fear, to last so: I dare not look that way, because I blush To think how I have scandaliz'd my Sex! And how Ormasdes now is justified! In his contempt of Women, for my sake! I have no power to take away my hand, Yet dare not own, to leave it with him longer.
Ormas: Oh why? what has Ormasdes ever done? Justly to merrit this dissertion? Val: Pray Madam, say something in my behalf; Either to hide, or to excuse my shame. Queen. Turn this way then, and let your Eyes excuse That guilt, which will Ormasdes disabuse. They turn her. Ormas: She looks desperately ill! Queen. 'Tis only weaknesse, and no danger in't; Pray call her Servants, and let us retire. Ormas: Retire! you have engag'd me now so farre, That I must see the Battle wonne, or lost! Before I can consent, to a Retreat. Queen. 'Tis late, and she must sleep. Ormas: Why Madam, so she may, though I be by! I'le sit as silent as the God of sleep, And here attend, while her tir'd servants rest. Queen. You will not watch all night Ormasdes? Ormas: Oh but I will Madam; watch night, by night, Till she recover! This is my fixt Post, Appointed by the Gods; not your command, Nor any force, has power to take me hence; While this good Sword will hold for my defence. Takes up his sword. Queen. Why so fierce, and violent Ormasdes? I am much joy'd, to see you thus concern'd! And on this quarrel, am not like to fight With such a man at Arms, by Candle-light! Ormas: For Heav'n sake Madam, pardon my rash words, And disrespect unto your Majesty; For I do scarce know what I say, or do; I am become a stranger to my self, So suddainly transform'd, that I would hide Me from your sight, if I durst stir from hence! Queen. I will forgive, so you'l let me direct Your future actions, I'le your Love protect! Ormas: If you'l command? —I gladly will obey. Queen. You must submit, to what she does appoint. Ormas: Most willingly. Valer: sighs aloud, and weeps. Queen. Does our discourse, these sighs, and tears produce? Val: You have said nothing that will need excuse. These Tears slow from joy, and gratitude, To you great Queen, who by this act, include More pious pitty, then past stories tell; — To make Ormasdes counterfeit so well! —This thought rais'd those unruly sighs you heard, And Madam, now it makes my soul afraid, To see so great a courage thus submit, To flatter me, because you think it fit; —At your command, to put on this disguise, In kindnesse unto one, he does despise. Queen. Do you then think his kindnesse counterfeit?
Can his great soul consent, to such deceit? Valer: I can yet find no argument, for ground, To change so great contempt, as I have found, Into so high esteem! as he does now, By your advice, in charity allow; That my last minutes, may some pleasure have, He yields, to send me smiling to my grave. Queen. You cannot judge so ill, of him you love; Nor can so brave a man, so worthless prove! Val: I do confess, I should be glad to find All real that I see; and his great mind The same brave Character he had, maintain Through his whole life; and not that glory stain; But if't be real, this comes now too late, His kindnesse cannot change the course of Fate! Queen. Think not of Death, for if you will endure The Tryall? I will undertake the Cure; I see your sufferings do compassion move, Which in most generous hearts, does turne to Love. Ormas: Madam, I know not what, you do call love, Nor how in that fantastick Sphear to move! I cannot talk the language Lovers use, When they design fair Ladies to abuse; Nor can I yet, by this experience guesse, If Love, or a distraction, does possesse, My heart? give me but leave to watch this night, That while you sleep, I may my heart invite, To tell me what it ails! if it be Love? What all the World allows! I shall approve: And then, I'le rather dye, then e're forsake What I avow, or what I undertake. Queen. Pray Madam, give him leave to watch this night Some serious thoughts may set his fancy right. He has lyen often on the frozen ground, On lesse occasion, and more danger found. Valer: I shall not rest then, though you think it fit, I shall condemn my self, if I submit. Queen. 'Tis somewhat more then custome does allow, I must confess; but how to help it now, Who knows? you see he is resolv'd to beat Us all, if we but mention his Retreat. Ormas: Pray let not this my first sute be deny'd, But give me leave to sit on yonder side, As silent as sleep self; my body shall Be fixt, as is that figure on the Wall. Queen. Let him Valeriana, pray consent, 'Twill prove his honour, or his punishment! Ormas: Who can have more care? who so fit as I, To watch? who am resolv'd with her to Dye. —Good rest unto your Majesty. He leads off the Queen.
Queen. He'l turn me out, if I refuse to go! — But why Ormasdes do you tremble so? Ormas: This shaking fit may to a Feaver turn, And I, e're day, in Loves bright flames may burn. Exeunt omnes. THE FIFTH ACT. Valeriana is discover'd a sleep on a Couch, with Doctors, and Ladies all asleep about her, Ormasdes rises from the ground, at the Couch side. Ormas: ALl Eyes are shut, all hearts can rest, but mine, I've something here, that will not let me sleep: —Tis Love, I am bewitch'd, or it is Love! That thus disturbs my body, and distracts My mind; no other passion works like this! Well then, if it be Love! where's the wonder? The wisest, bravest, and the greatest men, Have been in Love as much, or more then I; —But why then was I, thus long without it? Why did not bright Cleandras Beauty burn? Why was not this Fire kindl'd untill now? How comes Valeriana by this power? To wound me deeper, then Cleandra did! My Kind, loving heart, how comes this to passe? Valeriana sighs and groans aloud. Ormas: Ha! Her spirit by that sigh informs me, That doubl'd groan, struck through my wavering soul, Oh thou Divinest power! what ere thou art! I do submit, Valerianas groans, Are all sufficient Arguments for Love! It seems, my stony heart, was proof against All charms, but deep fetch'd sighs, and dying groans; By which, 'tis now made supple, and so soft, That it is ready to take any form; That sick Valeriana shall direct; — — Great God of Love, forgive my past neglects, And now restore this Lady to her health, Then I with Insense will thy Altars load, Thy Temple with those Trophies, now adorn, Which my whole life prepar'd, for Mars and Iove. Since they allow me to submit to Love! Valer: wakes and calls. Valer: Drusilla. Ormas: Madam, your Servants do all sleep, but I. Valer: I would not have wak'd you, Ormasdes.
Ormas: You have not Madam, I have not slept yet; Pray let your Servant know what 'tis you want! Val: I want assurance of a thing I doubt. Ormas: Can I give you that assurance? Val: Yes. Ormas: And will you not lay that command on me? Val: Do they all sleep? Ormas: They do. Val: Ormasdes I would know, what I do fear, You are pre-ingag'd never to tell me; Ormas: By your fair self, I swear, I'm not ingag'd In any kind, but may, and will impart, What ever in my knowledge, you inquire. Val: My first doubts does still remain, that the Queen Upon assurance of my suddain death, Has won you, thus to flatter my last hours, Like glittering Sun-shine upon dying Flowers. Ormas: Madam, by all that's Holy, she has not: What shall I say? what do? to gain your Faith? Val: You have done it now; I am satisfied. And do believe all's truth, Ormasdes speaks, But I do fear this truth appears too late. Orm: Why Madam? have you made vowes against me? Will no repentance? nor no pennance serve, To wash away my Sins against your Sex; Will you, that Universall quarrel wed? And bring destruction on your servants head? Val: Vowes Ormasdes, and those against you made! Oh do not take away the Joy you gave, By such a thought; I never wish'd, nor pray'd, For blessing upon Earth, beyond your Love, Which you in charity, so amply shew, That I do doubt I dream, what I injoy. Ormas: Madam, you do now misjudge my passion, To call that charity, which may be love For ought I know; this so late acquaintance, With my new heart, is short, and my transports So great, it must be madnesse, if not love: For, give me leave to swear, that I will know No other Joyes then yours, nor thoughts admit, But with design to serve, and honour you. Val: I do now wish the Gods my life would spare, And make me worthy of Ormasdes care. Ormas: Madam, you speak a Language of respect To me, who merrit nothing but neglect; Your favours flow so fast, they over-whelm My heart with joyes, and raise my soul so high, It turns amazement into extacy! Val: I should not talk thus, if I did not see't; Tis harde for you now to hide, then shew't:
I do not fear your passion will go lesse, But doubt by death to loose, what I possesse. Ormas: You cannot dye Madam, I have no fear To find so great a curse, from Heav'n sent, I onely doubt I sleep! and fear to wake Lest this abundant blisse should vanquish quite, And so involve me in Eternal Night; May I presume to beg a favour yet? Which will my fancy ix, and so confirm My doubtfull soul 'tis real, and no dream. Val: You may. Ormas: I beg that Ring you wear; but if of price Too great for me? pardon my Avarice. Val: 'Tis a trifle, ask something of more worth. Ormas: Sure nothing can of greater value be If you repent, what you now promis'd me. Val: You ask, what is not in my power to give! My dying Mother with this Ring, bequeath'd Her curse, if ever I did part with it! But to the man I meant to make my Lord. Ormas. 'Tis a charm not to be dissolv'd, by me; Who dare not touch it, on the termes you name; I was ambitious to wear it Madam, But onely as your servant, not your Lord. Val: It never can be had, on easier termes; Ormasdes you must have this, and me together, Alive or dead, you must have both, or neither. Ormas: All my Limbs do tremble, at what I hear, I dare not understand the words you speak, Lest my mistakes, do give you an offence, Beyond a pardon, for such impudence. Val: You do not mistake me, nor can you erre! If you'l avow, this kindnesse that you shew. Ormas: By all our Gods, I think my flame is Love, I know no other name for what I feel, But if you doubt? propose a way to try, And as it proves, declare my destiny. Val: I will consider on some way to try, But must submit unto this drowsinesse, For some minutes time, 'twill take me from you! Pray Sir, command the Musick now to play. [He steps to the Door then.] [Musick playes a while.] Ormas: She has talk'd her self into a Repose, Now I will try to get a little Rest. That my tir'd fancy, may at last be fixt. Valeriana Counterfets to sleep, Ormasdes lyes on the ground by her Couch, and while he sleeps, she puts the Ring on his finger; then the Musick ends.
Val: So — when he calls to mind, what I have said; He can expect no more, then I now give; —Great goddesse of pure hearts, protect my fame, And this rash act, forgive; which frights me now; To such repentance, with such suddain pain, I am resolv'd to take it off again, She offers to take it off, and cannot. — His hand is so fast clos'd, I cannot do't; And to wake him in the attempt, is worse; Such boldnesse may a double censure get, I blush to think how rashly I begun, And now repent the folly I have done: — — His hand opens: — And now 'tis mine again, She takes off the Ring, Musick playes; she sleeps in earnest, while the Musick is. Oh blest accident! [Enter the Queen, and Train.] Queen. Wake them not; has Ormasdes walk'd to night? From that corner, hither, in his sleep? Did any of you hear them talk ith' night? Doctor. Not I Madam. First Lady. Nor I. Second Lady. I heard none stirre Madam. Ormasdes wakes, and upstarts. Ormas: The Queen; is it so late? Queen. You have had a hard Lodging my Lord. Ormas: I have had the happiest night Madam; And am Richer far then both the Indies;— Ormasdes starts, and looks distractedly for something lost. —Ha! I am undone, undone for ever! Queen. What look you for my Lord? what have you lost? Ormas: I had it now, just now, on this finger! I look for Treasure Madam, worth the World; He Searches. —'Twas no dream, it must be here abouts! —I beg your pardon Madam, for this search, Which does concern my life, and honour too. Queen. This is the strangest passion, I ere aw, Has your great losse, no name to know it by? Ormas: Yes, I have lost Valerianas Ring. Queen. You did but dream, see, 'tis on her Finger: Ormas: How! 'tis so indeed, do I not dream now? Or do the Gods us men with shadowes mock? When we do seek such great felicities, As they allow us not to have below! —What a strange height of bliss? am I fall'n from? Qu: Has this one night, such mutual friendship gain'd? That the prophetick Ring, could be obtain'd! Ormas: I know not what to say, nor what to think! I know not when I sleep, or when I wake!
Yet must believe that Ring, was mine this night; And I have lost that Treasure▪ Childishly: Some kind friend strike me hard, that I may feel I now am waking; your pardon Madam, For my disaster makes me almost mad. Valeriana wakes. Queen. How have you slept Valeriana? Val: Very well Madam, for one so weak! Ormas: Did you not wake about mid-night Madam? Val: Not that I remember. Ormas: Was ever man so much abus'd in's sleep? Val: Ormasdes, what means your disorder'd looks? Queen. He finds his waking fancies, are much lesse Delightfull, then his sleeping happinesse. Orm: I dream't Madam, that Ring you prize so much, Was this night, by you, put on my Finger; When a thousand, thousand joyes fell on me, Which now waking, I have no name for. Val: My Ring Ormasdes! and on your Finger! And by me put on! 'twas a dream indeed! I hope, you do not waking, think it fit, That I should waking do so bold an act. Ormas: Madam, it does not become me to say I wish, what you do not allow; nor dare I tell so great a lye, as to deny, The joy I dream'd of, when I thought I saw, And did believe I felt, it once was mine. Val: 'Tis farre from my serious thoughts Ormasdes, After such high passion, as I have shew'd, Now to raise any discontent in you, But do not lessen your esteem of me, By the acquisition of such favours, As you your self, in others would condemn! Have we not both, at first sight, done enough, To justifie, what we professe; I fear Too much on my part, did not Cleandra Own, all that she has done, on my behalf. Ormas: I submit, and will wish, and think, and do What the wise Queen, and you advise me to. Queen. Ormasdes has not lost his time I see, Nor my design for your recovery, Fall'n short! the Gods in their good time will bring You to give, and him to accept the Ring. May your new friendship never know decay, But freely both command, and both obey: —I must now leave you for an hour, or two. Ormas: leads the Queen to the Door, and returns. Ormas. Madam, is this a fit time to enquire Nearcus Story? may I now desire You, to unriddle the bold claim, he makes.
Val: You shall hereafter have it all at large, Onely know now, he us'd a violence, In shew, with such unparallel'd deceits! Such insolent demands, so cunning couch'd! His threats, with humble looks, so plain disguis'd; That at first sight, I found, I was surpriz'd; Then, to avoid his purpose, I was forc'd, To use such doubtfull words, to bring me off, His madnesse did interpret his own way; While I was safe, by what I wisely said, To farther my escape, when so afraid! Thus was Cleandras trust, and mine abus'd; A baser treachery, was never us'd. Ormas: You have inform'd me fully of his fact. I suddainly will find Nearcus out, And hurle such vengeance, on his curs'd head, Aside That all the World shall say, 'tis well he's dead. [They carry off Valeriana.] Exeunt omnes. [Enter Nearcus.] Near: 'Tis strange, I hear not of Ormasdes yet! If he oblige me really! I'm his, If not! I shall resume my first resolves, This his delay, begets more jealousies, Then my impatient burning heart, can bear.— [Enter Ormasdes.] Near: —Now Sir, how have I prosper'd in your hands? Ormas: As you deserve. Near: How is that? Ormas. With much scorn rejected. Near: Is that my merrit, in your opinion? Ormas: In mine, as in Cleandras, and in all! Who have heard the ground of your false claim, Which the fair Princess, and her Servants tell; —A Treachery so base, an act so foul! That all do think, Nearcus has no soul. Near: This you dare justifie? Ormas: I had not dar'd to tell it else! me thinks My looks might shew, my businesse was to find You out, and now to let you know, I must Defend the Princess, in a cause so just. —Before I knew Valerianas heart, Or was at all acquainted with my own; I judg'd your cause, against her innocence. But now inform'd the right from all, I find No argument, in Justice to compell, Such a forc'd promise to Nearcus made,
Should now to Leonatus be perform'd. Your jugling Arts, and your disguised Name, With your unworthy force, ore throws your claim. Near: You are become a subtle Orator, Since you convers'd with Ladies; but I shall Your great Eloquence, with this steel convince; I am not to be frighted by big words, We now must try the temper of our Swords. Ormas: We must indeed, though I lament, my hand Should harm a man, unto the Queen aly'd. Near: Shall that scruple, and this good Sword once more, Teach you to call for help? as heretofore! Ormas: I may change your opinion, with my own. Near: Come then. They Fight, Ormasdes runs him through, Disarms him. Ormas: Get Surgeons for Nearcus presently; My hurt is slight. Exit Ormasdes. Enter Surgeons, or Servants, who carry off Nearcus. Enter the Queen, in Valerianas Chamber, with her, and attended by Old Titus, Old Nearcus, Lords and Ladies, a full Train. Queen. 'Tis by your good nature, Valeriana, That this mans evil spirit threatens us, Had you reveal'd Nearcus treachery! His punishment had suted with his crime. Val: Madam, I do confesse my lenity May have imbolden'd him to higher ills, Which my just complaint, might have prevented; But then, how hard a censure should I gain? By ruining so Eminent a man! Who from his principles of honour fell, Through love to me, though I contemn'd his hopes, His passion made me pitty his distresse, So far, as his first error to forgive, In hope he might in better order live. Queen. You argue well, and ought to justifie Your gentle disposition, to forgive. Mercy, does a young Princess, much adorn, But I am bound to vindicate my self, My Nation suffers, if I be not just, To punish crimes like this! I break my trust; He is the first, that ever da'd asperse The Citherean Name, by such a fact, As no past Chronicle, can parallel! I shake to think, how great your danger was!
And how much greater might have been my shame, To trust a man, who values not his fame. Val: Let not his faults your anger higher raise, The punishment he feels, by ill successe, Is a just doom, for his unworthinesse. Queen. His sentence must, to after times appear, Lest my story be blemish'd with a thought, That I did wink at such a crime as this! My people will exclaim, the Gods will frown, If such a wickednesse unpunisht passe! He must dye Valeriana, his house Be burnt, the ashes scatter'd in the Ayre, With prayers t' appease our Citherian Gods, We cannot offer a lesse Sacrifice. Val: For my sake, let his doom, be banishment. If I have any favour in your Eyes? Make not me guilty by that Sacrifice. She kneels. Queen. Rise Madam, you shall govern as you please. [Enter to them Ormasdes, and Young Titus.] Queen. Ormasdes, are you hurt, by that vil'd man? Ormas: It is too little, to be call'd a wound! I come now, to beg Nearcus pardon; 'Twas I that did inforce him to this fight. Val: And I, most wrong'd, who freely do forgive. Queen. The wrong was done to me Valeriana, I put you in his power, my trust, he broke; My honour, for your safety, was ingag'd! Our Nation suffers, by his Villany; The Citherean honour calls for Justice, Against so barbarous a breach of Faith; Nor was it you provok'd, but were compell'd By him to fight, for innocence aspers'd! Ormas: Madam, though I shall never justifie Nearcus actions; his misfortune may Admit excuse; Because humane nature Is subject to passions, which the best men Can never mannage, as they ought! how then, May Valeriana's beauty guilty be? That did excite Nearcus love; and led Him into this distraction, past his power! To mannage his own heart; (as we think best;) If so! 'tis she has turn'd him to a Beast; But when your Majesty shall call to mind, The gallant service by this Mad-man done; You will then pitty his Distraction.
[Enter to them Nearcus, brought in a Chair.] Queen. What means this boldnesse? Near: Madam, I come not to beg your pardon, But to justifie my actions, and my self; Against Ormasdes, who does now with-hold Valeriana, my betroathed Wife, Confirm'd by vows, in presence of the Gods. Queen. Now Ormasdes! is he fit for pardon? Ormas: Yes Madam, as a distracted person! Near: Why do you wrong my person, and my cause? To call my just Title, a distraction; Do me Justice Cleandra, or give me Death! Queen. You may have both your wishes in good time: Cleobulus, guard him to the Castle. Val: Pray Madam, let his doom be banishment, Because his Crime, went not beyond intent. Queen. Madam, he must thank you, for his life then; — Cleobulus, see him a close prisoner, Untill his wounds, permit his Banishment. Near: I do your proffer'd mercies, all refuse, And either Death, or Valeriana chuse. Queen. Lead him to banishment: make him obey. Near: Hold a little: —Cleandra look, this way, Tis Leonatus calls; he who at foyles, The young Prince your Brother slew; And fled your Fathers rage, (untill his death!) Then shelter'd by this borrow'd Name, return'd, And in Nearcus Family secur'd, By this disguise; liv'd as his only Son, Who dyed, as I return'd; —is it death yet? Queen. No, this insolence, shall not change your doom, Nor your confest disguise, (long known to me,) Force a punishment beyond the merrit Of that sad mishap! which I believe Was fatall accident! no purpos'd crime! Though my Father look'd on his onely Son, By your hand slain, with such revenging rage! As might his losse become, and him ingage To throw out vowes, that Justice should persue, So great a Traytor, as he then thought you; For your succession after me, became His fancies object, which encreas'd your blame. —But I, who have exactly been inform'd, Of my dead Brothers love, and yours, now must For that sad accident, to you be just, Near: I'le rather quit my innocence, then own— Your mercy, when you Justice do deny; Give me the fair Princesse, or give me death.
Queen. I cannot with Justice, give you either; How can I, a free Princes will compell? Or how Ormasdes true pretence deny? Or how afford you death, for that offence, Which your unluckie hand, did act by chance. Near: Would I had dyed, the day of my return, Since great Cleandra dares not do me Right; But suffers false Ormasdes to possesse, What is my due; I all your mercy scorn, And will the worst of Tyranny endure. Queen. I have imploy'd you as my Brothers friend, Thus long, not at his Murtherer conniv'd! And untill now, by force compell'd, my face To frequent smiles, in favour of your worth, While my heart ak'd, to think what you had done! But you of late, unworthy our great Name, Have scandaliz'd the Citherean Fame, Boldly to own a Crime so great! as may insence, The World to question your first innosence! Which clearly shewes, you are for mischief built, That dar'd to entertain so base a guilt! —My mercy may prove sin, unlesse betimes, My Justice do prevent your farther crimes. Near. Must I be held? and baited thus to death! Be torn, and tortur'd by a Womans breath? Queen. See my Command obey'd Cleobulus. —I shall take order for an Equipage, Fit for your great, and shall now confine You to an Island near, from whence you may Return, if you out-live me, and mine! —Remove him hence. Ne: Hold a while! —curse on, curse light on you all, For this unjustice, which you mercy call; Tyrants, cruel Tyrants, your jugling Art, Lay by, and strike a Dagger through my heart; — If Ormasdes any honour have in store? He'l fight another bout upon the Shore, As I take ship; and if I chance to Dye! My soul shall then applaud thy Victory, And sing thy praise to the infernal Ghosts, That they may chuse thee Captain of their Hosts, When thou com'st down! — Let not a Ladies word Destroy, by piercing deeper then thy sword! — —Will you not answer? cruel, and unjust! Ye Gods! why put you Scepters into Womens trust? Who crushes me to raise a Cowards Name! Whom I will in the Elizium fields Defame, No honor'd Ghost of Troy, shall there own thee, The Grecian, and the Roman Souls, with me
Will trample on thy Cowards neck, with scorn, —Poor shadow of a gallant man, only born To lye in Ladies laps, perfum'd, and curl'd! —I'le Poste thee Coward, in the other World. They force him away, on the Queens back with her Hand. Adm: Tis strange, that none of us should know him! Y. Tit: The general opinion he was drown'd, Made us not see through his disguise; Admir: But his strange passion does amaze me most. Ormasdes wedding, will his frenzy cure; When love does see no possibility, Desires, and hopes, will vanish by degrees. Y. Tit: We see dispairs, work often other wayes. Queen. He has disturb'd me, but I'le forget him; —Valeriana come, let us consult, The Ceremony of your Wedding-day, Ormasdes joyes, and yours, will blow away The farther thought, of Leonatus crimes. Val: Our Wedding Madam! I see no reason For so great a haste! now we are secure. Or: Madam, since you have rais'd my hopes so high! It were a sinne to doubt my destiny! Yet say, when shall my thoughts so fixt remain? That I may never think I dream again. Val: Ormasdes, not too fast, we must proceed With much discretion, to so great a deed! The Eyes of all this Nation, do behold Our actions, and may think my part too bold, If I again shall do; what I repent! It would deserve a double punishment; My over-hasty Love, was once my crime, I must redeem that fault, by taking time To finish, what so violent begun, Lest into greater errors, I do run; — —A year or two's delay, will adde much grace To our young Love, which Time cannot deface. Ormas: Why have you led me forth, with gentle gales? Into this dangerous deep? why fill'd my Sails, With such propitious winds? us would convey Me safe to my wish'd Port, the nearest way. Why do you now abstruct this happy course? As if you wish'd for storms! or something worse! Why thus forsake the Light? to sailith dark, As if you sought out hazzards, for this Bark, In which, you are the onely fraight, that I, Can fear to loose; by my mortality. Oh! do not then my Joyes to time betray, Lest you do ruine all, by your delay!
Queen. How Valeriana! must this Scene of Love, Fall from its height? and now no farther move! Does your quick conquest of Ormasdes? make Him lesse worthy? when we such pris'ners take, As might our selves command! if they will serve! We cannot give them more, then they deserve; Consider well, lest you, your self destroy, If thus, you do deferre Ormasdes joy! Val: Madam, you, and the World too well do know, My love to him, can now no higher grow! I onely thus stand off, lest he despise, A conquest gain'd, without an enterprize. And that by injur'd Sex, hereafter may Judge of my innocence, by this delay; Honour forbids, that we in haste ingage, Rash actions often, ill events presage. Though I, (like a tall Ship that spreads her sails, When she is carried on, with prosperous gales; To her wish'd Port!) do sigh, to be delay'd, And blame the Remora, by which I'm staid. Ormas: Honour, and fancy, at great distance stand; You have no argument for this command, But your own nice, unnecessary thought, By which your Virtue, may become a fault! Tis true, that my neglects to Woman kind, May urge, that I should now no favour find; Till my whole life be spent, to gain a bliss, To crown my latests hours with joyes, like this! I do confesse such judgment were my due, From all the women in the World, but you;— Who have no argument, nor a pretence, Why you should prove the Rod for my offence: Val: Ormasdes true, I only now would prove, By some short time, the temper of your Love; And shew the World, that mine was not in hast, Though its first motion mov'd so fierce and fast! It makes me blush to think, that this great Queen, And her whole Nation, have such weaknesse seen! As all commanding Love, forc'd me to show, Oh! 'tis a bold attempt, when Women wooe! Ormas: What ere the vulgar think, great Princes may, The dictates of their greater souls obey; 'Tis a self-doubting sin, when you alone, Dare not avow, what Gods, and men do own. Queen. These cautious wayes, are onely fit for such As have suspected virtues; you are much Above the reach of Censures; — 'twas I, That woo'd him first, mine be the infamy, Who boast the active part, with the successe, And would not for the World, it had been lesse!
It does become me, now to see your hands United, as your hearts! —If my commands Be slighted! and my self not understood! When I require what's for your mutuall good, I shall repent the kindnesse, I have shown, And wish, you never had Ormasdes known. Val: Madam, when you command, I must submit; —But will Ormasdes waking think it fit? Now to accept this Ring? and safer keep What he desires, then when h' last did sleep; I had some pleasure, and no little pain; To put it on, and steal it off again. But now, since Gods and you, do all agree! Receive this bond of my Captivity. Ormas: I kiss the hand, that freely gives it now, May thunder strike me dead, when I do bow To other Earthly Power, or wish a blisse, That Heaven can give, the Gods allowing this! Ormasdes heart, shall into insence turn, And in bright flames, before this Altar burn; So long as my fair Saint, does not despise, To look upon so mean a Sacrifice— —To you great Queen, I know not what to say, How to expresse a gratitude, that may Declare the glory of your life to be A perfect pattern, for Posteritie. Qu. Brave Lord, your Triumphs, and your Trophies still Increase our wonder! and our Nation fill, With such Esteem, as all my people may, With Honour, keep your Wedding, Holy-day. And in our Story, after Ages show, Friendship, and Virtue, did together grow. FINIS.
PANDORA, A Comedy. By Sir WILLIAM KILLIGREW, Vice-Chamberlaine to Her MAIESTY. OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Ric: Davis, 1666.
The Names of the Actors. The Prince of Syracusa. Theodocia his Daughter. Pandora, a great Lady of the Prince his Family. Lindamira, a Lady of Quality. Lonzartes, Right Heire to the Principality. Clearcus, a Lord of the Prince his Kindred. Silvander, a young Lord of the Court. Aristonicus, Three Councellors. Clothero, Three Councellors. Ormuseus, Three Councellors. Teretia, Ladies attending the Princess. Philora. Ladies attending the Princess. Three more Attending Ladies. For Pandora. Three more Attending Ladies. And Lindamira. Men-Dancers. VVomen-Dancers. Sanga, Lacquies. and Geta. Lacquies. An Old-VVoman.
The PROLOGVE. LOvers to You I come, without a Bribe, From one that boasts himselfe of your own Tribe, And therefore hopes, that your good Natures may On his behalf, above your Iudgments sway: VVhat you'le see here is naturall, all pretence He disavowes, to VVit, or Eloquence: VVith Friendship he presents you, and with love, Such as are wont in his free breast to move; Such passions as he feels, our Author writes, And humours such, as he observes, indites: From Conversation bringing to the Stage, VVhat he does think, will please the presents Age. And if you do not grudge your time here spent, He will accept it for a Complement.
PANDORA: OR THE CONVERTS. The SCENE in Syracutia. FIRST ACT. Enter Lonzartes and Clearchus in long Grey Cloaks over their Rich Cloaths, with Sanga and Geta, two Lacques carrying Lanthornes, the two Lords Enter a private House, the two Servants stay. San. COme Geta, our Lords have no more use of us, we may go sleep! Geta. 'Tis a fair time indeed to sleep, when day begins to break? —this is a lew'd life, that our Lords do lead. San: Why man? the Night was made for labourers to rest; and for great Lords to Revel in, come away. Geta. My Lord, is not half so ill as thine. Sanga. What's that to thee, or me, come away; wee'l go to Beggars Hall, and be as merry as our Lords. Geta. No, no, I will no more ully my Credit, in thy company; I converse with our tall Dary-maid, who affords me Honours, thou canst not guesse at Sanga! Oh the great Felicities! that do belong to chast imbraces? as I imagine! San: I like Imbraces well. Geta: I mean by Wedlock man: San: A Cox comb thou art, and a Cuckold thou wilt be; adiew Fool. Geta. Adiew Rogue. Exeunt severally.
A noise within, Re-enter Clearchus, and Lonzartes, in the Darke. Clearcus. Botts on thy slippery heeles; we are undone! Lon. Let us draw, and stand upon guard, I hear some call within! Cle: What was that strange noyse, you made? Lonza: At the bottom of the staires I fell, which gave the Alarum to the Doggs, and they wak'd all the Family! [Enter Old-Woman.] Woman. Oh my Lord! what have you done? all the House are up, pray stand close a while, —are you alone? Cle: Yes, yes. Exit Old-woman. Lonz: Thou art a very Villain Clearcus, thus to betray a poore Wench, that loves thee; and to force me accept a Favour I abhorre to think on. Cle: Be the blame mine, I have no joy in any thing, unlesse my friend participate; —If I have any skill in Woman; you will thank me for this favour, and say, you never had the like of Angelica. Lon: Suppose she will not consent? must I ravish her? —you say she knowes not of my coming. Cle: I swear she does not. Lonz: Would I were out again, these Romances please not me; — pray how must I proceed? Cle: Thus, she is in Bed, the Room is dark, I'le entertaine her with discourse, while you undresse; then I'le retire, and soon returne with Light, to let her see, my friend and I, must be as one man to her. Lon: I wonder all Women do not hate thee, thou doest abuse all them that trust thee. Cle: You are deceiv'd Lonzartes, such silly Girles, do take it for a complement, to recommend them to a Noble Friend! Lonz: Well, I must now be subject to thy will, and do submit to do, what I detest! —me thinks this is a kind of Rape I undertake; —thou art too wild for my Converse Clearcus. Clearcus. Hold your peace. [Enter Old-Woman.] VVoman. Hist, hist, my Lord! Cle: Here, here. VVoman: Give me your hand, softly, softly, follow me. Exeunt Woman, leading them off, holding hands. Enter the Old Prince of Syracusa, with Silvander, Aristonicus, Clothero, Ormuseus, and Traine. Prlnce. How does Lonzartes bear his Suppression Aristonicus? now he is full-man grown.
Ariston: Like a wise man Sir, that will not seem to see, what he can∣not remedy. Pri: I have better thoughts for him, then he has for himselfe; if Clearcus spoyle him not! Ariston: When more years have overcome some evils, incident to youth▪ I hope he will be worthy your highest favours Sir. Prin: Some of you should advise him to a little more sobriety, then Clearcus will allow of; —I apprehend Silvander, that the Corinthian will quarrel, for my refusing to treat his Marriage with Theodosia, whom I design another way: —she has aversion to him. Sil: The Princes's may be excus'd for her dislike, unto so fierce a man, the Corinthian Prince, is all Fire, and fury, which does fright, not winne affection. Prin: If Theodosia will be advised by me, I shall provide better for her; —you know Lonzartes right Silvander! if he were reclaim'd, I would wish him to my Daughter. Sil: I have some thoughts Sir, that Lonzartes does consort with wild Clearcus, and complies in all his Vanities, onely to avoid your jea∣lousie, of his higher thoughts of interest in the State! he is no foole Sir. Prin: I wish it prove not too much his Nature, to be so debauch'd, for he has not higher thoughts of State-interest, then I have for him; he has been wrong'd Silvander, and I will endeavour to do him right, if hee'l be worthy of it. Exeunt omnes. [Enter Lonzartes and Clearcus in a Garden.] Cle: Why this grave face to me Lonzartes? Lonz: Thou art so wild, that I have lost my credit by conversing with thee, which I must redeem, by keeping better company here∣after. Cle: Wisely resolved, and in good time declared; —I have indeed observ'd, that you of late converse with Ladies, and delight in rich lac'd Sattin, and in Silver Petticoates; as if you meant to turn Apostate; from the freedome we have had, and now seek your game in secret, my Lonzartes. Lonz: If I should, pray which is most Honourable? and most suita∣ble to my Quality? The dayly terrour of getting such diseases as in∣habit your dark houses, has frighted me into better purposes. Cle: Your Quality! I wish your Prince-ship had all the Ladies you desire, so I might have like freedome with their Maids. Lonz: I shall not spoyle your Market, but leave you those cheap Cattel, at your own price. Cle: See the difference now, between your Pride, and my Humility; you have studied, learn'd discourses too, such as must justifie your con∣version (as you call it) but have never weighed the difference of our crimes; —such thoughts Lonzartes, do move my tender Conscience, to take what I can find, for ready money; which I freely enjoy, with∣out those frights you daily feel.
Lon: Thou dost mistake me, and exclaimest against crimes, I never understood. Cle. You can counterfeit I know, and may cozen all the World, but me! I will not give my freedome up, to such follies as you serve, to be Master of all your wishes. Lon: I shall not labour to convert you, but will take leave to dispise your mean wayes, while you envy mine. Cle: Envy! by Violinus Eyes, I do dispise you, and your wayes, and will wager any thing you dare, that I enjoy this night a beauty more exact, then any cloath of Gold-Dame you treat with, I envy you! no, I pitty you Lonzartes, that after such experience, at your years, you should be fool'd so; confesse now seriously, if you have ever met a bet∣ter shape, a softer, or a whiter skin, or any more sweet, or more be∣witching faire, and lovely, then my Angelina. Lonz: If I have not! what then? Cle: Why? she shall be Fine, and rich arraid, when I so please! I can call her Sultaness too! and by my fancy, raise her above those, the World allowes of. Lon: I do believe thee, and thy fancy, alike extravagant. Cle: But why so serious on the suddain? and so dull? you shall have good Chear, and good Company to night, at the old place. Lonz: I shall get an ill Conscience by it! Cle: That sauce, agrees not with the Dainties we must feed on, pray lay by your Conscience, untill morning. Lonz: I wish I were well rid of thee, all thy Rhetorich shall never in∣gage me, to meet such company again. Cle: Why pray, how can you spend your time better? Lonz: I do begin to hate my self, and will love thee no longer. Cle: Very good; — Are not you the most debauch'd man in Syracu∣sa? (except my self!) how come you by this impudence? to blush for going to a merry meeting? Is not your own Lodging, beyond a Scandal? are not all the Wenches in that Street, your Pentioners? — not love me; I will study to scorne you, and your love for ever; I dispise a man, that does forsake his Principles. Lonz: I begin to hate thy over-much lewdnesse, and to see my own Deformities. Cle: Not love me! Lon: Come, I do love thee, too well I love thee, shall we go home, and put off this meeting? Cle: Lonzartes, though I do love your Friendship, I do hate this Humour in you, that thus would lay a blemish on me. Enter to them Lindamira and Teretia, not at first seen by them. Ter: See Lindamira, the two wild Princes are in our way, how shall we get by 'um? Linz: Put on a confidence beyond theirs, and 'twill amaze them! Ter: Can that be? Lin: I'le be your Forlorne Hope, do but second me, and I'le secure
your pass this time; —You'l see them start, shoot aside, as from a Basaliske! the honest Woman! Ter: Barbarous! —I have heard indeed, they shun all virtuous Women! Lin: They alwaies look over us, as if they saw us not; but where they have an interest, or hope to gain it, they can like subtil Serpents, humbly creep, to flatter, and betray. [He now sees the Ladies.] Cle: A prize, a prize Lonzartes, each of us one; let us reconcile for this booty, and dispute at leasure; —yon close walk invites; which will you assault? Lin: Neither, they are both virtuous? Cle: Who knowes that? have they done sucking? Lin: Dost thou think there be none virtuous, beyond their infancy! Cle: Yes, much too many, but I hope better of these; give me the Woman, and keep her virtue to your selfe: —I'le charge 'um both, there may be a Criticall minute for me; —fair Ladies. [To them.] Lin: Hold my Lord, you are out at first, one of us is very brown I assure you. Cle: You do not think your self so, or if you do, you think brown the best Madam. Lin: I do indeed, think my Beauty such, as may prejudice your Lordship, if you dwell on it; which gave me boldnesse, to interrupt your set Speech; lest you engage past retreating; —our businesse is to find the Princess. Cle: And ours, to entertain those, who have nothing else to do. Lin: How would you entertain us my Lord? Cle: As young Gallants, use to treat Fair Ladies; with love, and our best service. Lin: I have no imployment for so great a Servant as your Lordship, and for love, I understand it not. Cle: That you may do, is my ambition. Lin: Nay, if you be come to ambition already! I guesse your love will grow to such a Monster, in a moment, that I dread the thought on't. Cle: You cut me off so short, you cannot apprehend, what I would say. Lin: Therefore I do it, because I do not care to hear. Cle: What have I done Madam, to merrit this neglect from you? Lin: In the behalf of all our sex, I am the chosen Champion, against all men, who do believe all Women do admire 'um. Cle: When shall I have leave to speak? that I may informe you better. Lin: When I have done. Cle: When will that be? Lin: When I am gone. Cle: How can you be inform'd in absence? Lin: As much as I desire to know, I know already, —my good wishes shall attend your Lordship; —come Teretia; we may find the Princess in the other walks. Exeunt.
Lon: Now Sir, how do you like this Ladies mettle? Cle: Why, well, I like her, and her humour very well. Lon: You thought her a sure prize. Cle: I did but hope so at the first, now I am sure of her, she is my own, if ever we do meet alone; —by this severity, she has cozen'd Tere∣tia, and you, and confirm'd me. Lon: I must laugh, to think how thou art mistaken, in this innocent freedome virtuous women use, and would give a good summe, to see thee but converse a Moneth or two, with persons of Honour, which I believe would reclaime thee, and fix those virtues, now lost in a Chaos of wild actions. Cle: I marry, if you could shew me a Woman, that would not be wonne; I would fancy some delight, to passe away an hour to two, at idle times; but all that I do meet with are mine, before I wish it, so that I am alwaies forc'd to stand upon my guard amongst 'um. Lon: That's no wonder, amongst those women you converse with; —shall I chuse you a Mistris? and if you get her! let the reproach be mine. Cle: Shall she be worth my pains? if so! I will think on't, when I have time to throw away; —come will you go with me yet? Lon: I'le stay here a while. Cle: I'le go before then, and make ready for you. Exit. Lon: What pitty 'tis, such parts should be so drown'd! — Though I resolve to quit, I'me guilty still, If longer I do countenance his ill. Enter to him, as in the Garden, the Princess Theo∣docia, Pandora, Lindamira, Teretia, and Ladies, and Silvander. Theod: Lonzartes, I have been laughing at Lindamiras relation of Clearcus humour; she sayes, she has abus'd him his own way, in the behalf of honest Women, whom he declares against. Lon: The encounter indeed was pleasant, but the successe is beyond her guesse! for she thinks, that her neglects, have dash'd his hopes, by which he is grown confident, that her seeming scornes, were onely to dazle our Eyes, while he doubts not to gain an interest. Lin: I wish him joy my Lord, of his quick Victory, the next encoun∣ter, will decide this difference of Opinions. Pan: But how dare you Lindamira, enter the lists of Wit, with young Clearcus, who has the sharpest tongue in Syracusa. Lin: There is no contest so easie, his whole discourse to Women, is ever of love, or something like it! and does believe that all our souls, delight in nothing else, which makes me interrupt him still as he begins, and never hear him out. Sil: Is that civil, to a person, of his Quality? The: Is he not angry, when you slight him so? Lin: No Madam, I am his mirth, and he is mine.
Lonz: If Pandora would permit! I do fancy his conversion might be wrought by her, and his Eclips'd virtues, made to shine brighter then his vices do. Sil: 'Twill be a Noble undertaking Madam. Lin: I wish he were within my cure. Pan: Wee'l joyne our forces Lindamira, for I shall easily consent unto so good a work, as may reclaim so great a person as Clearcus; a man so near allied unto the Duke! but how must this Charitable work be done? Lonz: If you Madam, will admit his visits? for a Moneth or two, the cure of course will follow; for he who never yet convers'd with civill Woman, will surely be concern'd, when he shall see the harm∣lesse mirth, that virtue does allow, to persons of your Quality! Pan: So, I be obliged no further then to civil visits, his birth does require that for him, which I deny to no man. Lin: Leave the rest to me. The: How happy are you Cousin, that may dispose of your self as you please! I must speak, and look, and move, as my Father, and the State directs me. Pan: Great Princes indeed, are bound to some strict Rules, most sub∣jects understand not? Lin: Your Highnesse complains without a cause, we hear the Duke will leave you to your own choise, only he will recommend. The: When Parents recommend, 'tis so like command, it frights me to think whom it may be. Pan: Now you are safe from the Corinthian, have no fear untill you see occasion for it. The: I wish my dear Cousin, you would marry too, I should then like it better: I now dread to put on that yoak, by all the World so much desired? Pan: Will my being in the pound, get your Highnesse out of it? why would you have me runne the hazzard, to loose that happinesse I now am sure of? by a single life; —If men did ever appear in their own likenesse! we might chuse some one, amongst many, worth the having, but in our sights, they are allwayes disguis'd in such shapes, and hu∣mours, as they believe we like best, and so cozen us, and themselves too; for if they make us unhappy; it seldome failes, but we make them so. Lin: No Oracle ever spoke truer; I am of your Sect Madam, (as to matters of Faith!) yet I would gladly have a Husband, though it be dangerous to put my heart into anothers keeping, (And as my learn'd Author sayes,) to give my freedome up, unto I know not whom! (nor ever can do, till I have him) —this were a sad condition Madam, if we had not the same Arts to cosen them, that think to cosen us. The: Would I could get a merry heart, like yours Lindamira. Lin: I'le present your Highnesse with a piece of mine, I have e∣nough for both.
Enter Messenger. Mess: Madam, the Prince calls for you. The: I attend him, pray Cousin go with me to my Father. Exeunt Ladies: Lon: A few such excellent Women, would make this World a Paradice! —how have I walk'd in the dark, 'till now? how strongly been misled, by my affection to Clearcus? that have approv'd, and acted in all his ills, begun upon designe, and led on, till custome has all∣most chang'd my nature, but will no more now. [Enter Clearcus to him.] Cle: How now Lonzartes? walking alone? take heed the Devil find thee not at leasure. Lon: A greater then thy self, can hardly find me. Cle: Very gravely replyed, if I mistake not, you are whimpering after some great Lady, and now practizing to play the fool wisely, to spend your time, adoring you know not who, nor why! Lon: Thou art still ith' wrong. Cle: Let us meet then, at the old place to night. Lon: That's a freedome, I shall never take more, you have conver∣ted me, beyond all the Homilies I ever read, you have made me asha∣med of my self for being so long like you. Cle: Oh Hypocrite! what new piece have you got? that I must not be trusted with; come tell me, and I'le cry up your Austere pur∣pose, and rail at your conversion, as if I did believe it! Lon: When you see me next in ill company, Lam then that Hypo∣crite you mention. Cle: Out upon these tender Consciences, they spoyl more mirth, then they are worth; let old folks hear Homilies, while we enjoy the time we have, and not whine away our youth, on dreams of virtue, which signifie we know not what! Lon: Peace Clearcus, thou are not half so ill as thou appearest, but dost glory in talking worse, then thou canst be. Cle. What should we talk of more, then what we most delight in? Lon: Of nothing lesse, because we often do delight, in what we ought not own; —Is't not enough to offend the Gods through frail∣ty, which perverse nature does invite us to; but we must provoke Heaven, beyond sence, and appetite, by our discourse, as if we studied to defie those Powers, we ought to tremble at. Cle: I hate Hypocrisie. Lon: And I abhorre to aggravate my crimes, by such unnecessary boastings, as thy wild brain delights in; when I offend, I am sorry for it, dost thou all honesty despise, all virtue slight? Cle: How Lonzartes, will you confine honesty, and virtue, to the fruition of one Woman only? Fie, what a scandal is this to mankind? as if there were no honesty, nor virtue but in such chast breasts as yours? what an affront to this good company, pray speak Gentlemen, is any
here of his opinion? can you Lonzartes shew me one young man, that looks as he were guilty? or any so old, who would be thought so weak? —Is this a fit design, to set up your Title to the Dukedome? Lon: I see this is not the hour for your Conversion. Cle: Nor shall ever live to see that hour, I hope. Lon: Nor you I fear, ever live to tast, and relish the true felicity ob∣tain'd, by such a conquest on thy self; but I will pray for thee, and thy conversion. Cle: I had rather your Lordship were at Ierusalem, then see that day of my conversion; what have I done Lonzartes? to deserve such ill from you, do not provoke me to a revenge. Lon: Revenge, for what? Cle: Can you aske for what? suppose the Gods should hear your prayers, and turn my heart, how miserable a man were I, how should I spend my time, for forty years to come; Is it not enough to forsake your cause, but you must seduce me too? Lonzartes, if you pray for me, I shall curse you heartily; I dare stay no longer with him. Exit Clearcus. Lon: If this brave man this humour could expell, His Virtues would his Vices far excell. I have put on this Cloak of wantonness onely to avoid being thought a serious man, left the Duke grow jealous of my pretentions to his Crown; —while the Duke is civil, and I am safe; —he shall be so too? —But if I finde designes against me; I have Friends, and force enough, to gain my right by this; —Oh but Theodocia does un∣man me quite; —when I look on her, all these high thoughts do vanish, and I become the humblest creature in the Court: I have no Title, that I ere shall owne, Unlesse she daine to raise me to the Throne. THE SECOND ACT. Enter Lonzartes alone, Clearcus hoarkning at the Doore. Lon: OH Cloris, Cloris! what strange unwonted pains I feel? what fears? what new disease congeales my blood? —if it be love, 'twill not offend the Gods, because my soule does now rejoyce to find, Beauty and Virtue so divine, that both may be well worshipp'd at one Shrine. [Clearcus chaps him hard on the Shoulder.]
Cle: Are you talking in your sleep Lonzartes? or is it some divine meditation, thus transports you? Lon: You are too rude Clearcus. Cle: I cry you mercy Sir, you can be angry then I see; I thought your conversion, had set you above such passions, as we wicked men are subject to. Lon: I do confesse thou didst make me start, and speak hastily, but I am not angry, nor can be with thee: [Imbraces him.] Cle: I'le try your temper presently, —Oh! Beauty, and Virtue so Divine! both may be worshipped in one shrine; Ha, ha, ha. Lon: What of this, you heard me repeat an old Song. Cle: An old Song, to a new Tune Lonzartes: dost thou pray for my Conversion this way? must I get a Cloris to sigh after? —as thou dost; —I have heard all, and have observ'd thee too, I and do guesse who Cloris is, —come, tell me quickly, that way to oblige me to si∣lence; for if by my own skill, I do discover her, I'le lay thee open to the World, tell me who Cloris is, left I tell thee; Adiew. Exit. Lonzar. How can he discover that I love? when I know it not yet my self! —Yet I may admire her, and by my adoration of her Virtues— —Be by them, from all meaner passions freed, When this new virtue, shall my vice exceed. Exit. Enter Geta. Geta. What the Devil ailes my Lord? his wonted mirth is changed into hey hoes, and twenty times a day, he sends me on sleeveless Errands, that he may be alone; I think Lord Clearcus will prove the wisest man at last; —I have been five times this morning to enquire, if the Prin∣cess be in health! if she be stirring, or if near ready! if she go to the Temple! —And after Dinner I must enquire, if she have dyned! if she comes forth in publick! if she ride abroad; and thus twenty times a day, he tires me, with these silly Errands, when I might ask them all at once, and save much labour; I'le try if I can find some way to contract these Embassies; —'tis well for my Lord, that his man is wiser then himselfe. Exit. [Enter Silvander with Lindamira and her Maid.] Silvand: Do not my looks Lindamira enough expresse, what I would say? Linda: Yes, to me, who do discern your passion thus suppressed, more cleare, then by those loud noyses, which some Lovers most delight in. Sil: But how shall I be assured, this is not Rallery? Lin: Cannot you judge by my looks, as well as I by yours? what kind of security do you require? I have no Citizens that will be bound for my good behaviour!
Sil: A serious word or two, with a kind look confirm'd, will secure me against the World. Lin: Will this look serve? and I am yours, suffice for words? with this hand given from my heart! ingage beyond your wish. Sil: It does, may I be— Lin: Nay, no strong lines I beseech you, make me not jealous by professing more, then I expect. Sil: I am confirmed, past ever doubting more. [He kisses her Hand.] Lin: I shall try your temper, if my merry humour hold! Sil: 'Tis that free innocence, takes me! Lin: And that I can afford enough of, at an easie rate. [Enter Clearcus to them, Silvander goes off.] Lin: Your Lordship was going another way, pray let not me divert you, my lodging is farre off. Cle: Madam, I have long sought an opportunity to kiss your hands there. Lin: You may do it here, and save the labour of going so farre for nothing. Cle: Do you call that honour nothing, which I do prize above the World? and would give all my interest on Earth, to purchase one kiss of your fair hands, by a free consent. Lin: The World is little beholding to your Lordship, for so low a value, that will give all your interest on Earth, for a kiss of my Hand, and this, I must in civility, look, as if I did believe. Cle: I'le swear it Madam. Lin: That's as easy done, as said, but I am hard of Faith. Cle: How shall I obtain more credit? Lin: I'le shew you a short way; bring me a conveyance of half your Land, and you shall have two kisses of my hand, three if you please; and as you like your Market, you may have more, for the other half of your Estate! and this is much cheaper, then to give all the World at once for such an honour! Cle: Why do you mock me? who truly love, and honour you, above all women! by those Fair Eyes I do. Lin: How can I believe it? when I know you talk thus, to every woman that you meet. Cle: May my hopes neer prosper, if you are not the onely object of my heart. He offers to kiss her Hand. Lin: No touching good my Lord, my affaires calls me away, I must be gone. Cle: And I must wait on you home Madam. Lin: Ile rather stay here this Twelve-month, then give your Lord∣ship that trouble.
Cle: Am I such a Monster, in the opinion of all women, as you make me? Lin: I must take care you make not me one; —Oh happy de∣liverance! Enter to them, Theodocia, and Pandora, and Silvander. Cle: This is such a piece of nicety, as I neer met before; —these are no company for me. Exit. The: Stay Clearcus, I would speak with you; —my Cousin Pandora tells me, you Court Lindamira, which her self does not much deny. Cle: I am practising I must confesse, how to talk to Ladies, and have learnt some speeches to that purpose, whereof Lindamira has had her share. Theod: You have mocked her then! and intend her only for your mirth! [He makes a legg.] Lin: Methinks his silence, and that legg, shewes more love to me, then I know what to do with. [aside.] Sil: Excellent Girle! how she playes with his wanton humour! [Enter to them Lonzartes.] Cle: Nay, if Lonzartes fall on me too? I shall be over-whelmed with wisdome. Lon: Now there is some hope of him, his look is Civillized already. Pan: Are you not pleased Clearcus? to see the whole Court con∣cerned for you? to see your self so valued, methinks it should stirre up the Noble Blood of your great Ancestors, to set you on to such actions, as may out-shine their stories, and not loose one day more, in your wild wayes. Cle: Madam, Your Language, and your looks, agree with your great Soul; I can be proud to be so taught, when the Princess Theo∣docia, and you direct, 'twere great stupidity to shew neglect; but in my Opinion Madam, one of a family is enough to be a Saint; —'twould take from great Lonzartes credit, and render his conversion no rarity▪ if I should become virtuous too, in the same year. The: Pandora, and I, are much obliged to you, for your good opini∣on of us, I wish all our Sex were so too. Cle. My opinion, and my practise, differ very much Madam; I do honour virtue in your Sex, as much as any man; but my Tallent lies the other way, Lonzartes does enough illustrate the Platonick Name, and Eminently maintaine, that high Sraffick flame, which is above my reach. Lon: Tell me now Clearcus, is there not more rellish in this Conver∣sation? then with your Getinas, and your Angelinas! —that blush shewes well, there is some hopes of grace in that blush. Cle: Hold your pratling, my conversion does not belong to you. Lon: I hope I may direct you to a Lady, that will work that wonder. Cle: Hold your peace then, till we be alone.
The: Wee'l be gone Pandora, and not hinder so good a work; —you shall neither of you go with us, but if you please Clearcus, Lindamira may walk with you a little longer. Cle: No Madam, I have enough of her already, she out-wits me; we shall neer agree. Lin: I have got credit enough for a young Souldier, by my honou∣rable retreat, from so hot a charge. Exeunt Silvander and Ladies. Lon: Let us now persue our Argument, for thy Conversion. Cle: It comes on a pace; —what a fine Gentleman are you grown, since the Spirit of Chastity has possest you? and you hope tht I will live chast, that I may have the honour, and felicity to be in love! —to be a fool! to intangle my self in netts that I shall neer get out of! I'le none of it. Lon: Let my old Friendship so farre prevaile, that on my request you will sometimes converse with andora, if thy visits do ingage her to undertake thy cure! and she do work that Miracle! she must value what her self has made worthy of her self; for so wilt thou be, if thy wandring fancy, were once fixt? Cle: So then all this bussle, is to make me in love; though you know, I have been a thousand times in love already. Lon: I Clearcus, I know thy thousands, but I would have thee once in love. Cle: I never will be mad, as you are; yet to give you, and the World satisfaction in this point; I will condemne my selfe to one Moneths pen∣nance, and make experiment to look, and talk as idlely with Pandora, as you do with your Divinest Cloris! —If I were sure Pandora were not to be won; I could fancy a pretty kind of pastime, by raising my de∣sires to hopes of what I cannot have! but I could never meet a Wo∣man yet, that was impregnable; and my nature is not capable of being converted, by any that I can conquer; —Pray Sup at my Cham∣ber this night. Lon: I will not fayle, if you will go with me unto Pandora? — And visit her, while this good motion's warm, 'Gainst all your fears, I'le fit you with a charm. Cle: I go. Exeunt. Enter Pandora with Lindamira and Ladies in her Chamber, and Silvander. Pand: Lindamira, you must be my second, they will be two to one else. Lin: Gladly Madam, I cannot wish a gentler Enemy, then him that thinks he has me at his mercy. Pan: But if you be over-sharp upon him, you may hinder the great work, we undertake! and make him hate all honest Women for our sakes.
Lin: I shall use him with more Art, and lead him on with hopes, that all our Sex do scramble for him; —if I can fit his Fancy, and his Wit, I'le ingage him in a concerne for you, and then mannage my young Gallant to my will, till I confute his common places, so often urged to the prejudice of Ladies, I cannot fancy better sport, then to see  mad in love with you Madam. Pan: The Gods forbid, I would not cure him at that rate, for my own sake, and his; left that prove a greater evil, then he now has; I shall be very careful, to give him no incouragement, for thoughts of that nature, my undertaking is not beyond a common civility, as to all o∣thers of his Rank. Lin: That will do it, if I mistake not; —and catch you both I hope, —here he comes? Enter Lonzartes, and Clearcus. Lon: Madam, I have brought my Friend, to kiss your hand. Cle: Thus farre Madam, in order to my ingagement, I have given you the trouble of the first visit, I ever made against my will. Pan: Your Lordship, does me honour; came you now from Court? Cle: Yes Madam, and left the Princess Theodocia in great comple∣ments with her kind Father, who has now declared against the proud Corinthian, and given Theodocia, her free choice where she please. Pan: You tell me Newes, beyond my hopes, this will raise the Prin∣cess drooping Spirits again; I wonder she is not here by this time. Lon: The Duke and she, are not yet parted Madam; —how now Lindamira, are you tonguetyed? no welcome for my Friend, to en∣courage him to like of civil company; —You look as if you feared to loose your Gallant. Cle: No, no, she knowes she has too fast hold of my heart, to part so easily. Lin: 'Tis honour enough for me, to be in the number of your Martyrs Sir. [She Sighes.] Pan: How long have you two been acquainted? Lin: Ever since last night Madam. [She Sighes] Pan: And dost thou sigh already? Lin: 'Tis only to give you warning by my harmes. Pan: I thank your care, but I am arm'd against the World Cle: That's good Newes Lonzartes, there is some hope, she has made firme resolves against Wedlock; that I may assault her with security.— [Aside.] Lon: You may, you may. Cle: Madam, You speak, as if you held mankind at a defiance. Pan: By way of Marriage I do, but I can value all men that I see worthy. Cle: He must be a bold man, who does designe beyond the favours you allow, but have you made vowes against marriage Madam? Pan: No vowes, but such resolves, as are unchangeable. Lon: You are severe to men. Lin: If all Women were of your opinion Madam? how should the World be Peopled.
Cle: I marry Madam, that was well urg'd. Pan. I thought Lindamira you would have been on my side. Lin: So I am, when you are in the right, this is our common cause; Suppose you bring these two Lords, and they bring twenty more, to be of your judgment, and this Heresie should spread; what will become of us, who think of nothing else but Marriage? Lon: She tells you true Madam, when her own concern is at stake, you may excuse her. Pan: I do, and will make good my argument alone. Cle: Never to marry Madam? Pan: Never my Lord, is my full resolve. Cle: You are the happiest, and the wisest Lady living! and I the joy∣fullest man, if you'l permit me to adore you at this distance, for I am of your own opinion Madam. Lin: Two Fannaticks well met. Pan: So long as your respects be free from love, my house is open to you. Cle: You are all witnesses, that this Lady does adopt me her avow'd Gallant, on the conditions before mentioned: —you give me leave Madam to talk of love, and to carry up this jest, as high, as he who really does love. Pan: I do, so it be ever in publick; all private visits, and all whispe∣rings are excepted. Cle: 'Tis enough Madam; —This is a pretty kind of Entertainment, I never thought of: Lonzartes, thou art in the right, this will he sport beyond my hope. Lon. But how does Lindamira like, to see her new Gallant, thus ta∣ken from her? Cle: 'Tis her own fault, she might, have ix'd me another way, if she had been wise! Pan: Indeed Lindamira, I thought not of your concern, and did con∣clude too rashy, but I will use my interest on your behalf. Lin: —'Twill not be needfull Madam, I know all his professions to you, are meant to me. Cle: Very prettily contrived, —This is a new kind of wit, I never heard of; so then you are to love me, in spite of your Teeth, and I you, and I you, in spite of mine; what will this come to at last? Lon: Mirth man, all the year a constant mirth: —Is not this better then spending your time in a smoaky house, with your old Acquain∣tance? Cle: I cannot tell you that, till I have tryed this, as long as I have the other. Lin: Pray my Lord, do not peswade your Friend, all this earnest is a jest, I allow you as much mirth as you please, so the conclusion be serious. Pan: We must leave the successe unto the Fates; —Clearcus may in time have pitty on you Lindamira, he does not yet believe, you are in earnest.
Cle: Nor ever shall do Madam, till I see her heart break, and then 'twill be too late. Lin▪ He dissembles well, for so young a Schollar Madam. Lon: We have don all well methinks, and now tis time that we retire. Cle: How soon may I make my next visit to you Madam? Pan: As often as you please my Lord, at publique houres. Exeunt Silvander, and the two Lords. Lin: How did I perform my part Madam? Pan: You fell too soon into your humour, he sees you mock him. Lin: That's all I ayme at, he has too much wit to be abused; my onely business is to let him see, that he cannot cozen me; —I believe you will see this Sceen changed, at his next visit, if I have any skill, you will be troubled with him. Pan: I am arm'd at all points, against all men, and him most. [Enter Theodocia, and Ladies.] The: Oh Cousin! I am freed from all my fears, and come to re∣joyce with you. Pan. I have rejoyced already Madam, and have begun a Sceen of mirth, will hold us long; —Had your Highnesse come a little sooner, you had found the late Convert Lonzartes, and his Friend Clearcus here, who is become my avowed Gallant, and looks as if he liked our company already. The: Then you have hopes to cure him; —Pray order it so, as I may come to your next meeting, my heart is now so light, that I could play with any thing; —Can I have no part in your Comedy? Lin: For two reasons, your Highness can onely be a looker on, 'tis petty Treason to make love to you, though in jest; and then your beauty is too dangerous to be dallied with; these be edge-tools, too sharp for us to play with. The: Why may not Princes participate in such innocent mirth we make stricter Rules then need; true virtue will shine through such thin clouds, without a prejudice, and be above the reach of vile Tongues. Pan: I Madam, if you could shew a rule, to distinguish between In∣nocence, and Guilt; —But we often see that Angelical virtues are as∣persed, by malicious tongues, and no quality exempt, from rude cen∣sures. Lin: I differ in opinion, Princes may enjoy harmlesse mirth, as freely as we; to be too much reserved, does look like disguise. The: I would be so merry Lindamira, as should defie all scandall, and with an open face, justifie it to the World; to wear alwayes a stiff-state look is intollerable. Pan: Private persons may be bold that way, when few Eyes ob∣serve, —But Princes are set on Pirameds, for all to see, and imitate. The: You shall not fright me from your mirth, with this grave Lecture, are they not both, my near Relations, whom you endeavour to
reclaime? why may not I share it so worthy a designe,—I fear Linda∣mira she doubts lest I may gain her Gallant from her. Lin: She may well be jealous, if your Highnesse undertake him, I shall have small hopes, if you two quarrel for him. The: Why Lindamira? is Silvander vanished? Lin: No Madam, the more Trophies I can fairly get by Victories on others, will raise his Conquest higher, who gaines me from the rest. The: Thou art safe, and mayest say any thing, Silvander is thy secu∣rity, against all scandall, though you carry it thus unconcern'd, the se∣cret spreads. Lin: 'Tis time it should do so, now we do own Our love, 'tis fit the secret should be known. Your Highness may assist, while you look on, Though onely wee, the active part do own. The: Let us retire to council then. Exeunt. [Enter Teretia, and Geta.] Ter: What is thy businesse honest Geta? How does Lonzartes thy brave Lord? Geta. My Lord is in good health of body Madam, his brains are onely out of order. Ter: How meanest thou Geta, has he got a blow on his head? Geta: Onely some fumes from his heart Madam, makes his head addle, 'tis call'd the Spleen of late, and much in fashion; his Lordship does desire to know the Princess mind this morning, what she means to do all day? Ter: This will be a hard question, to the Princess fasting, why would he know all this now? Geta. Because he has some great affairs for me to mannage, and can∣not spare me to ask, so oten as I use to do. Ter: Of what nature, be thy particular queries Geta? Geta. He would know how she slept last night? in what health now? by what hour she will be drest? when to her devotions? and then, where she walks this morning? and if she dine in publique? then, how she intends to passe her time till night? else I must come twenty times, for what you may at once dispatch me. Ter: And does Lonzartes send thee, to enquire all this at once? Geta. These Women are so silly, they cannot reach a deep design; [aside.] —No, but he does every day make me trouble my self, and every body that I meet, to ask these questions severally, which I would do at once, to shew him I am a man of quick dispatch. Ter: Oh! is that the matter? I can fit thee with one answer to all these; — Tell thy Lord, the Princess did take cold last night, and will keep her bed all day. Geta. I like it well, and wish her Highnesse would do so this moneth. Ter. Out Traytor, I'le make thy Lord braine thee for that wish.
Geta: Why Madam? I meant no harm, 'twas but to save you the trouble, and me the same questions to morrow, and so on till Dooms∣day, I think! Ter: Well Sirra, for this time, I'le not complain of you, this Jest shall excuse your knavery. Geta. This will be a play-day for me, I like this lying a Bed well. Exeunt. THE THIRD ACT. [Enter Lonzartes and Clearcus.] Clear. TEll me then, who Cloris is! Lon: Thou art so mad, I dare not trust thee. Clear: I will know now, or break all friendship! Lon: I have not interest enough, to make a visit yet, and thou wouldst have me own, that I do love, before I do! Clear: Tell me but who she is! what your hopes are! and what you wish! that I may joyne, in your designe. Lon: I have yet not designe, nor any hope, for what I wish! Clear: But do you think any Woman may not be, what you can wish? if you approach her the right way! Lon: Thou art so much Divell grown, thou canst not discerne the Angelicall nature that is in those, who are virtuous of that Sex; thou hast no tincture of goodnesse left, but art become a Monster of man-kind! Clear: All this, will not fix your Herecy on me! I shall never learne to flatter a few grave Matrons, to be laugh'd at, by all that are worth wishing for! —come, shall I know Cloris yet? this is the last time of asking. Lon: Ere long, you shall; if I do prosper in my pretence! Clear: Oh! is it come to a pretence! then look to your self, lest I discover Cloris to the World! and make you wish, that you had trusted me. Enter to them, Theodocia, Pandora, Lindamira, Teretia, and Ladies, and Silvander. The: Where did you leave my Father Lonzartes? Lon: I have not seen the Prince to day Madam. The: I was told, that you were just now walking with him. Cle: That may well be Madam, for his brains do crow of late; —do ye see how he stands; Lonzartes, the Princess speaks to ye. Lon: To me, does your Highness command me any thing? Silvander and Lindamira entertain themselves in whisper.
Cle: Did not I tell you Madam, that his brains are turn'd, he neither hears, nor sees of late; The Idea of his Seraffick love, takes him whol∣ly up, from all converse with us mortals. Lon: Hold your prating, or I shall be angry. Pan: What has made you so grave of late Lonzartes? all your woted mirth is gone. Lon: No man is alwayes in good humour Madam. Cle: He's in Love Madam, on my knowledge, o're head and eares in Love. Pan: In Love, Lonzartes, I thought you had not been at leasure, to be in Love; —'Tis your fault Clearcus, that have not councell'd your friend better. Cle: Thus am I chid for your follies, who reject all my Councels, and refuse all my approv'd Antidotes, which do preserve me against that Serpent (you call Love) while he convers'd with me, he was safe Madam. Lonz: Thou hast fool'd enough Clearcus, the Princess, and all the company are weary of it: —If your Highnesse allow him this fredome, he will grow troublesome. The: Is it Love Lonzartes? or is Clearcus onely merry with you? Lon: Your Highnesse knowes him too well, to credit all he sayes this way, he is at this time, very angry, that I have chid him for his lewd life, and hath with-drawn my self from his ill company, which he imputes to my being in Love. Cle: I say he is in Love, most seriously in Love; shall I unmask this grave Reformado, and shew you the Lady now? The: If Lonzartes be content, I would gladly see her, whom he thinks worthy of his heart. Cle: No matter for his consent Madam, so you like it: —And thus I [He holds them all to Lonzartes, one by one.] begin my tryal; —By your good leave Lady—Tis not here; —nor is it this; —nor is it you Lady? Lin: I lament the losse of such an honour. Lon: Thou art become a pretty fool Clearcus, dost thou not observe how all the Court do laugh at thee? Cle: Yes, and shall make them laugh at you, e're I have done; if Pan∣dora will make the next tryal. Pan: I am content to try, what this will come to. Cle: Now Sir, have at you; —Tis not your good fortune neither Madam. The: How can you make Lonzartes an amends, for all this abuse? Cle: I will give him present satisfaction, if your Highnesse will per∣mit me to bring him to you? The: To me! think you Lonzartes is in love with me? Cle: Tis a Cloris in the Clouds, one much above his reach, which you onely are Madam. The: With all my heart, I shall be proud to own his conversion, as a Trophie of my Honour. Cle: See if his guilt do not make him avoid the tryal; —stop him [Lonzartes is going out.] there; Lonzartes, the Princess calls you. Lon: Ile cut thy Throat.
[He holds Lonzartes to the Princess.] Cle: He threatens me, —guilty I'le warant; —now Madam, do you see no alteration in his face? —no change yet? speak all, —you ae all assistants in this judgment. [Lonzartes throwes him off in anger.] Lon: It will disturb a Saint, to be thus subject to the fancies of a foole. The: Be not disturb'd Lonzartes, you take this in earnest, which we look on as a jest, only to passe the time; Clearcus has more wit, then to be in earnest. Lon: I hope your Highnesse will not preferre his follies, before my professions, who disclaim such a presumption. The: If you turn this jest to earnest Lonzartes, I shall believe Clear∣cus; —I take it now as Ralliery; —I wonder Lindamira you get not hold of some young Lovers heart? Lin: I have twenty in store Madam, more then I know what to do with. Pan: Then you allow as many Lovers, as you can get, and mean to chuse the best. Lin: I think tis credit for Women to be admir'd and honour'd by worthy men; it shewes a value, to move so many, to a generall esteem, and must be the Womans fault if she deserve a censure. The: You are in the right Lindamira, men may designe, but Women may destroy, faster then they can build; my thanks, unto Clearcus for our mirth. Cle: Mirth ought to be our business Madam.— —The angry Gods affords cross Fates, to give Us griefes enough, and troubles while we live. Exeunt Lonzartes and Clearcus severally. Enter the Prince and Lords, who meet the Ladies going off. Prince. We were now discoursing of your Gallant Pandora, have you hopes to work this miracle. Pan: This Lady and I, have ventred our credits on his conver∣sion Sir. Prince. To reclaim him, were a good work; bnt suppose he fall in Love with either of you. Pan: At his peril that, let Lindamira look to her self, I am safe. Lin: I have a sure retreat Sir, 'tis but seeming to comply, and hee'l give ore; for he can love none that he can conquer, and I am resolv'd rather to be vanquish'd, then not to be rid of him, when I see my time. Sil: Could all her Beauty with my love expire, Her flowing Wit, would still create new Fire. Aside. [Enter to them Clearcus and Lonzartes.] Prince. You two I know, come now from exercising of your Troops.
Cle: No Sir, we went hence just now; I wish my Troop here to guard me. Prince. Have you an Enemy in view Clearcus? Cle: I have many Sir, that have rob'd me of my peace, I cannot sleep of late, but have a thousand fancies, which do set my brains on fire. Prince. Take heed it prove not love. Cle: That is the danger Sir, for if Pandora do keep her resolve for single life; I may be in love; for I do feel strange alterations, that I know not what to make of! Lin: Have you no affection left for me my Lord? can you so soon forget your last nights professions? Cle: Now Sir, you see how I am assaulted, I shall be pull'd in pieces presently. Prince. Silvander and I, will secure you from Lindamira. Cle: If I were assured you could Sir, I should like her wit, and hu∣mour well, —but I fear, —if I should be in earnest, she would be so too. Lin: You see his inclination is for me Madam, so that what ever he shall say to you hereafter, is meant to me. Cle: Nor so, nor so, sweet Lady, I do respect Pandora, above all her Sex; you throw out hooks, to catch young Gallans, she neglects those are laid for her, that's my danger. Prince. What riddle is this Clearcus? dost thou desire that thy de∣sires may not be answered? Cle: Yes Sir, from some persons, for if my love be return'd, all ends in the fruition, (as most Examples shew,) But if Pandora keep her re∣solve for single life, then I can raise my fancy while I live, to Adoration of her Beauty, and that Virtue, with a continual delight, which will last while I last, so she do never yeild! The: You are then my Lord, the happiest lover living, for you will find my Cousin, just as you wish. Pan: Pray Madam, answer not too fast for me, for if I find Clearcus a person of such Noble Nature, beyond what I did ever hope to mee in man; I may change my Opinion of men, for his sake; and therefore 'tis best to find some other sport, lest we destroy each other. [He starts.] Cle: Look you now? I am Treypand! he: Start not Clearcus, she but mocks you, you are both ingaged for his Moneth, to entertain us, and your selves, no going off now. Pan: I shall not break Covenants. Cle: Nor I Madam, though I do sometimes reminde you, of your resolve against Marriage, whereon depends my bliss, secure me but of that, and I am ever yours. Pan: I shall endeavour what I can, to give you that satisfaction. Cle: I kiss your fair hand on that word, which has given new life to my doubtfull heart, and now I do defie Lonzartes gravity, to put his heart in a more loving dress, then mine shall be hereafter. Prince. If Lonzartes can love too, my wonder ceases! The: He is my servant Sir, and has a chief part in the Comedy. Prince. I like your pastime well, but me thinks Lonzartes looks as if
he were compell'd unto his part, and will do it scurvily. Lin: That's the sport Sir, and will afford the more variety. Lon: I shall be glad Sir, if I might be excus'd. The: By no means Servant, what an affront is this, that I must beg your favour, in the face of the whole Court to own me? Prince. You must not be so grave Lonzartes, all is for our mirth. Cle: Now Sir, have not I done your work for you? Lon: Would thou wert hang'd, hold thy peace. Cle: Give me better words, or I'le talk aloud. Lon: Was ever man thus hamper'd between jest and earnest? Lin: They are comparing Notes in private; there's Trechery in their Faces; I'le play no more. Prince. When begins the love Clearcus? this is only talking of it. Cle: It is begun already Sir; if I had not valued this excellent Lady above the World; I had not taine this care to secure my interest to a perpetuity. Lin: Madam, you are not to believe a word of this, for he has with the same grave Face, sworn the same to me but yesterday. Cle: That was in jest Madam, but now every action of my life, shall justifie each syllable I utter unto you. Pan: I shall endeavour to believe it my Lord, and yet allow you the same Christian liberty with Lindamira, and the rest, as you had before. Cle: Madam, you speak, as though you did not value my respects, now my whole soul is set to serve, and honour you alone. Pan: I must confess, I cannot change my faith, so fast as you do your discourse; —And then, as I remember, my lesson is to keep my di∣stance, lest I loose my lover. Cle: True Madam, as to comply, but you are to see, and credit my ambitious love, and to admit it with the same esteem, I serve you. Pan: How can I do that, and not return you love for love? and then you will dispise me; pray my Lord, at your next visit, bring my part in Writing, that I may not erre in it. Prince. She is in the right Clearcus, you now seem to seek such con∣tradictions, as all the Court will laugh at; consult with Lonzartes, a∣gainst your next visit. Exit Prince and Train. Lon: If he will follow my advise, he may do well Sir; —now we are alone, tell me what crotchets next? prethee make me understand what thou wouldest have Pandora do? Cle: I think you were best release me the residue of my Month, that I may go seek my wits, where I last left them; —must I see none of my old friends, untill this Month be over? Lon: If you consider your promise, not see one of them. Cle: Then shall I be lost, if those preservatives be all forbid me; I do find already love will be Predominant. Lonz: The better for you if it be; —let us now talke seriously; —suppose Pandora may be won, can you fancy a happiness on Earth, beyond having her?
Cle: Yes, I do fancy that having twenty, is better then any one in Christendome! Lon: Thou dost not love then, else, that one belov'd, has more vari∣ety then a thousand. Cle: Make but that good, I'le marry her to morrow. Lon: You think then she is already at your dispose. Cle: When she once sees that I am in earnest, she will be, who will have her; and the truth is Lonzartes, I do like her best of all I ever talk'd with, and have great fear that I shall be like other men, who never value what they have, which makes me covet what I cannot get. Lon: Suppose some other do obtaine her, while you are thus long resolving? Cle: Nay, I am resolv'd no other shall ever have her. Lon: And you resolve for her too. Cle: Yes, she cannot in honour ingage to any, while I pretend. Lon: Art thou turn'd fool, to think thus? be more serious, or thou wilt be dispis'd. Cle: Why do you not allow me some reliefe then? to live a whole Moneth honest, will put my blood into a flame; I have tempted all I meet, and all within these Walls prove honest. Lon: By your own experience then, you will find that Courts are Nurseries of virtue, and are onely scandaliz'd by such vild persons, as would have the clearest innocence aspers'd, that their own guilts might be no wonder; —you find few virtuous persons, amongst Censurers. Cle: That's true, but take heed Lonzartes, you do not lead me into snares that will destroy me, for I allready find some inclination; towards Pandora, which I am asham'd to own, lest I be laugh'd at. Lon. You have reason, for there can none of us believe thee. Cle: You have made me a fine Gentleman in a few dayes:—if Pandora be of your mind, adiew to your Philosophicall Love. Lon: I hope thou art too fast to free thy self. — Thou playest with flames, which undiscover'd burn, Untill they do thy heart to Ashes turn. Exit Lon▪ Cle: Did ever man betray himself as I have done? by putting Fet∣ters on in jest, which already are become so fixt, I cannot shake 'um off, but must humbly beg, to be allow'd to worshp that Divine Nature, I so much dispis'd in virtuous Women, and must now confess: — If I do neither Faith, nor Favour find, The God of Love is just, though he be blind. Exit. Note, that all the Play through, when Silvander and Lindamira speaks not, thy are to whisper  in privae discourse. [Enter Theodocia and Lindamira.] Lin: If your Highness do consider Lonzartes's Worth, and his great
Birth, as it deserves; whose Ancestor was not many Ages since, by yours, but by this Dukedome, on a nice point, (as I have heard;) so that to me Lonzartes's love, looks like a Divine direction, to his Re∣stauration. The: I am of Pandora's mind for single life, and have as small a value for that idle passion you call love, as she. Lin: Your Highnesse may as well judge what they do in China, as guesse at our Felicities that Love? —I can kiss the ground that my Silvander treads on, with more relish, then all other joyes can bring me. The: You have high fancies that lead you on to hopes, which you may never find. Lin: Those hopes are more delightfull! then an Age of dull life without them; if your Highness did converse as much with me, as with Pandora, I should convert you. The: Why do you not then change her severity, against men? Lin: I had not the honour to be known to her, before her heart was set another way; but yet Ile try what I can do. The: I wish Silvander may answer your expectation Lindamira; but if such honour, and such bliss accompany your loves, why thus long car∣ried on ith' dark? and why not yet avow'd. Lin. 'Tis now avow'd unto the Duke, though I took time to know my Gallant, before I did admit his Love, and on long tryal found his silent looks, did speak more truth, then such loud noyses, as most passions make; we whisper our hearts to one another, with a sincerity beyond the reach of lowd professions. The: You praise Silvander as if you meant to sell him. Lin: He is no Prince Madam, and is therefore safe from you. The: The lesse safe, if I so pleas'd; —do you believe his virtue, and his love so great, that I could not win him from you, for a Friend of mine? Lin: I do, and shall not think him a losse, who can be won from me, by the greatest Princess in the World? The: If I could once see such a man, I might change my opinion. Lin: Why don't you try Lonzartes? The: He is too much concern'd to be play'd with; —you dare not venture your fine man then? Lin: I dare, and do desire it withall my heart, and do voluntarily in∣gage, not to work against your Highnesse. The: And I am resolv'd to try his faith to you, it may cure Lonzar∣tes to see himself neglected, when anothers chosen, though but in jest, for I can pitty, though I do not love him. Lin: And 'tis my desire to have Silvanders faithfull love, made Emi∣nent by this temptation. [Enter Lonzartes, and Silvander to them.] The: In what humour left you Clearcus my Lords? Lon: In such as does become his greatnesse Madam. The: Most brave men are often puffed up with vain glory, that does Eclipse those virtues, which themselves do over-value. Lin: Your Highnesse is severe to men, but all are not so vain.
The: Most are, when we do value them too much, —yet I con∣fess I am well pleased, when I find men worthy my esteem. Lin: How does that appear? when your Highnesse does dispise mankind by your resolves against them. The: To shew how much you are mistaken; help me to unpin this Jewel; —wear this Silvander for my sake; I'le own it to the World, that I do value men of Worth. Sil: Madam, I understand not what this kind of favour means; I hope your Highness does not chuse me for mirth. The: Do you Silvander raise mirth from my Favour? —come with to Lin: aside. me Lindamira; —I do command you to stand near us, within hearing; —I will not runne the hazzard of any Censure, by this tryal to satisfie my curiosity, concerning Lovers, such high Romantick Lovers! who soar above the reach of all temptations. Lin. I shall obey you Madam, though I desire it not. Exeunt Ladies. [The Men stand amazed.] Sil. Can you guess Lonzartes, what this tends to? Lon. Tis a Riddle farre beyond my understanding. Exit Lonz: [Lindamira Re-enters to Silvander.] Lin. Wake, wake Silvander, the Sun shines bright upon thee; Theodocia dotes on thy Virtues, and will advance thy youth, much faster then thy own wishes can propose. Sil: How Lindamira! have you so mean thoughts of me? Lin: So high thoughts, why may not the Princess neglect the Co∣rinthian, for you? such things have been in story. Sil: You speak, as if you wish'd it. Lin: Can I wish you well, and not applaud it? Sil: You cannot fancy me a greater curse, unlesse your own heart be turn'd against me. Lin: The Princess desires your company in the next Room; I can stay no longer. Exit Lindamira. Sil: I have so much to think on, that I know not what to say; —the Princess unexpected favours, with Lindamira's no concern, begets such wonder, as does amaze me! —I will not go; —and yet I must, or make my self Ridiculous, by judging what I cannot guesse at. Exit. [Enter Lonzartes.] Lon: Have I thus long ador'd the Princess? and still approach'd her with the same trembling, I draw near the Alter, for this scorn at last! —before my Face, to Court a man, she knowes ingaged unto another, a man of so much lower quality then I; this I confesse does make my Faith stagger; —Silvander was as much surpriz'd as I, — Lindamira too, was out of tune; —If Theodocia can go less, this change will be more my admiration, then her virtue was.
[Enter Lindamira, passing in by him.] Lon: Now Madam, whither so fast? Lin: To see which way the winde blows; —pray my Lord, where is your heart now? Lon: In the Princess lodgings, with yours; —or can you tell me bet∣ter where your own is? Lin: I change my mind so often, that I know not where I left it last. Lon: Are you no more concerned? Suppose Silvander change his opinion? Princess have mighty power to overcome mens hearts. Lin: Why then his opinion will be chang'd? —I cannot value him, that leaves to value me; —methinks my Lord, the Princess favour to Silvander, should abate your passion for her. Lonzar: My desires go no higher, then to look, and wonder at her perfections! my Esteem cannot be call'd love, beyond what Duty, and Obedience does allow; —but how does Silvander receive this great Honour? Lin: They are now in private; you may judge by his exalted looks when you see him next; — I am glad your Lordship is no more con∣cern'd. Lon: This is a forc'd discourse Lindamira, pray do not mock me, who have a true value of your worth. Lin: The truth is, the Princess often angred at my confidence in Silvanders love; onely now tryes if she can shake his faith, by higher propositions; —and my hope is, that his Virtue may beget in her, some better thoughts for men, which will do your businesse, and confirm mine, for Silvander is above temptation; and I think Lonzartes does deserve what he desires. Lon: You oblige me to say, your confidence does merrit the grea∣test faith from man; but is Silvander of your Plot? Lindam: No, 'twould then be none, nor I no tryal have of his sin∣cerity. Lon: These are dangerous sports, and we too late may find them so; the Princess and you are both too bold, and do too much rely on your own beauties. Lin: If Silvander can be won, I can smile at such a losse. Lon: 'Tis easie to say so, when you fear it not; but I have seen stout hearts fall to pieces by such a blow; —you have setled my heart again, and I advise you from these dangerous sports, lest they blow up your joyes, when you are most secure: we know our present minds, but cannot foresee what we shall like to morrow: — Our Nature with such frailty is indow'd, Tis well if present moments be allow'd! Exeunt severally.
Enter Theodocia, and Silvander, two Ladies at a distance; Lindamira is seen near ob∣serving them. The: Is your heart my Lord so fixt on Lindamira, that no Person, nor any Argument, can e're prevail with you to change? Sil: Our Souls Madam, are so united, that I hope death can only make that separation. The: Can no Fortune, nor any Quality invite you to Honours, and Happinesse, beyond what you can ever hope from Lindamira? Nor a greater Beauty dis-ingage your heart from her? Sil: None can ever move me to a thought of change Madam. The: What if she have chosen higher, and gives way for your prefer∣ment also. Sil: I can smile at all this, when your Highnesse is so merry; —Lin∣damira and I Madam, do understand a happinesse, can never be dissolv▪d; we are above temptation. The: Suppose my Father be her choice, will you pretend to love, and hinder her advancement, by your claim? —Suppose my dear Cou∣zin Pandora, have like affection unto you; and puts on this severity to others, in design onely to gaine you? will you let such a Beauty, of so high virtue and extraction dye for you? Sil: Your Highness sure does fancy what is impossible? —but if all this were so, I could dye in gratitude to serve Pandora, but do preferre Lindamira's love, and virtue, above the brightest beauty, or greatest Empire this World has. The: Can there be such worth in men? how have I been mis-infor∣med? [Aside.] —Princes who do not converse, know not the World they live in, but take all on trust from others; —You believe that I am now in jest Silvander, and do not deal so freely, as I expect. Sil: By all thats —I am sixt, past altering; —if your Highness knew the joyes, which do accompany united hearts, you would sooner undertake to pull down Stars from Heaven, then hope a separation, where true love Triumphs. The: I am fully satisfyed, that Lindamira has what she deserves, a worthy Lover; —appear now Lindamira, and call in Lonzartes, with the rest: —I am converted. [Enter Lindamira with Lonzartes and Ladies.] The: Here Madam, you are coupled by the Gods, Silvander does deserve your confidence; —Now wear that Jewel, I before gave you in jest Sir, as a mark of my Favour, for your approv'd virtue. Lindam: Has your Highnesse any better thoughts for Marriage, then you had? The: I have found an honest worthy man, beyond my expectation; —Lonzartes you look sad. Lon: My heart is not so full of Feathers as it was, but is of late be∣come a lump of Lead.
The: We have indeed been all too serious of late; come Lindamira, let us find some entertainment to refresh us on the Sea this Evening; Lonzartes, you, and Clearcus may go with us, if you please? Exeunt all but Lonzartes. Lon: Your Highnesse does honour us; — what these various fancies tend to, is above my understanding; — As Nature has fram'd Women of a more refined matter, then us men, so she has given to some, Souls so much above ours Excellent, that their Intrincique purity, dazles our Judgments, more then their brightest Beauty does our Eyes; —Theodo∣cia is certainly without blemish; —yet may have some notions of my love, which she thinks not fit to cherish, because she likes not me: —And yet may have a virtuous concern for my Birth, and sufferings, such as her good Nature is unwilling to destroy; —'Tis Theodocia's Excellen∣cies makes me thus humbly seek my Right, as her Gift; else my Sword should make my way to ascend this Throne, which is my own; — but no more of that yet: — —For if I can be rightly understood, My Love may save the expence of so much blood. Exit. THE FOURTH ACT. Pandora with Lindamira are seen sitting on a Couch; Enter Clearcus to them, they rise. Cle. MAdam, 'Tis a felicity to love you though neglected; by what Name then shall I call my Joy? Now you allow my Love, to what height raise my thoughts? — Shall I dare to enter upon such a state of bliss? —To be thus snatch'd into so much Light, from the long Chaos I have liv'd in, may prove more rui∣nous to me, then that Hell I came from. Pan: My Lord, you speak a new Language I understand not. Cle: Alas Madam, I have this night seen Visions! and do find my passion, growing much above my own command; —For when I look on your Eyes, I forget that there are Gods, and shall do such Idolatry to you, as will provoke them, to make me more miserable, then you can wish me happy; — Bnt when I consider how vast a Chasme, your resolves have made between us; I sink into such an abyss of misery, that I can nee'r get out of. Pan: I understand you lesse, and lesse; —The more you say, the more you do confound my judgment. Lin: All this Madam, is onely to let us see, how he could talk; if any Woman were worthy of his real love; —pray my Lord proceed,—I shall take Notes and edifie. [Pulls out a Table-Book.]
Cle: Your mirth Madam, is now out of season, when every word I utter, flowes from my wounded heart. Lin: Why do you not speak to me then? who can change my mind as often as your self? I was made for you; this Lady is im∣pregnable. Cle: I yield Lindamira, let not your wit destroy a man, that does submit to mercy; I beg quarter. Lin: Oh! do you so? Pan: 'Tis enough Lindamira, that he does confesse himself o're∣come, let it be Registred amongst our Victories; —And now my Lord, what is your next desire? Cle: My next Madam! I have scarce begun with this, you do mi∣stake all I say for mirth; Does not my looks and Language shew an Alteration? —All those Chymeras, that did possess my idle head, are vanished, and I become a serious man: —Your Miracle is already wrought, and I now see the onely way to my Felicitie, is to gain what I so much contemn'd. Lin: Excellently well Acted, this might cozen twenty, that did not know him. Pan: You shall do well my Lord to pursue this new path, untill you do obtain a general opinion of your virtue; But I hope you would not have us credit it at first sight! Cle: Though my love cannot yet gain credit in your esteem, do not deny me the joy to think, that you see how much I love, and ho∣nour you. Pan: This is too serious for our Comedy my Lord. Cle: Nothing can be too serious Madam, to expresse my love, by which the Gods are pleas'd to bring me to them; thus by forbidding what might intice me to slight Paradice, by having had you here: —'Tis fit then that I submit, and raise a joy from what I am now too apt to repine at, for 'tis a blessing to be so fixt, as Antidates my Elizium here on Earth; this Souls joy will endure like its own nature, unto Eternity. Pan: What think you of this Lindamira? Lind: I think he is in love, he talkes such nonsence! Pan: You are cured then Clearcus, and will unto the Prince confess your conversion, if we call you to it? Cle: Propose a way for my acknowledgment, and try. Lin: Let us take time Madam to consider of it, lest we loose half the Entertainment by our haste, and so spoil the jest. Cle: Madam, let not this Ladies mirth prevaile with your good na∣ture, to afflict a man, who can live only by your smiles. Pan: I must confesse I have some pain, to hold in my smiles thus long, for this serious way of fooling, I expected not from you my Lord. Cle: Why Madam, do you take all this for jest still? Pan: Yes indeed do I. Cle: By all the powers above, I do Adore you, next to them I Worship. Lin: That's no Oath Madam, for he Worships none: Pan: I have the same thoughts Lindamira, and am safe.
Cle: What a Monster am I grown, give me credit Madam, or give me death? —If I do not love you, let Iove strike me with suddain thun∣der, or I will gladly seal what I have said with my best blood, if nothing less will satisfie. Pan: Hold Clearcus. [He drawes.] Lin: Oh! let him alone, hee'l not hurt himself, he only hopes to fright us. Pan: My Lord you fright me now, and since you think fit to turne our Commick Scene into a Tragedy; I shall quit my part in it; and from this time, admit no farther visits from you: —Let us retire Linda∣mira, his converse growes dangerous. Exeunt Ladies. Cle: This had been my fate, had I ingaged a little farther, and this the fruit of chast, virtuous love; What a folly 'tis, to give our freedomes up, unto the will of Women, so humbly to obey, those we are Created to command: —But I am safe yet, and will now play with 'um, at their own game; and through a seeming sorrow for my rejection, laugh at them, who think to laugh at me. [Enter Lonzartes.] Lon: A good day unto my Friend. Cle: You speak too late Lonzartes, this is a fatal day, and I am study∣ing how I may make it more Eminent by Death, then by my sufferings. Lon: Why what's the matter man? have you visited the Ladies be∣fore they are drest? and made 'um froward. Cle: Thy love Lonzartes has ruin'd me; —yet I thank thee for my conversion, I shall now dye a sober man. Lon: Thy looks speak some disaster, tell me the worst, that I may joyn to find a Remedy. Cle: In a word then, I do love Pandora, as she deserves, and did so to the life expresse my love; that in spight of Lindamiras mirth, she did believe it, and has forbid my farther visits. Lon: 'Tis not possible that she can be so fool'd, she forbad thee in jest, come let us go to her now. Cle: I'le swear she did forbid me, and in great anger turn'd from me, I dare not go. Lon: This is pretty, wouldst thou have me believe thou lovest? Cle: Lonzartes, I am not in humour to be play'd with. Lon: Nor I in humour to be fool'd; what would'st thou have me say, when thou talk'st thus to me? thou in love! Ha, ha. Cle: What shall I say? what do, to beget faith in thee? —Pandora's resolution against Marriage, which I so much rejoyc'd at, is fatally be∣come my scourge, and I must dye, or have her. Lon: That's the onely way to obtain belief; do but hang thy self, and then a Printed Ballad (The Dary-Maids greatest Faith;) will make them swear thou dyedst for love. Cle: Do my looks agree with so much jest? does not my Face de∣clare, my heart does love? Lon: No, nor ever can do to me, wouldst thou have me belye my self, that thou mayest laugh at me? these shallow Plots are lost on me. Exit Lonzartes.
Cle: This is right, had I been fool'd into the Platonick pound; I might have knock'd my head against the Walls, and never been belie∣ved; —Thus I blow away those bubbles, hose ayrie Lectures of chast love! which lead silly mortals into slavery; —Ha Sanga. [Enter Sanga.] Sanga. Your pleasure Sir. Cle: Go presently, and summon all that merry Crew, (who danc'd the other day,) to sup with me this Night; and bid the Musick come. Exit Sanga. Sanga. I go Sir▪ Cle: I will retreat while I am safe, and be Arm'd against my Wise, Virtuous, Chast Friends, with their Cobweb Netts, so subtilly laid to catch me; —Thus I throw all their Inchantments off; —And now like the Grand Seignor, after some great Victory atcheiv'd; —I will retire to my Seraglio. Exit. Enter the Duke, with Theodocia, Pandora, Linda∣mira, Teretia, and Train: —and Silvander. Duke. You tell me a story beyond belief Theodocia, Clearus playes with you all this while; he love? The: If Pandora be mistaken, he will triumph over Women-kind for ever▪ Pan: I wish it were no worse Sir, 'tis I who now am to be pittied, who for the common sport, and for his good, have brought an evill on my self, I cannot bear. Duke. Why Pandora, he is descended of our own Blood, and his Estate proportionable to his Birth? so that if you can raise his Virtues above his vices, you'l have no cause to murmur at his love. Pan: True Sir, if I were nor ingag'd to a single life, much might be said, to set Clearcus's merrits above mine. Lin: Is there no dispensation for such resolves Madam? when it may be disputed, whether the gods approve them? —They give us Lawes enough, we need none of our own making. Pan: My heart will nee'r consent to alter my resolves. Lin: We shall have enough to do then. The. Let us all agree to laugh him out of it. Lin: You will find little cause for mirth, when you see Clearcus next Madam. The: Can so few hours, alter a man of his temper, so much? Lin: He is asham'd of his first Principles, and is angry at that shame; He hates himself for loving, and loves so much, he dares not wish it less; This mixture of passions, does beget such a confusion of thoughts, that makes him look as if he had fed on nought but sighes, and tears this twelve Mounth; and I fear we shall have cause to turn our laughter into sorrow for him.
Duke. I'le give him Commands that shall divert him; —come with me Theodocia. Ezeunt Duke and Theodoci. Lin: 'Tis great pitty so brave a man should be so lost. Pan: 'Tis so Lindamira, but how can it be help'd? must I become mad, because he is so; —'Twas not a rash word, by chance let fall, but on debate and mature judgment, because I saw none so happy after Marriage as before; —Why may not I then live and dye, as free as I was borne? Lin: You see why, because the Gods do not allow so great felicity on Earth, as might keep us from ever wishing to be with them; pray who ever heard of a pair of true Lovers, that desir'd to be in Heaven, if they might stay here till Doomsday? 'Tis therefore for our good, that such united hearts are so rarely to be found on Earth; take heed Pandora, that you bring not more evils on your head, then you fore-see. Pan: I must now bear my Fortune as I may. Lin: Though you have not met with many happy Marriages, I have heard of some, who all their lives have had a constant Spring of Love; their passions so high, and joyes so great, each striving to raise the others happinesse above their own; this I believe, and hope for; —Me∣thinks till I am married, I am a thing laid by, as if forgotten by the Gods. Pan: 'Tis not high passions, nor great joyes, I doubt to find, but their continuance; —suppose the Gallant Lovers, to the Warres be sent, what terrours will possess their frighted Ladies, 'till their return? and if miscarry? what will their whole lives have to joy at after? Lin: Those who stay at home, may have equall dangers, these are anticipated dreams of evils, that may never happen; then you conceive not the joy those dangers bring, when they are over; this World affords us nothing to relish our delights by, but such accidents, as love, which some fears, and dangers bring; 'Tis sharps, make sweet, the sweeter! Pan: But if I am satisfied with less ioyes, without those pains you find so usefull, why must I try to gaine more happiness? then I do wish for, when I have joyes enough allready. Lin: Joyes enough Madam! there is no such thing in Nature, as e∣nough of what we love. Pan: I am weary of this idle talk. Lin: And I know no better Entertainment. [Enter to them Lonzartes, and Silvander.] Pan: How think you Silvander, is Clearcus what he seems? Sil: Lonzartes knows him best Madam. Lon: I do believe he loves, though I seem not to credit him, and am now resolv'd to play with his passion, as he has done with mine; 'twill entertain the Princess rarely, to see how I shall anger him. Sil: Is he enough fix't? to be so abus'd, for if neither Men, nor
Women have any faith in his budding love, he may fly off for ever. Lon: I am now going to see what humour he is in. Sil: I'le wait on you. Pan: Pray do, and let me know how I must behave my self, that would not hurt him. Lin: I can direct you best, if you'l trust your self to me! Pan: I shall trust you as farre as any, in this affaire; let us consult within. Exeunt. Enter Clearcus and Sanga, with Men, and Women Dancers. Cle: Welcome my dear Friends, I will be no more seduc'd by grave Lonzartes fooleries; this night shall re-unite us, while we live: —Is the Musique come? San: Not yet Sir. Cle: I have broke through their Nets, and now the day, and night are ours to Revel in; we will be so merry, that our hearts shall seem much lighter then our heels. [Enter Sanga.] Sanga. Lonzartes, and Silvander are without. Cle: They are come as I could wish, I'le entertain 'um, as they de∣serve; they are my kind, chast, virtuous, well-wishing spies; —pray [Exeunt Dancers.] retire all into that Gallery, while I dispatch my Court-Friends: —San∣ga, shut the windowes close, then call 'um in, and say, that I am grown sad of late, monstrous sad! —Now for a grave face to suit with my Exit Sanga. disquise; I have some fear my sides will burst, with holding in my laughter. [He sits in a sad posture.] [Enter Sanga with Lonzartes, and Silvander.] Sanga. Softly pray; —for a strange Melancholy has seiz'd him on the suddain; —He is now talking to Pandora. Sil: She is not here! San: He entertains her Idea in her absence, with the same passion, he would her; —the only sure way for a lovers happinesse; —hark. Cle: Blessed Angel, turn not away; —these tears must be my daily Incence, offer'd at your feet; if you refuse this Tribute? from my cap∣tiv'd heart, you'l turn the Elizium I enjoy, to Hell: Oh stay! and take my Soul with thee; —that gentle look! that: — Lon: Why so sad fond lover? let not one repulse dismay so great a [Lon: inter∣rupts him.] Conqueror; thy next charge may prove more prosperous; —we come to councel thee Clearcus, and to raise thy drooping Spirits by new hopes! Cle: Or to laugh at my affliction! whose Soul is sunk so low by my dispair, that all my Spirits are vanished; I must submit to my Cativity Lonzartes. [He sighes.]
Lon: That sigh had almost blown me over, yet I am glad to see this, and am now full satisfied thou art in love, in love Clearcus; —let me imbrace my fellow-Prisoner, we will now shake our shackles, to the same sad tune together. Cle: I know you come to mock me; but I must bear it. Lon: Oh no! who can have so hard a heart? we pitty you, and have some fears Pandoras heart will break, when we relate your mighty suf∣ferings; —but if I should sit thus in the dark? would it create the like Angelical Idea in my brain, Clearcus? Cle: This is barbarous, to catch a Lyon in your Toyles, and bait him like an Asse; —thus to render my passion Ridiculous, will beget Pan∣doras scorn, and may prove my destruction! Lon: If she discern not your passion, how can she proportion her fa∣vours, to your merrit? Cle: Do I deserve this mirth from you? thus to heighten my affliction. Lon: Do you not? —all that I can do this Twelve-month, will not bring me on equal termes, for thy abuses: —remember how you held me to the Ladies, and made me your mirth, by which scandal, you de∣stroy'd my credit with the Princess, this is my revenge, ha, ha. Cle: 'Twas a great scandal indeed! to procure you the Princess leave to love her; by my means you have obtain'd a happinesse, be∣yond your hopes, which all your whining Poetry, or your Eternall sighes, could never reach; —for which special service; —prethee good sweet Lonzartes spare me: —by our old Friendship I do beg: —by [Hangs on him.] thy own virtue, and unparalel'd chast heart, I do conjure thee, not to raise a publique mirth, out of my Souls sorrow, which you have brought me to. Lon: Well then, if I find you do continue thus humbly penitent, and truly thus afflicted, I will shew more mercy, then I found from [Embraces Clearcus:] you: —come chear up, we will sigh, and condole together, and if pos∣sible? so order our sad hearts, that both may the same moment break, and infect the World with such a sorrow! as may fright the Female Sex, from like rigour unto men: so shall we become a Noble Sacri∣fice to love, for the good of a whole Nation. —or if you please, wee'l send for some of our old Gang, to dance, and drink these Melancholly vapours from our hearts; to let the Ladies see, their Beauties are not so destructive, as we make them believe. [Clearcus Imbraces Lonzartes with great joy.] Cle: I marry Lonzartes; now, thou talkest like a Phylosopher, now, thou prescribest the onely remedy for our disease! Sanga, —bid the Musick strike a chearful Ayre, and then call in those Friends in the next Room: —Nay, if you allow this way of cure? I shall soon expel loves venome from my heart, into my heeles. [Embraces Lon:] Lon: What is all this Clearcus? art thou mad still? Lonzartes starts back.
Cle: I am wise, and do not mean to quit my cool, pleasant, flowry paths, for your consuming flames of restless love, who walke on tops of Steeples, and at that height, plead, that your chast desires, are plea∣sing to the Gods; —But I, who know the end of such fair flashes, as at first appear, with such folded Armes, and down cast looks, are but steps, to approach the Ladies fingers ends; — —Then by degrees grown bolder, you aspire, Till nought but ruine, quench the subtle fire. [Enter Dancers.] Lon: what doest thou mean by this misterious language? and this Rabble here? Cle: I mean to follow thy advise, —to sigh only when I make love to Ladies, (their backs turn'd) I mean to dance, and sing as often as I can, that their neglects may pierce no deeper then their Eyes discern; —here Lonzartes, this Girle will cure the bite of a Tarantula, and drive the poyson from thy heart. Lon: Out Hypocrite; —is this thy love unto Pandora? was all thy passions counterfeit, the other day? Cle: No, 'twas fairly growing up to equal thine in all sincerity of Noble thoughts; But the nice Lady, would not permit it to take so deep root as yours, before she blasted all my hopes, and in a moment let me see, that love is like a bitter poion, which many tast, and flying away, rather chusing their disease, then so ill a relished remedy; This made me return to my old Antidotes Lonzartes; —what think you of a heat or two, before you go? —call in the Musique. Sil: Pandora was to blame, to throw him off so rashly. Lon: Let us retyre Silvander, this Ayre is infected. Exeunt Lonzartes and Silvander. Cle: Go whine fond Lover, go whine, I say, go whine, While we chear our hearts with Wenches, and Wine, I say go whine. Exeunt omnes. HERETHEY DANCE. [Enter Lonzartes, Lindamira, and Ladies.] Lin: I do not wonder that he is fallen off, 'twas what I feared, when his passion went so high; I saw Pandora was concern'd, but we will bring it on again. Lon: You are mistaken Madam, all he said then was jest, for he is now as mad as ever; —I left him Incirculed with six wild men, and as ma∣ny wanton Girles, prepar'd to Dance, and Revel all the Night. Lin: There is no harm in Dancing my Lord, unlesse they do catch cold; you judge Clearcus by what is past; but when I see him with Pandora next, I'le give my opinion of his concern.
Lon: By what means may their meeting be procured? Lin: Wee'l think on't. [Enter Theodocia, and Ladies to them.] The: I am sorry Lonzartes, that Pandora has cast off Clearcus, which has occasioned his relapse, when a little patience, would have setled him in the way of virtue. Lon: 'Tis every way, what I expected not; his love was as strange, as his rejection, and his relapse in the old humour, beyond all the rest; —I know not what to think of him. Lin: Let us bring them once more together, and I'le undertake to guesse at both their hearts; it may be govern 'um. Lon: I Madam, but how shall they be brought together? when both, would rather see a Basaliske, then one another. Lin: You may be mistaken my Lord, who judge by what you see, when 'tis our businesse, and our virtue, not to shew our hearts, 'till a full tryal, that men are worthy of them; —then you forget, that Clearcus conversion, must be by one, he cannot conquer. The: But if he will neither conquer, nor be subdued, how can his con∣version follow? Lin: If your Highnesse can contrive an interview, I have a fancy in my head, that may reconcile them, and effect what we all wish. The: I will send presently for Pandora, and intreat my Father, to pretend some businesse, to call Clearcus hither. Lon: He will suspect. Lin: Let him come, no matter what he suspects. The: Do you Lonzartes, once more see what humour he is in.— —We must endeavour, and not fear to try, But trust the Event, unto their destiny. Exeunt severally. [Enter Duke with Silvander and Lords.] Duke. I ever thought Clearcus did but mock, and laugh at their designes; his Brain is not yet ripe for serious Love: —But how does Theodocia look on Lonzartes? Sil: With much neglect Sir. Duke. That is not well, have you Silvander instructed Lindamira, that she may inform Theodocia of Lonzartes Title to this Dukedome? and how much better then a Forraine Prince, her Marrying him, will be applauded by our people, who are not ignorant of his pretence. Sil: I have Sir, and the Princess gives a serious ear to it, though she yet makes no reply; a little of your Councel, and Authority, I believe may incline her to a better value of him. Duke. That shall not be wanting, Lonzartes is all that I can wish in a Successor; —and his love looks so without design, that I will cherish it, and try to win my Daughter to comply.
Sil: Your Highness will gain a double interest in all your Subjects hearts, by this honour to Lonzartes, who has merrits proportionable to your favour, and his birth, all which his love gives Lustre to. Duke. I see it Silvander, and will recompence his Faith, and his Hu∣mility, with my advice to Theodocia, who yet knowes not his story. Sil: The Princess must needs hear, what every body talks, and all do wish! Duke. I shall now inform her fully of Lonzartes Right, too long held from him: bid him meet me at my Daughters Chamber; I will no longer hide my purpose for him: — —His Birth and Virtue, with his constant Love, Declares he never can unworthy prove. Exeunt, THE FIFTH ACT. [Enter Lonzartes and Clearcus.] Cle: NO, I'le never see her more. Lon: Do you not love at all? Cle: Nor ever will, methinks Love is like a smooth Water, that invites men to Bath, and tumble in it with delight, untill they be destroyed by Serpents, which in the bottom undiscover'd lie. Lon: What means this similie? Cle: This Serpents bite, has Metamorphized you into a whining lover, into the shaddow of a man, of late become a shape without a Soul; why must I busie my head with such Chymeras's, when I can please my self, to my hearts wish, my own way? — Prethee sweet sup∣press'd Prince, do not forsake me thus, for specious shewes of happi∣nesse, or vaner hopes of better dayes, then you will ever find in Court; —You are now safe, but when you grow wise, and serious, it will in the Dukes head great jealousies create; to let him see your Virtue may be dangerous; and your pretence appear worthy of his fear. Lon: That hazzard is better, then what I now suffer, in the opinion of my best Friends, who believe this wildnesse, is my Nature, or such as may beget a habit in me, which I can nee'r put off; and thus my se∣curity in this disguise, may become my ruine; — I wish I could per∣swad you Clearcus, to shew forth that Virtue, all the World would wonder at. Cle: To what end I pray? if the good Duke would give me im∣ployment fit for his Kinsman? and worthy of my Sword, I could soon be my self: But now I have nothing else to do, and therefore play away my time in folly; and 'tis a hard question which is best? for we know that too much wisdome, does undoe more men, then it advan∣ces, or else begets Eternal slavery, to State Affairs, where the wisest,
ever walk on needles points; —I have weighed these things, and do be∣lieve 'tis better to maintain the peace, and the security I now live in, unregarded, then to be advanc'd according to my birth. Lon: But you will loose the Dukes favour, and become contemp∣table to the whole Court, if you continue thus extravagant, what de∣signe can I have, by my desire, to see you great and glorious? Cle. Have I not tryed, and been misled: yielded to your wise Ma∣ximes, against my own better judgment, and been rejected in the height of my endeavours, to be (as you call it) great, and glorious, is not this true? does not Pandora with the whole Court, scorne me but for see∣ming. wise. Lon: Yes, in part, 'cause they believe it not. Cle: I will no more of your advice, 'till you can cure your self. Lon: I have an Honourable Argument for my love. Cle: Who has not? untill he be dispis'd! Lon: Was it not your own desire to be neglected? did you not declare against all Women, that you could conquer? you left Pandora no way for Victory, but by rejecting you; so that I can conclude a good sucsess, from what you raise dispair. Cle: Ha! think you Pandora did reject me, in compliance with my humour only? Lonzar: What else? can she be angry with you, for loving her too much? Cle: You do surprize me with a discourse I look'd not for; —but I will be no more abus'd; —I will not see her. Lonzar: How can you be reconcil'd then? shall she make love to you? Cle: No, I abhorre that thought, beyond her anger, a woman Wooe, that were preposterous! Lon: Will you treat by Embassadours? and Wed by Proxie? Clear: Nor so, that's only fit for Princes, who cannot meet to treat. Lon: Will you have her? if she declares she would have you? Cle: I shall never like her change of mind. Lon: Can' you tell whether you would have her, or not? Cle: That's a harder question, then the other. Lon: Will you have her by compulsion? Cle. That were a Tyranny, would make her hate me ever. Lon: Shall the Duke by his Prerogative power, in spight of both your teeth, compel you both to compliance? Cle: Let me think on this a little, at first sight this looks likely to agree us: —if two impossibilities can make one possible? this might do our businesse. Lon: Well, what do you resolve? Cle: Nothing, why do you tempt me to farther evils? —I know not what to resolve, nor what to say; —but will no more of love, my heart shakes at the thought of my last tryal; —I blush to think how much lesse then man I was, and hovv much more then Woman, I crea∣ted her, in those fevv houres I lov'd; —
[Enter a Messenger.] Messen: The Duke calls for Lonzartes. Lon: I'le attend his Highnesse presently▪ Cle: I take you for my Friend Lonzartes; —do not discourse me into a Ruine, you will share in. Lon: I have no Rule for friendship above my desire to see you happy. Cle: I believe it Sir, and beg your pardon for my distracted language; —I must attend the Duke too. Lon: And I. Exeunt. Enter Pandora and Lindamira. Pan: You tire me Lindamira, and chide me for a fault, I cannot own; I had no other way to free my self. Lin: You might have check'd his approaches with somewhat lesse severity, your rigour may beget despair in him. Pan: Dispair of what? my undertaking was only on the Dukes command, to afford him civil visits, which I have done, in hope of his conversion. Lin: You did give o're, before the work was perfected. Pan: You speak as if the design to set him free, were to inslave me, to the humour of a mad man. Lin: The wildest young men, do often prove the soberest at the last; and the truth is Madam, we do all desire to see you, and Clearcus, con∣vert one another; so to beget that unity of hearts, which the World seeks most. Pan: Do you believe that I, who have a prejudice against the best of men, can e're esteem the worst? Lin: If Clearcus were under that notion! I should have other thoughts; but when I consider such men reclaim'd, do often make good Husbands I have hopes of him. Pan: If his wildnesse were his only fault, time, and experience might reclaim him. Lin: If these be your only Exceptions Madam, I wish you would trust me to mannage this affair. Pan: You must not talk me into an Intreque, which I avoid; —I do not love him. Lin: You will do, when you have him, I know many have done so after Marriage, who did not before. Pan: That is too bold a venture for me, who have no faith in men; and those Examples you mention so rarely to be found, my courage dares not undertake it; pray no more of this. Lin: The Princess desires your company at Court this Evening. Pan: I did intend to wait on her.
[Enter Duke, Theodocia, and Lonzartes.] Duke. I have given you Arguments enough on his behalf, which his dejected looks you see declare; —Your favours Theodocia should not be restrain'd, because his adoration is so great, he dares not beg 'um; come near Lonzartes. The: Lonzartes's Worth is understood, beyond the weak Rhetorick of flattering words; he cannot wish to be more valued, then he is by me. Lon: Nor will I ever sue for favours, beyond these you now afford me Madam; —may I confirm my hopes, by understanding what you say, my own way? The: You may, for since my Father does so much advise for Mar∣riage, I may alter my opinion, when I find just cause to value men, above my resolves against them. Lon: For Heavens sake Madam say no more, my breast cannot contain these spreading joyes you give me, my hopes increase too fast, for my dispairing heart, to comprehend these honours you allow, with∣out an Extacy! Duke. Theodocia, I shall nee'r revoke the freedome I have given, to make your own choice, though I direct you to Lonzartes, to whom our Ancestors have done wrong. The: This your indulgence Sir, makes me more cautious, how I pro∣ceed; —Marriage is a concern so great, I dare not at once resolve it, and the same day chuse the man: —I can yet only say, that I have alter'd my opinion, in favour of Lonzartes. Lon: My Amazement, and my concern are too great, to answer Ma∣dam, my felicity is above the reach of a reply. Duke. Theodocia, I have given you my best Councel, and my full consent to please your self. The: I thank you Sir, and I will endeavour to regulate my heart to your advise, and to Lonzartes wish; —give me but time to examine, and approve, what I am willing to submit to. Enter Pandora, and Lindamira to them, with Silvander. Duke. How is it Madam, that you quit the field? before your un∣dertaking be perform'd. Pan: I have done my part Sir, which was on your command, to al∣low him civil visits; and to entertain the Princess, I complyed with Lindamira, to try how our Raleary would work on him, which did pro∣duce so unlook'd for an effect, that I was forc'd to quit my part, to save my self: Duke. Were you in danger to be lost then? —I did not think Cle∣arcus had prevail'd so farre; but if he be reclaim'd, he will be worthy your esteem. Pan: Your Highnesse did mistake me, I was in no danger to be lost through love, nor at all concern'd; for a man who does declare against all worth in Women, where he can get an interest: pray Sir, make me understand what you would have me do?
Duke. We would have you marry Clearcus. Pan: Whether he will or no; —if I consent, can you prevail with him? Duke. Do you comply, wee'l try what we can do? Pan: I would not be Treypand into a Marriage, I am so much averse to, in confidence of his old humour, think my self secure, and be so lost! Lin: You may venture safely Madam, you see he is so great a Co∣ward, that he only dares pursue them that fly him, do but charge, and he will runne away. Pan: If I were sure of that! I would seem any thing, to be freed from farther trouble. Lon: Trust me Madam, he is now worse then ever. Duke. Lonzartes, pray use your interest to bring him to us now. Exit Lonzartes. The: Do you think Cousin, we have a design to harm you? Pan: No, but your Highnesse disputes me into a condition, your self does not approve; pray shew me the way to this felicity, that I may credit what you say, by what you do. The: Will you then ingage to marry Clearcus? the same day I marry? Pan: Shall I chuse your man? as you would mine? The: Suppose I have already chosen. Pan: I thought your Highnesse had been of my opinion; But if provided, I give you joy. The: Now you runne too fast the other way, I am only towards marriage. Pan: That journey seldome proves long Madam, when we look to∣wards it. Lin: That was said like a sage Sibell, the quintessence of truth, in few words, 'tis but a willing mind, and then— Pan: Prethee Lindamira help me to be rid of this uncertain man. Lin: I know no better councel, then to be in love with him, or to seem so, for if he should take you at your word, and marry, that may do your work; for I once knew a Lady, who chose to marry an impor∣tunate Sutor, that she might be rid of him, and was so; for soon after marriage, they parted, and never met more. Pan: You are allwayes in jest, I would have serious councell now. Lin: You have had my story twice over, to no purpose. Duke. By all my observations, I cannot judge, whether Clearcus, or you Pandora, be most extravagant. Lin: Your Highnesse may do well, to put them into the Colledge of half mad Folks, where they will either cure one another, or become quite mad together; when their disease is known, some remedy may be found; 'tis now past judgment, what either of them ayle! The: Lindamira saies well, 'tis very strange you will not declare so farre, as to let us see how we may serve you. Pan: Do but leave me to my self, and I am well Madam. The: Many sick people are of that opinion, when in most danger, and must therefore by their friends be govern'd.
Pan: As many healthy people, think themselves sick, when they are not, and by seeking Remedies for nothing, do create evils, they ne∣ver can finde cure for; such high passions as Lindamira's, do never let us rest in peace, but do create perpetuall storms. Lin: You argue well Madam, if a dull calme, were the onely happi∣nesse, appointed us on Earth, then one degree from being a sleep, would prove our greatest bliss; —sure no age did e're produce, two such Icy-hearted Ladies, as the Princess, and you. [Enter to them Lonzartes and Clearcus.] Lin: Here comes a Homely, and a Jigg hand in hand; —now for the second part to the same tune, Of love me, and love me not. Duke. Clearcus, it troubles me to see you delight in a retired dark∣nesse, or else to walk in such clouds, as we cannot see through; I would perswade you to regain Pandora's good opinion. Cle: Is the mistery of love, to be discuss'd in publique Sir? Duke. With us, who are so near alli'd unto you both; I think it may, because we all know what you both profess in private, and now desire to hear, what you will face to face avow; and we intreat you Pandora, first to shew, why you threw off Clearcus. Pan: You do amaze me Sir, to examine me as a Criminal! Duke. You have no cause for this displeasure Pandora, but mis-judge our love and our respects; we know your worth, and would to the World Illustrate that virtue, you design to smother by a single life; I allow your purpose, did become your younger dayes, and did expresse an Angelicall innocence; but I question whether now, on mature judg∣ment, you may not do better for your self, and us, to reclaim Clearcus. Pan: You demand impossibilities from me, for if I should change my mind, he will change his too; Pray shew me a rule to reclaim him by, before you do condemn me. Duke. We onely desire you will afford him the same civility, as did first induce him to adore that Virtue he dispised before. Pan: I have done this. The: You did begin, but you gave o're too soon. Lin: And all her kindness but in jest too Madam, which he dis∣cern'd. Duke. How do you answer this? Lindamira was of your Councel. Pan: I undertook him but in jest, and was by him injoyn'd to such severity, as I perform'd, and 'twas then thought, the onely way to vin∣dicate our Sex, and to work his conversion, which he at first did counter∣feit so well, as to deceive, and fright me from his farther visits. Lin: Was his love so terrible? Pan: To me it was, who thought him uncapable of ever having no∣ble thoughts, for any of our Sex. Duke. But when you found him growing worthy, why did you not cherish that virtue? as your own Creation. Lin: Because she fear'd, her Virgin vow might be defil'd, by ow∣ning such a Manchild of her own begetting; for he began to aske her blessing, 'till she laugh'd him into so great anger, that one day he
proffer'd to kill himself, which gave end unto our Comedy. Pan: If his cure had lain within the reach of Raleary, I had gloried in my part, but never shall consent to inslave my self unto the humours of a man, who cannot be a minute in one mind; his imaginations are be∣yond the Moon, and would have, he knowes not what▪ Duke. Clearcus, you have heard your charge; —Guilty or not Guilty? Lin: Guilty Sir. Cle: I shall never want your good word Madam; — Lindamira tells you true Sir, I am guilty. Duke. Of what? Cle: Of all the crimes, that offended Lady does object; pray Sir pronounce my doom, and put me out of pain. Duke. Will you submit then, and obey it? Cle: If it can put me out of pain, I will? Duke. I doubt it not; —my sentence is, that you revive that love you shew'd unto Pandora lately. Cle: Oh Sir, the very name of Love, puts me into a shaking fit; for Heavens sake, give me Halters, Poysons, Daggers, any means to let out life, rather then renew those torments, which I felt that hour I lov'd. Lin: Pray Sir, give me leave, to put him some Interrogatories. Duke. Do so. Lin: Your Lordship has confest, that you have lov'd one hour, and must have some reason why you lov'd no longer; shew us that reason, or for ever hold your peace, and submit to judgment. The: How Clearcus, nonplust by a Judge in Petticoates? [Clearcus stands mute.] Lin: Why Madam? many of our Sex have puzled the wisest men; —give him leave to think a little; but if what I have said, has struck your Lordship dumb, hold up your Finger, —'tis enough; —He has [He hold it up.] nothing to say for himself, but submits unto the mercy of the Court; I understand him Sir; —and have now found a remedy for both their evils; —If you will trust me with your hand my Lord, I will not harm it: —and if I have credit enough Madam! to be trusted with your hand [Clearcus gives his hand.] too, pray lay it without fear on mine, that I may try a charm I have, to conjure out the evil Spirits, that possesse you both; —you may at your own pleasure, take back your hands; —only let me hold 'um, while I pronounce my charm within. [Pandora turns away.] Duk. Pandora I intreat you to try Lindamira's charm, give her your hand, she deals not with the Divel. [Pandora gives her hand.] Lin: The Divel I work by Sir, is truth, drest in her rich Robe of Innocence; —if truth do not convince both these Delinquents, my charm will have no power on them; —My Lord you have in this great Assembly, often said, that you could never value any Woman you could win; —if now you have found this Lady, as impregnable, as you can wish, she is your fate; —hold Sir, remember you are dumb, 'till I [He proffers to speak.] have done; —Now Madam, I must speak serious sence to you, who stand here the expectation, and the wish of all the Court; — yet I know, you must not consent to give your hand to him, nor in a look, or word comply, with what I say; for if you yield, Clearcus will forsake the
Field: —I shall therefore only put your hands together, no marri∣age, nor no contract make, onely desire that you will thus hand in hand, retire a while with me in private, to apply my charm, who now do pray, that all the evils which ever did befall the most unhappy lovers, may light on him, or you, that shall their hand remove, before my charme does work; now come with me. Exeunt hand in hand. Duke. What the issue of this will be, I cannot guesse; — Now The∣odocia, I must remind you of Lonzartes, who dares not approach you, on his own behalf, who is, what you can wish, to make you happy; and I do again invite you to Crown his unparalell'd Humility, with a bliss, he presumes not once to mention, lest it offend you; I have also a State Argument you understand not Theodocia, your two interests in this Dukedome, thus united, will make it flourish; —Lonzartes has been wrong'd. The: I know his wrong Sir, and have observ'd his sufferings, or I had never dallied with his love; Lonzartes's clear Soul is adorn'd with more glories, then this Crown will bring him. Duke. If then your hearts agree, give me your hands; —here Lon∣zartes is the best reward I have, to incourage modesty, and worth; whey they do in one heart combine, as now in thine. Lon: Great Sir, I am so much surprized, so over-loaden with my joyes, that I have nought but blushes to expresse my gratitude; —nor know I how to welcome this unlook'd for honour from the Princess, who dains to raise her humblest Servant from her feet, to set me on a Throne, incirculed with more joyes, then that you now restore me to. [He kisses her hand.] The: Keep still your Character Lonzartes, as I will mine, high trans∣ports in love, are not long liv'd, I fear. Lon: I shall be Madam, whatever you direct, though this unlook'd for happinesse, do raise my heart above my own command, for such an excess of joy, is hard to mannage. [Kisses her hand.] [Enter Lindamira to them.] Lin: I may now wish your Highness Joy I hope, now your Fanna∣tick love, conformes to the Law of Nations; —Now you may talk your pleasure against high passions Madam; —and methinks you Sir, do look as if you lik'd this better then that wise Sect of ayrie Lovers, whose Phylosophy doth teach, not to desire, what they can never reach. Lon: You are Madam the best Phylosopher I ever met, and do de∣serve to have a Golden statue in Loves-Temple set. Duke. But how have you disposed of your Fantastick couple? 'tis that great work, must Crown all your undertakings Lindamira. Lin: That goes on excellently well Sir, I have left them sitting on a Couch, with their hands still ixt, eagerly gazing on each others Eyes, as if through them, they could discern the inside of each others Hearts; by their no motion, and their stedy looks, I can foresee they vvill be of one mind suddainly. The: Why could not vve see this Experiment?
Lin: Oh Madam, my charm will not work in company; Lovers will seemingly dispise, what they like most, only to deceive observing Eyes; I believe they held off thus long, for shame to own what they had so publickly declar'd against; and to themselves will hardly dare to let their hearts appeare these two dayes; —they must look them∣selves into an Agreement, for no words can ever reconcile their first Principles. If their hands, do not their hearts discover, I'le no more pretend to charm a Lover. The: May we not peep at the hanging, and stand unseen. Duke. Let us not turn this serious work into a jest, unlesse Lindami∣mira do approve it; none shall stir that way. Lin: I can place you so, as you may see and hear too. The: Pray Sir be pleas'd to look on them, our Testimony may be of use. Duke. Come then. Lindam: Your Highness must stand silent, or you'l hinder my Pro∣jection. The: We will, we will. Exeunt. They all Re-enter behind the Couch, and stand on each side of the Stage; then is discover'd Pandora, and Clearcus holding hands, and sitting on a Couch, a while silent, looking on each other; then Clearcus proffers to kiss that hand he holds, she puts him back with her other hand, and turns her face from him, —He sighes: — Cle: Turn not away those beautious lights, have guided me to Heaven; nor look as if you were in pain, to see my heart thus chang'd, from a rude destraction, to an extasie of Bliss; from a deformed Satyr, with a confus'd Chaos of dark thoughts, and blacker actions, by your glorious Beauties, and brighter Virtues, new form'd into the Figure of a man, Emulating those Excellencies I admire in you: — Oh turn this way, and own what is your own Creation; by your perfections rais'd from what was worse then nothing, to something now, too worthy to be cast away; I should this happy hour believe my self were in Elizi∣um; did not this fair, soft Hand, and those bright Eyes assure me I yet live; from whence some divine instinct, teaches my rude nature to a∣dore, what I never understood before. Pan: I do not like to be thus long left alone, to be expos'd unto your passion, and the Worlds censure; Lindamira has deceiv'd my trust; — I now see your plot, and her design discover, but will no lon∣ger suffer the abuse. [Offers to rise.] Cle: Be not so cruel unto your self and me, think on the curse hangs over us, if we remove our hands 'till she return. Pan: 'Tis too much foolery, to give faith to! Cle: Remember we complied, to what she said; by which her words are Registr'd in Heaven, and have ingaged the Gods by our consent. Pan: 'Twas rashly done, and I repent; —when will this subtle
Sorceress return? my innocense will justifie my blind consent, to which I was misled by my fidelity and trust, and will no longer fear to take away my hand. [Offers to rise.] Cle: Oh take not your hand away, untill the holy Charm have recti∣fied your heart, and therein created so much Charity, as in a moment may remove your scorns, and teach you love; for I, who so long sligh∣ted your neglects, and fled all civil favours from your Sex, do now tremble at the thought of parting hands, untill our hearts like them, become united. Pan: Do you believe Lindamira Mistris of such Magick? that her words have power to reconcile dissenting hearts, like ours: Cle: Yes, I find them work on me, and hope the same effect on you, else why sit we here obeying those commands she left? why fear we to offend those powers she did invoke? —when you consider this, I hope you dare not stirre a finger towards such impiety! Pan: Though Lindamira's virtue be approv'd, I was surprized by her inticing words, and by the Duke compell'd to do, I know not what; —and therefore will no longer now obey. [Offers to rise; he holds her.] Cle: Stay, oh stay, and let the fatal curse strike me alone; my guilts have merrited what e're can fall on me; —Do but command me to remove my hand, and I'le obey; that you may see how much your power prevails, above my fear of Lindamira's threats: If so, I may di∣vert your harms: I will against my Nature, and my Faith, destroy all hopes of future bliss, to pull this ruine on my self, which else may light on you: —Say, must it be? [Pandora sits silent a while.] Pan: If I command your hands remove, and her curse should after follow you, my unblemish'd innocense may suffer more, then all your crimes can merrit: —I have no faith in charmes, nor cause to apprehend her curses can reach me, and yet— —My doubts and fears, my reason does dismay, I know not what to do, nor what to say; The Wonder is so great, I am afraid, Aside. Some god this Serpent, has an Angel made, And now indow'd him with Coelestial Art, To force obedience from my stubborn heart. Cle: 'Tis worthy your consult, before you do destroy a body and soule: here, a ready Sacrifice to set you free, for now I find that Lin∣damira's charm does higher work! And now again, that dazling light display, Which did my heart in flame the other day: Ye Gods, I do implore your power to move, Aside. The bright Pandora, to allow my love; 'Twill be the same, if now Clearcus dies, By Thunder struck, or by Pandora's Eyes!
Pan: Lindamira's virtue, and her wit, are much more powerfull, then her charms; —(which I contemn,) but you my Lord, have now by chance thrown out such words, I shake to think on; —Your body and your Soul, are now at stake, you say; —and by your looks I read, you think our Fortunes, and our Fates, depend on my reply; —and so do I; —this is then too great a work, for so few minutes to dispatch; we must look up Clearcus, and from above seek ayde! — 'Tis piety, when we our hearts submit, To undergo, what e're the Gods think fit. Cle: 'Tis so, let us hasten to the Temple then, there Celebrate: — [They rise up.] This happy issue of so strange contest, Wrought by the gods, must by the gods be blest. He kisses her hand, three or four times in joy. Cle: Where is this powerfull Sibell gone? whose Sacred Charms do dis-inchant fantastick hearts. Lin: I am here Sir, with witnesse enough, to hold Pandora to her word. Cle: Let me adore thy Divine virtue Lindamira? who hath shew'd such skill, to raise dead folks to life; for we were dead in follies, and are now become true converts Sir. Duke. This is great Newes, you are both well come to your Wits again, which does declare Lindamira a great Artist. The: What sayes Pandora for her self? Pan: I have both waies done too much, either to excuse, or justifie my self; silence becomes me Madam. Lin: Let the Clock strike twice, before we credit what they say, or else make all sure, by I Clearcus take thee Pandora, &c. Duke. Lindamira is my Oracle; —give me your hand Pandora, and yours Clearcus. May they most wretched live, and cursed dye, Who shall this knot endeavour to untye. The: My prayers concur with yours Sir, and now dear Cousin, what I wish'd is come to passe, that you and I might on the same day be Married: Thus for our good we see the Gods fulfill What they designe, though much against our will. Pan: Your great example Madam, is sufficiennt to lead me from all my own resolves to follow you, and if now Clearcus be reclaim'd, we must own all our happinesse to Lindamira's wit, who has conquer'd both, when neither of us could subdue the other; And now Clearcus I hope will seek occasions to shew the World by his own actions, the Noble stock he is descended from. Cle: By your permission Madam, I shall set my heart towards my Prince his, and my Countries Service; —I beg imployment Sir, on the next Gallies you send out, lest idlenesse corrupt my busie brain. Lin: Mark that Sir, he is allready wavering; Madam take heed, how you take the spirit of uncertainty, (in the habit of a man.)
Pan: You speak too late, the uncertain man is now my certain fate. Cle▪ Some diversions are necessary Madam, to look on the same objects ever, dulls, and tyres the best Eyes; but Lindamira can say no∣thing, I dare contradict. Duke. You shall command in Chief Clearcus, to shew the World, the vigour you have too long hid. Lon: Joyes on joyes, light on Clearcus head. They embrace. Cle: May those joyes be Multiplied on you Sir; my Redeemer, and now become my Prince. Duk. We must conclude this happy day Lindamira, by joyning Silvanders hand with yours, if your mirth will give us leave to be so serious. Lin: That is a serious jest Sir, I have long look'd for. Duk. Come near Silvander;—which of you two is most pleas'd now? Both. I sir. Duke. Who spoke first? Both. I Sir. Duke. This is a good Omen to a joyfull life; may you be both as happy, as ever love made any. Sil: We are happy to our wish Sir. Lin: He speaks for himself Sir, on hopes of more then he may find. Duke. Wee'l Celebrate these Weddings suddainly, and see that Lin∣damira's praise be in loud Hymenealls Sung through all the City, to in∣courage the like Virtuous, and Noble undertakings. Lin: I thank your Highnesse for your good opinion, but shall love you for this gift of my Silvander, above all your other favours; Now Silvander, Let us dwell Arme in Arme, and dayly show Our loves increase, that all the World may know Our hearts; Now the Fair Princess does confesse, That Wedlock may afford true Happinesse. EPILOGUE. LADIES, Our Author has so great Respect To your Fair Sex, he fears some grosse Defect In his best Characters, may prove so short, Of your perfections, he needs pardon for't. If such sad fate, do now attend his Play, In's Cloak, thus muffl'd, he will sneak away; But if you lik't, he will on tip-toe go, That all the World, may the proud Author know. FINIS.
