L1858 R2792 12960408 96072
LEX LONDINENSIS; OR, The City Law. Shewing the Powers, Customs and Practice Of all the several COURTS Belonging to the FAMOUS CITY OF LONDON: VIZ. The Lord Majors Court. The Orphans Court. The Court of Hustings. The Court of Common Councel. The Court of Aldermen. The Wardmotes. The Courts of Conservacy for the River of Thames. The Court of Conscience. The Sheriffs Court. The Chamberlains Court. TOGETHER With several Acts of Common Councel, very useful and necessary to be known by all Merchants, Citizens, and Freemen of the said City. And also, A Method for the Ministers within the said City to Recover their TITHES. With a TABLE to the whole Book. LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft for Henry Twyford in the Hall-Court of the Middle Temple. 1680.
THE PREFACE. THE City of London being the Metropolis of this Kingdom, hath had many large Priviledges and Immunities granted to it by the Favour and Munificence of the An∣cient Kings of England, and con∣tinued to this Day, which hath oc∣casioned the erecting and establish∣ing several Courts therein, the bet∣ter to dispence the benefit of the said Grants to the Citizens and Inhabi∣tants
of that City. And indeed, whosoever shall consider the said Priviledges, and the nature and Jurisdiction of the said several Courts, may conclude there is no∣thing left for the Citizens to desire, for the happy and good Government of that City, for the Advancement of the Trade thereof, and for the se∣curing every man's Property there∣in, which is not already granted to them, and which by the benefit of the said Courts, they may not en∣joy: Some of which Priviledges be∣long to all the Inhabitants; as the Recovery of their just Debts and De∣mands without travelling for the same out of the Liberties of the City, which may be done either in the Lord Major's Court or the She∣riffs Courts. The Enrolling of Deeds, Settling Estates, and Docking En∣tails by Recoveries of Houses and
Lands in the said Liberties, which are to be done in the Court of Hu∣stings. Other belong only to the Freemen of the said City; as the Preservation of the Estates of Or∣phans by the Court of Aldermen; the regulating all Matters of Dif∣ference between Masters and their Apprentices by the Chamberlain; the easie recovering of small Debts under forty shillings by the Court of Conscience; the choice of Officers and ordering of Parish Affairs by the Courts of Wardmotes, and the making of By-laws for rectifying a∣ny abuses, and for the well Govern∣ment of the City by the Court of Common Councel, and by the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen. And that nothing may be wanting which may any way conduce or tend to the welfare and convenience of this Ci∣ty, the Government of that famous,
pleasant, and profitable River of Thames upon one side whereof it is situated, is granted to the said City, and managed by the Lord Major at his Courts of Conservacy for the said River. As the benefit of these several Courts are very great, so the know∣ledge of the practice and usage of them must needs be very desirable to the Citizens and Inhabitants, there being very few, but at some time or other, must necessarily be cencerned in some, if not most of them. There hath been several times printed a Tract, called The City Law, which treats of some of these Courts: But there being many O∣missions and Defects therein, this Discourse hath not only supplyed the same, but also rectified the mistakes therein; shewing at large the Pow∣ers, Authorities, Customs, and Ʋ∣sages
of all the above-mentioned Courts, as well to the Delight and Pleasure, as to the Profit and Bene∣fit of the Reader. In this Treatise are inserted se∣veral Acts of Common Councel, all of them so necessary, or at least expedient to be known, that this Discourse would hardly be compleat without them. This whole Work being Composed and Digested for the Publick good and benefit, it is hoped it may meet with a favourable and candid Re∣ception, and that the Reader will pardon the Faults and Errata's of the Printer.
THE LAW and PRACTICE Of the several COURTS Belonging to the Famous City OF LONDON. Of the Lord Majors Court. THE Lord Majors Court, com∣monly called the Majors Court in London, is a Court of Record, and is held in the Chamber of the Guildhall. The Recorder of the City of London for the time being, is Judge of
this Court; but the Lord Major and Alder∣men may st as Judges with him if they please: This Court being held by Custome, and all the Proceedings are said to be before the Major and Aldermen. The Sheriffs of London may in like manner sit with the Judges of the Sheriffs Court: The Proceed∣ings in that Court being also said to be held before the Sheriffs respectively. In this Court all manner of Actions may be entered and tried by a Jury as in other Court, for any Debt, Trespass, or other matter whatsoever arising within the Liber∣ties of London, and to any value whatsoever, and is not a Court of Equity only, as many Citizens suppose, and to this day believe. There is only four Attorneys belonging to this Court, who upon their admission by the Court of Aldermen, take the Oath follow∣ing. The Oath of an Attorney of the Majors Court. YOU shall swear that you shall well and lawfully do your Office of At∣torney, and well and lawfully examine your Clients and their quarrels, with∣out Champerty and without procuring of any Iuries or any Enquests embra∣cing. And that you shall change on quarrel out of its nature after your un∣derstanding. Also you shall plead ne
ley, nor suffer to be pleaded or leyed by your assent, no forreign Release, Acquit∣tance, Payment, Arbitration, plain Accompt whatsoever it be to put the Court out of its Iurisdiction, nor none other matter, but it be such as you shall find rightful and true by the informati∣on of your Clients, whose information and saying upon your Oath and Consci∣ence you shall believe to be true. And you shall not inform ne inforce any man to sue falsly against any persons by false or forged Actions. Attendant ye shall be upon the Major of the said Ci∣ty for the time being, and ready ye shall be at all times to come at the warning of the said Major, but if ye be letted a∣bout the Business of the said City, or by some other reasonable cause. Ye shall not deliver any Book or any manner of Copy to any person of any thing that toucheth the Liberty of this City with∣out licence and oversight of the Major, Recorder, and Town-Clerk of this Ci∣ty for the time being, or of two of them, or shew to any person any Book con∣cerning the Customs of the said City, nor suffer any Person to look upon any such Book of Customes at any time, saving only the Councel of this City, but that ye shall keep the same Books secret among your selves. The secrets of this Court ye shall keep, and not dis∣close any thing there spoken for the Com∣mon
weal of the said City that might hurt any Person or Brother of the said Court, unless it be spoken to his said Brother, or to other which in his Con∣science or Discretion he shall think it to be for the Common weal of this City. And that well and lawfully ye shall do all such things that to the Office of At∣torney pertaineth to do, as God you help. The manner of entring Actions in this Court is different from the Sheriffs Court: For you cannot enter an Action in this Court at either of the Compters, but must go to one of the four Attorneys, and enter your Action with him; and if it be an Action of Debt it must be entered thus; R. B. Defend' versus G. W. Quer' in pl'ito deb'ti super demand' leg'lis, &c. Pleg' &c. If in Case, In pl'ito transgr' super cam' dam' leg'lis, &c. Pleg' &c. If in Trespass, In pl'ito transgr' dam' leg'lis, &c. Pleg' &c. If for Account, In pl'ito quod reddat ei computum super re∣ceptor' diversor' bon' & merchandiz' ipsius Quer' ad valenc' leg'lis &c. Pleg' &c.
If for Covenants broken, In pl'ito convention' fract' damn' le∣g'lis &c. Pleg' &c. If in Debt at the Chamberlains Suit, J. F. Defend' versus T. P. Mil' Camerar' Civitatis London Quer' in pl'ito deb'ti super dem' leg'lis &c. Pleg' &c. If in Debt upon a Penal Statute, R. G. Defend' versus W. B. Qui tam pro Domino Rege quam pro seipso in hac parte sequi∣tur in pl'ito deb'ti super dem' leg'lis &c. Pleg' &c. When your Action is thus entered by the Attorney or his Clerk, you must not imploy any of the Sheriffs Officers to Arrest the Defendant, but give your Action or a Note thereof to one of the Serjeants at Mace be∣longing to the Major and Aldermen. There is six Serjeants belonging to this Court, who are men of good Estates, and do not belong to either of the Sheriffs. Most of them attend daily at the Attorneys Offices, and one of them is constantly attending at the Lord Majors House. If you give any of them a Note of your Action, he will Arrest the Defendant, and in case such Defendant cannot find Bayl, the Officer will carry him to one of the Compters, that being the Prison as well for this Court as the Sheriffs Court, which Imprisonment and the Cause thereof is constantly Recorded in a Publick Book, called the Book of Impri by the At∣torney
that entred the Action: But if the Party arrested find Bayl, the eldest of the four Attorneys must take the same, he being Clerk of the Bayls; and in Case he shall take in sufficient Bayl, and the Defendant do ab∣scond, the Plaintiff may, after he hath a Judgment for his Debt or Damages, compel the Clerk of the Bails to pay the same Debt or Damages, by Petition to the Court of Aldermen, or to Mr. Recorder. An Action entered in this Court will re∣main in force for ever, although no pro∣ceedings be had thereupon; whereas an A∣ction entered at either of the Compters dies, and may be crossed after sixteen weeks. And the Charge of entering an Action in this Court is but 4 d. besides the King's Duty. An Action commenced in this Court may be brought to a Trial for 30 s. Charge, and in fourteen days time, whereas in the Sheriffs Court they require more time, and much more money, as those that have had occasi∣on know by experience. If there happen to be six weeks time be∣tween the putting in Bayl to an Action in this Court, and the time of the Defendants Plea, in such Case the Defendant cannot re∣move the same Action or Suit into any other Court. Note.That an Action commenced in this Court, cannot be removed into the Sheriffs Court; but an Action commenced in the Sheriffs Court may be removed into this Court, ei∣ther by the Plaintiff or Defendant, at any
time before a Jury is sworn to try the Cause. The manner of removing such Action is set forth hereafter. If any man that is not a Freeman of London keep any Shop, inward or outward, within the City or Liberty, for the Sale of any Goods or Wares by Retail, he forfeits 5 l. for every day, and an Action of Debt lies against him for the same in this Court, in the Name of the Chamberlain of London for the time being, pursuant to an Act of Common Councel made in the-Majoralty of Sir Leonard Halliday Knight, which Act is as followeth: WHere by the ancient Charters, Customs, Franchises, and Liber∣ties of the City of London, confirmed by sundry Acts of Parliament, no person not being free of the City of London, may or ought to sell, or put to sale any Wares or Merchandizes within the said City, or the Liberties of the same, by Retail, or keep any open or inward Shop, or other inward place or room for shew, sale, or putting to sale, of any wares or merchandizing, or for use of any Art, Trade, or Occupation, My∣stery, or Handicraft within the same. And whereas also Edward, sometime King of England, of famous memory, the third of that name, by his Charter made and granted to the said City in the Fifteenth year of his Reign, confirmed
also by Parliament amongst other things granted, That if any customs in the said City, before that time obtained and used, were in any part hard or de∣fective, or any thing in the same City newly arising, where remedy before that time was not ordained, should need a∣mendment, the Major and Aldermen of the said City, and their Successors, with the assent of the Commonalty of the same City, might put and ordain thereunto fit remedy as often as that should seem expedient unto them; So that such Ordinance should be profitable to the King, for the profit of the Citi∣zens, and other his People repairing to the said City, and agreeable to reason; And whereas by force of the said Cu∣stoms, Franchises and Liberties, and of the Charter last aforementioned, confirm∣ed as is afore specified by Parliament, The Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mons of the said City, did the twelfth day of October, in the third year of the Reign of Edward, sometime King of England, the fourth, as a thing thought fit and convenient for that time, amongst other things, agree and ordain that the Basket-makers, Goldwire-drawers, and o∣ther Forreigners, contrary to the Li∣berty of the said City, holding open Shops in divers places of the City, and using Mysteries within the said City, should not from thenceforth hold Shops
within the Liberty of the City aforesaid; But if they would hold any Shop, or dwell in the same City, they should dwell at Blanchappleton, and there hold Shops, so as they might have sufficient dwel∣ling there. And whereas the Lord Ma∣jor, Aldermen, and Commons of the same City, did afterwards, the Six∣teenth day of May, in the Seventeenth year of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord of famous memory, King Henry the Eighth (as a course thought fit and agreeable for that time) Ordain, esta∣blish, and enact that no manner of person or persons being estrange from the liber∣ties of the said City, from thenceforth should hold or keep any open Shop or Shops within the said City, or Liber∣ties of the same, neither with any Lattice before, nor yet without Lattice (certain numbers of poor men occupying the Seat of Botchers, Tailors, and Cob∣lers only except) upon pain of Imprison∣ment, and also to forfeit and pay Forty shillings to the use of the Commonalty of this City, as often times as he or they should do the contrary. And where also the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the same City did afterwards, the Twentieth day of January, in the said Seventeenth year of King Henry the Eighth (reci∣ting, that whereas a Common Councel holden the Sixteenth day of May, in the
Seventeenth year of the Reign of King Henry the Eeighth, It was ordained and enacted, That no manner of person or persons, being estrange from the Li∣berties of this City, from thenceforth should hold or keep any Shop or Shops within this City, or the Liberties of the same, neither with any Lattices be∣fore, nor yet without any Lattice, upon pain of Imprisonment) further or∣dain and establish, That if any person or persons, being Forreign, should hold and keep any open Shop or Shops, as is aforesaid, he should forfeit for eve∣ry time so doing Forty shillings, to be levied by distress, to the use of the Com∣monalty of the said City, by the Cham∣berlin for the time being, or other Offi∣cer of this City; And also have Impri∣sonment by direction of the Major and Aldermen for the time being. Now for∣asmuch as divers and sundry Stran∣gers and Forreigners from the Liber∣ties of the said City, nothing regarding the said ancient Charters, Franchises, Customs, or Liberties of the said City, and Acts and Ordinances heretofore made according to the same, but wholly intending their private profit, have of late years devised and practised by sini∣ster and subtil means, how to defraud and defeat the said Charters, Liberties, Customs, good Grders and Ordinances, and to that end do now inwardly in pri∣vy
and secret places, usually and ordi∣narily shew, sell, and put to sale their Wares and Merchandizes, and use Arts, Trade, Occupation, Mysteries and Handicrafts within the said City and Liberties of the same, to the great de∣triment and hurt of the Freemen of the said City, who pay lot and scot, bear Offices, and undergo other Charges, which Strangers and others not Free are not chargeable withal, nor will per∣form; For reformation of which disor∣ders, and avoiding of such prejudice and damages as thereby groweth to the Freemen of the said City, and is now more of late used then was in any time heretofore suffered, and to provide for the common profit and good of the Free∣men and Citizens of this City; It is therefore by the Lord Major and Alder∣men and Commons in this Common Councel assembled, ordained and esta∣blished that no person whatsoever, not being Free of this City of London, shall at any time after the Feast of St. Micha∣el now next ensuing, by any colour, way, or means whatsoever, either directly or indirectly, by himself or by any other, shew, sell, or put to sale any Wares or Merchandizes whatsoever, by Retail within the City of London, or the Liber∣ties or Suburbs of the same, upon pain to forfeit to the Chamberlin of the City of London for the time being, to the use
of the Major and Commonalty of the said City, the sum of five pounds of lawful money of England, for every time wherein such person shall shew, sell, or put to sale any Wares or Merchandi∣zes by Retail within the said City, Li∣berties, or Suburbs thereof, contrary to the true intent and meaning thereof. And it is further ordained and establish∣ed, That no person whatsoever, not be∣ing free of the City of London, shall at any time after the said Feast of St. Mi∣chael now next ensuing by any colour, way, or means whatsoever, directly or indirectly, by himself or by any other, keep any Shop, or other place whatso∣ever, inward or outward, for shew, sale, or putting to sale of any Wares or Mer∣chandizes whatsoever, by way of Re∣tail, or use any Art, Trade, Occupati∣on, Mystery, or Handicraft whatsoever, within the said City, or the Liberties or Suburbs of the same, upon pain to forfeit the sum of Five pounds of law∣ful money of England, for every time wherein such persons shall keep any Shop, or other place whatsoever, in∣ward or outward, for shew, sale, or putting to sale of any Wares or Mer∣chandizes whatsoever by way of Re∣tail, or use any Art, Trade, Occupati∣on, Mystery, or Handicraft whatsoever, within the said City or Liberty, or Su∣burbs of the same, contrary to the true
intent and meaning hereof. All which pains, penalties, forfeitures, and sums of money to be forfeited by virtue of this Act or Ordinance, shall be record∣ed by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, to be prosecuted in the name of the Cham∣berlin of the City of London for the time being, in the Kings Majesties Court to be holden in the Chamber of the Guild∣hall of the City of London, before the Lord Major and Aldermen of the said City, wherein no essoin or wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed for the Defendants. And that the Cham∣berlin of the City for the time being, shall in all Suits to be prosecuted by virtue of this Act or Ordinance against any Offender, recover the ordinary Costs of Suit to be expended in and about the prosecution thereof; And further, that one equal third part of all Forfeitures to be recovered by virtue hereof, (The costs of the Suits for recovery of the same, being deducted and avowed) shall be after the recovery and receipt there∣of, paid and delivered to the Treasurer of Christ's Hospital, to be imployed to∣wards the relief of the poor Children, to be brought up and maintained in the said Hospital, and one other equal third part to him or them which shall first give Information of the Offences for which such Forfeitures shall grow, and prose∣cute Suit in the name of the Chamber∣lin
of the said City for recovery of the same, any thing in this Act to the con∣trary notwithstanding. Provided al∣ways that this Act or Ordinance, or any thing herein contained shall not extend to any person or persons for bringing or causing to be brought, any Victual to be sold within this City, or the Liberties thereof, but that they and every of them, may sell Victual within the said City, and the Liberties thereof, as they might lawfully have done at the making here∣of, any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. If a Freeman of London shall imploy a Forreigner to work within the City or Li∣berties, he forfeits 5 l. a day; and an Acti∣on lies against him for the same. In like manner, pursuant to an Act of Common Councel made in the Majoralty of Sir Wil∣liam Garrard Knight, which Act is as follow∣eth:
Commune Concilium tent' pri∣mo die Augusti Annis Philippi Mariae tertio & quarto Co∣ram Willielmo Garrard Mil' Major, &c. WHere by the ancient laudable Laws, Liberties, and Franchi∣ses of this Noble City of London, no per∣son or persons should be willingly suf∣fered to exercise, use, or occupy any Ma∣nual Occupation or Handicraft within the said City or Liberties thereof, un∣less he or they were free of the same Ci∣ty, or Apprentice or Apprentices with some that be free of the same City, the which said ancient Laws, Franchises, and Liberties, notwithstanding divers Artificers and Handy-crafts-men being Freemen of this City, not regarding or esteeming the said Laws, Liberties, Customs, and Franchises, nor the Oath that they have taken to the said City at such time as they were made Free, so the maintenance and advancement of the same City, have now of late not only willingly suffered, hired, and set on work within the said City and Liberties thereof divers Forreigners, from the Liberties of the same City, in divers
and sundry Handycraft and Manual Occupations, but also have refused to take and set a work in the said Manual Occupations or Handycrafts the honest poor Citizens and Freemen of the same City, to the great hindrance, loss, and prejudice of the said poor Citizens, and to the utter undoing of a great num∣ber of the said poor Handycrafts-men, being Citizens and Freemen of the said City, and also of their poor Wives and Children for ever, unless some speedy remedy be herein provided. For refor∣mation whereof, be it enacted, ordained, and established by the Lord Major, Al∣dermen, and Commons in this present Common Councel assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no person or persons, now being Free of this Ci∣ty of London, or that hereafter shall be Free of the same, shall after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel now next coming, by any colour, ways, or means set at work in any Manual Occupati∣on or Handycraft within the said City, the Liberties or Suburbs thereof, any manner of Forreigner from the Liber∣ties of the said City, upon pain of for∣feiture of Five pounds of currant Mo∣ney of England for every time that every such person or persons shall offend or commit or do any thing contrary to the purport, true intent and meaning of this present Act.
All and singular which Penalties and Forfeitures above, and by this present Act limited and appointed, shall be divi∣ded into three equal parts, whereof the one to the use of the Major and Com∣monalty and Citizens of the said City for the time being, and one other part thereof to be to those of the first presenters of the same Offence, and the third part thereof to be to those of the Company or Fellowship, that every such Offenders shall be free of; and that all and every such Penalty and Penalties and Forfeitures shall be recovered, as well upon the proper confession of the same Offence made by the same Offen∣der or Offenders themselves before the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen for the time being, as also upon good and sufficient proof thereof to be made by the Witnesses before the said Lord Major and Court of Aldermen for the time be∣ing, or by Bill or Plaint of Debt to be commenced by any such Informer or Presenter in any of the King & Queens Majesties Courts of Record within the said City, in the name of the Chamber∣lin of the said City for the time being, wherein no essoin or wager of Law shall be admitted or allowed for the party Defendant. And be it also enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it be law∣ful for the said Lord Major and Alder∣men of the said City for the time being,
upon every confession or proof of any such Offence aforesaid before them made, or sufficiently proved, to commit every such Offender or Offenders to Ward, there to remain without Bail or Main∣prise, until he or they have fully satis∣fied or paid the said Forfeiture or For∣feitures and Penalties, to the uses a∣foresaid. Provided always, that this Act of Common Councel, or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to be prejudicial or hurtful to the Masters or Governors of Christ's Hospi∣tal and Bridewell, or to any other of the Hospitals belonging to the said City for the time being, or to any of them, for the setting at work either Strangers or Forreigners within the said Houses, or any of them, neither to the said Strangers or Forreigners that shall so happen to work therein, nor to any of them, neither to any Freeman or Wo∣man of the same City, for having or setting a work any Apprentice or Ap∣prentices at any time hereafter, in any Manual Occupation or Handycraft, within the said City, nor to any such Apprentice or Apprentices that shall so serve, that his or their Indenture of Apprenticehood be Inrolled in the Chamberlins Office of the said City, according to the ancient Customs of the same City in that behalf used and observed. Provided also, that this pre∣sent
Act, or any thing therein contain∣ed, shall not extend, or be prejudicial or hurtful to any person or persons now being, or that hereafter shall be Free of the said City, for setting a-work at any time or times, any person or per∣sons being Feltmakers, Capthickers, Carders, Spinners, Knitters, or Brewers, or to any person that now keepeth, or hereafter shall keep any Brewhouse within the said City, or the Liberties thereof, for working or using any of the said Crafts or Occupations within the same City, or within the Li∣berties or Suburbs thereof, this pre∣sent Act, or any thing therein contained to the contrary in any wise notwith∣standing. ATTACHMENTS. AN Attachment made in this Court will continue in force for ever; so that the Plaintiff may proceed thereon at his pleasure: Whereas an Attachment made by any of the Sheriffs Officers is not in force longer than sixteen weeks All Attachments are grounded upon A∣ctions of Debt, and the manner of enter∣ing Attachments is the same as is before∣mentioned for Actions: And one of the six Officers belonging to this Court must be im∣ployed to make the same.
The Advantages of making Attach∣ments in this Court are conside∣rable. FIrst, An Attachment for moneys may be made and condemned in this Court in 5 days time, if by consent, or if no opposition shall be made; and if it be in the Plaintiffs own hands, may be finished for 10 s. charge, the Officers Fees included: And if in a third persons hands, may be condemned for 15 s. charge, the Officers Fees included: Where∣as in the Sheriffs Court an Attachment cannot be made and condemned under three weeks time, or thereabouts, although by consent; and the charge is usually above a third part more than is demanded or taken in this Court for condemning an Attcah∣ment. Secondly, If B. Attaches the Moneys or Goods of W. in the hands of F. in this Court, and if F. have no Moneys nor Goods in his hands belonging to W. at the time when the Attachment shall be made; and it shall happen that six Months after F. shall become indebted to W. or have Goods in his hands belonging to W. the Plaintiff, by virtue of the Attachment made as aforesaid, shall re∣cover the Money or Goods he shall prove came to te hands of F. after the Attach∣ment made. The General Issue upon all
Attachments being, whether F. who is cal∣led the Garnishoe, at the time of the At∣tachment made, or at any time after, had any Moneys or Goods of W. in his hands. Thirdly, An Attachment made in this Court must be there tried, and cannot be removed nor tried in any other Court; whereas an At∣tachment made in the Sheriffs Court may at any time, before trial, be removed into this Court by a Warrant signed by the Lord Major or Recorder; which Warrant is cal∣led a Levetur Querela, the charge whereof is 5 s. 10 d. and is made in this Form: Levetur Querel' inter W. B. Quer' & G. R. De∣fend' & Attach' superindo fact' in manibus P. W. praemon' in pl'ito &c. If it be an Action only to be removed, the Warrant must be made thus; Levetur Querel' inter C. F. Quer' & J. W. Defend' in pl'ito &c. The Levetur Querela must be written by an Attorney of this Court, for which he re∣ceiveth 4 d. and for his Fee 1 s. 8 d. and then must be delivered to one of the six Officers before mentioned to procure my Lord Major or the Recorder to sign the same, for which 4 d. is due to his Lordship, and is constantly paid. And after the Warrant is signed, the Officer must carry it to the Clerk of the Papers belonging to the Compter, where the Action was entered, and give him 2 s. 6 d. to allow the same Levetur, and to certifie the Action or Attachment, and the Officer for his pains hath 1 s. and so the 5 s. 10 d is distributed.
Fourthly, An Attachment may be tried in this Court for 30 s. although the Concern be 500 l. But by reason of new Devices of Continuances in the Sheriffs Court, the charge of a Trial there comes to much more. The Court of Common Councel in Lon∣don took notice thereof, and in the Year 1669. in the Majoralty of Sir Richard Ford, made an Act, Intituled, An Act for the better regulating of the Courts of Law in the Guild∣hall, London. Which Act, amongst other matters therein contained, is as follow∣eth: BE it enacted, ordained, and establish∣ed by the Right Honourable the Lord Major, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Com∣mons in this Common-councel assem∣bled, and by the Authority of the same, That no person or persons be at any time hereafter admitted into any the Places or Offices of Secondaries of the Comp∣ters, Clerks or Attorneys in the Ma∣jors Court, Clerk of the Papers, Clerk Sitters, Attorneys in the Sheriffs Courts of this City, Sergeants or Yeo∣men of the Compters, but that he or they do first take his or their Freedom of this City, according to former Acts and Orders of Common-councel.
And forasmuch as it is observed that the Clerks and Attorneys of the Ma∣jors and Sheriffs Courts of this City do breed and bring up under them a multitude of young Clerks, taking with them considerable Sums of Mo∣ney, but for shorter terms than hath been accustomed within this City, And the Attorneys, Clerks, and Officers of and belonging to the Sheriffs of Lon∣don, and the Sheriffs Courts, do often tender themselves to the Defendants Arrested in the Sheriffs Courts, to be∣come their Bail, whereby in case of the Defendants absenting himself, all pos∣sible means are used to delay and dis∣appoint the Plaintiffs in their just Suits, to their great wrong and abuse of Iustice; Be it therefore ordained, enacted, and established by the said Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in this Common-councel assembled, an by the Authority of the same, That n person or persons whatsoever be hence∣forth at any time admitted, or capable to be admitted, a Clerk or Attorney in one of the Courts of this City, before he or they shall, bona fide, have served some Master-Clerk or Attorney in one of the Courts of this City, as a Clerk, the full term of seven years; And that every or any Grant or Admission that shall happen at any time hereafter to be made, contrary to this Act, shall
be null and void, as if it never had been made, and that no Attorney, Clerk, or Officer, of or belonging to the Ma∣jors Court, or Sheriffs, or their Clerks or Servants, nor any of them, do, or shall at any time from and after the Twenty third day of October instant, presume to become Bail for any person or persons whatsoever, in any Action, Attachment, or other Suit or Cause whatsoever that shall be entered, com∣menced, or depending in the Majors Court, or Sheriffs Courts, and that neither the Clerk of the Bails in the Majors Court, nor Clerk of the Pa∣pers, nor Clerk-sitters of the said She∣riffs Courts, nor any of them, nor their, nor any of their Clerks or Servants, nor any other whose Duty it is to take the Bails, do presume from and after the said Twenty third day of October, to take, accept, and enter upon Record any of the said Attorneys, Clerks, or Officers, or any of their Clerks or Ser∣vants, for the Bail of any person or persons whatsoever. And to the end that the said City Courts, as well the Majors as the Sheriffs Courts, may be supplied from time to time, with a∣ble and sufficient Iury-men, be it further ordeined and enacted by the said Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common-councel assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no
person or persons whatsoever be at any time hereafter returned by any In∣quests of the Wards of this City, to serve as Iury-man or Iury-men, either Grand or Petty, in the Courts of this City, but such men as either have been, or for time to come shall be Sub∣sidy men, and so taxed in the King's Books; or in Default thereof, such o∣ther discreet and sufficient persons as shall be equal in Quality and Estate with them, and that the Issues, upon default of Iury-men Appearances, be constantly levied, and duly and truly answered. And whereas the said Court, called the Lord Majors Court, is an ancient Court of Record, wherein Causes both of Law and Equity, and also Attach∣ments, are determinable, and the same Court is Superiour to the Sheriffs Court, and whereas also the Lord Major for the time being, of ancient Custom and constant Practice, hath and have, whereof the memory of man is not to the contrary, ever had Power and Authority, by his Warrant called Le∣vetur Querela, to remove Causes from and out of the Sheriffs Court into the Lord Majors Court, without any re∣striction or limitation of time, so as the same Levetur he brought before the Iu∣ry, or any of them (summoned for tri∣al of such Cause or Causes) shall be
sworn; and whereas of very late time such Levetur hath been often disallowed, contrary to the said ancient usage, and in contempt of the said Majors Court, upon several new pretences never heard of till of late time, whereby Clients are necessitated (where they have cause to appeal to Equity) to remove their Suits out of London, whereas they might otherwise be relieved in the Lord Majors Court with far less Charge and greater Expedition. For remedies whereof it is ordained, enacted, and established by the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in this Common-councel assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That at all times hereafter the said Warrant of Levetur Querela, under the Hand of the Lord Major, or Recorder of the City of London for the time being, for removing of any Plaint, Attachment, or other cause or causes levied or depending in either of the Sheriffs Courts of this City into the Majors Court (being brought by a Serjeant at Mace and Minister of the Majors Court, to the said Sheriffs Court, either at the Guild∣hall or Compter, at any time before the Iury or any of them shall be sworn for Trial of such Cause or Causes) shall be presently obeyed and allowed of. And that neither the Iudge, nor any Clerk or Officer of either of the said Sheriffs
Courts, do at any time hereafter pre∣sume to reject or disallow of any such Levetur Querela so brought or tendered unto him or them, upon any pretence whatsoever, other than in case of a fur∣ther Order or Warrant under the hand of the Lord Major, or Recorder for the time being, in that behalf first had and obtained, as anciently hath been used and accustomed; And to prevent the daily inconveniences happening in Suit now depending, or hereafter to be de∣pending in the Courts of the said She∣riffs, by reason of the great delays they meet with there, by putting off of Causes, under pretence of continuan∣ces entered by the Attorneys on both sides, for the most part at the very time they should be Tried, without the con∣sent of the Parties Clients, contrary to the ancient practice and usage of the said Courts, whereby the Clients is delayed, Witnesses and Iurymen dis∣couraged by frequent and fruitless at∣tendances, to the intolerable expence of the Suitors: For the preventing hereof for the future, Be it enacted by the said Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common-councel assembled, and by Authority of the same, That no Cause or Causes, in either of the Sheriffs Court, be at any time hereafter, from and after Issue joyned, put off from Trial by pretence
of any such Continuances entered, or hereafter to be entered, by consent of the Attorneys on either part, but upon motion thereof first made in open Court, and for some just and reasonable Cause to be shewed and allowed upon Oath before the Iudge of the same Court, and upon payment of such Costs to the Par∣ty thereby delayed, as the Court shall see cause to tax and allow; And that no Clerk do henceforth presume to enter any Continuance in any Cause summoned for Trial, without the special order and direction of the Iudge of the Court in that behalf first had as aforesaid; And that no Fee be henceforth demanded, ta∣ken, or allowed by, or to any of the At∣torneys of the Sheriffs Courts afore∣said, for, or in respect of the putting off of any Trial under the pretence of such Continuance entered, or hereafter to be entered as aforesaid, upon pain that e∣very Attorney so demanding, taking, or receiving, shall for every such Of∣fence, for the first time, forfeit the Sum of Five pounds, and for the second to be finally discharged of and from his place of Attorney in the said Sheriffs Courts. And to prevent the great mischiefs now daily growing and encreasing in the said Sheriffs Courts, by excessive Costs taxed upon Iudgments there gi∣ven by the consent for the most part of the Attorneys of both sides, contrary to the
usuage of all former Ages; Be it ena∣cted by the said Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in this Common Coun∣cel assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That no Bill of Costs, ex∣ceeding the sum of Four and twenty shillings, for the Trial of a Grand Iu∣ry Cause, or exceeding the sum of Twen∣ty two shillings for the Trial of a Petty Iury Cause, shall at any time hereafter charge the Client of either side; Never∣theless it shall and may be lawful for the Iudges of the said Courts respectively, for good and reasonable cause shewed to them respectively, by the parties of ei∣ther side upon due examination of the circumstances of the Case (in the pre∣sence of both parties) to encrease the said costs of Suit by their discretions, by a special Rule of Court to be enter∣ed for that purpose, expressing the cause why such costs are so increased. And upon complaint made by any person of greater charges then as aforesaid, and producing the Bill under the Attorneys hand, or other Witness, that the respe∣ctive Iudges of the same Court punish the Offender, and relieve the party grieved, according to their good discreti∣ons and the Rules aforesaid. And that no Officer of either of the said Courts shall presume to make out Execution upon any Iudgment wherein the costs of Suit shall exceed the sums aforesaid
respectively, without such special Rule as aforesaid to warrant the same, on pain to forfeit for his first Offence Five pounds to the relief of the Prisoners of that Compter wherein the Action shall be entered; and for the second default to be expelled the Court for ever. And to prevent the daily abuse of the Serjeants and Yeomen of the Sheriffs, sometimes in permitting persons Ar∣rested by them to go at large without Bail, sometimes in keeping them in Alehouses, or some other private pla∣ces, and not returning the Process in due time, (by which the parties were Arrested) so that the Plaintiff is de∣laied, and the Prisoner by the extorsion of the said Serjeants and Yeomen of∣tentimes put to a greater expence than will discharge the original cause of A∣ction, and sometimes by discharging persons by them duly Arrested, with∣out causing the Actions wherein they were so Arrested to be withdrawn, al∣though they take Money from the Defendant sufficient to do the same with; and sometimes in not duly returning Executions by them execu∣ted, or by discharging persons taken in Execution before satisfaction be en∣tered upon Record, whereby the said persons are oftentimes doubly charged for the same Debt; Be it therefore en∣acted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Serjeants and Yeomen of the said Sheriffs, and every of them, shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, make due return into the said Sheriffs Courts of all the Precepts of the said Courts to them to be directed at the next Court after the Execution of the same Precepts, and that all persons by them to be Arrested by virtue of the said Pre∣cepts, or any of them, shall be either delivered upon good and sufficient Bail, or in default thereof by him or them, committed to some of the persons with∣in the said City, at or before the next Court to be holden after such Arrest so to be made, to the end the party Plain∣tiff may proceed in his Action according to Law, and that none of the said Offi∣cers presume to discharge any person or persons by him Arrested after agree∣ments made between the parties, till such time as the said Officer shall have caused either the Action to be withdrawn or satisfaction to be acknowledged on Record, as the case shall require: And if any of the said Officers shall hereaf∣ter offend in any of the Cases aforesaid, and shall be thereof convicted by Exa∣mination of the Iudge in open Court upon complaint of the parties grieved, or in default thereof by any other who shall inform the same, that then, and in every such case, the Officer or Officers so offending shall for the first offence be by
the said Iudge forthwith committed to the Compter, there to remain till he shall have paid down the sum of Five pounds, the one Moiety to the party grieved, or in default of Information to be given by him or them as aforesaid, then to such other person or persons who shall in∣form the same to the said Court, over and besides such remedy as the said party grieved may have, by his or their Acti∣ons at Law, against the said Officers, or any of them, for any of the Defaults aforesaid; and the other Moyety to the relief of the poor Prisoners in such of the said Compters wherein the said cause is or shall be entered; And if any of the said Officers, after he or they shall have been once convicted of any of the Offen∣ces aforesaid, shall presume to offend in any of the said Cases the second time, and be thereof convicted as aforesaid, That then and in every such Case the said Offender, over and above all other penalties herein above limited and ap∣pointed, shall be ipso facto absolutely discharged from his said Office and the Sheriffs of the City for the time being, are hereby impowred and required to nominate and present to the Court of Aldermen, some other fitting persons to be by them admitted in his or their places, as if the persons so offending and convicted as aforesaid, were natu∣rally dead.
Provided always, that no Informer shall be intituled to the moiety of the said Five pounds, unless the said Of∣fender shall be convicted by the evidence of one or more persons indifferent and unconcerned to the profit or prejudice coming by the default of the said Offi∣cer. Ever since the making of this Act, my Lord Major's Warrant for removing Causes out of the Sheriffs Court into this Court hath been obeyed; but as for the other mat∣ters, they are not observed by the Attorneys in the Sheriffs Court, which is the reason of the great Charge Plaintiffs and Defendants are compelled to pay to try Causes in that Court. In all Attachments the person whose Mo∣neys or Goods is attached is called the De∣fendant in the Attachment; and the person in whose hands the Attachment is made, is called the Garnishee. And if the Plaintiff in the Attachment shall obtain a Verdict and Judgment for the Moneys or Goods at∣tached in the Garnishees hands; yet the Defendant in the Attachment may at any time before satisfaction acknowledged upon Record, put in Bail to the Plaintiffs Action, upon which the Attachment is grounded, and thereby discharge the Judgment and all the Proceedings against the Garnishee; and although the Garnishee be taken in Execut∣on
upon any such Judgment; yet if Bail shall be put in by the Defendant in manner as aforesaid, before the Money shall be paid, the Garnishee will be immediately discharg∣ed. If an Attachment shall be made for Goods only, and the Garnishee plead he had no Goods in his hands at the time of the At∣tachment, or at any time after, and the Plaintiff prove the Goods attached, or any part of them, in his hands, the Jury in such case must find for the Plaintiff, and say what Goods they find in the Garnishees hand, whereupon Judgment must be entered as followeth: Ideo considerat' est quod fiat appre∣tiatio. And thereupon a Precept must be made, and directed to one of the Officers of this Court, to appraise the same Goods; and if the Garnishee shall not produce them, the Officer must return an Elongavit, which is that the Garnishee hath conveyed the Goods out of the Liberties of this Ci∣ty. The next Court-day for Trials after such return made, a Jury must be sworn to en∣quire of the value of the Goods found by the former Jury to be in the Garnishees hands, and Judgment must be entered for the value, according to the Verdict of such Jury. Note.That upon Attachments no Costs are allowed to either party, let the Verdict be for or against the Plaintiff.
The day for Trials in this Court is every Tuesday, but every day is a Court for enter∣ing Proceedings, as Appearances, Rules, Pleas, and Judgments, except Holy-days, the week before Easter, the first three weeks in August, and from the Sixteenth of December till the Munday after Twelfth-day. After Judgment obtained by the Plaintiff against the Garnishee upon any Attachment, the Plaintiff must, before Execution is a∣warded, find Sureties who must undertake for the Plaintiff, that if the Defendant in the Attachment shall within a year and a day then following come into Court, and dis∣prove or avoid the Debt demanded against him by the Plaintiff, that then the Plain∣tiff shall restore to the Defendant the mo∣neys by the Plaintiff attached and condem∣ned in the Garnishees hands, or so much thereof as shall be disproved, or else that they will do it for him; and then Execution will be granted against the Garnishee for the Moneys mentioned in the Judgment. If A. attaches Money in the hands of B. as the Moneys of C. and in truth B. hath no Money in his hands belonging to C. but ex∣pects to receive the Moneys of B. some short time after; in such Case B. after four De∣faults passed (which is usually in four days) may discharge the Attachment by coming into Court personally, and giving a Rule to declare upon his Attachment; and if A. do not declare in three days following, then Judgment will be entered against A. to dis∣chage
the Attachment. But if A. do de∣clare, then B. may presently plead he had no Moneys in his hands at the time of the Attachment, or at any time since, and put the Plaintiff to prove any Moneys in his hands, or else B. may discharge the At∣tachment by waging his Law. Note.That the Plaintiff shall not give evidence of any Moneys that came to the Garnishees hands after the time of the Plea. The manner of waging Law to an Attachment is thus: THe Garnishee must come into Court, and there take the following Oath, viz. You shall swear that at the time of the Attachment made, which was the  day of  last past, between the hours of Nine and Ten in the Fore∣noon of the same day, or at any time since, you had not owed, nor did detain, nor yet have owed, or do detain from C. in in the Bill original and Attachment a∣foresaid the Defendant named, any part thereof the said Sum of  so as a∣foresaid, nor any penny thereof, in man∣ner and form as the Plaintiff by his Bill, Original, and Attachment afore∣said hath supposed. So God you help.
But if the Plaintiff hath two Witnesses that will swear the Garnishee had Moneys in his hands when the Attachment was made, he must cause their Depositions to be ta∣ken by the Town-Clerk or his Deputy, and that will stop the Garnishee from wa∣ging his Law, and force him to plead to the Country, in case their Depositions be full. If A. be indebted to B. in 20 l. by Bill or Note, payable at Six Months or more, in such case you cannot enter an Action a∣gainst A. till the Money is due: But if B. shall be indebted to C. in any some of Mo∣neys, C. may so soon as the Bill or Note is given to B. by A. cause an Attachment to be made in the hands of A. as the Moneys of B. and if A. appear, he shall be forced to give Bail within two days after his Ap∣pearance to have his Body forth coming, or pay what Moneys shall be found in his hands: And until A. hath given Bail, he shall not be admitted to plead to the At∣tachment; and if he neglect to give Bail, Judgment will be entred against him for the Money attached. But in this case, after A. hath put in Bail, he must plead that it is true he hath so much Moneys in his hands, but that the same is not due nor payable to B. the Defendant till a certain time to come. C. the Plaintiff shall have Judgment present∣ly against A. the Garnishee for the Money attached, but Execution shall not be award∣ed for the Money when it becomes due, ac∣cording to the time mentioned in the Plea.
If A. shall be indebted to B. in a Sum of Money for Goods bought, & a Verbal agree∣ment only to pay for them at a time to come, and an Attachment shall be made in the hands of A. for the Money before the time agreed for payment thereof, shall be elap∣sed, in such case A. the Garnishee may plead the same Plea as above, and shall not be com∣pelled to pay the Money till it became due by the Agreement, but the Plaintiff shall have Judgment presently. And if the Defendant in an Attachment after satisfaction acknowledged upon Re∣cord, shall bring an Action against the Garnishee for the Money so attached; the Garnishee may in such case plead the Gene∣ral Issue, and give the Attachment in evi∣dence, but must at the same time prove the Debt to be a just Debt for which the Money was condemned, and the Courts above have always allowed it as good Evidence against the Plaintiff in the Action. If R. D. ows Money to L. C. and absconds and happens to leave Goods in a House or Warehouse locked up, and no person in the House or Warehouse; in such case L. C. may sequester the House or Warehouse, and the Goods and Chattels therein contained, & in 6 days time may condemn the Goods: the man∣ner of making a Sequestration is as followeth: L. C. must enter an Action of Debt against R. D. with one of the four Attorneys of this Court, and then one of the Officers of this
Court must go to the same House or Ware∣house, and say these words: I Do sequester this Warehouse, and the Goods and Chattels therein con∣tained, as the proper Warehouse, Goods, and Chattels of R. D. to answer L. C. in a Plea of Debt upon demand of 100 l. And then must put a Padlock upon the Door of the House, and set a Seal upon the Key∣hole. After four Court days passed, which is usually in four days, the Officer will re∣ceive a Precept to open the Warehouse, and cause the Goods therein to be Inventry'd and Apprais'd by any two Freemen; and the Appraisors must set their Names or Marks to the same Inventory, and come to the next Court, and there take the Oath following: The Oath to be taken by the Appraisors. YOU and either of you shall swear that the Appraisement you have made of the Goods and Chattels in this Schedule or Inventory specified, where∣unto you have subscribed your Names, is a just and true Valuation and Ap∣praisement of the same Goods and Chat∣tels,
according to the best of your Iudgments and Skills. So help you God. The same Court-day that the Appraisors are sworn, the Plaintiff may have Judgment and Execution for the Goods, bringing two sufficient Sureties, who will enter into a Recognizance to this effect; viz. That if the Defendant R. D. shall come into Court with∣in a year and a day, and disprove or avoid the Debt demanded by L. C. that then L. C. shall restore the Goods, or the value thereof, to R.D. or else that they will do it for him. The manner for a Defendant in an At∣tachment to disprove or avoid any Debt de∣manded, is as followeth. The Defendant must either render his Body to Prison, or give Security to pay the Debt demanded, and then may bring a Scire facias, which is called a Scire facias ad disprobandum debitum; and the Plaintiff in the Attachment must be summoned to appear and plead thereunto; and after the Plaintiff hath pleaded, if the Debt demanded be not a Debt due by Bond, Bill, or Specialty under Hand and Seal, the Defendant may wage his Law, and thereby discharge himself of the Money demanded by the Plaintiff, which must be done in Court as followeth: I R. D. do swear that upon the  day of  (naming the day the Action was entered) I did not owe
nor detain, nor as yet do owe or detain from L. C. the Plaintiff the sum of xxxl. nor any part or parcel thereof in man∣ner and form as the Plaintiff by his Bill original hath supposed. So help me God. And if the Defendant be a Freeman of London, he must have six Compurgators, who will swear that they believe in their Consciences that what the Defendant swears is true: But if the Defendant be not a Free∣man of London, then two Compurgators will be sufficient. If the Defendant shall not think fit to wage his Law, but will put the Plaintiff to prove his Debt, he must in such case plead that he owes nothing to the Plaintiff; an issua∣ble Plea. And in case the Plaintiff fail to prove his Debt, a Verdict and Judgment will pass against him for restitution of the Money, or value of the Goods attached and condemned. And if the Plaintiff in the Attachment shall in such case be taken in Execution, and shall be unable or unwilling to restore the Money, his Security or Pledges that he gave when the Money was condem∣ned, will be compelled to pay the Money; for the Sureties cannot discharge themselves by rendring the Plaintiff body to Pri∣son. But if the Plaintiff prove his Debt, the Verdict will pass for the Plaintiff in the At∣tachment, and then Judgment will be en∣tered
for the Debt proved to be due; and if so much was not recovered upon the At∣tachment or Sequestration, the Bail for the Defendant are liable to answer, and pay the same with costs. Touching Apprentices. BY the custom of London, Apprentices that are or shall be bound by Indenture above the Age of Fourteen years to Freemen of London, for the full term of Seven years, are compellable to serve the full term, and an Action will lie against the Apprentice for breach of any of the Covenants. But if the Apprentice shall be under the Age of Four∣teen years at the time of his binding, his In∣denture is not good. By the ancient and laudable Custom of the City of London, every Master ought to In∣roll his Apprentice within the first year of his term, before the Chamberlain of Lon∣don for the time being, who attends every day at his Office in Guildhall for that purpose. And if the Apprentice be Inrolled within the first year of his term, the Fee is but 2 s. 6 d. But if he shall not be Inrolled with∣in the first year, then such Apprentice may be discharged from his Masters Service in such manner as is hereafter set forth. In case any Apprentice shall refuse to be Inrolled within the first year of his term, the Master may within that time bring his
Indenture to the Chamberlain or his Clerk, who will Record the same; which Record is as good as an Inrollment, and shall barr the Apprentice from discharging himself. Ma∣ny Citizens of London are of opinion not to Inroll any Apprentice, and the reason they usually give is, that if the Apprentice be In∣rolled, they are bound to keep him, although he shall be a Thief or Gamester, but if he is not Inrolled they can turn him away at their pleasure; which is a great mistake: For if an Apprentice shall not be Inrolled, and the Master turn him away, the Apprentice may in such case bring his Action upon the Cove∣nants in his Indenture, and recover Dama∣ges from time to time against the Master: And if the Apprentice be Inrolled and turn'd away, he must take the same course against his Master. If the Apprentice be a Thief, the Master may as lawfully turn him away when he is Inrolled, as when he is not Inrol∣led; for the Inrollment is no obligation up∣on the Master to keep the Apprentice more than before he was not Inrolled. But by the Inrollment the Master answers the Oath he took when he was made Free, and obliges the Apprentice not to go away at his plea∣sure. And every Master ought in Conscience to Inroll his Apprentice: For otherwise he disappoints the Father, who possibly paid the Master a considerable Sum with his Son Apprentice, and if the Apprentice knows he may leave his Masters service at his plea∣sure, it happens very often that he neglects
his Masters service, and takes bad courses, whereby the Father loses both his Money and his Son, which might in all probability have been prevented if the Apprentice had been Inrolled. Secondly, Although an Apprentice be Inrolled, he may be discharged from his Master in case the Master shall beat him un∣reasonably without just cause, or in case the Master refuse to find him sufficient necessa∣ries, or if the Master turn the Apprentice out of his service, or leave off his Trade, or shall neglect to instruct his Apprentice, or turn him away; whereas many Citizens do believe that if an Apprentice be Inrolled, he cannot be discharged from his Master for any cause whatsoever. The manner of suing out an Apprentices Indenture is thus; He must bring his Inden∣ture, or a Copy, to an Attorney in this Court, who will give a Note or Warrant to to one of the Sergeants before mentioned, to signifie to the Master the Apprentices in∣tention of thing out his Indenture, and for what cause; And four Court days after will leaven Summons in writing at the Masters house, for him to appear in this Court, and shew cause why his Apprentice should not be discharged. And if the Apprentice sue his Indenture out for not Inrollment the Master may appear, and delay it a small time, but cannot present the Apprentices discharge: But if it be for any other cause, the Master may appear by an Attorney of this Court,
and plead and try the truth of the matter complained of by the Apprentice, and the Master need not doubt a fair Trial; the Ju∣ries being all Masters, and the Court con∣stantly shew them all just and lawful favour. And if a Verdict pass for the Apprentice, or the Master, no Costs will be allowed to either party. Many Citizens have been unwilling to have any Cause tried in this Court, or the Sheriffs Court, by reason of insufficient Jury∣men that are summoned to try Causes in both Courts. It is very true, there have been in some years men of mean quality and capacity returned for Jurymen to serve in this Court; but the Citizens of London are the occasion thereof: For it is the Custom of London, that the respective Juries to try Causes in this Court and the Sheriffs, shall be returned by the several Wards in the City of London at their Wardmote Inquests eve∣ry Christmas, which they constantly do, by an Indenture under their Hands and Seals: In which Indenture they also return the Names of the Common-councel-men, Con∣stables, and Scavengers. There are parti∣cular Wards appointed to serve as Jurymen for every Month, which are divided as fol∣loweth:
The Jurymen returned by the Wards of Aldgate Portsoken Cornhill Serve for the Month of Janu∣ary. The Ward of Cheap for February. The Wards of Bassishaw Cripplegate within Cripplegate without for March. The Wards of Vintry Breadstreet for April. The Wards of Tower Billingsgate for May. The Wards of Farrindon without for June. The Ward of Bridge for July. The Wards of Aldersgate Colemanstreet Broadstreet for August. The Wards of Farrindon within Castle-baynard for Sept.
The Wards of Queenhith Dowgate Walbrooke for October. The Wards of Langborne Limestreet for November. The Wards of Candlewick Cordweyner Bishopsgate for December. So soon as the Names are returned by the several Wards, the Town-clerk writes them into a Book, and gives the Officers of this Court a Copy thereof, and also gives a Co∣py to the Officers of the Sheriffs Court, the same Jury serving for both Courts; and if they are not men of sufficient understanding it is the fault of the respective Wardmotes for not returning able persons. That the persons so returned,Note. and no o∣ther, must serve as Jurymen in this Court and the Sheriffs Court, except in some spe∣cial Cases where the Court shall order a Jury of Merchants, and in such Case the Town∣clerk returns their Names. That an Apprentice cannot sue out his Indenture against a Freeman but in this Court.Note. If an Apprentice shall be bound for eight, nine, or ten years, and enrolled, he shall be compelled to serve the full term, and cannot be discharged from his Master after seven
years service, unless for a very reasonable Cause; and it often happens that one years service, after seven years shall be expired, may be very considerable to the Master. A Freemans Widow may take a Maid Ap∣prentice for seven years, and Inroll her in like manner as a youth, in case she be above fourteen years of age; but if the Indenture shall be made for less then seven years, it is naught, and against the Custom of London, and will not oblige the Apprentice. If an Exchange-woman or Sempstriss, that hath a Husband free of London, take a Maid Apprentice, such Apprentice must be bound to the Husband, and not for less then seven years, and may be Inrolled, and made Free at the expiration of her term, in case she continue so long unmarried. If any Master refuse to make his Appren∣tice Free when the time mentioned in the Indentures is expired, such Apprentice may (if he have duly served) force his Master to make him Fre, by summoning him before the Court of Aldermen, or before the Cham∣berlain of London for the time being. This Court is also a Court of Equity or Chancery, for any matters within London, and the Liberties thereof; and the Recorder for the time being, usually sits as Judge or Chancellor to determine such matters. The manner of exhibiting a Bill in this Court is thus: First, it must be drawn and signed by one of the four City Councel, whose Fee for perusing and signing thereof,
is 6 s. 8 d. then it must be ingrossed and en∣tered in Court, and one of the Officers be∣longing to this Court, must give the Defen∣dant a Summons personally within the Li∣berties of London to answer such Bill, o∣therwise he is not obliged to appear. The charge of drawing the Bill is 4 d. for every Sheet, accounting twelve Lines to a Sheet, and 6 d. a Sheet for ingrossing thereof, and for the entering it in Court 2 s. and for the Attorney's Fee 3 s. 4 d. If an Action shall be depending in this Court, and the party Defendant cannot be relieved but in Equity, in such case he may exhibit his Bill against the Plaintiff in the Action, and the entring the Bill in Court is a good Injunction to stay the Plaintiffs proceedings at Law, without any motion, until the Plaintiff shall give in his Answer thereto. And note, that when the Bill is to be re∣lieved against an Action at Law, the Plain∣tiff in the Bill shall not be compell'd to give the Plaintiff at Law any Summons to make answer to the Bill; but if Affidavit shall be made that the Plaintiff at Law was 100 miles from London at the time of the exhibiting the Bill, then upon motion to the Court, the Plaintiff at Law shall and may proceed to Trial notwithstanding the Bill, but Judg∣ment and Execution must stay till the Plain∣tiff at Law answer the Bill, or the Court shall make an Order to the contrary. If an Action at Law shall be commenced in the
Sheriffs Court, the Defendant must cause the Action to be removed into this Court, before he can stay the Plaintiffs proceedings at Law, by exhibiting a Bill as aforesaid; and if the Plaintiff at Law answer the Bill, the Plaintiff in Equity may in eight days after the Answer, put in exceptions to the An∣swer; but if the Answer shall be full, and the Plaintiff in Equity cannot prove the matters in his Bill suggested, the Plaintiff at Law shall recover all his Costs against the Plaintiff in Equity. Note.That where a Bill is exhibited, and no Action at Law depending, the Defendant hath 8 Court days given him to Answer the Bill after his Appearance, and if he does not answer the Bill in that time, the Plain∣tiff in Equity may have an Attachment a∣gainst him, for which the Fee is 2 s. 6 d. and the Officers Fee for serving thereof is also 2 s. 6 d. which Fees the Defendant must pay when he gives in his Answer. After Answer the Plaintiff may reply ge∣nerally or specially, and may examine Wit∣nesses (in like manner as is done in the high Court of Chancery) to prove the Equity of his Bill; and within a Month after Replica∣tion, may bring his Cause to a hearing. The Town-clerk or his Deputy is appoint∣ed to examin all Witnesses on both sides, and his Fee for swearing and examining eve∣ry Witness is 2 s. 4 d. and for the Copies of the Depositions 4 d. per Sheet; but for the Copies, è contra, his Fee is 8 d. per Sheet.
The Town-clerk's Fee for every Order for publication or hearing of any Cause, is but 6 d. and for an Order at hearing but 1 s. but if the Decree be drawn up and inrollect, his Fee is 10 d. per Sheet, and for the Copy 4 d. per Sheet. After a Decree made, the Plaintiff must serve the Defendant with a Copy thereof personally, and make Affida∣vit thereof, before an Attachment will be granted against the Defendant. That the Plaintiff may serve the Defen∣dant with a Copy of the Decree in any place whatsoever,Note. although out of the Li∣berties of London. A Bill may be removed out of this Court into the high Court of Chancery any time before publication is passed, after which time the high Court of Chancery will not retain the Cause. The manner of removing a Bill out of this Court is thus: First, the Defendant must file a Bill in the high Court of Chancery against the Plaintiff in this Court, and then must at the Registers Office give Bond to prove the suggestions in his Bill within four∣teen days, and procure Certificate that his Bill is filed, and security given as aforesaid, and then Petition the Lord Chancellor for a Certiorary to remove the Bill out of this Court: And when the Petition is answered by his Lordship, the Clerk in Chancery will make the Certiorary, which must be deliver∣ed to the Town-clerk, and he will allow it, for which his Fee is 2 s. and then the At∣torney
for the Defendant in this Court will certifie the Bill, Answer, and Proceeding into the high Court of Chancery, for which his Fee is 10 d. per Sheet. If exceptions shall be put in to an Answer in this Court (and a Cause at Law depending between the Parties) the Plaintiff in Equity must the next Court move for a day to argue those exceptions, otherwise they are over∣ruled in course. If the Defendant in Equity demurr or plead to the Plaintiffs Bill, he must the next Court after the Demurrer or Plea is entred, move for an Order to argue such Demurrer or Plea, otherwise the same will be over∣ruled in course, and the Defendant will be compelled to give an Answer. When a Freeman's Apprentice is legally discharged from his Master, his proper way to recover part of the Money which his Ma∣ster received with him Apprentice, is to ex∣hibit a Bill in this Court against his Master; but if the Apprentice hath served five years, or near that time, this Court will not re∣lieve him, in ordering any money to be re∣turned, unless there be very extraordinary cause. A Freeman's Widow by a Bill in this Court, may recover her customary part of her Husband's Estate, against the Executor of her Husband; but if the Executor live out of the Liberties of London, she will be compelled to exhibit her Bill in the high Court of Chancery.
If a Plaintiff in Equity shall be advised not to examin any Witness, he may go to a hearing upon the Bill, and answer within fourteen days after Answer; and in such case the whole Charge will not in probability ex∣ceed 3 l. If any person exhibit a Bill in this Court, whose Habitation shall be out of the Liber∣ties of London, this Court upon a motion will order the Plaintiff to give security by Bond to pay the Defendants Costs, in case the Bill shall happen to be dismist, or in de∣fault thereof will dismiss the Bill; and until such Security be given, the Court will not compell the Defendant to give any answer to the Bill. After answer given to a Bill in this Court, if the Plaintiff do not give in Ex∣ceptions in eight days, the Court upon mo∣tion will order the Bill to be dismist, unless the Plaintiff do reply in a weeks time: For which Order the Fee is 6 d. and in case the Bill happen to be dismist, the Fee for draw∣ing up the Dismission is 6 s. 8 d. which will be allowed to the Defendant in the Costs.
The form or beginning of a Bill in this Court is thus; To the Right Honourable Sir R. C. Knight, Lord Major of the City of London, and to his Right Worshipful Brethren the Aldermen of the same City. IN all humility complaining, sheweth unto your Lordship and Worships, your daily Orator, &c. The Conclusion thus: May it therefore please your Lordship & Worships, out of your accustomed good∣ness, to cause the said A. B. and E. D. to be warned by one of your Lordships and Worships Serjeants at Mace, and Mi∣nisters of this Honourable Court, per∣sonally to be and appear in the same Court at a day certain, to be by your Lordship and Worships to them there∣unto prefixed, then and there to make answer unto all and singular the Pre∣misses upon their Corporal Oaths: And that they may be enjoyned to stand un∣to, perform, and abide such Order and Decree in the Premisses, as to your Lordship and Worships, upon hearing the Cause, shall seem meet.
The Practice of the Orphants Court. THis Court is held before the Major and Aldermen of the City of London, who are Guardians to the Children of all Freemen of London that are or shall be un∣der the Age of 21 years at the time of their Fathers decease. The common Serjeant of this City is the only person intrusted by the Court of Aldermen to take all Inventories and Accompts of Freemen's Estates: And the common Crier is intrusted to summon all Executors and Administrators of Free∣men, to appear before the Court of Alder∣men to give in Inventories and Accompts of the personal Estate of such Freemen. The youngest Attorney in the Lord Major's Court is always Clerk of the Or∣phants, and is appointed to take all Securi∣ties for Orphants Portions; which Securities are constantly taken in the name of the Chamberlain of London for the time being: And the Custom is, that in case the Security live out of London, they are taken bound by Bond; but if they live within London, they are constantly bound by Recognizance. When a Freeman of London dies, leaving Children under age, the Clerks of the re∣spective Parishes within the Bill of Mortali∣ty, ought to give the name of such Freeman
to the common Crier of this City, who is thereupon to summon the Widow or Execu∣tor of such Freeman to appear before the Court of Aldermen, there to be bound to bring in an Inventory of the Testator's E∣state. And note, that the Court of Aldermen always allow two Months time for the bringing and exhibiting such Inventories. If the party summoned do not appear, the Lord Major may, if he please, send his warrant and force an appearance: And if any Executor refuse to become bound to bring in an Inventory, the Court of Alder∣men may by their power send such Executor to Newgate, there to remain till he submit; and the Courts at Westminster will not release such person. The Condition of a Bond for exhibiting an Inventory. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bound A. B. do, and shall within two Months now next ensuing bring and exhibit in∣to the Court of our Sovereign Lord the King, holden before the Major and Al∣dermen of the City of London for the time being, in the Chamber of the Guild∣hall of the same City, a true and perfect Inventory in writing upon his Corporal
Oath of all and singular the Goods, Chattels, Rights and Credits, Plate, Iewels, ready Money and Debts, which were due and belonging unto the said R. R. deceased, at the time of his death; And also if the said A. B. do not in the mean time purloyn or convey the fame, or any part thereof, out of the Freedom or Liberties of the same City, without the licence and consent of the same Court first had and obtained in writing; Then &c. or else &c. After such Bond given, the Executor must procure four Freemen to appraise the Te∣stators Goods, and must cause them to appear before a Justice of the Peace in Lon∣don, and take the Oath following before they appraise the Goods. The Oath. YOu and every of you shall swear, that the Appraisment you shall make of the Goods and Chattels of A. B. late Citizen and Mercer of London, deceased, shall be a just and true Valu∣ation and Appraisement of the same Goods and Chattels, according to the best of your Iudgments and Skills. So help you God. For which Oath the Fee is only 1 s. 4 d.
The common Crier must have notice when the Appraisement is to be made; for he is appointed by the Court of Aldermen to be present when all such Appraisments are taken, that he may see the same be fair∣ly done to the best advantage of the Or∣phants: And unless the common Crier or his Deputy be present, and the Inventory shall be signed by the common Crier, the Court of Aldermen will not allow there∣of. The common Criers Fee for signing every Inventory is 10 s. and for his attendance, du∣ring the time of the Appraisment, at least 10 s. per day. When the Appraisment is made as afore∣said, and signed by the common Crier and the Appraisors, it must be given to Mr. com∣mon Serjeant, or one of his Clerks, at his Office in Guildhall-yard; and if he approves thereof, he will cause it to be Ingrossed, and a Duplicate thereof to be made for the Ex∣ecutor or Administrator: And when the same is examined by him, and his hand is set thereto in testimony thereof, the Executor or Administrator must in the Court of Al∣dermen swear the same Inventory is a true Inventory of the Goods and Chattels of the Party deceased, according to the best of his knowledge. When the Inventory is so exhibited, the Executor must become bound in a considera∣ble Penalty, either to bring in the money that shall appear due to the Orphants by
such Inventory, or within two Months, or within that time to give good Security to pay the same into the Chamber of London, for the use of the Orphants when they shall come to age, or be married. The Condition of a Bond to bring in Money, or to give Security, is as followeth. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bound A. M. do and shall within two Months now next ensuing, bring, or cause to be brought into the Court of our Sovereign Lord the King, holden before the Major and Aldermen of the City of London for the time being, in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the same City, good and suf∣ficient Sureties to be bound for the true and sure payment of the Orphanage and Legatory portions due and belong∣ing unto the Children and Orphants of the said E. M. deceased, at the time of his death, by the Laws and Customs of the City of London, or by the last Will and Testmet of the said Testator, or else do or shall pay, or cause the same to be paid into the Chamber of London, to the use of the same Orphants, and do and shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, within one Month next
after warning or notice to her given, or for her left in writing, at the now dwel∣ling House of J. W. situate in Cornhill, London, bring or exhibit into the Court aforesaid, a true and perfect Accompt in writing upon her Corporal Oath, of all and singular the sperate, doubtful, and desperate Debts whatsoever, that were due and belonging unto the said E. M. at the time of his death, as shall come to her hands, or to the hands or custody of any other person or persons to her use, or by her appointment: And upon like no∣tice to her to be given, or for her to be left in writing as aforesaid, bring or cause to be brought into the Court afore∣said, good and sufficient Sureties to be bound for the true and sure payment of so much mony as upon every such Accompt shall appear, or be found due or belong∣ing to the same Orphants, or else do and shall pay, or cause the same to be paid, into the Chamber of London, to the use of the same Orphants, without fraud or covin; then &c. or else &c. If the Executor pay the money into the Chamber of London, the Court of Aldermen usually allow 5 l. per Cent. Interest for so much of the Testator's Estate as is due to the Or∣phants by the Custom of London, so as the same exceed not 500 l. and for Legacy mo∣ney 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. per Cent. If the Executor shall not think fit to pay
the money into the Chamber, he must be∣come bound with three Sureties to the Chamberlain of London for the time being, in one or more Recognizances, or else by Bond to pay the money due to Orphants; and in case the Security live within the Liberties of London, they must be bound by Bond. Note that if the Sum be 900 l. the Security must become bound by three Re∣cognisances, each for the payment of 300 l. the Custom being never to make any Recog∣nizance touching Orphants of greater Pe∣nalty than 400 l. and not for the payment of above 300 l. The Condition of every Bond that is for Security of Or∣phants Portions, is as follow∣eth: THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the within bound S. D. T. G. W. G. and J. Y. or any of them, their, or any of their Executors or Administrators, do, and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, in the Court to be holden before the Major and Aldermen of the City of London for the time being, in the Chamber of the Guild∣hall of the same City, to the within na∣med Sir T. P. Chamberlain of the City
of London, or his Successors Chamber∣lains of the same City for the time be∣ing, 100 l. of lawful Money of England, to and for the use and behoof of K. the Daughter and sole Orphant of W. D. late Citizen and Mercer of London, de∣ceased, at such time as the said Orphant shall attain to her full Age of 21 years, or be married, to the said Orphant be∣longing out of the Goods, Chattels, Rights and Credits of her said Father, by the Laws and Customs of the City of London, or by his last Will and Testa∣ment, or otherwise: And if it shall hap∣pen in the mean time before the said Mo∣ney shall be fully paid as aforesaid, that the said Orphant shall dye and depart this mortal life, then if the said S. D. T. G. W. G. and J. Y. or any of them, their, or any of their Executors or Ad∣ministrators, do, and shall within one Month next after the death of the said Orphant, pay, or cause to be paid into the Court aforesaid, to the Chamberlain of the City aforesaid, for the time being, the Sum of One hundred pounds so due, and belonging to the said Orphant, to the intent the same may be disposed where of right the same shall appertain. And further, if the said S. D. T. G. W. G. and J. Y. or any of them, their, or a∣ny of their Executors or Administra∣tors, do and shall, until the said Mo∣ney shall be fully paid as aforesaid, find
and provide, or cause to be found and provided unto the said Orphant, Meat, Drink, Apparel, Linnen and Woollen, and all other Necessaries to the said Or∣phant meet and belonging, And do not in the mean time willingly permit or suffer the said Orphant to be married, cloyned, bound Apprentice, or by any other ways or means to become bound, without the special licence and consent of the Major and Aldermen of the City a∣foresaid for the time being first obtained: And if it shall happen that the said S. D. T. G. W. G. and J. Y. or any of them, shall dye and depart this mortal life, or grow into poverty or insufficiency in their or any of their Estate or Estates, before the said Money shall be paid as aforesaid, Then if the said S. D. T. G. W. G. and J. Y. or any of them, their, or any of their Executors or Administra∣tors, do, and shall within one Month next after such dying, decaying, grow∣ing into poverty or insufficiency in their or any of their Estate or Estates, as a∣foresaid, bring, or cause to be brought in∣to the Court aforesaid, to be holden be∣fore the Major and Aldermen of the Ci∣ty aforesaid for the time being, such and so many other good and sufficient Surety and Sureties as the same Court, for the time being, shall accept and allow of, who shall and will then and there be∣come bound to the Chamberlain of the
City aforesaid, for the time being, in manner and form and every condition (Mutatis Mutandis) as in these Presents contained in the stead or place of him or them so dying or decaying, growing in∣to poverty or insufficiency in Estate or Estates, as aforesaid. And lastly, if the said S. D. &c. or any of them do year∣ly appear before the Major and Alder∣men of the City aforesaid, for the time being, in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the same City, on Munday next af∣ter Midlent Sunday, That then, &c. or else &c. The Lord Major and Court of Aldermen do meet at Guildhall, and sit in the Or∣phants Court, there once in every year, viz. on the Munday morning after Midlent Sun∣day, purposely to hear the Names of all the Securities that stand bound for Orphants Portions called over, and therefore that day is termed Call-day, upon which day one of every of the Sureties ought to appear to give an account, whether the other Securi∣ties are living, and in good condition, and whether the Orphants are living and mar∣ried. If none of the Security appear upon that day, they forfeit their Recognizances and Bonds, and the Clerk of the Orphants in such case must make out Process against the Security, and force them to give the Ac∣compt above required, and pay the Charges of the Process.
The Security must take particular care that none of the Orphans marry, or be put Apprentice with their consents without the leave of the Court of Aldermen first ob∣tained for that purpose. And as the Or∣phans come to be of the age of One and twenty years, or shall be married with the consent of the Court of Aldermen, they must take care to bring them to Guildhall, with a person to prove the age of such Or∣phan; and then the Orphan must acknow∣ledge satisfaction for the Money due to him, or her, of the Testators Estate, which must be done in the Court of Aldermen; but one of Mr. Common Sergeant's Clerks must first draw up a Note to this, or the like effect. J. B. Parish-Clark and Register of All-hallows Lumberstreet, London, is come to prove unto this Honourable Court, upon his Corporal Oath, That R. B. one of the Sons and late Orphans of R. B. late Citizen and Mercer of London, de∣ceased, is of the full Age of 21 years. And the said R. B. the Son, is come to acknowledge satisfaction to this Ho∣nourable Court for 500 l. growing due unto him for his own part and portion of the Goods, Chattels, Rights and Cre∣dits of the said R. B. his late Father de∣ceased, by the Laws and Customs of the City of London.
If a Freeman leaves Lands and Tenements to his Children, the Executor must become bound with Sureties to accompt for the Rents and Profits of such Lands with Con∣dition, as followeth: The Condition of a Bond to Ac∣compt for Rents, &c. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas A. W. Exe∣cutor of the last Will and Testament of J. W. late Citizen and Skinner of Lon∣don, deceased, is by order of the Court of Orphans, holden before the Major and Aldermen of the City of London, appointed to receive the Rents, Issues, and Profits of certain Lands, Messua∣ges, and Tenements in the Parish of B. in the County of M. which are be∣queathed to R. the Son and Orphan of the said J. W. in and by the last Will of the said J. W. when the said Orphan shall attain the Age of 21 years: If therefore the said A. W. her Executors or Administrators, do and shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, until the said Orphan shall attain the Age of 21 years, well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, the yearly Rent of 10 l. reserved in the Grants or Leases of the same Lands and Messuages, according
to the Covenants of the same Leases: And also do, until the said Orphan shall attain the aforesaid Age, keep and maintain the said Messuages, and eve∣ry of them, in good repair; And do and shall convey, assign, and assure unto the said Orphan, when he shall attain the full Age of 21 years, the same Lands and Messuages, and every of them, discharged and freed from all Rent or Rents in the said Leases or Grants re∣served, and from all and all manner of Forfeitures and Rentries, and well and sufficiently repaired and sustained: And if the said A. W. her Executors or Ad∣ministrators, shall not do any act or acts, thing or things, whereby the said Or∣phan shall not enjoy the said Land and Messuages at the said Age of 21 years, without incumbrances, from her, them, or any of them, That then, &c. or else, &c.
WHen any Orphan is of full Age, and shall acknowledge satisfaction in the Court of Aldermen for all Moneys due to him or her; The same Court, upon motion made by Mr. Common Sergeant, doth constantly order, That all Bonds en∣tered into for the payment of such Orphans Portion shall be delivered up, and cancelled, and if the Security became bound by Re∣cognizances, the Clerk of the Orphans will cross and discharge such Recognizances, for which his Fee is 2 s. upon each Recogni∣zance. The Chamber of London is accounted the safest and best Security in or about London; for the Moneys paid therein to the use of the City, or any Orphan, is constant∣ly repaid upon demand without any trouble. And when Orphans come to Age, or be mar∣ried, with the consent & approbation of the Court of Aldermen, they may receive their Portions (if paid into the Chamber) at an hours notice, although the sum shall be Ten thousand pounds or more; Mr. Chamber∣lain or his Clerks attending daily for that purpose. The Interest or finding Money is constant∣ly paid as it becomes due, and the Court hath always taken great care that every Or∣phan shall receive his and her Portions out of the Chamber of London, without pay∣ing any other or greater Fees then hath been anciently taken; and if any Officer exact or
take any other Fees, the Parties will, upon their application and evidence of the Fact to the Court of Aldermen, have remedy, and all just relief against the Offenders. Mr. Common Sergeant keeps his Office in Guildhall-yard, near St. Lawrence's Church, and constantly attends to dispatch all per∣sons that are concerned for Orphans, and will not permit any Fees to be taken for any business to be done by virtue of his Office, more then hath been paid time out of mind; and if any of his Clerks exact any greater Fees, he will upon complaint cause satis∣faction to be given to the Party grieved. The Widow of every Freeman, if she shall be Executrix or Administratrix of her Hus∣bands Estate, ought by the Custom of Lon∣don to exhibit a true Inventory of her Hus∣bands Estate into this Court before she con∣tract Marriage, otherwise the Court of Al∣dermen may impose a reasonable Fine upon such Executrix or Administratrix, to the use of the Orphans of such Freeman. To prevent abuses that sometimes happen to Freemens Estates in prejudice of Orphans by Executrixes and Administratrixes not gi∣ving an Inventory in due time after the Te∣stator's decease; The Court of Aldermen have made an Order not to allow any finding Money or Interest for any Money that shall be paid into the Chamber of. London by any Executor or Administrator belonging to any Freemans Estate, until such time as the Ex∣ecutor or Administrator of such Freeman do
bring in and exhibit upon Oath a true and perfect Inventory to his knowledge of all the Goods, Chattels, Plate, Jewels, ready Money, and Debts, which did belong to such Freeman at the time of his death. It is the interest and advantage of all Ex∣ecutors and Administrators of Freemen to exhibit Inventories of the Estates of such Freeman within the time limited and ap∣pointed by the Court of Aldermen, for the doing thereof, especially such as shall leave no greater Estate then to pay their Debts: For if upon the bringing any Inventory into the Court of Aldermen, it shall appear to the Court, that the Testator did not leave more Estate then to pay his just Debts, in such case the Court will discharge such Exe∣cutor or Administrator of the Recognizance he gave for exhibiting an Inventory without paying any Fee to any Officer whatsoever: Provided such Executor or Administrator bring in such Inventory, when he shall have notice from Mr. Common Crier so to do. The Court of Aldermen do commit the custody of Orphans to such person or per∣sons as they shall think sit, and if any per∣son whatsoever do intermarry with any Orphan without the consent of the same Court first obtained, such person may be fi∣ned by the said Court, according to the quality and portion of the Orphan, and un∣less such person do pay the Fine, or give Bond to pay the same in some reasonable time, the Court of Aldermen may commit
him to Newgate, there to remain until he submit to their order: And although such person shall have ten times a better Estate then the Orphan he intermarries, yet he must submit to pay such Fine as the Court shall impose upon him: But if he settle an Estate upon the Orphan as the Court shall direct, and make application to the same Court by Petition to have the Fine remit∣ted, they will in probability shew favour to such person, as they have done in the like cases. This Custom hath been adjudged reason∣able, and was argued in the Court of Kings Bench, in the Case of a Merchant that had a good Estate, who intermarried with an Or∣phan, without the consent of the Court of Aldermen: The Orphan had but 200 l. or thereabouts in the Chamber of London, but her Portion was 800 l. and upon hearing the matter in the Court of Aldermen, the Merchant did seem to justifie himself, be∣cause he had the consent of the Orphans Relations: Thereupon the Court ordered him to pay 40 l. as a Fine, which he refu∣sed, and was committed to Newgate: And after some considerable time he brought a Habeas Corpus, which was allowed, and the cause of his Imprisonment returned; and upon perusal of the Return, and after long debate had by Counsel on both sides, the Court of Kings Bench remanded the Gen∣tleman back to Prison, and directed him to submit to the Court of Aldermen; which
he did by paying the Fine, and was there∣upon discharged; but upon his humble Suit to the Court, a great part of his Fine was returned. The Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mons of the City of London in Common Councel have made several good Acts and Orders to prevent Freemens Children from marryi without the consent of their Pa∣rents and Guardians, and to keep them from vicious Courses; more particularly by an Act of Common Councel in the Majoralty of Sir Andrew Judd Knight, in the Fifth year of King Edward the Sixth, It is enacted and e∣stablished for a Law perpetual to be obser∣ved and kept within the said City, as follow∣eth, viz. FIrst, If any Manchild or Woman∣child shall maliciously go about, or attempt to do or cause to be done, any bodily harm, death, or destruction to his or their Father or Mother; or if any Mankind do hereafter marry or contract marriage in the life of his Father or Mother, by whom he will claim any portion under the age of One and twen∣ty years, without the consent of his said Father or Mother, by whom he will claim any portion; or if any Woman∣child do hereafter marry or contract marriage in the life time of her Father or Mother, or other Parents, by whom she shall claim any portion before the age
of eighteen years, without the consent of her Father, or such other Parent, by whom she shall or may claim any porti∣on; or if any Manchild be a Chief, or a Felon, or common Whore-hunter, or common Dicer, or common player at unlawful Games notoriously known; or if any Womanchild shall hereafter commit any whoredom, or be a common picker, that then every of the persons so offending shall be barred and excluded to have or demand any portion: Provi∣ded always, that it shall be lawful for the Father or Mother of any such Child or Children, to give and bequeath in Le∣gacy to such Child or Children asmuch as the portion of such Child so offend∣ing shall amount unto by the Custom of the said City, and then such child there∣by to be enabled to have and demand the same as portion, this Act notwithstand∣ing, so that the same Legacy be contain∣ed in his or their Testament in writing, and not otherwise; and that then and from thenceforth his said child or chil∣dren to be admitted and restored to claim such Legacy or Legacies, in such sort, manner, and form, as if there had been never such offence done or committed by any such child. Item, It is further ordained, enacted, authorized and established by Authority aforesaid, That if any Womanchild, be∣ing an Orphan, and under the age of
One and twenty years, at any time hereafter after the death of her Father, do censure or contract herself in marri∣age, or else according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm do perfectly solem∣nize or consummate marriage with any Freeman of this City, the consent and agreement of the Lord Major and Al∣dermen of the said City of London for the time being not obtained and had, that then for every such default and offence committed or done by any Orphan or Orphans of the said City, the same be∣ing confessed or sufficiently proved by two Witnesses, or otherwise, before the Lord Major and Aldermen of the said City of London for the time being, at and in a Court of Aldermen, she or they that so happens to behave her or themselves, as is aforesaid, shall forfeit and forego and lose 12 d. of and for every pound so due, or to be due unto her or them, by reason of any such Orphanage, the said sum of 12 d. for every pound to go, or be to the use of the Chamber of the said Ci∣ty, according to the ancient Custom be∣fore this time in such case used. And if the said contract or marriage of such Orphan or Orphans be made with a∣ny forreign, not being free of this City, at the time of any such contract or mar∣riage made, that then the said Orphan or Orphans, or every of them, shall for∣feit and lose three shillings for every
pound due, or to be due, unto her or them by virtue of any Orphanage or Custom had or used within the said City, one shilling of the said three shillings of eve∣ry pound to go, or to be to the use of the Chamber of the said City, in such man∣ner and form as is aforesaid, and the o∣ther two shillings so forfeited of every pound to go to the use of such other Or∣phan or Orphans as then shall remain unmarried, or else for default of such Orphans or Orphan, to remain to the next of the Kindred of the Orphan so offending. Also be it further Enacted, Ordained and Established by Authority aforesaid, for and in discharge of divers Varian∣ces, Contentions, and Suits that daily heretofore have, and hereafter may en∣sue, That if a Freeman's child, man or woman, fortune to be married here∣after, in the life time of his or their Fa∣ther, by this consent, and not fully ad∣vanced of and to his and her full part or portion of his or her said Fathers Goods as he shall be worth at the time of his decease, according to the ancient Laws and Customs of the said City, That then every such Freemans child so being mar∣ried in the life time of his or her Father, shall be to all intents and purposes dis∣abled to demand any further part or portion of his or her Fathers Goods, af∣ter the decease of his or her Father, but
shall be adjudged, reputed, or taken to be fully advanced, according to the Law and Custom of this City, and hath been long time out of mind, except his or her said Father do mention certainly in the last Will or Testament, or by some other writing signed with his own proper name or mark, the certainty of the sum or sums, Goods or Chattels, and the value of them that the Father gave, paid, or departed withal, or otherwise assured, or hereafter shall give, pay, depart with∣al, or otherwise make assurance of un∣to him or her, before, at, or after the marriage of him or her, or otherwise, in his life time, for and towards their advancement, in the name of his or her part or portion, and then every such Orphan or Child, which after the de∣cease of his or her said Father, can bring forth the said Testament or other Writing signed or marked with the Fathers hand or mark, wherein the certainty of such Money, Goods, or Chattels as they gave, or shall have received of their said Father, or by the same Father assured by Specialty or otherwise, shall have as much more of the ready Money, Goods, Chattels, and Debts of the said Father, as with that which he or they shall have received towards their ad∣vancement in the life of the said Father, shall make up a full childs part of his Goods and Chattels, as he shall be
worth at the time of his decease, the same to be demanded, asked, and claimed, or sued for against the Executor or Exe∣cutors, Administrator or Administra∣tors of the Goods and Chattels of the said Father, by Bill original to be com∣menced in our Sovereign Lord the King's Court, holden in the utter Cham∣ber of the Guildhall of the said City, be∣fore the said Lord Major and Aldermen of the same City for the time being, any Law or Custom heretofore made or used to the contrary notwithstanding; In which Action no wager of Law or Es∣soin shall be admitted or allowed. Provided always, and it is further enacted, That if any Freemans Son, being of full age, which shall hereafter be married with the consent of his Fa∣ther, or any other person, being of full age, which shall hereafter marry any Freemans Daughter, do at the time of the Espousals, or at any time after, confess themselves by writing fully sa∣tisfied of his or their portions, or do o∣therwise, or discharge the said Father of such Sons or Daughters, of all their part and portion due, or to be due, by the Law and Custom of the City, that then every such person so confessing, acquit∣ting, or otherwise discharging, shall be reputed and taken as fully advanced of his or their whole part or portion, and shall not be able to demand any further
or greater part of the Substance, Goods, and Chattels of his or her Father, this Law or any other Law or Custom here∣tofore made or used to the contrary not∣withstanding. And further, Forasmuch as it is thought very prejudicial and hurtful to the Fatherless Children and Orphans, when the Mother, or Mother-in-law, being Executor of the last Will and Te∣stament of her late Husband, by whom, and after whose death, the Orphans are entituled to an Orphanage, according to the laudable Customs and Ordinan∣ces of this City, do divers times mar∣ry or contract Matrimony, some with forreigners and persons unknown, and some with Freemen, before a just In∣ventory of the Goods, Chattels, Plate, Iewels, and ready Money of the Te∣stators be by them brought in, by reason whereof many times they either for fear or affection of their Husbands, or for some other sinister cause, do bring in very suspicious Inventories, omit∣ting therein either ready Money, Plate, Iewels, or Debts, or some other thing or things, whereby some benefit should redound to the Fatherless children, to the great loss and hinderance of the Or∣phans, and sometimes slander to the Lord Major and Aldermen of this Ci∣ty, notwithstanding the great care and travel that they take for the good order∣ing
and true answering of the said Or∣phans. It is therefore by like Authority or∣dained, established, and enacted, That if after the First day of November next ensuing, any Widow which is or shall be made Executor of the Testament and last Will of her late Husband, being a Freeman, or shall take upon her the Ad∣ministration of the Goods and Chattels of her late Husband, being a Freeman, do not upon her Oath bring in and ex∣hibit, or cause to be brought in or exhi∣bited, before the Lord Major and Alder∣men of this City for the time being, at and in a Court of Aldermen, a just and perfect Inventory, to their knowledge, of all the Goods, Chattels, Plate, and Iewels, ready Money and Debts, as were her said Husbands at the time of his death, appraised according to the Law of the said City, before she do en∣sure herself in marriage, or contract mar∣riage, or else according to the Laws of the Realm, do perfectly solemnize or consummate marriage with any person before such time as aforesaid, that then every person so offending shall forfeit and lose eight shillings of every pound of her portion of the Goods of her late Husband, due to her by the laudable Customs of the said City, the same to go to the use of such Orphan or Orphans as then shall be intituled to have or de∣mand
any Orphanage or Portion after the death of his or her late Father, the same so demanded, asked, claimed, or sued against such Executor or Admini∣strator, and by Bill original of Debt to be commenced in our Sovereign Lord the King's Court aforesaid, any Law or Custom heretofore had, made, or used to the contrary notwithstanding; In which Action no wager of Law or Es∣soin shall be admitted or allowed. THis Law or Act is called Judd's Law, and is not repealed; but the Lord Ma∣jor and Aldermen have sometimes for espe∣cial reasons thought fit to dispence with the same Act in favour of Orphans that have sought relief against the Penalties therein mentioned. By the Custom of London a Freeman's Widow may require a third part of his personal Estate after his Debts paid, and Funeral Charges discharged, besides her Wi∣dows Chamber furnished; and his Children may require another third part thereof, and the Freeman may by his last Will give away the other third part of his Estate, either to his Wife, or any of his Children, or any other person whatsoever, but if he shall have no Children, then his Widow may require a Moiety of his personal Estate, after Debts paid, together with her Widows Chamber
furnished. And if a Freeman shall make his Will contrary to this Custom, and give a∣way more then a third of his Estate from his Wife and Children, they may be relieved a∣gainst such Will by exhibiting their Bill in this Court against the Executor of such Free∣man, and so much of his Will as shall be contrary to the custom will be declared void and of no effect. If a Freeman shall in the time of his last sickness, give and deliver any part of his Goods, Chattels, or Moneys to his Wife or Child, or any other person, with intent that such person shall keep the same Moneys or Goods to his or her own use: Such Gift is against the Custom of London, and the Mo∣neys or Goods so given shall be accounted part of the Estate that belonged to such Freeman at the time of his death, and may be recovered by Bill in this Court: For a Freeman cannot in the time of his sickness whereof he shall dye, give away any part of his Estate, otherwise then by his last Will. If an unfreeman, or any other person, shall by his Will give a Legacy to an Orphant, the Court of Aldermen may compel the Ex∣ecutor of such unfreeman to pay the Money bequeathed into the Chamber of London, or give Bond to pay the same according to the purport of the Will. If a Freeman dye without a Will, and leave a Wife and Children, Administration of his Estate will be granted to his Wi∣dow,
and she will claim a third part of his Estate by the Custom of London, and one third must be divided amongst his Children, and the other part thereof must be divided between the Wife and Children; and usu∣ally the Widow is allowed two thirds of the Freemans third part, and the Children one third thereof. If a Freeman shall give part of his Estate to any of his Children in life time in marri∣age or otherwise, and afterwards die and make a Will, and give away his Estate to his other Children, and shall declare that the Child he so disposed in marriage, had re∣ceived 500 l. or more of his Estate, and was thereby fully advanced; such declarati∣on shall not bar the person so married, but he or she may recover an equal share with the other Children of the personal Estate that belonged to such Freeman at the time of his death; but then such person must bring in the Money received of his Father in his life time, and reckon it part of the Estate left by such Freeman at his death; and such bringing in the Money is called bring∣ing it into Hotchpott. If a Freeman shall settle or make over a∣ny part of his Estate to the use of his Chil∣dren, with design to defraud his Wife of her full third part, the Widow may, after his death, set aside such Settlement by a Bill in this Court.
When an Inventory is exhibited in this Court, and the Orphants can prove any Goods omitted or undervalued, or any Debts charged to be owing from the de∣ceased, which were not real and just Debts, in such case the Clerk, upon complaint made, will summon a Jury to enquire whether the Inventory so exhibited, be a true and perfect Inventory, or not? And if the Jury find any omissions, undervaluations, or surcharges, then the same Clerk will sue the Executor upon the Bond he gave for exhibiting an Inventory, and will thereby compell him to make good to the Estate so much as shall be found by the Jury to be omitted, underva∣lued, or surcharged, unless he can by proof discharge himself thereof before the Court of Aldermen, who upon application made by any Executor, will examin into the Ac∣compts of such Executor, and do right to all parties, without any expence to the Execu∣tor or the Orphants. When it shall appear by any Inventory that many Debts are standing out due to the deceased, the Court of Aldermen do con∣stantly compel the Executor to give Bond to render a true Accompt from time to time when he shall be thereunto required; the Condition of which Bond is as follow∣eth.
The Condition of a Bond to Accompt. THe Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the above bounden A. B. do at all and every time and times hereafter, within One month next after warning to him to be given, or for him to be left in writing at the now Dwel∣ling-house of R. B. situate in Cornhill in London, bring and exhibit into the Court of our Sovereign Lord the King, to be holden before the Major and Aldermen of the City aforesaid for the time being, in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the same City, a true and perfect Accompt in writing upon his Corporal Oath, of all and singular the sperate, doubtful, and desperate Debts whatsoever, which were due and belonging to R. R. late Ci∣tizen and Grocer of London, deceased, at the time of his death, as shall come to his hands or custody, or to the hands or custody of any other person or persons to his use, or by his appointment, and upon like notice to him to be given, or for him to be left in writing as aforesaid, bring, or cause to be brought, into the Court aforesaid, good and sufficient Sureties to be bound for the true and sure payment of so much Money as up∣on
every such Accompt shall appear, or be found due or belonging to the Chil∣dren and Orphants of the said R. R. or else do and shall pay, or cause to be paid into the Chamber of London, to the use of the same Orphants, so much Money as upon every such Accompt shall ap∣pear, or be found due or belonging to the same Orphants; That then, &c. or else, &c. It is usual once in Twelve months to sum∣mon the Executor to give an accompt, and if upon the exhibiting thereof it shall appear that any Money is due to the Orphants, the Executor must either pay the same Moneys into the Chamber of London, or give good Security to pay the same; which if he omit or refuse, his Bond will be put in suit a∣gainst him. The method for giving an Ac∣compt. THe Executor must write an Accompt of his Receipts and Payments since the Inventory exhibited, and give it to Mr. Com∣mon Sergeant, who will examin it, and cause it to be ingrossed, and set his Hand thereunto, and to a Duplicate thereof for the Executor; and then the Executor must
make Oath before the Court of Aldermen that the Accompt is true. Note.That if any Executor cannot give in his Ac∣compt according to the time mentioned in his Bond, he must apply himself to the Court of Aldermen for further time, which is usually granted. Fees to be paid when Security is gi∣ven for Orphants Moneys, if the Sum to be secured amount to 100 l. and do not exceed 300 l.   s. d. To the Common Sergeant 6 8 To the Common Crier 6 8 To the Town Clerk 2 0 To the Clerk of the Orphants 1 4   16 8 The like Fees must be paid for every 300 l. that is secured; and if the Sum secured be 1000 l. then the Security must enter into 4 Recognizances; the last of which Recog∣nizances must be for payment of 100 l. on∣ly the Fees in such case will amount to  3 l. 6 s. 8 d.
If the Sum secured is but 20 l. then the Fees are as followeth:   s. d. To the Common Sergeant 3 4 To the Common Crier 3 4 To the Town Clerk 2 0 To the Clerk of the Orphants 1 4   10 0 If the Sum of any Recognizance shall be under 20 l. then the Common Sergeant's Fees and Common Criers Fees are but One penny in every pound: But the Town Clerk and Clerk of the Orphants have the same Fees as above is mentioned. Fees to be paid for acknowledging satisfaction upon 4 Recognizan∣ces for 1000 l.   s. d. To the Common Sergeant upon e∣very Recognizance 6 8 To the Common Crier 5 6 To the Town Clerk 2 0 To the Clerk of the Orphants 1 4 The Fees in such case will in the whole a∣mount to three pounds.
If satisfaction is to be acknowledged up∣on a Recognizance but for 20 l. then the Fees are as followeth:   s. d. To the Common Sergeant 3 4 To the Common Crier 2 6 To the Town Clerk 2 0 To the Clerk of the Orphants 1 4   9 2 But if the Moneys due to the Orphants shall be paid into the Chamber of London, then there is no Fees due to any person. Here followeth the form of a Bill for the Son of a Freeman unadvanced by his Father in his life time, to re∣cover the Customary part of his Fathers Estate. To the Right Honourable, &c. HVmbly complaining, sheweth unto your Lordship and Worships, your daily Orator A. B. of London, Gent. Son of J. B. late Citizen and Mercer of Lon∣don, deceased, That whereas there is now, and for all the time whereof the memory of man is not to the contrary, there hath been an ancient and laudable Custom used, continued, and approved
within this Honourable City of London and Liberties thereof, and by several Acts of Parliament ratified and con∣firmed, That if any Citizen and Free∣man of this said City of London, happen to dye, having at the time of his death no Wife, but a Child or Children of his Body lawfully begotten, unadvanced in the life time of such Citizen and Free∣man with the Goods and Chattels of Citizen and Freeman so deceasing; And such Citizen and Freeman of the said City of London so deceasing, being of his death possessed of, or any ways interes∣sed in any Goods, Chattels, and other personal Estate, and so dying a Freeman of the said City of London, Then and in such case all and singular the Goods, Chattels, and personal Estate whereof such Citizen and Freeman of the said Ci∣ty of London was so possessed of, or in∣teressed in at the time of his death, af∣ter deduction and defalcation made of the just and due Debts that were owing by such Citizen and Freeman so deceas∣ing at the time of his death, and of the reasonable and customary expences of the Funeral of such Citizen and Free∣man so deceasing, is and ought to be, and for all the time aforesaid have been accustomed to be divided into two equal Moieties and half parts and portions, and disposed of in manner following, viz. one moiety and equal half part
thereof doth belong, and ought to go to the Child of such Citizen and Freeman of the said City, of his Body lawfully begotten, and unadvanced by his or her said Father in his life time, with the Goods or Chattels of such Citizen and Freeman so deceasing; And if such Citi∣zen and Freeman of London so dying, shall have more then one Child of his Body lawfully begotten, at the time of his death, unadvanced by their said Fa∣ther in his life time with the Goods and Chattels of such Citizen and Freeman so deceasing, then the said moiety or e∣qual half part of the Goods, Chattels, and other personal Estate whereof such Citizen and Freeman shall dye possessed of, or be interessed in, at the time of his death, doth belong, and ought to go and be divided to and amongst such Children of such Citizen and Freeman of the said City, of his Body lawfully begotten, and unadvanced by his, her, or their said Father in his life time, with the Goods or Chattels of such Citizen and Freeman so deceasing, share and share alike as his, her, and their Orphanage or customary part and portion of, and in the said Goods, Chattels, and other per∣sonal Estate of such Citizen and Free∣man so deceasing; And the other moiety or equal part of the said Goods, Chat∣tels, and other personal Estate whereof such Citizen and Freeman of the said
City of London, shall dye possessed of, or be any ways interessed in at the time of his death, doth belong to such Citizen and Freeman so deceasing, to be at his dispose in and by his last Will, if he shall make any, or to go to the Executor or Executors of such last Will and Testa∣ment, or to the Administrator or Admi∣nistrators of the Goods, and Chattels of such Citizen and Freeman so deceasing, as the case doth require; And by the said Custom of this Honourable City of of London, all and every Wills and Te∣staments, Devise or Devises, or other Acts made or done by any such Citizen of the said City of London, for devising, settling, or disposing of his personal E∣state, or any part thereof, contrary to, or not agreeable with the said Custom of the said City of London, is, and are, and time out of mind have been deemed and adjudged by the usage of the said City, as unto so much thereof as hath been contrary to the said Custom, frau∣dulent, void, and of none effect: And your Orator further sheweth, that his said late Father J. B. was in his life time, and at the time of his death, a Citizen and Freeman of this Honoura∣ble City of London (to wit) of the Com∣pany of Mercers of London, and was then possessed of, and interessed in a per∣sonal Estate, consisting in Goods, Chat∣tels, Wares, Leases, ready Money,
Plate, Housholdstuff, Linnen, Woollen, Bedding, Brass and Pewter, and of Debts due by specialties, and of Debts due without specialties, and of other things of the value of Eight hundred pounds; And he the said J. B. being so possessed of such Estate, did in his life time, viz. in or about the  day of  last, make his last Will and Testament in writing, and thereof did constitute and appoint E. B. his Ex∣ecutor; And shortly afterwards, viz. on the  day of  last past, he the said J. B. your Orators said late Father departed this life, being at the time of his death a Citizen and Free∣man of this City, and then possessed of, and interessed in the personal Estate a∣foresaid, having no Wife, and but one only Child, viz. your said Orator, who was altogether unadvanced by his said late Father in his life time with the Goods or Chattels of his said late Fa∣ther; And he the said E. B. shortly after the death of the said J. B. proved the said last Will and Testament, and took upon him the execution thereof; And by vir∣tue thereof the said E. B. hath possessed himself of all and every the said Goods, Chattels, Leases, ready Money, Plate, Housholdstuff, Linnen, Woollen, Bed∣ding, Brass, Pewter, and other the said personal Estate, whereof the said J. B. your Orator's said late Father, died
possessed, or that he was interessed in at the time of his death, or of the great∣est (or a very considerable) part thereof, or the same is come to the hands, custo∣dy, or possession of some other person or persons, by or with his privity, know∣ledge, or consent; And the said E. B. or some other person or persons on his be∣half, have had and received some of the said Debts and Sums of Money that were due and owing to the said Testator at the time of his death, and hath alter∣ed the property of others of the said Debts, by taking new Securities for the same in the name of himself, or in the name or names of some other person or persons in trust, to and for his use; And the said E. B. hath possessed himself of divers Bonds, Bills obligatory of Debt, Accompts, Books of Accompts, and other Writings and Papers that that belonged to the said Testator at the time of his Death: And your Orator further sheweth, That your Orator's said late deceased Father J. B. in his life time, viz. about two Months next be∣fore his death, finding himself drawing towards his end, and honestly intend∣ing to pay and discharge all his just Debts before he died, did deliver unto the said E. B. the Sum of 100 l. or there∣abouts in trust that he should therewith pay his the said Testators said Debts, and to render an Accompt thereof, and
restore the residue or overplus thereof (all his said Debts being satisfied) unto the said Testator; And he the said E. B. did accordingly satisfie (or ought to have paid) therewith all the Debts that your Orator's said late deceased Father J. B. did then justly owe, so that the said Testator was not at the time of his death indebted to any person whatsoever, or if he were, yet it was in some very inconsiderable Sum of Money; But he the said E. B. rendred no Accompt of the said 100 l. or other Sum, or of any part thereof, un∣to the said Testator in his life time, nor did he repay to the said Testator the o∣verplus of the same over and besides what was by him disbursed in or to∣wards payment of the said Debts, as by the said Trust reposed in him as a∣foresaid, he ought to have done: And your Orator further sheweth, That one moiety or equal half part of the said clear personal Estate whereof your O∣rators said late deceased Father J. B. was possessed of, and interessed in at the time of his death, as aforesaid, amount∣ing to the Sum of 400 l. or thereabouts, and the same being due unto your said Orator by the said Custom of this Ho∣nourable City, as your Orator is the only Child that his said late Father had at the time of his death, and was al∣together unadvanced by your Orator's
said late Father, by or with the Goods or Chattels of his late Father, in his said late Fathers life time; And the said Testator having no Wife at the time of his death, your said Orator hath lately in friendly manner demand∣ed your Orator's said customary part of his said late Fathers personal Estate of him the said E. B. But so it is, may it please your Lordship and Worships, that the said E. B. doth absolutely deny to satisfie the same to your Orator, and will not discover the said Testators said Estate, but concealing the same, hath not exhibited any Inventory of the Particulars of the same Estate; But if he hath exhibited any Inventory thereof, the same is a very untrue and imperfect Inventory, and many of the Particulars therein mentioned are therein, and in the Appraisement there∣of, greatly undervalued; And divers Particulars of the said Testators said Estate are wholly omitted out of such Inventory; And the same Inventory is surcharged with divers Debts sup∣posed to be due by the said Testator at the time of his death to several persons, whereas in truth the same were in the life time of the said Testator paid and satisfied by the said Testator himself, or by the said E. B. for and on the said Te∣stators behalf, and by his order, and with the proper Moneys of the said Te∣stator
as aforesaid; And the said E. B. hath omitted out of the said Invento∣ry several Debts that were due and ow∣ing to the said Testator at the time of his death; And the said E. B. hath not made any Accompt of the said 100 l. or other Sum so delivered to him by the said Testator, or order, in his life time, in trust for discharge of the said Testa∣tors Debts; Nor hath he brought the o∣verplus (or any part) thereof to the E∣state of the said Testators: All which doings of the said E. B. tend to your Orators great wrong, and to the de∣frauding him of his said Customary part of his said late Fathers said perso∣nal Estate, and are contrary to Equity and good Conscience. In tender consi∣deration of all which premisses, and forasmuch as your said Orator hath no remedy or relief touching the premisses, at or by the strict Rules of the Common Law of this Realm, for that your O∣rators Witnesses, by whom he should prove the Particulars of the said Estate, and other the Premisses to be such as they are hereby afore declared, are in parts beyond the Seas, and in pla∣ces far remote from this Honourable City, so as your Orator knoweth not where readily to find them; But your Orator is only relievable in the Pre∣misses in this Court of Equity, where matters of this nature are most proper∣ly
to be examined; And where your Orator doth well hope that the said E. B. will upon his Oath discover the truth of the Premisses (being thereun∣to required) To the intent therefore that the said E. B. may set forth a true, perfect, and exact Inventory and Ac∣compt of all and every of the Goods, Chattels, Leases, ready Money, Plate, Houshold-stuff, Debts due by Specialties and otherwise, and other the said personal Estate whereof the said J. B. died possessed, or was any ways interessed in at the time of his death, and the true and particular va∣lues of the same, and how much the said personal Estate doth amount unto; And that he may set forth all and every the Particulars of the same Estate that within two months before the death of the said Testator, or at any time since hath come to the hands, custody, or pos∣session of him the said E. B. or of any other person or persons, by or with his knowledge, privity, or consent, and of whom and where the same are, and the particular values of them also, and all and every the Debts, Sum and Sums of Money that he the said E. B. or his or∣der, hath had or received, that were owing or belonging to the said Testator, at his death, or to his said Estate since his death; And may also set forth, whether the said Testator, or order, did not in
his life time deliver unto him the said E. B. the Sum of 100 l. or some other Sum of Money, and how long before his death, and to what use or purpose; Whether it was not in trust that he the said E. B. should therewith pay and dis∣charge such Sums of Money or Debts, or some of them, that he the said Testa∣tor did then owe, and how and to whom he the said E. B. did pay or dispose of the same, or any part thereof in the said Testator's life time, and how much thereof did remain at the death of the said Testator indisposed of; And whe∣ther there remained any Debt or Debts due by the said Testator at the time of his death unsatisfied, and may declare the particulars of the same Debts, and the Names, Sirnames, and Places of abode of all and every the persons to whom the same were respectively due; And may also declare how much the one Moiety, or one half part of the said Testator's clear personal Estate where∣of he died possessed, or was interessed any ways in at the time of his death, doth amount unto; And may set forth a particular of all and every the Bonds, Bills, Leases, Books of Accompts, and other Accompts, Papers, and Writings of and belonging to and con∣cerning the said Testator and his E∣state, that hath come to his hands, custody, or knowledge, and the respe∣ctive
Contentts of the same; And may answer all and singular other the Pre∣misses, and your Orator be therein re∣lieved according to Equity; May it please your Lordship and Worships of your accustomed goodness to cause the said E. B. to be warned &c. to Answer the Premisses upon his Corporal Oath; And that he may be enjoyned to per∣form and abide such Order and De∣cree in and touching the Premisses, as to your Lordship and Worships, upon hearing the Cause, shall seem meet. And your Orator shall pray, &c.
THE Hustings Court. THE Court of Hustings is a very ancient Court of Record, and is always held in Guildhall before the Lord Major and Sheriffs of London for the time being, and when any matter is to be argued or tried in this Court, Mr. Recorder sits as Judge with the Lord Major and She∣riffs, and gives Rules and Judgment there∣in. This Court is recorded to be held upon Mondays, but it is usually held every Tues∣day; and if Tuesday happen to be a Holy-day, then there is no Court held for that reason: But a Court is always held although Monday be a Holy-day, except at the parti∣cular times hereafter mentioned. There is Hustings of Pleas of Land, and Hustings of Common Pleas, the Titles of which Courts for this present year, and the times when there is not, nor cannot be any Court held, are as followeth.
Jan. 12. 1678/9. Pl'ita terre tent' in Hustingo in Guihald' London die Lune prox' post Festum Epiphanie Dni' Anno Regni Caroli Scdi' &c. Tricesimo primo. 19. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune in Festo Sci' Wolstani Epi'. 26. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum Converc'onis Sci' Pauli. Febr. 2. Co'ia Pli'ta tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sce' Agathe Vir∣ginis. 9. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum Sci' Valentini Epi' & Martyris. 16. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Valentini Epi' & Martyris. 23. Pl'ita terre nulla Quia dies Mar∣tis fuit Festum Carnis privij. Mar. 1. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Mathei Apo∣stoli 8. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum Sci' Gregorij Epi'. 15. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Gregorij Epi'. 22. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum Annuntiac'onis Beate Marie Virginis. 29. Co'ia Pl'ita nulla Quia post Do∣minicam in Passione.
April 5. 1680. Pl'ita terre nulla Quia post Domi∣nicam in Ramis Palmar'. 12. Co'ia Pl'ita nulla Quia in Hebdo∣mada Pasche. 19. Pl'ita terre tent &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum Sci' Georgij Matyris. 26. Co'ia Pl'ita tem' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Marci Evan∣geliste. May 3. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Apostolor' Philippi & Jacobi. 10. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Johannis ante Portam Latinam. 17. Pl'ita terre nulla Quia Hebdoma∣da Rogac'onis. 24. Co'ia Pl'ito tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Dunstani Ar∣chiepiscopi. 31. Pl'ita terre nulla Quia Hebdoma∣da Pentecostes. June 7. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum Sci' Barnabe Apo∣stoli. 14. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Barnabe Apo∣stoli. 21. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum Sci' Joh'is Bap∣tiste. 28. Pl'ita terre nulla Quia dies Martis fuit Festum Apostolor' Petri & Pau∣li.
July 5. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Visitac'onis Beate Marie Virginis. 12. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Benedicti Ab∣batis. 19. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum Sancte Margarette Virginis. 26. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Jacobi Apostoli. Aug. 2. Co'ia Pl'ita nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur à primo die Augu∣sti usque Festum Sci' Michaelis Arch'i scdm' con∣suetud' &c. 9. Pl'ita terre nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur à primo die Augu∣sti usque Festum Sci' Michaelis Arch'i scdm' con∣suetud' &c. 16. Co'ia Pl'ita nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur à primo die Augu∣sti usque Festum Sci' Michaelis Arch'i scdm' con∣suetud' &c. 23. Plita terre nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur à primo die Augu∣sti usque Festum Sci' Michaelis Arch'i scdm' con∣suetud' &c. 30. Co'ia Pl'ita nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur à primo die Augu∣sti usque Festum Sci' Michaelis Arch'i scdm' con∣suetud' &c. Sept. 6. Pli'ta terre nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur à primo die Augu∣sti usque Festum Sci' Michaelis Arch'i scdm' con∣suetud' &c. 13. Co'ia Pl'ita nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur à primo die Augu∣sti usque Festum Sci' Michaelis Arch'i scdm' con∣suetud' &c. 20. Pl'ita terre nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur à primo die Augu∣sti usque Festum Sci' Michaelis Arch'i scdm' con∣suetud' &c. 27. Co'ia Pl'ita nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur à primo die Augu∣sti usque Festum Sci' Michaelis Arch'i scdm' con∣suetud' &c. Octob. 4. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Michaelis Arch∣angeli. 11. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum tnanslac'onis Sci' Ed'ri Regis & Confessor'. 18. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum translac'onis Sci' Ed'ri Regis & Confessor'. 25. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum Apostolor' Simonis & Jude.
Nov. 1. Pl'ita terre nulla Quia dies Mar∣tis fuit Festum omnium Animar'. 9. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' ante Festum Sci' Martini Epis∣copi. 15. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Martini Epis∣copi. 22. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Edmundi Re∣gis. 29. Pl'ita terre nulla Quia dies Mar∣tis fuit Festum Sci' Andree Aposto∣li. Dec. 6. Co'ia Pl'ita tent' &c. die Lune prox' post Festum Sci' Andree Apo∣stoli. 13. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune in Festo Sce' Lucie Virginis. 20. Co'ia Pl'ita nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur post Festum O sa∣pientia & ante Festum Epiphanie Domini. 27. Pl'ita terre nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur post Festum O sa∣pientia & ante Festum Epiphanie Domini. Jan. 3. Co'ia Pl'ita nulla Quia null' Hu∣stingum tenetur post Festum O sa∣pientia & ante Festum Epiphanie Domini. 10. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. die Lune prox' post' Festum Epiphanie Do∣mini.
In this Court Deeds may be Inrolled, Re∣coveries may be passed, Wills may be pro∣ved, and Replevins, Writs of Error, Writs of Right, Patent, Writs of Waste, Writs of Partition, and Writs of Dower, may be determined for any matters within the City of London and the Liberties thereof. The Attorneys of the Lord Major's Court are Attorneys also in this Court;Note. and the second Attorney is always Clerk of the Inrollments, and Inrolls all Deeds that are brought for that purpose. The method for Inrolling a Deed is thus: First, the Parties that Sealed the Deed must go before the Lord Major, or the Recorder, and one Al∣derman, and acknowledge it to be their Act and Deed; and if a Wife be a party, she is examined by them, whether it was done by her freely and without compulsion; and then his Lordship and the Alderman set their hands in testimony thereof; for which 4 d. is paid to each of them, and to the Attor∣ney for the Indorsment 2 s. Then the Deed must be delivered to the Clerk of the In∣rollments, who will at the next Hustings then following, cause Proclamation to be made, If any person can any thing say why the same Deed should not be Inrolled: And then proceeds to Inroll the same.
The Fees for Inrollment of a Deed are as followeth.   s. d. To Mr. Recorder 6 8 To the Chamberlain 1 8 To the Town-Clerk 0 10 To the Attorney for every Press 6 0 To his Clerk 0 8 A Deed Inrolled in the Hustings is ac∣counted as good as a Fine at Common Law, for that it bars the Wife from claiming her Dower. When a Will is to be proved in the Hustings, the Witnesses thereto must be sworn at some Court of Hustings; and if their Evidence be full, the Clerk of the Inrollments will enter it upon Re∣cord, which is the best way of pro∣ving Wills touching Estates in London. The manner of passing a Recovery in this Court is thus: First, a Writ of right Patent must be obtained from the Cursitor for London, which must be deli∣vered to one of the Attorneys of this Court, who will thereupon prepare the Record, and procure the Recovery to pass: The Charge whereof is as follow∣eth:
  l. s. d. For drawing the Writ 0 1 0 For the Writ of Right 0 5 6 For allowance thereof 0 2 0 For the Attorneys Fee 0 3 4 For the Warrant of Attorney 0 0 4 For the Precept of Summons 0 2 0 For the Retorn thereof 0 2 8 For the Declaration 0 2 0 For the Tenants Plea 0 2 0 For entring thereof 0 2 0 For the Vouchees Plea 0 2 0 For entring thereof 0 2 0 For the Common Vouchers Plea 0 2 0 For entring thereof 0 2 0 The Record for the Pleaders 0 2 6 The Common Crier 0 1 0 The Common Voucher 0 1 0 The Green-cloth 0 1 0 The four Pleaders 0 13 4 For entring the Judgment 0 2 0 The Attorneys Fee thereupon 0 3 4 The Precept for Seizin 0 2 0 Retorn thereof 0 2 8 For drawing and ingrossing the Record 0 13 4 For exemplifying it 0 6 8 For the Seal 0 6 8 The Clerk 0 0 8   4 7 0
It is usual to have a Deed sealed to lead the uses of the Recovery, and to cause such Deed to be Inrolled. If the Vouchees cannot attend at Court, they may sign a Warrant of Attorney, and acknowledge it before Mr. Recorder, and that will be allowed as good as their per∣sonal attendance; which Warrant must be in these words: J B. & A. ux' ejus quos B. R. vocat ad warrantizand' &c. po. lo. suis W. L. & T. M. conjunctim & divisim versus L. B. in pl'ito terre &c. viz. de quatuor Messuagiis & quatuor gardinis cum pertinen' scituat' jacen' & existen' in Parochia Sci' Botolphi extra Ald∣gate in Warda de Portsoaken London ad lucrand' & perdend' &c. secundum consuetud' Civitatis London. Primo die Julij Anno &c. J. B. A. B. capi' & cognit' coram me G. J. Recordator'.   s. d. For which Warrant the Fee to Mr. Recorder is 6 8 When any person would Replevy Goods in London, he must go to the Clerk of the Pa∣pers belonging to one of the Compters, and give in the Particulars, and Security to re∣store
the Goods or the value, in case upon a Trial it shall appear the same did not be∣long to him. And then the Clerk will give a Warrant to one of the Sheriffs Officers to cause the Goods to be Appraised, and to de∣liver them to the Plaintiff. After the Ap∣praisment is made, and the Goods delivered the Officer must make return thereof to the Clerk of the Papers, who will immediate∣ly thereupon certifie the Record thereof in∣to this Court, where the same must be de∣cided: And if Issue shall be joyned to try in whom the property of the Goods was when the same were taken, a Jury must be summoned to try the Issue: And in order thereunto, Precepts must be issued to the Beadles of the six adjacent Wards, to re∣turn the Names of the six substantial Free∣holders and Inhabitants in each Ward, which Precepts must be as followeth. By the Major. To the Beadle of the Ward of THese are to require you, with the advice of your Alderman and De∣puty, to return unto me in writing un∣der your Hand the Names and Sir∣names of six Freeholders, Inhabitants within your Ward, to be of a Iury at
the next Hustings of Common Pleas in the Guildhall, London, for trial of an Issue joyned between R. G. and W. B. in a Plea of Replevin, and hereof not to fail. Dated the  day of  1680. When the Names are so returned, a Pre∣cept must be sent to the Sheriffs, to require them to Summon the Jury to appear at the next Hustings of Common Pleas, to try the Issue. A Writ of Error may be brought in this Court to reverse any Judgment given in the Sheriffs Court. The Writ must be made by the Cursitor for London, and dire∣cted to the Major and Sheriffs of London; and when Sealed, must be delivered to Mr. Town-Clerk to allow the same; and at the same time must enter into Bond with two sufficient Sureties to pay the Debt, or Da∣mages, and Costs recovered, and which shall be assessed in case the Judgment should happen to be affirmed, or in case the Plain∣tiff in the Writ of Error should not prose∣cute the Writ of Error with effect: And when Security shall be so given, Mr. Town-Clerk will make a Supersedeas directed to the Sheriffs, to stay further proceedings upon the Judgment. And it is usual to move the Court at the next Hustings of Common Pleas, after the allowance of the Writ, that the proceedings in the Sheriffs Court may be certified within fourteen days then following, into this Court, where Errors may be assigned and argued; and if Judg∣ment
shall be affirmed, the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, may bring another Writ of Error before the Judges to examin the former Judgment. The Condition of a Bond to be given upon allowance of a Writ of Error in this Court. COndic'o istius Obligac'onis talis est quod cum supra obligat' J. J. deliberavit Ro∣b' to Clayton Mil' Majori Civitatis London & Jonathan' Raymond Mil' & Simon' Lewis Mil' Vicecomitibus ejusdem Civitatis quoddam breve de Error' Corrigend' in Recordo & Pro∣cessu Loquele que fuit in Cur' Dni' Regis Ci∣vitatis praed' coram Johanne Chapman Mil' nu∣per uno Vicecom' dicte Civitatis sine breve dicti Dni' Regis secundum consuetud' Civitatis praed' inter predictum T. M. & J. J. de deb'to du∣centar' librar' quod idem T. M. à prefat' J.J. exigit ut dicitur necnon in reddic'one Juditij Loquele praed' coram praed' J. C. Mil. si igitur pred' J. J. prosecutus fuerit cum effectu breve pred' Ac etiam solverit & satisfecerit prefat' T. M. debitum damna & custag' sua tam sibi adjudicat' quam imposterum adjudicand' in hac parte Et hoc infra quatuordecim dies prox' post affirmac' o∣nem Juditij praed' si contigerit Quod tunc pre∣sens obligac'o pro nullo h'eatur Alioquin in om∣ni suo robore stet & virtute.
The form of a Supersedeas is as followeth. Per Majorem, &c. Vicecom' London. QƲia in recordo & processu ac etiam in red∣dic'one Juditij Loquel' que fuit in Cur' Dni' Regis Civitatis pred' coram J. C. Mil' nu∣per uno Vicecom' dicte Civitatis sine breve dicti Dni' Regis secundum consuetud' ejusdem Civita∣tis inter T. M. & J. J. de quadam transgres∣sion' super casum per prefat' J. J. illat' ut dicitur Error intervenit manifestus ad grave dampnum ipsius J. J. sicut ex querela sua accepit dictus Do∣minus Rex & pro eo quod pred' J. J. imposuit co∣ram nobis sufficien' securitat' ad breve pred' prosequena' cum effectu necnon ad satisfaciend' prefat' T. M. damna miss' & custag' tam ipsi adjudicat' quam imposterum adjudicand' si conti∣gerit Judicium pred' affirmari Vobis igitur pre∣cipimus quod quoad execuc'onem Juditij pred' in aliquo faciend' Supersedeatis omnino (dicta breve de Error' penden' indecissus) Et ulterius vobis mandamus quod record' & process' Lo∣quel' pred' cum omnibus ea tangen' coram nobis ad prox' Hustingum London de Com'ibus Pl'itis apud Guihald' Civit' pred' tenend' h'eatis Ac etiam premon' partibus pred' quod tunc sint ibi∣dem
auditur' record' & process' pred' si &c. Et h'eat' ib'i tunc hoc precept' &c. When Judgment shall be affirmed in this Court, upon a motion the Court will order the Bond to be delivered up to the Defen∣dant in the Writ of Error, to put the same in suit for his Costs and Damages susteined, by reason of the delay of Execution, who shall not be compelled to cancel or part with the same till he shall be fully satisfied. If the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error do not certifie the Record out of the Sheriffs Court into this Court, according to the time given by the Court, or if he shall not assign Errors, the Court will give Judgment against the Plaintiff, and issue out a Warrant in the nature of a Procedendo to the Sheriffs of Lon∣don, thereby commanding them to proceed to Execution upon the Judgment obtained in that Court. That the Sheriffs by commandment of the Lord Major are Ministers to execute all Process out of this Court,Note. notwithstanding the Original Writ be directed to the Major and Sheriffs jointly.
Writs of Right are made as fol∣loweth in these words. CAROLƲS Secundus Dei gratia Angl' Scotie Francie & Hibernie Rex Fidei Defensor' &c. Majori & Vicecomibus London salutem. Precipimus vobis quod sine dil'one ple∣num rectum teneatis R. B. de septem Messuagiis cum pertinentiis in London que clamat tenere de nobis per liberum servitium unius denar' per an∣num pro omni servitio que J. B. ei deforc' Ne amplius inde clamore audiamus pro defectu recti Teste meipso apud Westmonasterium  die  Anno Regni nostri Tricesimosecun∣do. Which Writs have this Process by Cu∣stom of the City, viz. the Tenants shall have three Summons at three several Hu∣stings, and three Essoigns. The Summons are after this manner. Per Majorem. Vi' London. PRecipimus vobis quod summon' primo per bo∣nos summonitor' J. B. quod sit hic ad prox' Hustingum London de pl'itis terre in
Guihald' Civitatis pred' tenend' &c. ad re∣spondendum R. B. in pl'ito terre &c. Et ha∣beatis tunc & ibidem nomina illorum per quos &c. Et hoc preceptum &c. Dat' apud Gui∣hald' Civitatis pred'  die  Anno &c. After the Sheriff hath returned all the Summons, three Essoigns are allowed, and after that a View if desired. The Essoign is recorded after this man∣ner. Pl'ita terre tent' &c. AD hunc Hustingum J. B. essoin' est primo versus R. B. in pl'ito terre &c. per Jo∣hannem Auncient' & Ric'um Custome secundum consuetud' &c. Election of Burgesses and other Officers. IN this Court the Burgesses to serve for the City in Parliament must be Elected by the Livery-men of the respective Com∣panies. Upon every Michaelmas day it is the Cu∣stom to choose a Lord Major for the Year following; and the useage is to put all those Gentlemen in nomination that are Alder∣men
under the Chair, who have held the Office of Sheriff. The Commons must choose two, and retorn their Names to the Lord Major and Aldermen, who elect which of the two they think most fit to hold the place, and signifie their choice to the Com∣mons. And the Person so elected must be presented to the Lord Chancellor, and after∣wards must be sworn at Guildhall on St. Si∣mon and Judes day, and the day after at the Exchequer. Upon Midsomer day the Livery-men of the respective Companies do choose Sheriffs: But my Lord Major by his Prerogative may drink to any Citizen, and nominate him to be one of the Sheriffs; and the usage hath been for the Commons to confirm such Per∣son, and to elect another to serve with him. And after the Sheriffs are elected, the Com∣mons choose two Auditors for the Chamber and Bridge-house Accompts, a Chamberlain, two Bridgmasters, and four Ale-Conners. Note.That the Sheriffs are Judges of the Electi∣ons, and do declare by Mr. Common Ser∣geant, who are the Persons elected. After the Sheriffs are so elected, they take an Oath at Guildhall upon Michaelmas-Eve, and the day after Michaelmas day must be presented to the Barons of the Exchequer; and when they are sworn, it is not in the power of the Commons to remove them at their pleasure.
The Chamberlain and Bridge-Masters, after Election, take the usual Oath before the Lord Major and Court of Alder∣men. THE COURT OF Common Councel. THis Court is held in the Chamber of Guildhall before the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Councel-men of the City of London, at such times as the Lord Major shall appoint and direct it, being in his Lordships power to call and dismiss this Court at his pleasure. Several Committees are Annually ap∣pointed and elected by this Court for the better and more speedy dispatch of the Ci∣ties Affairs, who make report to this Court of their doings and proceedings, as occasion requires, viz.
1. A Committee of six Aldermen and twelve Commoners for letting and demising the Cities Lands and Tenements, who usu∣ally meet every Wednesday in the Afternoon at Guildhall for that purpose. 2. A Committee of four Aldermen and eight Commoners to let and dispose of the Lands and Tenements given by Sir Thomas Gresham, who usually meet at Mercers-Hall at such times as the Lord Major for the time being directs and appoints. It being the Custom to elect the Lord Major one of this Committee. 3. This Court doth also Annually elect Commissioners for the Sewers and Pave∣ments. 4. This Court doth also Annually elect a a Governour, Deputy-Governour and As∣sistants, for management of the Cities Lands in Ʋlster in Ireland, pursuant to the King's Charter, which is as followeth, viz. WE will also, and by these presents for Vs, our Heirs and Succes∣sors, do grant, constitute, and ordain, That the aforesaid Society of the Go∣vernor and Assistants of London, of the New Plantation in Ulster, within the Realm of Ireland, for ever hereafter shall be yearly elected and appointed by the Major, Aldermen, and Commonalty of the said City of London, at the first Common Councel to be holden in the
same City of London, next after the Feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, at which time the Deputy of the Governor, and twelve of the same per∣sons which have been Assistants for the Year precedent, shall be removed from their Office, and one other Deputy and twelve other Assistants shall be of new named, supplied, and appointed into the places of the same Deputy and As∣sistants, so as aforesaid to be removed, for the help of the Governor and Assi∣stants not removed, for One year next following; And that at the end of that year then next following, such former Assistants which continued in the same Office in that year then preceeding, shall be then likewise removed, and others shall be likewise of new named, sup∣plied, elected, and appointed into their places, and so by an interchangeable course, so that twelve of the same As∣sistants shall be, and continue in their places, during the tearm of Two Years. And further, We will, ordain, and constitute for Vs, our Heirs and Suc∣cessors, That at a Common Councel in the aforesaid City of London, next af∣ter the Feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, next after the date of these Presents, the nominati∣on and election of the aforesaid Gover∣nor, Deputy, and Assistants be, shall
be, and shall be made in form aforesaid, and so from thenceforth yearly from time to time for ever. A Stranger born may be made Free of this City by Order of this Court, and not o∣therwise. The several Places of Common Sergeant, Town-Clerk, and Common Crier are in the Gift of this Court. The Judges of the Sheriffs Courts have sometimes been elected by this Court, and sometimes by the Court of Aldermen. After the Death of John White, late Clerk of the Court of Requests, common∣ly called the Court of Conscience, in Lon∣don, this Court did elect and choose Major Gunstone Clerk in his stead; but Mr. White was elected by the Court of Aldermen: And always before and since Major Gunstone's E∣lection, the Court of Aldermen have elected the respective Clerks of that Court. And it hath been declared by Counsel Learned in the Law, That the right of electing Clerk of the Court of Requests is not in this Court.
THE COURT OF ALDERMEN. THis is a Court of Record, and is held in the inner Chamber of Guildhall e∣very Tuesday and Thursday, except Holy-days, and in the time of Sessions of Goal delivery. All Matters touching Lights, Water∣courses, and Party-walls may be determined in this Court. The Assize of Bread is constantly ap∣pointed by this Court. All Bonds and Leases that pass under the City Seal must be sealed in this Court. Several places are in the Gift of the Lord Major and this Court, viz. The Recorder. Sword-Bearer. Four City Counsel. City Remembrancer.
Common Hunt. Water-Bailiff. Cities Solicitor. Comptroler of the Chamber. Two Secondaries. Four Attorneys of the Lord Majors Court. Clerk of the Chamber. Hall-Keeper. Three Sergeant Carvers. Three Sergeants of the Chamber. Sergeant of the Chanel. Yeomen of the Chamber. Four Yeomen of the Water-side. Yeoman of the Chanel. Under Water-Bailiff. Meal-weighers. Clerk of the Cities Works. Six Young-men. Two Clerks of the Papers. Eight Attorneys in the Sheriffs Court. Eight Clerk-Sitters. Two Prothonotaries. Clerk of the Bridge-house. Clerk of the Court of Requests. Beadle of the Court of Requests. Thirty six Sergeants at Mace. Thirty six Yeomen. The Gager. The Sealers and Searchers of Leather. Keeper of the Green-yard. Two Keepers of the Compters. Keeper of Newgate. Keeper of Ludgate. Measurer.
Steward of Southwark. Bailiff of Southwark. Bailiff of the Hundred of Ossalston. There are other Places in the Gift of the Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffs; as the Ci∣ty Carpenter and other Artificers: But the Rent-gatherer hath been put in by Mr. Cham∣berlain. If any Officer shall mis-behave himself in his Office, upon Complaint made thereof to this Court, and Proof of the Fact, such Of∣fender may be, and is usually suspended from the Profits of his Place, during the pleasure of this Court. The Rulers of the Company of Water∣men are Annually elected and appointed by this Court, pursuant to an Act of Parlia∣ment made in the Second and Third Year of Philip and Mary, which is as followeth: WHereas heretofore for lack of good Government and due Order a∣mongst Wherry-men and Water-men, &c. there have divers and many mis∣fortunes and mischances happened and chanced of late years past, to a great number of the King and Queens Sub∣jects, as well to the Nobility, as to o∣ther the common People, that have pas∣sed and repassed, and been carried by Water, by reason of the rude, ignorant, and unskilful number of Water-men, which for the most part be Masterless
men and single men of all kinds of Oc∣cupations and Faculties, which do work at their own hands, and many Boys being of small Age, and of little Skill, and being Persons out of the Rule and Obedience of any honest Ma∣ster and Governor, &c. For reformation whereof, be it Enacted by the King and Queens Majesties, &c. That there shall be yearly appointed, chosen, and elected by the Major and the Court of Aldermen of the City of London for the time being, the number of eight per∣sons of the most wise, discreet, and best sort of Water-men, being Housholders, and occupying as Water-men upon the said River, between Gravesend and Windsor; which Election shall be yearly at the first Court of Aldermen to be hol∣den within the said City next after the First day of March; And the same eight Persons so elected shall be named and called, The Overseers and Rulers of all the Wherry-men and Water-men, that from and after the said First day of March, shall use, occupy, or exercise a∣ny rowing upon the said River of Thames, betwixt Gravesend and Windsor aforesaid; which said Overseers and Rulers shall keep and maintain good order and obedience amongst the said Water-men, according to the true mean∣ing of this present Act.
And also be it further Enacted, That the Lord Major of London, and the Al∣dermen of the same City, and the Iu∣stices of Peace within the Shires next adjoyning to the said River of Thames, every of them within their several Iu∣risdiction and Authorities, shall have full Power and Authority by virtue of this present Act, upon Complaint made to them, or any of them, by the said O∣verseers and Rulers, or two of them, or the Master or Masters of any such Ser∣vants, not only to examine, hear, and determine all Complaints or Offences to be done or committed by any such person or persons that shall offend con∣trary to the true meaning of this present Act, and to set at large all and every such person and persons as shall fortune to be imprisoned by the said Overseers and Rulers, according to this Act, if just cause shall appear unto them so to do, but also by their good discretions and wis∣dom to punish, correct, and reform the said Overseers and Rulers, and every of them that shall unjustly, or without good cause or ground punish any per∣son or persons by colour of this present Act, or any thing therein contained. And be it further Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That if any person or persons, which at any time hereafter shall be elected or chosen to be a Ruler or Overseer, as before is expressed, do hap∣pen
negligently to use and exercise his or their room or place, or that will ob∣stinately refuse to take upon him or them the room or rooms, place or places of a∣ny the said Overseers or Rulers, that then all and every such Offender or Of∣fenders shall lose and forfeit the sum of Five pounds of lawful Money of Eng∣land, the one half whereof shall be to out said Sovereign Lord, &c. and the other half to him or them that will sue for the same, &c. And be it further Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That the said Major and Court of Aldermen of the said City of London for the time being, shall from time to time, at their discretions, limit, set, and assess the price and prices, and sums of Money that every person or per∣sons so authorized to rowe, as is afore∣said, betwixt Gravesend and Windsor a∣foresaid, shall take for his or their la∣bour or fare from place to place, parti∣cularly betwixt Gravesend and Windsor aforesaid, and the same prices and as∣sessments to be set, shall bring, or cause to be brought to the Privy Council of our Sovereign Lord, &c. to be viewed and seen by some of the said Privy Council; and after that the said assess∣ments and prices shall be signed and subscribed with the hands of two of the said Privy Council at the least, and the said Major and Court of Alder∣men
for the time being, shall cause the said prices and assessments to be writ∣ten and set up in Tables in the Guild∣hall in the City of London, Westminster∣hall, and elsewhere, where the said Major and Court of Aldermen shall think convenient; And every person or persons that shall take for his or their fare or labour above the prices that shall be assessed, viewed, written, and set up in form aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such Offence Forty shillings, and also shall suffer imprisonment for One half year; The one Moiety of the said Forfeiture to be to the King, &c. and the other Moiety there∣of to him or them that will sue for the same in any of the King's Courts of Record, by Action of Debt, or by a∣ny other the ways or means above specified, wherein no Wager of Law, Essoin, Protection, or Injunction shall be admitted or allowed for the Defendant or Defendants.
The Rates signed and agreed upon by the Privy Council, and the Lord Major and Court of Alder∣men, to be taken by Water∣men. From Lon∣don to Limehouse. Oars. Skuller. 1 s. 6 d. From Lon∣don to Newcrane. Oars. Skuller. 1 s. 6 d. From Lon∣don to Shadwell Dock. Oars. Skuller. 1 s. 6 d. From Lon∣don to Bell-Wharf. Oars. Skuller. 1 s. 6 d. From Lon∣don to Ratcliff-Cross. Oars. Skuller. 1 s. 6 d. From Lon∣don to Wapping Dock. Oars. Skuller. 6 d. 3 d. From Lon∣don to Wapping New-stairs. Oars. Skuller. 6 d. 3 d. From Lon∣don to Wapping Old-stairs. Oars. Skuller. 6 d. 3 d. From Lon∣don to The Hermitage Rotherhith Church-stairs. Oars. Skuller. 6 d. 3 d. From Lon∣don to Rotherhith-stairs. Oars. Skuller. 6 d. 3 d. From St. O∣laves to Rotherhith Church-stairs. and Oars. Skuller. 6 d. 3 d. From St. O∣laves to Rotherhith-stairs. Oars. Skuller. 6 d. 3 d.
From Billingsgate to St. Saviour's Mill, Oars 6 d. Skuller 3 d. From St. Olaves to St. Saviour's Mill, Oars 6 d. Skuller 3 d. All the Stairs between London Bridge and Westminster, Oars 6 d. Skuller 3 d. From either side above London Bridge to Lambeth, Oars. Skuller 1 s. 6 d. From either side above London Bridge to Foxhall. Oars. Skuller 1 s. 6 d. From White∣hall to Lambeth, Oars. Skuller. 6 d. 3 d. From White∣hall to Foxhall. Oars. Skuller. 6 d. 3 d. From Temple to Lambeth Oars Skull. 8 d. 4 d. From Dorset-stairs to Lambeth Oars Skull. 8 d. 4 d. From Black-Frier-stairs to Lambeth Oars Skull. 8 d. 4 d. From Pauls-wharf to Lambeth Oars Skull. 8 d. 4 d. Over the Water directly in the next Skuller, between London Bridge and Lime-house, or London Bridge and Foxhall 2 d. From London to Gravesend, whole Fare 4 s. 6 d. with Company 9 d. From London to Graise or Greenhive, whole Fare 4 s. with Company 8 d. From London to Purfleet or Eriff, whole Fare 3 s. with Company 6 d. From London to Woolwich, whole Fare 2 s. 6 d. with Company 4 d. From London to Blackwall, whole Fare 2 s. with Company 4 d. From London to Greenwich, whole Fare 1 s. 6 d. with Company 3 d.
From London to Deptford, whole Fare 1 s. 6 d. with Company 3 d. From London to Chelsey Buttersey Wansworth whole Fare 1 s. 6 d. with Com∣pany 3 d. From London to Putney Fullham Barn Elms whole Fare 2 s. with Compa∣ny 4 d. From London to Hamersmith Chiswick Mortclack whole Fare 2 s. 6 d. with Company 6 d. From London to Brentford Isleworth Richmond whole Fare 3 s. 6 d. with Com∣pany 6 d. From London to Twickenham, whole Fare 4 s. with Company 6 d. From London to Kingston, whole Fare 5 s. with Company 9 d. From London to Hampton Court, whole Fare 6 s. with Company 1 s. From London to Hampton Town Sunbury Walton whole Fare 7 s. with Comp. 1 s. From London to Walton Weybridge Chertsey whole Fare 10 s. with Compa∣ny 1 s.
From London to Stanes, whole Fare 12 s. with Company 1 s. From London to Windsor, whole Fare 14 s. with Company 2 s. Rates for carrying Goods in the Tilt-Boat between London and Gravesend. For a half Firkin 1 d. For a whole Firkin 2 d. For a Hogshead 2 s. For a hundred weight of Cheese, Iron, or any heavy Goods 4 d. For a Sack of Salt or Corn 6 d. For an ordinary Chest or Trunk 6 d. For an ordinary Hamper 6 d. For every single Person in the ordinary Pas∣sage 6 d. For the hire of the whole Tilt-Boat 1 l. 2 s. 6 d. The Lord Major for the time being may cause any person inhabiting within London, or the Liberties, to be summoned to appear before his Lordship upon the Complaint of any Citizen; and for non-appearance, may grant his Warrant to bring such person be∣fore him, and hath power to hear and de∣termine differences between party and par∣ty.
If any Apprentice or other Person shall be carried on Ship-board, or there detain∣ed against his will, my Lord Major may send his Warrant by his Water-Bailiff, and com∣pel the Captain or Commander of the Ves∣sel to release such Person. The Citizens of London are Toll-free throughout England; and the Lord Major usually, at the Request of any Citizen that trades in remote parts, grants his Warrant or Certificate to such Citizen, in these words. TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, or the same shall see, hear, or read, J. S. Knight, Lord Major of the City of Lon∣don, sendeth Greeting in our Lord God everlasting; Know ye, that amongst o∣ther notable and ancient Liberties, Pri∣viledges, and free Customs by the Char∣ters of the Noble Progenitors of our most dread Sovereign Lord the King that now is, to the Citizens of the said City of London granted; And also by the Authority of divers Parliaments ratified and approved, These Articles and Priviledges under-written in the same Charters be contained; that is to say, That all the Citizens of the said City of London, and all their Goods and Merchandizes, shall be quit and free, in, by, and through all the Power and Do∣minions
of the King our said Sove∣reign Lord; And that the said Citizens shall and man may freely, without impedi∣ment of the King's Highness, or of any of his Subjects, carry, convey, utter, sell, and put to sale, their Goods and Merchandizes, as well on this side the Sea as beyond, and by the Ports of the Sea, as well on this side the Sea as beyond; And that the same Citizens, and all their Goods and Merchandizes, shall be quit and free of all manner of toll, passage, lastage, pickage, pontage, murage, prisage of Wine, and of all other Customes; And that the same Ci∣tizens, at their wills and wheresoever they will, shall and may stay, abide, and remain within any part of the King's Dominions, to utter, buy and sell any manner of Goods, Wares, or Merchandizes frank and free, without any lett, impediment, or restraint of the King's Highness, or of any of his Majesties Subjects, as they alwaies heretofore accordingly have used and ac∣customed; And if any person or per∣sons within any place of any part of the Dominions of the King's High∣ness on this side the Sea or beyond, do molest, grieve, lett, or trouble any of the said Citizens, their Attorneys, Fa∣ctors, Assigns, or Servants in, about, or concerning any the Premisses, or take any toll, passage, pickage, lastage, pon∣tage,
murage, prisage of Wines, or a∣ny like Custome of the said Citizens, their Attorneys, Factors, Assigns, or Servants, contrary to the said Privi∣ledges, Franchises, Liberties, and free Customs, for and in right of the said Citizens, after that they, or any of them shall so lack, and default of right in that behalf, the Sheriffs of the said City of London shall take within the said City of London, therefore Distress or Di∣stresses of other person or persons, and parties resorting to the said City of London, of the Town, Burrough, Place or City where the said Citizens of Lon∣don were so grieved, molested, troubled, or vexed, or toll, prisage, lastage, pirage, pontage, paunage, murage, prisage of Wines, or any other Customs, shall be free, had or taken contrary to the said Liberties, Franchises, Priviledges and free Customs aforesaid; Therefore in our Friendliest manner we pray, require, and exhort you, and every of you, in eschewing of further troubles and vari∣ances, that you, nor any of you, mo∣lest or trouble, or cause to be molested or troubled, by any means, or in any wise, our well-beloved Citizen R. G. Citizen and Draper of London, for his Goods, Wares, and Merchandizes, contrary or against the tenour or effect of the said Freedoms, Franchises, Liberties, Cu∣stoms, and Priviledges aforesaid; and
if ye have troubled or molested, or suf∣fered, or caused to be troubled or mole∣sted, or shall at any time or times here∣after trouble or molest our said Citizen, his Servants, Factors, Attorneys, or Assigns, or any of them; Or if you take, or have taken of the same our Ci∣tizen, or any of his Attorneys, Factors, or Servants, any thing contrary to the tenour and effect of the Freedoms, Li∣berties, Franchises, Customs, and Priviledges aforesaid, we pray and re∣quire you, and every of you, to dis∣charge, or cause to be discharged, our said Citizen, his Factors, Servants, and Goods, and that restitution or amends be made to him, them, or one of them, as of right it ought to be, so that for default of Iustice we be not constrain∣ed or compelled to execute, or cause to be executed, the penalties and pains in the said Charters and Grants contained. In witness, &c. The Lord Major of London may grant his Warrant to Distrein the Goods of For∣reigners, who shall refuse to pay the Duties of Balliage for Wares and Merchandizes brought to the City of London by Water westward. The Form of which Warrant is in these words.
Lond' ss. TO all Christian People to whom these presents shall come, or the same shall see, hear, or read, Sir T. D. Knight, Lord Major of the City of Lon∣don, sendeth Greeting; Whereas the Duties for Tolls and Balliage, due and payable for Goods and Merchandizes, brought to this City and Liberties thereof, and carried and conveyed from the same, as well by Water as by Land, by Strangers and Forreigners, from the Liberties of the same City, and other persons not lawfully discharged from payment thereof, time out of mind have appertained, and still do appertain to the Major, Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, and time out of mind have been accustomed to be demanded, gathered, and levied by certain Officers and Ministers thereunto appointed and authorized, who have answered, and still do answer several Rents for the same towards the Fee-farm of three hundred pounds yearly paid into the Court of Exchequer, which Duties of Toll and Balliage, are by the Fran∣chises of the said City confirmed by Parliament to the said Major, Com∣monalty, and Citizens of London, which time out of mind they have enjoyed and ought to enjoy. And whereas I am in∣formed that the said Duties are many times wrongfully detained, to the preju∣dice
of the Franchises and Liberties of this City, These are therefore to require all Barge-Masters, Hoy-Masters, Liter∣men, and all Masters of Vessels what∣soever, that bring or carry Goods to or from this City from London-Bridge west∣ward, at all time and times whatsoever, to give a particular account of the said Goods in their Vessels, and the several persons they belong unto to T. C. who is deputed and appointed under the Common Seal of the said Major, Com∣monalty, and Citizens, to collect, levy, and receive the said Duties for all Goods, Wares, and Merchandizes what∣soever coming in, or passing forth by water from London-Bridge westward, to or from the said City or Liberties there∣of; And these are further to authorize the said T. C. to raise, levy, and receive the said Duties, And upon denial of payment thereof, or any part thereof, to Distrein on the Goods and Chattels of the person or persons so offending or de∣nying, as well by Water as by Land, within the Liberties of the said City, and for refusal to make sale thereof immediately, and return the overplus according to Law; And for want of such Distress from time to time, and at all times, as often as occasion shall re∣quire, to bring before me, or some other of His Majesties Iustices of the Peace within this City and Liberties, the
person or persons so offending, refusing or neglecting payment, resisting or break∣ing the Peace; And these are in his Ma∣jesties Name strictly to charge and com∣mand all Constables, Wharfingers, and Meters of Sea-coals, Corn, and Salt, and all other Officers and Ministers whatsoever within this City and Liber∣ties, that they from time to time, as of∣ten as occasion requireth, be aiding and assisting to the said T. C. And that they from time to time do their best endea∣vours to see the said Duty paid, and his Majesties Peace kept in the due execu∣tion of the Premisses; And that they, or some of them, bring before me or some other of his Majesties Iustices of the Peace within this City and Liberties, all and every such person and persons as shall break, or at least disturb the Peace, or use any violence or opposition in the lawful and due execution of the Premisses, or that shall refuse to pay the Duties aforesaid, or any part there∣of; And hereof I require the said Con∣stables, and all other Officers and Mi∣nisters, or any other person or persons, being thereunto required not to fail, as they and every of them will answer the contrary at their perils, &c.
His Lordship may also grant a Warrant a∣gainst Hawkers with Flesh-meat: The Form whereof is as followeth. London ss. WHereas I am informed that divers Butchers, and other persons, having often times heretofore in Lanes, Alleys, Inns, Warehouses, Streets, Stalls, Passa∣ges, and other places within this City and Liberties thereof, offered, and there put to sale, by way of Hawking in se∣cret manner, Beef, Deal, Pork, Mut∣ton, Lamb, and other Flesh, refusing to bring the same to be sold in any Butch∣ers Shop or Markets of this City; which Flesh so offered to be sold, hath oftentimes been corrupt, rotten, and un∣wholsome: And such practices are con∣trary to ancient Customs of this City, and in particular contrary to the late Act of Common Council made in the Majoralty of Sir George Waterman Kt. late Lord Major of this City, whereby it is provided that the Flesh so offered to be put to sale shall be forfeited and dis∣posed of to such Prisons of this City as the Lord Major for the time being shall direct and appoint: Now it being found by Experience that such secret Offen∣ders shun and escape all search and due punishment, and the Markets of this City are thereby neglected and decayed; And such secret sales of Flesh are also
found to be a means of encouraging ma∣ny thievish, idle, and ill-disposed per∣sons, to steal Cattle in the Country and parts adjacent to this City, to the great deceipt and damage of his Majesties Subjects, and scandal of the Govern∣ment of this City; For the prevention whereof for the future, These are in his Majesties Name straitly to charge and command you forthwith, on sight here∣of, to be from time to time Aiding and Assisting unto the Bearer or Bearers hereof, and every of them, who shall from time to time give you notice of such Offenders; And you are hereby required to apprehend and bring before me, or some other of his Majesties Iustices of the Peace, the body or bo∣dies of all such Offenders as shall here∣after be found to sell, or offer to be put to sale in such manner, any Beef, Pork, Mutton, Lamb, or Deal, by way of Hawking, in any Inn, Lane, Ware∣house, or other obscure place or open Street within this City or Liberties thereof, to be examined and dealt with∣al as to Law and Iustice shall apper∣tain; And also that you seize such Flesh so offered to be put to sale by way of Hawking in such manner, and bring it before me, or some other of his Maje∣sties Iustices of the Peace, to the end that it may be disposed of as by the said Act is limitted and appointed;
And hereof fail not. Given under my Hand and Seal, &c. To all and every the Constables within the City of London and Liberties thereof. This Warrant is usually granted pursuant to an Act of Common Councel, Intituled, An Act for the settlement and well-ordering of several publick Markets within the City of Lon∣don. Which Act is in these words: FOr the better Order and Regulation to be had of the Market at Leaden∣hall, and the Greenyards there, with the other Market Grounds thereunto be∣longing; and of the Market at Wool-church, and the Market of Honey-lane, or Milk-street, as also the Market near Newgate, and all other Common Mar∣kets already settled and appointed, or which hereafter shall be settled and ap∣pointed within the City of London: Be it Enacted by the Right Honourable the Lord Major, and the Aldermen his Bre∣thren, and the Commons in this Com∣mon Councel Assembled, and by the Au∣thority of the same, That the Rules, Orders, and Directions hereafter pre∣scribed, he duly observed by all persons that are or may be concerned there∣in.
And first, whereas by former Acts of Common Councel, the sale of Beef hath been restrained and appointed to be only in Leaden-hall, and the Greenyards there; which if now observed, would be very inconvenient to the Inhabitants of this City, in regard the late Butchery of the Stocks, and St. Nicholas Shambles (which heretofore furnished with Beef and other Flesh Victuals, those parts of the City) are now removed and other∣wise disposed of: Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every Butcher and Butchers, Poulterer and Poulterers (other then such as are hereafter excepted) Country Farmer, Victualler, Lader, or Kidder, who keep∣eth Butchers, or Poulterers Shop, or Shops within the City of London, or Liberties thereof, or within two Miles distance of the Liberties of the same City, may from and after the publica∣tion of this Act, take to Farm, or hire Standings, Stalls, or Places, in any the aforesaid respective Markets; and there sell, utter, and put to open shew, or sale, his or their Beef, Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Pork, and other Butchery or Poultry Wares, or other Provisions, upon the four days of the week, in man∣ner as is hereafter expressed (viz.) upon Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays week∣ly, between the Feast of the Annunciati∣on, and the Feast of St. Michael, from
six of the Clock in the Forenoon, until eight of the Clock in the Evening of the same day; and between the Feast of St. Michael, and the Annuntiation, from eight of the Clock before Noon, until five of the Clock in the Evening of the same day; and upon every Saturday in the Week all the Year long, from the a∣foresaid respective hours of six and eight of the Clock before Noon, until eight of the Clock in the Evening of the same day, for so long time only as he or they shall furnish the said Stalls, Stand∣ings, and Places with wholsom Flesh and other Provisions in his or their own right, and not as Servant or Servants, or otherwise, in behalf of any others; any thing in any former Act of Com∣mon Councel contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstand∣ing. Provided always, That no Butcher, or Poulterer whatsoever, who keepeth no Shop or Shops within the City of London, or Liberties thereof, or within two Miles distance of the same City, shall in the said respective Markets, sell, utter, or put to open shew or sale, his or their Butchery or Poultry Wares upon Mondays and Fridays weekly, upon pain that every such Butcher or Poul∣terer shall for every time he or they shall sell, utter, or put to open shew or sale in the said Markets his or their Butchery,
or Poultry Wares, upon Monday or Fri∣day in any week, forfeit the sum of ten shillings. And to the end the respective hours a∣foresaid may the better be observed in the said Markets, It is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that a Mar∣ket Bell in all the several Markets within the City of London, shall Ring twice every day, (that is to say) the first Ringing from the twenty fifth of March, yearly, until the twenty ninth day of September, at seven of the Clock before Noon, except upon Monday, and then the first Ringing shall not begin till eight of the Clock in the Forenoon: And from the twenty ninth day of Sep∣tember yearly, until the twenty fifth day of March, at eight of the Clock before Noon, and not before, except upon Mon∣day, and then the first Ringing shall not begin till nine of the Clock before Noon; and that the second Ringing of the Mar∣ket Bell for raising of the said Markets shall begin to Ring from and after the twenty fifth of March, yearly, until the twenty ninth day of September (except on Saturdays) half an hour after four in the Afternoon, and to continue Ringing till five of the Clock, and from and after the twenty ninth day of September, un∣til the twenty fifth day of March yearly, (except on Saturdays) to begin to Ring half an hour after three of the Clock, and
to continue Ringing until four of the Clock in the Afternoon: And that the se∣cond Ringing of the Market Bell upon Saturday weekly throughout the year, shall begin half an hour after seven of the Clock, and to continue Ringing un∣til eight of the Clock in the Evening of the same day. And if any Butcher, or Butchers, Poulterer, or Poulterers, Victualler, or Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder, or other person whatsoever, shall sell, or put to open sale any manner of Butchery, or Poultry Wares, or other Provisions in the said Markets, before Ringing of the Market Bell at the said several hours and times in the Morn∣ings respectively; such Offender, or Of∣fenders shall be proceeded against, as forestallers of the Market, as by the Law in this case is directed and ap∣pointed. And that no Butcher, Poul∣terer, Victualler, Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder, or other person whatso∣ever, shall sell or put to open sale, any Butchery, or Poultry Wares, or other Provisions, after the end of Ringing the Market Bell at the said several hours in the Afternoon respectively, but shall then depart from the said Markets, upon pain that every person selling Butchery, or Poultry Wares, or other Provisions after the said respective hours in the aforesaid Markets, shall forfeit the Sum of ten Shillings for e∣very
such Offence. And if any Butcher, Poulterer, Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder, or other person whatsoever, shall sell, utter, or put to open sale in the said Markets, any manner of Flesh-meat upon any other day or days then is before hereby limited and expressed, such Butcher, Poulterer, Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder, or other per∣son shall for every such Offence forfeit the sum of twenty Shillings. Provided always, That no Butcher, Poulterer, Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder, or other person whatsoever, shall upon the Saturday in any week bring into any of the said Markets, any man∣ner of Flesh-meat, after six of the Clock in the Afternoon, between the twenty fifth of March, and the twenty ninth of September, yearly; nor after four of the Clock in the Afternoon, between the twenty ninth of September, and the twenty fifth of March, upon pain of forfeiting the sum of ten Shillings for every time any such person shall bring into any of the said Markets any man∣ner of Flesh-meats, after the said respe∣ctive hours. And further be it Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That no Stall, Stand∣ing, or Place within any of the said Markets, shall from and after the pub∣lication of this Act, be letten or allotted to any Butcher or Poulterer, who doth
or shall keep any Butchers or Poulter∣ers Shop within the City of London, or Liberties thereof, or within two miles distance of the Liberties of the said City, for so long time as he or they shall keep any Butchers, or Poul∣terers Shop within the limits afore∣said. And further, That no Butcher, Poul∣terer, or other person whatsoever, shall have and enjoy more then two Stalls, Standings, or Places within any one of the Markets aforementioned, at one time. Provided always, That the Country people and others resorting to the said Markets, being not Butchers, not Poulterers, nor selling any manner of Flesh-meat, or Poultry, may stand, or sit and vend their Herbs, Fruit, Eggs, Butter, and other such like Provisions, and Commodities in the Markets, up∣on every working day in the week, be∣tween the Feast of the Annuntiation, and the Feast of St. Michael the Arch-Angel, from seven of the Clock in the Morning, until five of the Clock in the Evening of the same day: And upon every working day between the Feast of St. Michael and the Annuntiation, from six of the Clock in the Morning, until four of the Clock in the Evening of the same day, so as the same persons that bring them first to Market do continue the selling there∣of,
and do observe the Ringing of the Market Bell for keeping the said hours accordingly. And it is also further Enacted, (in regard that the Market is most princi∣paly intended for the benefit of House-keepers, who buy for their own use and behoof) That the Retailers and Traders of this City, who buy to sell again, shall not enter into any of the aforesaid Markets, to make their Provisions, and buy of any of the Market people there, to carry the same to their several Hou∣ses and Shops, until the Afternoon of every day, to the end that House-keep∣ers may provide themselves in the morn∣ing of every day at the first hand, and pay moderate Rates for their Provisi∣ons; upon pain that every such Re∣tailer, or Retailers, or Traders, shall for every time Offending herein, forfeit forty Shillings. And forasmuch as all dead Flesh-meat and other Victuals, and provisions of all sorts of Fruits, Herbs, Fish, and the like, ought to be sold in open and common Markets, allowed and ap∣pointed, and not under private Stalls, or at Tavern doors, or in any Street or Common passages, or in any private places, or carried up and down, and sold by way of Hawking; by means whereof, much unwholsome Provisions, dangerous to the Health and Bodies
of his Majesties Subjects, may be ut∣tered and sold: Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Butcher, Poulterer, Country Farmer, Lader, Kidder, Victualler, Gardener, Fruite∣rer, Fish-seller, or other person or per∣sons whatsoever, shall from and after the publication of this Act, sell, utter, or put to shew or sale, by way of Hawk∣ing, or as a Hawker, or in any other∣wise, any Beef, Mutton, Lamb, Veal, Pork, Poultry, Butter, Cheese, Fish, Fruit, Herbs, or other Victuals, or provision whatsoever, in any private House, Lane, Alley, Inn, Warehouse, Street-stall, or Common passage, or o∣ther place or places whatsoever, within the City of London, or Liberties there∣of, but only in his or their open Shop, or Shops, or in the publick Market place, or places, and in Market time only, according as is before appointed, upon pain that every such person so car∣rying, or offering to put to sale, by way of Hawking, or in any otherwise, any Flesh-meat, Poultry, or other Victuals whatsoever, as aforesaid, in any private House, Lane, Alley, Inn, Warehouse, Street-stall, or Common passage, or o∣ther places whatsoever, being not his, or their open Shop, or Shops, or the common Market place, shall forfeit the same Goods so offered to sale, without any manner of favour, according to the
ancient Custom of the City of London, used and approved; and the same so for∣feited, shall be disposed of to such pri∣sons within this City of London, as the Lord Major for the time being shall di∣rect and appoint. And to the intent that Forestalling, Regrating, and Ingrossing of Victuals, and other Commodities, may be the better prevented, and the Laws made against the same more effectually obser∣ved, It is Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person, or persons, from and after the publication of this Act, shall buy, or cause to be bought, any Victuals, or other things whatsoever, within the said City of Lon∣don, or Liberties thereof, coming to any the Common Markets of this City, or make any Bargain, Contract, or Pro∣mise, for the having and buying of the same, or any part thereof, so coming as aforesaid, before the same shall be brought into one of the said Markets, ready to be there sold: And also, That no per∣son, or persons that shall by any means Regrate, Obtain, or Get into his or their Hands, or Possession, in any the said Markets, any Victuals or other things whatsoever, that shall be thither brought to be sold, shall from henceforth sell the same again in their Shop, or Shops, or any of the Markets, or o∣ther places within this City and Liber∣ties
therof, or shall ingross or get into his or their Hands, by buying, contracting, or otherwise, any of the things afore∣said, in the said Markets, with intent to sell the same again, in the same, or any other Markets, or places within this City, and Liberties thereof, upon pain that every such Fore-staller, Regra∣ter, and Ingrosser, shall for every such Offence, forfeit forty Shillings. And whereas, for Accommodation of Market people, with Stalls, Boards, Shelter, and all other like things ne∣cessary for their standing in any of the Market places within this City of Lon∣don, and cleansing and keeping clean the same; and otherwise for defraying the incident Charges of Repairing and maintaining the same Market, and to Gratifie and Reward the Care and At∣tendance of such persons as shall be im∣ployed therein, there hath always been given and paid certain reasonable Rates for the said Accommodations and Charges: And to the intent that the said Rates may be ascertained and made publick to all Market people, whereby the persons that shall from henceforth, by Order of the Committee for Letting of the City Lands, with Approbation of this Court, be imployed therein, as Collectors or Receivers of the same Rates, may be prevented from De∣manding, or Extorting more then is al∣lowed,
as is herein after expressed: Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person and persons, resorting to any of the said Markets, to sell and vend their Commodities, shall from henceforth pay unto such person or persons, as from time to time shall be thereunto appointed, as aforesaid, to take and receive the Profits of all, or a∣ny of the said Markets, to the use of the Major, Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, of, and from all Market people thereunto resorting, for their Stalls, Standings, and other Ac∣commodations, in the several Market places aforesaid, after the Rates follow∣ing (that is to say) for every Stall or Standing of the length of eight Foot, and breadth of four Foot, used or imployed for sale of Flesh-meat, or Fish, for every day eight pence, or two shillings six pence per week; and for every such Stall or Standing, used or imployed for sale of any other Commodities, for every day four pence, or eighteen pence per week; and for every Stall or Standing of the length of six Foot, and breadth of four Foot, used or imployed for the sale of Flesh-meat, or Fish, six pence for every day, or two shillings per week; and for every such Stall or Standing used for o∣ther Provisions or Commodities, for every day three pence, or sixteen pence per week; and for every Standing for
Tanned Leather, six pence per day; and for every raw Hide, an half peny; and for every Horse Load of any Provi∣sions or Commodities not upon Stalls, three pence; and for every Cart-load of such Commodities, six pence. Provided that all Gardeners and Country people, and others resorting to the said Markets, early in the morn∣ing, to sell Herbs, Fruit, and other like Commodities, and there continue for no long space, quitting the Markets at eight or nine of the Clock in the morn∣ing, shall pay for the Larger Places or Standings, only three pence, for e∣very time they resort thither; and for the Lesser Places or Standings, only two pence. And that the said Collectors or Recei∣vers shall not Demand or Require of the Market people more then according to the aforesaid Rates, without the free Consent and Agreement of the said Market people, for some extraordinary Conveniency or Accommodation, unless in Leaden-hall Market, where other and larger Rates have been anciently payed for Stalls or Standings therein, and that no person or persons Inhabiting in or near to any the said Market places, or other person or persons what∣soever, upon pretence of any right what∣soever, other then the Receivers or Col∣lectors of the said Rates and Duties,
shall from henceforth provide any Stalls or other Accommodations in any of the aforesaid Market places; or directly, or indirectly take, require, or exact any sum, or sums of money, or other re∣ward of the Market people, for any Stalls, Standings, or Accommodati∣on of their place and station in the said Markets; upon pain that every person offending herein shall forfeit and lose, for every time so doing and offending, twen∣ty Shillings. And for the better Order and Quiet of the Market people, and the reconci∣ling all Differences that may arise therein, betwixt them and the Collectors, or Receivers in the foresaid Markets; as also that the Rates and Duties may be the better collected, and certainly paid into the Chamber of London, without fraud, and the said Markets more ef∣fectually supervised; for prevention of Abuses and Disorders that may arise therein, Be it enacted, That the Com∣mittee for Letting the City Lands for the time being, shall and are hereby Authorized from time to time, by and with the Approbation of this Court, to appoint fitting persons for Overseers of the said respective Markets, and Col∣lectors, or Receivers of the Profits, or Duties arising, or growing out of the same; and to Treat and Agree with the said persons, and allow them for their
care and pains, such part or portion of the said profits, as in their discretions shall be found requisite: Provided the said Allowance exceed not the tenth part of the whole clear profits (all necessary Charges being deducted) upon conditi∣on that the said Overseers and Colle∣ctors, or Receivers, that shall from time to time be thereunto appointed, by or∣der as aforesaid, do give sufficient Se∣curity to the satisfaction of the said Committee, for their diligence and faith∣ful performance in their Office, and over∣seeing the Orders and Provisions afore∣said, observed, and giving a just and true accompt of their Receipts and Pay∣ments of the moneys every week into the Chamber; and that the said Com∣mittee do once in every week meet toge∣ther at the Guildhall, and then and there audite the Accompts and Payments of the said Overseers and Collectors, or Receivers, for prevention of any abu∣ses that by neglect thereof might arise or happen; and also endeavour, upon any Complaints and Grievances of the Market people, against the said Over∣seers, and Collectors, or Receivers, or otherwise, to compose and redress the same as soon as possibly they can; that so all disturbances to the Market peo∣ple, and unnecessary Suits at Law may be avoided: And that the said Over∣seers and Receivers, or Collectors shall
frequently attend, and be in the said Markets, during Market time, and diligently oversee the same; to prevent with their best care, any abuses or dis∣orders that may happen, or be commit∣ted therein; and also to take care that the provisions and penalties appointed by this Act against all Offenders, con∣trary to the same, be duly and constant∣ly put in Execution: And if any of the said Overseers, and Collectors, or Re∣ceivers shall be remiss, or corrupt here∣in, then they shall be forthwith displaced, and disabled of any Office, or place touch∣ing the said Markets. And be it further Enacted, That in case the aforesaid Committee for Letting the City Lands, shall at any time here∣after find it most fitting, and advanta∣geous for the benefit of the Chamber, to let the said Markets, or any of them to Farm; that then the Committee afore∣said, for the time being, shall and may treat with any person, or persons, for Letting the same to Farm, upon the best terms they can, and report their proceedings unto this Court for their Approbation therein. All which pains, forfeitures, and pe∣nalties, sum and sums of money to be forfeited, by virtue of this Act, shall be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, or Plaint to be commenced and prosecuted in the Name of the Chamberlain of the
City of London, for the time being, in the Court holden before the Major, & Alder∣men in the Chamber of the Guildhall of the City of London; and that the Chamber∣lain of the said City for the time being in all Suits to be prosecuted by virtue of this Act, against any Offender, or Offenders, contrary to the same, shall recover the ordinary Costs af Suit to be expended in and about the prosecution thereof; and if the Suit pass for the Defendant, then the said Defendant to recover his Costs; and that the Cham∣berlain for the time being shall not have power to take less of any Offender then herein is limited to be forfeited for every Offence. And further, That one moiety of all Forfeitures to be recovered by virtue hereof (the Costs of the Suit for Re∣covery of the same being deducted) shall after Recovery, and the Receipt thereof, at or before the twenty fifth day of March yearly, be paid and delivered unto the Treasurer of Christ's Hospital, to be im∣ployed towards the Relief of the poor Children, to be brought up and main∣tained in that Hospital; and the other moiety to him or them which shall first give Information of the Offences, for which the Forfeitures shall grow; and prosecute Suit in the Name of the Chamberlain of the said City, for reco∣very of the same, any thing in this Act
to the contrary notwithstanding. And whereas the Serjeant, and Yeoman of the Channel, and Yeoman of Newgate Market, and Foreign-taker, while the common Markets were kept in Leadenhall-street, Cheapside, and New∣gate-street, did take care for sweeping and making clean the said Streets where the Market people resorted, and paid for carrying away the Soil there∣of; as also for furnishing the Market people with Boards, and other Ac∣commodations. In consideration where∣of, they received some certain Allow∣ance by consent of the Market people for their care and pains therein. Now forasmuch as the said Markets are re∣moved out of the Streets, and made Commodious, at the publick Charge of the City, and that the Revenue thereof ought to be improved for the benefit of the Chamber: Be it Enacted, That the several Officers aforementioned, shall from henceforth be wholly discharged from the Charge of Cleansing and Carrying away the Soil of the said Markets, and providing Boards and other Accomodations for the Market people, and likewise from any ways in∣termedling with the Receipt of any Du∣ties, Fees, or Profits, or taking any Money of any persons resorting to, or standing in any of the Common Mar∣kets aforesaid, upon any pretence what∣soever;
but that instead thereof the Serjeant and Yeoman of the Channel, for the time being, shall, during their Continuance in the said places, each of them, have and receive out of the Cham∣ber of London, the sum of three pounds weekly; and Richard Robinson the pre∣sent Foreign-taker, and Yeoman of New∣gate-Market, the sum of three pounds e∣very week, during the term of his na∣tural Life: All which sums respective∣ly, and none other, shall be paid by the Chamberlain out of the Profits a∣rising by the Markets, to the persons aforesaid, in full satisfaction of all their Right, Title, Claim, and De∣mand whatsoever, to any part or share of the Profits to be collected of the Mar∣ket people. Wagstaffe. BY an Act of Parliament made in the 22th and 23th Year of King Charles the Second, it is ordained and enacted, That the Annual certain Tithes of all and e∣very Parish and Parishes within the City of London, and Liberties thereof, whose Churches have been demolished by the dreadful Fire; And which said Pa∣rishes, by virtue of an Act, 22 Car. 2. cap. 11. Intituled, An Additional Act for Rebuilding of the City of London, U∣niting
of Parishes, &c. remain and conti∣nue single, as heretofore they were, or are by the said Act annexed or united in∣to one Parish respectively, shall be as followeth. The Parish of Alhallows Lombardstreet; One hundred and ten pounds. St. Bartholomew Exchange; One hun∣dred pounds. St. Bridget, alias Brides; One hundred and twenty pounds. St. Bennet Finck; One hundred pounds. St. Michael Crooked-lane; One hundred pounds. St. Christopher; One hundred and twen∣ty pounds. St. Dionys Backchurch; One hundred and twenty pounds. St. Dunstan in the East; Two hundred pounds. St. James Garlickhith; One hundred pounds. St. Michael Cornhill; One hundred and forty pounds. St. Michael Bassishaw; One hundred thir∣ty and two pounds eleven shillings. St. Margaret Lothbury; One hundred pounds. St. Mary Aldermanbury; One hundred and fifty pounds. St. Martin Ludgate; One hundred and sixty pounds. St. Peter Cornhill; One hundred and ten pounds.
St. Stephen Coleman-street; One hundred and ten pounds. Sts. Sepulchre; Two hundred pounds. St. Alhallows Breadstreet, and St. John Evangelist; One hundred and fifty pounds. Alhallows the Great, and Alhallows the Less; Two hundred pounds. St. Alban Woodstreet, and St. Olaves Silverstreet; One hundred and seveny pounds. St. Anne and Agnes, and St. John Zacha∣ry; One hundred and forty pounds. St. Augustine and St. Faith; One hun∣dred seventy and two pounds. St. Andrew Wardrobe and St. Anne Black-Friers; One hundred and forty pounds. St. Antholin and St. John Baptist; One hundred and twenty pounds. St. Bennet Grace church, and St. Leonard Eastcheap; One hundred and forty pounds. St. Bennet Pauls-wharf, and St. Peters Pauls-wharf; One hundred pounds. Christ Church and St. Leonard Foster-lane; Two hundred pounds. St. Edmond the King, and St. Nicholas Acons; One hundred and eighty pounds. St. George Botolph-lane, and St. Botolph Billingsgate; One hundred and eighty pounds. St. Lawrence Jury, and St. Magdalen Milkstreet; One hundred and twenty pounds.
St. Magnus and St. Margaret New-Fish-street; One hundred and seventy pounds. St. Michael Royal and St. Martin Vintry; One hundred and forty pounds. St. Matthew Friday-street, and St. Peter Cheap; One hundred and fifty pounds. St. Margaret Pattons and St. Gabriel Fen∣church; One hundred and twenty pounds. St. Mary at Hill, and St. Andrew Hub∣bard; Two hundred pounds. St. Mary Woolnoth and St. Mary Wool∣church; One hundred and sixty pounds. St. Clement Eastcheap and St. Martin Or∣gars; One hundred and forty pounds. St. Mary Abchurch and St. Lawrence Pountney; One hundred and twenty pounds. St. Mary Aldermary and St. Thomas A∣postles; One hundred and fifty pounds. St. Mary le Bow, St. Pancras Soperlane, and Alhallows Honylane; Two hun∣dred pounds. St. Mildred Poultry and St. Mary Cole∣church; One hundred and seventy pounds. St. Michael Woodstreet and St. Mary Staining; One hundred pounds. St. Mildred Breadstreet and St. Margaret Moses; One hundred and thirty pounds.
St. Michael Queenhith and Trinity; One hundred and sixty pounds. St. Magdalen Old-Fishstreet and St. Gre∣gory; One hundred and twenty pounds. St. Mary Somerset and St. Mary Moun∣thaw; One hundred and ten pounds. St. Nicholas Coleabby and St. Nicholas; One hundred and thirty pounds. St. Olave Jury and St. Martin Ironmonger∣lane; One hundred and twenty pounds. St. Stephen Walbrook and St. Bennet Sheerhogg; One hundred pounds. St. Swithin and St. Mary Bothaw; One hundred and forty pounds. St. Vedast, alias Fosters, and St. Michael Quern; One hundred and sixty pounds. Which respective sums of money to be paid in lieu of Tithe within the said re∣spective Parishes, and assessed, &c. shall be, and continue to be esteemed, deemed, and taken to all intents and purposes, to be the respective certain Annual maintenance (over and above Glebes and Perquisites, Gifts and Bequests to the respective Parson, Vicar, and Cu∣rate of any Parish for the time being, or to his or their respective Successors, or to other persons for his or their use) of the said respective Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, who shall be legally In∣stituted,
Inducted, and Admitted into the respective Parishes aforesaid. In which Act there is a Provision in these words: Provided always, and be it Enacted, That where any of the Parishes within the said City, have since the late Fire, by death or otherwise, become vacant, the surviving or remaining Incumbent of the other Parish thereto united, or therewith consolidated, shall have and enjoy, and have like remedy to recover the Tithes hereby settled to be paid, as if he had been actually Presented, Ad∣mitted, Instituted, and Inducted into both the said Parishes, since the Vnion and Consolidation thereof. And be it Enacted, &c. That the Al∣dermen of such respective Ward or Wards within the said City, wherein any of the said Parishes lye, and his or their Deputy or Deputies, and the Com∣mon Councel-men of such respective Parish wherein the maintenance afore∣said is respectively to be Assessed, to be nominated by such respective Aldermen, Deputy, Common Councel-men, and Church-wardens, or any Five of them, whereof the Alderman or his Deputy to be one, shall at some convenient and seasonable time before the 20th day of May, 1671. assemble, &c. and they, or the major part of them so assembled, shall proportionably assess upon all
Houses, Shops, Warehouses, and Cellars, Wharfs, Keys, Cranes, Wa∣terhouses, and Tofts of ground remain∣ing unbuilt, and all other Hereditaments whatsoever (except Parsonage and Vi∣carage-Houses) the whole respective sum by this Act appointed, or so much of it as is more then what each Im∣propriator is by this Act enjoyned re∣spectively to allow, in the most equal way that the said Assessors, according to the best of their Iudgments, can make it; which said Assessments shall be made and finished before the 24th of July then next. And be it further Enacted, &c. That if any variance or doubt happen to arise about any sum so assessed as aforesaid, or that any Parishioner or Parishioners, or Owner or Owners of any House, Shop, Warehouse or Cellar, Wharf, Key, Crane, Waterhouse, or other He∣reditament within any of the said Pa∣rishes, shall find himself or themselves aggrieved by the assessing of any sum or sums of money in manner and form aforesaid, that then upon complaint by the party or parties aggrieved to the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen of the said City, within Fourteen days af∣ter notice given to the party or parties assessed of such Assessment made, the said Lord Major and Court of Alder∣men, summoning as well the party or
parties aggrieved, and the Aldermen and such others as made the said As∣sessment, shall hear and determine the same in a summary way, and the Iudg∣ment by them given shall be Final, and without Appeal. Provided always, and be it enacted, That any Assessment or Rate to be made by virtue of this Act, shall or may in all or any the Parishes aforesaid, in like manner be received or altered, or laid again within three months after the 24th day of June, 1674. according to the aforesaid Rules, and any such Assess∣ment or state shall or may be again re∣ceived or re-assessed within three months after the 24th day of June, 1681. And that all and every such new Assessment and state shall be liable to the like Ap∣peals as aforesaid, and shall be collected, levied, and paid as any other Assess∣ment or Rate mentioned in this Act, may or ought to be. And be it further Enacted, &c. That if any the Inhabitants in any respective Parish or Parishes as aforesaid, shall or do refuse or neglect to pay to the re∣spective Incumbents aforesaid, of any of the said respective Parishes, any sum or sums of money to him respective∣ly payable, or appointed to be paid by this Act, or any part thereof, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Act (being lawfully demanded at the
House or Houses, Wharf, Key, Crane, Cellar, or other Premisses whereout the same is payable) that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the Lord Major of the City of London for the time being, upon Oath to be made before him, of such refusal or neglect to give and grant out Warrants for the Officer or Person ap∣pointed to collect the same, with the As∣sistance of a Constable in the day time, to Levy the same Tithes or Sums of Mo∣ney so due, and in arrear and unpaid, by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the party or parties so refusing or neglecting to pay, restoring to the Owner or Own∣ers the Overplus of such Goods over and above the said Arrears of the said Moneys so due and unpaid, and the reasonable Charges of making such Di∣stress, which he is to deduct out of the Moneys raised by sale of such Goods. In pursuance of which Act the Lord Ma∣jor, upon Complaint to him made by any Minister against any Parishioner, for refusing to pay the Rate assessed, will cause such Pa∣rishioner to be summoned to appear before his Lordship; and if he refuse to appear, or to pay the money assessed on his House or Warehouse, his Lordship will, upon Oath made of the Demand thereof, grant his Warrant to Distrein the Goods of such Of∣fender; which Warrant is usually as follow∣eth.
The Form of a Warrant to Distrein for Tithes or Mo∣neys Assessed and Rated to be paid in lieu of Tithes. WHereas A. B. is the Parson and present Incumbent of the Parish of St. M. B. in London, burnt by the late dreadful Fire, and hath for One year at the Feast of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary last past, and e∣ver since been legally Instituted, In∣ducted, and Admitted into the Parish aforesaid, and hath for that time officia∣ted and preached as Incumbent, and Parson of the said Parish, in a conveni∣ent place within the said Parish, nomi∣nated and appointed by the Lord Bishop of London. And whereas an Assess∣ment of Ten shillings per Annum, hath been duly made upon a certain House, called or known by the Name or Sign of the Bull, within the said Parish, now and for two years last past, inhabited by R. B. towards the raising of the Main∣tenance of the said A. B. the said present Incumbent of the said Parish, according to a late Act of Parliament, Intituled (An Act for the better Settlement of the Maintenance of the Parsons, Vicars, and
Curates in the Parishes of the City of London, burnt up by the late dreadful Fire there). And whereas I am informed that the sum of Ten shillings is due and payable to the said A. B. Incumbent and Parson of the said Parish, for four quar∣ters payment of the said Rate and As∣sessment at the Feast of the Annuntiati∣on of the blessed Virgin Mary last past before the date hereof. And forasmuch as Oath hath been this day made before me, Sir J. S. Lord Major of the City of London, by C. W. (he being the person appointed to collect the said Assessment) that he hath lawfully demanded the said Ten shillings at the said House whereat the same is payable; And that the said R. B. the said Inhabitant of the said House in the Parish aforesaid, doth re∣fuse and neglect to pay to the said A. B. the said present Incumbent of the said Parish, the said sum of Ten shillings, to him payable as aforesaid, These are therefore in his Majesties Name, streightly to Charge and Command you the said C. W. (being the person appoint∣ed to collect the same) with the Assi∣stance of a Constable, in the day time to levy the said sum of Ten shillings so due and in arrear, and unpaid of the said As∣sessment on the House aforesaid, by Di∣stress and Sale of the Goods of the said R. B. restoring unto him the Overplus of such Goods over and above the said
Ten shillings, and the reasonable Char∣ges of making the said Distress, accord∣ing to the said Act in such case made and provided. And these are further in his Majesties Name, streightly to Charge and Command all and every the Consta∣bles within this City and Liberties thereof, to be aiding and assisting unto the said C. W. in the due execution here∣of; and this shall be your Warrant. Dated, &c. To C. W. and all, every, or any of the Constables with∣in the City of London and Liberties thereof. The Lord Major for the time being, may grant a Warrant under his Hand and Seal to examine and try Weights and Measures, which is usually done in these words; viz. Lond' ss. WHereas great Abuses are and have been committed in the City of London and Liberties thereof, by u∣sing and keeping unlawful, unsealed, and unsized Weights and Measures, which are found to be very false and de∣ceitful, and not warrantable by his Ma∣jesties Laws to be used in buying and selling. And whereas many persons, Inhabitants within this City and Li∣berties
thereof, as I have been inform∣ed, do ordinarily use Weights, called or known by the name of Venice Weights, not allowed or appointed by the Laws of this Realm, nor by any other lawful Authority, and do usually buy by one Weight, and sell by another, These are to authorize and appoint you, and either of you my lawful and sufficient Depu∣ties, at all and every time and times, fit and convenient, peaceably and qui∣etly to enter into all Shops, Houses, Warehouses, and other places whatso∣ever within this City & Liberties there∣of, where any Beams, Weights, Mea∣sures, Yards, Ells, Sacks for Char∣coals, and such like, shall be suspected to be, and there to try and search all man∣ner of Beams, Weights, Sacks for Charcoal, and Measures whatsoever, whether they be true, just, sealed, and sized, as by the Laws and Statutes of this Land they ought to be, and if you, or either of you shall find any false Beams, or any unlawful, unsealed, or unsized Weights, Sacks, or Measures, That then you bring the same, or cause the same to be brought to Guildhall, there to remain until Order shall be taken for the defacing, or otherwise disposing thereof, and certifie me the Names and Sirnames, and dwelling places of the Offenders, to the end they may be dealt withal as to Iustice shall appertain,
and as the Law requireth: And also if you, or either of you do find any of the said Sacks of Charcoal that shall not be well and sufficiently filled, that then you, or either of you do cause the said Sacks to be set upright, and filled out of the rest of the said Sacks, according as is directed and appointed, that so the people of this City may not be deceived therein. And I do hereby require in his Majesties Name, to Charge and Command all and every the people of this Nation, resorting to, and inhabi∣ting in this City or Liberties thereof, who have used, or do use, or shall have any cause to use Weights, or Sacks for Charcoals, or Measures, that they do not in any wise hereafter use any but those that are or shall be just and true, and that they do not in any wise, from henceforth, hinder or withstand my said Deputies, or either of them, in the due Execution of the Premisses. And I do hereby require all Constables, Serje∣ants at Mace, and Beadles of the Ward, and other Officers and Ministers whatsoever within the said City and Li∣berties thereof, that they be aiding and assisting to my Deputies, J. M. and G. M. Citizens and Weavers of London, and either of them, in the due and lawful Execution of the Premisses, as they and every of them will answer the contrary, if they shall fail or refuse to do that
which shall be lawfully required of them in that behalf. Dated, &c. To J. M. and G. M. and to either of them. The Lord Major and Aldermen may, if they please, punish all Constables and others that shall neglect to Watch, pursuant to an Act of Common Councel made in the Ma∣joralty of Sir John Robinson, Intituled, An Act for the better ordering of the Night Watches within the City of London and Liberties there∣of; which followeth in these words. WHereas by the ancient, good, and laudable Custom of the City of London, all and every person and per∣sons which do dwell, occupy, or inhabit in any House or Houses within the same City or the Liberties thereof, as well such as are not free of the said City, as other the Freemen of the same, being persons able and fit to watch, or to find an able and fit person to watch, for him, her, or them, or in his, her, or their stead, ought by reason of their habita∣tion, occupation and dwelling, to keep watch within the Ward wherein he, she, or they do occupy and inhabit, for the preservation of the King's Peace, and for the arresting and apprehending of all Night-walkers, Malefactors, and su∣spected
persons, which shall be found passing, wandring, and mis-behaving themselves: And whereas every Con∣stable of any Precinct is a Constable to all intents and purposes, not only in the Precinct and Ward where he dwel∣leth, but in all and every other Precinct, Ward, and place within the said City and the Liberties thereof: And where∣as there is now, and of late years hath been (by reason of the great concourse of people from all parts to the said City) great necessity of a strong and sufficient Watch to be kept every Night within every Ward of the said City, and the Li∣berties thereof; and it hath been thought fit and provided by former Orders and Acts of Common Councel, for the safe∣ty and peace of the said City, that the number of men to watch every night, in every Ward throughout the said City and Liberties thereof, shall be as here∣after particularly followeth, viz. Aldgate 34 Dukes-place 10 Aldersgate 44 S. Martin's le Grand 12 Bishopsgate 80 Broadstreet 30 Billingsgate 30 Bridge within 25 Bassishaw 12 Breadstreet 26
Cornhill 16 Candlewick 24 Cordweiner 24 Cheap 25 Cripplegate within 40 Colemanstreet 32 Cripplegate without 90 Castle Baynard 40 Dowgate 36 Farringdon within 50 Mugwelstreet 4 Blackfriers 14 Farringdon without 130 Whitefriers 8 Bridewel Precinct 8 Bartholomew Great 10 Bartholomew Less 4 Limestreet 11 Langborn 34 Portsoken 60 Queenhith 40 Tower 40 Vintry 34 Walbrook 20 Yet nevertheless the said Watches are very weak and wanting, by reason that many ill-affected persons, not willing to do any duty for the publick safety, or not proportionable to the number of the Inhabitants where they dwell, under pretence that they ought not to watch with any other Constable then the Con∣stable
of the Precinct wherein they inha∣bit, whereas several Precincts within the said City and Liberties of late, by multiplicity of new Buildings, and Divisions of Houses, are grown far more populous, than other Precincts, and many Precincts have not Inhabi∣tants to make up a third, fourth, fifth, or sixth part of the number of Watch∣men aforesaid, or a competent number of Watchmen for safeguard of the said Ward, so that without some way (other then the Inhabitants of every Precinct to watch with the Constable of that Precinct, or some new Division of every Ward, for proportioning and ap∣pointing the number therein to keep watch) a sufficient Watch cannot be kept, whereof divers refractory persons ta∣king advantage, and pretending that they are not by Law compellable there∣unto, will not yield obedience to the Go∣vernment of the said City therein, but refuse to watch when they are required, whereby the Watches are generally much neglected, and the Constables and other Officers much troubled and dis∣couraged, and the said City and Inha∣bitants therein much damaged and in∣dangered thereby, and likewise upon se∣veral occasions and disturbances of late have been put upon great and extraordi∣nary charge and trouble, in serving up∣on Military Guards of the Trained
Bands and Auxiliary Forces of the said City. Now the Right Honourable the Lord Major, the Right Worshipful the Alder∣men his Brethren, and the Commons in this Common Councel assembled, taking the Premisses into their consideration, and conceiving it very necessary at all times, that there should be sufficient Watches kept within the said City of London and Liberties thereof, for reme∣dy therein, and for the better ordering and establishment of the Watches to be hereafter duly kept within the said City and the Liberties thereof, do Enact and Ordain, and be it Enacted and Ordain∣ed by the said Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in this Common Coun∣cel assembled, and by Authority of the same, that one Constable with the Beadle in every Ward, and the said number of persons respectively shall watch every Night in every of the Wards aforesaid respectively, from nine of the Clock in the Evening, till seven of the Clock in the Morning, from Michaelmas-day till the first of April, and from the first of A∣pril till Michaelmas-day from ten of the Clock in the Evening, till five of the Clock in the Morning: And that the Al∣derman, Deputy, and Common Coun∣cel-men of every of the said Wards re∣spectively, or the major part of them, shall forthwith take an exact Survey of all the Inhabitants and House-keepers
within their respective Wards, who are able and fit to watch or find Watchmen; and shall nominate and appoint one Con∣stable in their said Wards, with the Beadle of their respective Wards, and the full number of Inhabitants within the said respective wards, according to the proportions beforementioned, to watch e∣ery night within the respective Wards, beginning at one certain place within the said respective Wards, & from thence to proceed & go forward in an orderly way, and appoint the next Night one other Constable and the like full number of Inhabitants next adjoyning unto those who watched the Night before, and so to proceed forward through the Ward, one Constable and the full number of Inha∣bitants to watch every Night, and then to begin again with those Inhabitants who first watched, and proceed forwards every Night in turn as aforesaid, with∣out respecting any one Precinct more than another, but that all the Inhabitants within the said Wards respectively do watch, or find Watchmen in their turns, as aforesaid, who shall watch with the Constable appointed as aforesaid, though he be not of the same Precinct as the In∣habitants be; and that all the Consta∣bles within the respective Wards, shall in their turns, one after another, watch with the said Inhabitants, and when they have watched all over by turns as aforesaid, he that began shall begin a∣gain,
and the rest follow in their turns, and so one after another, as often as it shall come to their or any of their turns: And that the said Alderman, Deputy, and Common Councel-men of the respe∣ctive Wards aforesaid, or the major part of them shall likewise appoint a certain place within the said Ward, where the Constable and all the Watch∣men shall every Night first meet for that Night, & agree to what places they shall afterwards go to watch in the said Ward in such manner and order, that the Con∣stables and Watches of every Ward may maintain a correspondence and intelli∣gence with each other, and be ready up∣on some sound or sign, to be made or gi∣ven, to come in, in an instant if there be need, upon any disorder or other occasion, to the help and assistance of one another; and shall also appoint the number of Watchmen which shall be, and continue together in every place, and cause the name of the Constable, and of every Inhabitant which is to watch with e∣very several Constable, and the times and places of their meeting and watch∣ing particularly every several Night to be printed and delivered to every Con∣stable within their Ward respectively, and one or more papers thereof so print∣ed to be set upon posts or open places, where every constable and such as are to watch with him respectively dwell, that
every Constable and Watchman may know the Night, Time, and Places where they are to watch: And that the Constable, on the day before his watch∣night, or the Beadle of that Ward, do warn every man that is to watch with him accordingly, or leave notice there∣of in writing at the House of every such man: And that the Inhabitants of e∣very Ward do take notice hereof, any pretence of priviledge, usage, or cu∣stom to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. And be it also further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Con∣stable shall make default in executing his Office, or doing his Service in any of the Premisses hereby appointed, or hereafter to be ordered or appointed as aforesaid, without just and reasonable cause to be allowed of as is hereafter mentioned, that then every such Con∣stable shall forfeit and pay for every such default five pounds: And that if any person appointed and warned to watch or to find an able and fit person to watch in his or her stead as aforesaid, shall re∣fuse or make default to watch, or to find an able and fit person to watch in his or her stead as aforesaid, that then every such person so refusing or making default to watch as aforesaid, and not having just and reasonable cause for such his default, as shall be allowed of by the
Lord Major of the said City, or the Al∣derman of that Ward for the time being, shall forfeit and pay for every such de∣fault Twenty shillings. And it is hereby farther Enacted, That the Alderman, Deputy, and Common Councel-men of every Ward, or the ma∣jor part of them, for the time being, shall from time to time nominate and ap∣point two or more honest able men of the same Ward, who shall be called Super∣visors, to take care and oversee that the Watches appointed in every Ward be from henceforth duly kept: And that the Constables, Beadle and Watchmen, ex∣ecute, do and perform their duties and services therein, or otherwise pay the forfeitures and payments herein before ordained for their defaults respectively: and that the same Supervisors, or one of them, shall take notice of such of the said Inhabitants as absent themselves at any time from watching as aforesaid, and likewise of such Constables and Beadle as shall at any time make de∣fault, be remiss or negligent in per∣formance of his or their Duties in the Premisses, and shall likewise from time to time present the name of every sch Defaulter to the Lord Major of the said City for the time being, or to the Al∣derman of the Ward where such De∣fault shall be made, that every such De∣faulter may pay the forfeiture and pay∣ment
imposed upon him or her as afore∣said: And that the Beadle of every Ward, or some trusty person for him, shall in the presence of the Constable and one of the said Overseers, if they, or either of them can be present, call over the Names of all those which shall be ap∣pointed to watch each night respective∣ly in their course as aforesaid, as well at the hours appointed for their meeting in the Evening, as also at the time ap∣pointed for the breaking up of the watch in the morning; and that they the Con∣stable, or Beadle, or one of them, or some other trusty person in their or ei∣ther of their behalf, in case the Super∣visor shall be absent at any of the said times, shall take a Note in writing of the Names and Sirnames of every of the Inhabitants then appointed to watch, as shall be absent from their watch at any of the hours herein before appointed Evening or Morning, and shall deliver the said Note the next day to the Supervisors, or one of them: And that the Constables, Supervisors, and Beadle of every the said Ward, and e∣very of them, shall bring before the Lord Major of the said City for the time be∣ing, or the Alderman of their Ward, every Constable or other person making default in any of the Premisses respe∣ctively, if such person making default will readily and voluntarily go along
with him; and every such Defaulter shall then presently pay to the Lord Major or Alderman aforesaid, such for∣feitures and payments as are herein be∣fore limited and appointed for them re∣spectively to pay as aforesaid; and that all Moneys so forfeited and paid as a∣foresaid, shall be imployed to and for the relief of the poor of the said Ward, as the Lord Major or Alderman of the Ward where such default shall be made shall think fit and appoint: But if such Defaulter shall refuse to go with the said Constable, Supervisor, or Beadle, be∣fore the said Lord Major or Alderman as aforesaid, or going shall refuse or delay to pay the said forfeitures, penalties, or sums of Money, respectively as aforesaid, that then, and in either of the said ca∣ses, such Defaulter shall forfet and pay treble the aforesaid penalties or sums of Money: All which forfeitures hereby forfeited shall respectively be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, or Informa∣tion, in the name of the Chamberlain of this City for the time being, in the Court holden before the Lord Major and Aldermen of the said City, in the Cham∣ber of the Guildhall of the same City, to be prosecuted by the Beadle of the Ward wherein every of the said Offences a∣forementioned shall be committed, or a∣ny other person or persons thereunto ap∣pointed by the said Lord Major or the
Alderman of such Ward: And after re∣covery thereof one Moiety of the same after all Charges deducted, shall be to the said Beadle or other Prosecutors, and the other Moiety to be imployed to the relief of the poor of the Ward where∣in such Offence shall be committed, as the Lord Major or Alderman of the same Ward shall direct and appoint. In all which Suits to be brought by vir∣tue of this Act, the Chamberlain shall recover his ordinary Costs and Charges to be expended for the recovery of all such forfeitures against the Offen∣ders. And lastly, be it enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That the Beadles of the several Wards of this City, or any of them, shall not hereafter take or have any allowance of Watchmen, called Dead-pays, for or in respect of their Nightly watching, or for or in conside∣ration of any other Service whatsoever, but that the Inhabitants of every Ward shall amongst themselves raise some convenient sum of Money for a fit and competent Salary and Allowance to be made unto the said Beadles for their said Service: Or if the said In∣habitants of all or any the said Wards cannot agree upon raising such Salary or Sum of Money, then the same to be done by Authority of Common Councel, by such way and means, and in propor∣tion
to the Service and the Extent of each Ward, as by the said Common Councel shall upon farther consideration be found just and reasonable. The Lord Major doth Annually issue out his Precept to the Aldermen of every Ward to hold his Wardmote for the Election of Common Councel-men, and other Officers. The Tenor of which Precept is as follow∣eth. To the Alderman of the Ward of Ward∣mote. WE charge and command you, that upon St. Thomas day the A∣postle next coming, you do hold your Wardmote,and that you have a∣fore us at our General Court of Alder∣men to be holden  the Monday next after the Feast of the E∣piphany next coming, all the Defaults that shall be presented afore you by In∣quest in the said Wardmote; and the said Inquest shall have full power and authority by one whole year to enquire and present all such Defaults as shall be found within your said Ward,Inquest for the year. as often∣times as shall be thought to you expe∣dient and needful, which we will shall be once every Month at the least.
2. Inquest dying. And if it happen any of your said Inquest to die, or depart out of your said Ward within the said year, that then, in place of him or them so dying or de∣parting out of your said Ward, you cause to be chosen one able person in his stead to enquire and present with the o∣ther in manner and form abovesaid. 3. Non-ap∣pearance. And that, at the said general Court, you give afore us the Names and Sir∣names of all them of your said Ward that come not to your said Wardmote, if they be duly warned, so that due re∣dress and punishment of them may be had, as the case shall require, according to the Law. 4. Watch, Light, Vizard. And that you do provide, that at all times convenient, a sufficient watch be kept: And that Lanterns with Light by nightertail in old manner accustomed be hanged forth: And that no man go by nightertail without Light, nor with Vizard, on the peril that belongeth thereto. 5. Common Councel. And also that you do cause to be chosen men, of the most sufficient, honest, and discreet men of your said Ward, to be for your said Ward of the Common Councel of this City for the Year ensuing, according to the Custom in that behalf yearly used. And also that you do cause the said men, so to be chosen to be of the Common Councel, to be sworn before you, and in your pre∣sence,
according to the Oath by them u∣sed, and of old time accustomed: The Tenor of which Oath hereafter ensu∣eth: YE shall swear, that ye shall be true to our Sovereign Lord the KING that now is, and to his Heirs and lawful Succes∣sors, and readily come when ye be summon∣ed to the Common Councel of this City, but if ye be reasonably excused; and good and true Counsel ye shall give in all things touching the Common-weal of this City, after your wit and cunning: And that for favour of any man ye shall maintain no sin∣gular profit against the common profit of this City: And after that ye be come to the Common Councel, ye shall not from thence depart, till the Common Councel be ended, without reasonable cause be else by the Ma∣jor's Licence: And also that all secret things that be spoken or said in the Common Councel, the which ought to be kept secret, ye shall in no wise disclose. As God you help. And that together with the said Oath of their Office, you administer to the said Persons that shall be chosen of the Com∣mon Councel, the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and the other Oath hereafter following.
I A. B. Do utterly testifie and declare in my Conscience, that the KING's High∣ness is the only Supream Governour of this Realm, and of all other his Highnesses Do∣minions and Countries, as well in all Spiri∣tual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as Temporal; And that no Forreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, hath or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Su∣periority, Preeminence or Authority Eccle∣siastical or Spiritual within this Realm: And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all Forreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superi∣orities and Authorities, and do promise that from henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the KING's Highness his Heirs and lawful Successors; and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Priviledges, Preeminences and Authorities granted or belonging to the KING's Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or uni∣ted and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book. I. A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknow∣ledge, profess, testifie and declare in my Con∣science before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES is law∣ful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesties Dominions and Coun∣tries; and that the Pope, neither of him∣self, nor by any Authority of the Church or
See of Rome, or by any other means with a∣ny other, hath any power or authority to de∣pose the King, or to dispose any of his Ma∣jesties Kingdoms or Dominions, or to Au∣thorize any Forreign Prince to invade or an∣noy him or his Countries, or to discharge a∣ny of his Subjects of their Allegiance and O∣bedience to his Majesty, or to give Licence or Leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesties Royal Person, State or Go∣vernment, or to any of his Majesties Subjects within his Majesties Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or Sentence of Excommu∣nication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or granted, by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived or pretended to be derived from him or his See, against the said King, his Heirs or Succes∣sors, or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience, I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my power, against all Con∣spiracies and Attempts whatsoever which shall be made against his or their Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or co∣lour of any such Sentence or Declaration or otherwise; and will do my best endeavour to disclose and make known unto his Maje∣sty, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traiterous Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of, to be against him or any
of them. And I do farther swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest and abjure as impious and heretical, this damnable Do∣ctrine and Position, that Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may de deposed or murthered by their Sub∣jects or any other whatsoever. And I do be∣lieve, and in Conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope nor any Person whatsoever hath power to absolve me of this Oath or a∣ny part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be lawfully ad∣ministred unto me, and do renounce all Par∣dons and Dispensations to the contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely ac∣knowledge, and swear according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and under∣standing of the same words, without any e∣quivocation, or mental evasion, or secret re∣servation whatsoever: And I do make this Recognition and Acknowledgment heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian. So help me God, &c. I A. B. Do declare and believe, that it is not lawful, upon any pretence whatsoe∣ver, to take Arms against the KING: And that I do abhor that Traiterous Position, of taking Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are Commissi∣oned by him. So help me God.
And farther, that you likewise admi∣nister to the same Persons that shall be so elected of the Common Councel, to be by them subscribed, the ensuing Decla∣ration: I A. B. Do declare, That I hold that there is no Obligation upon me or any other Person from the Oath commonly called, The Solemn League and Covenant; And that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm a∣gainst the known Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom. For that otherwise, if the said persons or any of them, that shall be elected as aforesaid of the common Councel, shall not take the said Oaths, and subscribe the said Declaration, their Election and Choice is by the late Act of Parliament, for the Governing and Regulating of Corporations, enacted and declared to be void. 6. Consta∣bles. Scaven∣gers. Beadle. Raker. And that also in the said Ward∣mote you cause to be chosen certain other honest persons to be Constables and Sea∣vengers, and a Common Beadle, and a Raker to make clean the Streets and Lanes of all your said Ward, according to the Custom yearly used in that behalf: which Constables have and shall have full power and authority to distrain for
the Salary and Quarterage of the said Beadle and Raker, as oftentimes as it shall be behind or unpaid. 7. Roll of Names. Also that you keep a Roll of the Names, Sirnames, Dwelling-places, Professions and Trades of all persons dwelling within your Ward, and with∣in what Constables Precinct they dwell, wherein the place is to be specially noted by Street, Lane, Alley, or Sign. 8. Consta∣bles. Also that you cause every Consta∣ble from time to time to certifie unto you the Name, Sirname, Dwelling-place, Profession and Trade of every person who shall newly come to dwell within his Precinct, whereby you may make and keep your RollRoll. perfect: And that you cause every Constable for his Pre∣cinct, to that purpose, to make and keep a perfect Roll in like manner. 9. Inholder. Lodger. Sojourner. Also that you give special charge, that every Inn-holder and other person within your ward, who shall receive a∣ny person to lodge or sojourn in his house above two days, shall before the third day after his coming thither, give know∣ledge to the Constable of the Precinct where he shall be so received, of the Name, Sirname, Dwelling-place, Pro∣fession and Trade of life, or place of ser∣vice of such person, and for what cause he shall come to reside there: And that the said Constable give present notice thereof to you. And that the said Inn∣holder
lodge no suspected person,Suspect persons. or men or women of evil Name. 10. Search. Also that you cause every Consta∣ble within his Precinct, once every month at the farthest, and oftner, if need re∣quire, to make diligent search and inqui∣ry what persons be newly come into his Precinct to dwell, sojourn or lodge: And that you give special charge, that no Innholder or person shall resist or deny any Constable in making such search or inquiry, but shall do his best endeavour to aid and assist him therein. 11. Frank pledge. And for that of late there is more resort to the City of persons evil-affected in Religion and otherwise than in for∣mer times hath been: You shall dili∣gently inquire if any man be received to dwell or abide within your Ward that is not put under Frank pledge, as he ought to be by the custom of the City: and whether any person hath continued in the said Ward by the space of one year, being above the age of twelve years, and not sworn to be faithful and loyal to the Kings Majesty, in such sort as by the Law and Custom of this City he ought to be. 12. Beadle. To all these purposes the Beadle of every Ward shall employ his dili∣gence, and give his best furtherance. 13. Stocks, &c. Also you are to take order that there be provided and set up a pair of Stocks and a Whipping Post in some
convenient place in every Parish within your Ward, for the punishing of Va∣grants and other Offenders. 14. Fire. Also that you have special regard that from time to time there be conveni∣ent provision for Hooks, Ladders, Buck∣ets, Spouts, and Engines, in meet pla∣ces within the several Parishes of your Ward, for avoiding the peril of Fire. 15. Streets. Also that the Streets and Lanes of this City be from time to time kept clean before every Church, House, Shop, Ware-house, Door, Dead-wall, and in all other common Passages and Streets of the said Ward. 16. Husters of Ale and Beer. And where by divers Acts of Common Council, aforetime made and established for the Common weal of this City, among other things, it is Ordain∣ed and Enacted, as hereafter ensueth: Also it is Ordained and Enacted, That from henceforth no Huckster of Ale or Beer be within any Ward of the City of London, but honest persons, and of good name & fame, & so taken & admitted by the Alderman of the Ward for the time being; & that the same Hucksters do find sufficient surety afore the Major & Alder∣men for the time being, to be of good guid∣ing & rule: And that the same Hucksters shall keep no Bawdry, nor suffer no Le∣chery, Dice-playing, Carding, or any other unlawful Games to be done, ex∣ercised or used within their Houses: And
to shut in their Doors at nine of the clock in the night, from Michaelmas to Easter, and from Easter to Michaelmas at ten of the clock in the night, and after that hour sell no Ale or Beer. And if any Huck∣ster of Beer or Ale, after this Act pub∣lished and proclaimed, sell any Ale or Beer within any Ward of the City of London, and be not admitted by the Al∣derman of the same Ward so to do, or find not sufficient surety, as it is above rehearsed, the same Huckster to have im∣prisonment, and make fine and ransom for his contempt after the discretion of the Lord Major and Aldermen: And al∣so that the said Hucksters suffer no man∣ner of common eating and drinking within their Cellars or Vaults, contra∣ry to the Ordinance thereof ordained and provided, as in the said Act more plain∣ly appeareth at large. We charge you that you put the same in due execution accordingly. 17. Measres sealed. And also that ye see all Tipplers, and other sellers of Ale or Beer, as well privy Osteries, as Brewers and Inn-holders, within your Ward, not selling by lawful measures sealed and marked with the City Arms or Dagger, be pre∣sented, and their names in your said In∣dentures be expressed, with their De∣faults, so that the Chamberlain may be lawfully answered of their amerce∣ments.
18. Strangers born. And also that you suffer no Alien, or son of any born an Alien, to be of the Common Councel, nor to exercise or use any other Office within this City, nor receive or accept any person into your watch, privy or open, but Englishmen born: And if any Stranger born out of this Realm, made Denizen by Let∣ters Patents, or any other after his course and lot be appointed to any watch, that then ye command and compel him or them to find in his stead and place an Englishman to supply the same. 19. And also that you cause an Ab∣stract of the Assise appointed by Act of Parliament for Billets and other Fire∣wood, to be fair written in Parchment, and to be fixed or hanged up in a Table in some fit and convenient place in the Parish within your Ward, where the common people may best see the same. 20. Streets. Pain 40 s. And furthermore, we charge and command you, that you cause such pro∣vision to be had in your said Ward, that all the Streets and Lanes within the same Ward be from time to time clean∣sed and clearly voided of Ordure, Dung, Mire, Rubbish and other filthy things whatsoever be to the annoiance of the King's Majesties Subjects. 21. Vagrants. And also that at all times as you shall think necessary, you do cause search to be made within your said ward for all vagrant Beggars, suspicious and idle
people, and such as cannot shew how to live, and such as shall be found within your said ward, that you cause to be punished and dealt with according to the Laws and Statutes in such case ordain∣ed and provided. 22. Jurymen. And also we will and charge you the said Alderman, that your self certi∣fie and present before us at the said ge∣neral Court, to be holden the aforesaid Monday next after the Feast of the Epipha∣ny, all the names and sirnames truly written of such persons within your said ward as be able to pass in a Grand Iu∣ry by themselves: And also all the names and sirnames truly written of such persons being and dwelling within your said ward, as be able to pass in a Petty Iury by themselves: that is to say, Every Grand Iuryman to be worth in Goods an hundred Marks, and every Petty Iuryman forty Marks, accord∣ing to an Act in that case ordained and provided: And the same you shall indorse on the backside of your Indenture. 23. Harlots. Item, for divers reasonable and urgent considerations us especially mo∣ving, we streightly charge and com∣mand you on the King our Sovereign Lords behalf, That you diligently pro∣vide and foresee, that no manner of per∣son or persons within your said ward, what condition or degree soever he or they be of, keeping any Tavern or Ale-house,
Ale-celsar, or any other Victual∣ling-house, or place of common resort to eat or drink in within the same ward, permit or suffer at any time hereafter any common woman of their bodies, or Harlots, to resort and come into their said House, or other the places aforesaid, to eat or drink, or otherwise to be con∣versant or abide, or thither to haunt or frequent, upon pain of imprisonment as well of the Tenant and Keeper of e∣very such House or Houses, and all o∣ther the places afore remembred, as of the common woman or Harlots. 24. Also that you do give in charge to the Wardmote Inquest of your ward all the Articles delivered to you here∣with, and that you ticles.have a special care of keeping the peace and good order du∣ring your Wardmote; and if any of∣fend herein, you fine or punish him or them according to Law. 25. And whereas the moneys recei∣ved for the Fines of persons refusing to hold Ward Offices within your ward, ought to be employed in the service and for the publick benefit of the whole ward, and not of any particular Precinct or Parish within the wrd: These are therefore to require you to take care, that all such Fines be from time to time disposed of accordingly for the benefit of the whole ward, as you with the De∣puty and Common Councel-men of your
ward, shall think most fitting and con∣venient: And that no such Fines be re∣ceived or employed in any particular Precinct or Parish. Not failing hereof, as ye tender the common weal of this City, and advance∣ment of good Iustice, and as ye will an∣swer for the contrary at your uttermost peril. Dated at  under the Seal-Office of Majoralty of the said City, the  day of De∣cember, in the  year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c.
THE COURT OF CONSERVARY FOR THE River of Thames. THis Court is held before the Lord Major at such times as he shall ap∣appoint and direct within the respe∣ctive Counties near adjacent to the Cities of London and Westminster. The Water-Bayliff is my Lord Major's Deputy and ought to give notice to his Lord∣ship of all Offences committed by any per∣sons, contrary to the Orders made for pre∣servation of the brood and fry of Fish in the said River. There have been several Orders made and devised for that purpose; some of which Or∣ders are as followeth; viz.
Orders devised and agreed up∣on by the Right Honourable Sir Robert Ducie Knight and Baronet, Lord Major of the City of London, and Conser∣vator of the River of Thames and Waters of Medway, for the preservation of the brood and fry of Fish within the West part of the said River, as followeth. FIrst, That no man, upon penalty and forfeiture of his Net and Ten pounds, with imprisonment at the dis∣cretion of the Lord Major, shall presume to shute any Draw-net or Coulter-net, at any time of the year, before Sun-rising nor after Sun-setting; for that in the Night time unlawful Nets may be u∣sed, and other abuses offered, to the great hurt and annoyance of the said River of Thames; and to shute in their several rooms well known. 2. Item, That no Fisher-man or other shall still, lie, or bend over any Net du∣ring the time of the Flood, whereby both
Salmons and other kinds of Fish may be hindred and kept back from swim∣ming upwards, to the benefit and profit of such Fisher-men as dwell in the west part of the said River; upon the like pain and penalty. 3. Item, That no Fisher-man or other shall shute any Draw-net, Cod-net, or o∣ther Net or Engin, whereby any Salmon-fish shall be taken after Holyrood day is past, being the Fourteenth day of Sep∣tember, because at that time they are out of season, and remain here upon the Ri∣ver only to spawn and breed; upon the like payment. 4. Item, That no Fisher-man or o∣ther shall fish with any Net, or lay or hale any Weel, or use any other Net or Engine whatsoever, from Sun-setting on Saturday at Night, until Sun-rising upon Monday Morning, no, not during all the time of Lent, as being a thing not only very hurtful to the said River, but also a great abuse and profaning of the Lord's Sabbath; upon the like pay∣ment. 5. Item, That no Fisher-man or o∣ther shall at any time hereafter ship their Draw-nets (called Shipping a Stern) into their Boats, before such time as they have laid forth all their whole Net, as they do when they land towards a low water, nor that they ship some part of their said Net, and land the rest; but
that from henceforth they shall fulfil and observe that ancient order of landing their Nets (as they have heretofore u∣sually done) at low water; upon the like payment. 6. Item, That not Fisher-man or o∣ther person whatsoever shall use any Spear, called an Eel-spear, at any time of the year, for that they are likewise very great destroyers of Barbels and other kinds of Fish; nor shall work with any Bley-net, Rugge-net, or Smelt-net, upon the said water west∣ward, farther then Isleworth Church, from the Tenth day of March yearly, un∣til Holyrood day be past, being the Four∣teenth day of September; upon the like payment. 7. Item, That no Fisher-man or o∣ther shall at any time of the year use or exercise any Flue, Trammel, Double-walled-net, or Hooped-net whatsoever, for that they are not only the utter de∣struction of all breeding Barbels, but also a great spoil and hurt to other sorts of the young brood and fry of Fish, be∣ing with those kind of Nets infinitely destroyed, to the general ruin of the Ri∣ver aforesaid: upon the like payment. 8. Item, That no Fisher-man or o∣ther shall lay any Weels called Kills in any place of the River, from the Tenth of March till the Tenth of May yearly, for that all Roches do then shed their
spawn; nor that no man whatsoever cut any Bull-rushes, or other Flaggs or Sedges growing upon the River from Richmond unto the Markstone above Stains-bridge, for that they are a great succour and safeguard unto the Fish; upon the like payment. 9. Item, That no Fisher-man or o∣ther shall use within the said River of Thames, any Weel called a Lomb or a Mill-pot, or any other Engine, with the head thereof against the Stream, upon pain of forfeiture of Ten pounds, and imprisonment at the discretion of the Lord Major: Nor that no man what∣soever shall occupy upon the said River of Thames, any Nets called Purse-nets, otherwise Casting-nets, upon the like payment. 10. Item, That no Fisher-man or o∣thers shall be suffered to rug for Floun∣ders either by Ebbe or by Flood, at any time of the year, between London-bridge and Stran-gate on the South side, and Westminster-bridge on the North side, but only two casts at low water, and two casts at full sea or high water, for the safeguard of the fry and brood of Fish; and no Flounder shall be taken under the assize of six inches: Nor that no Fisher-man or other shall fleet with any Bley-net upon the benches from Whitehall to the Temple-stairs upon high waters, from Whitsontide to Bartholomewtide; upon like payment.
11. Item, That no Fisher-man or o∣ther person whatsoever shall cast, bring, or cause to be brought, any Carrion, Soil, Gravel, Rubbish, Sods of Earth, or any other Filth or Annoyance, where∣by Banks and Shelves are raised, and the common passage hindred, to the great danger of Fares, Boats, and Barges, passing to and fro upon the said River: Nor that no Fisher-man or other shall drive or cause to be driven a∣ny Piles, Stumps or Stakes, within the said River of Thames, upon which the like mischief and dangers may arise, until such time as they be lawfully li∣censed so to do; upon the like pain and penalty as aforesaid. 12. Item, That no Fisher-man or o∣ther shall presume to take up any Rack or Drifth upon the water of Thames, without notice given thereof to the Water-Bailiff, or his Substitute, with∣in convenient time, he satisfying him for his pains as shall be reasonable and thought fitting; nor shall conceal and keep secret the said Rack or Drifth from the said Water-Bailiff, to the end that such order and care may be taken there∣in as hath been accustomed, according to the Laws and Ordinances ordained for the preservation of the said River; upon like payment and penalty.
13. That no Fisher-man or other shall fish with any kind of Net, or use any Angle-rod with more then two Hooks upon a Line, or saw or scratch for Bar∣bel within the Limits of London-Bridge, or shall use any other Engine nearer un∣to the Bridge then St. Botolphs Wharf and the Bridge-house Wharf on the East side, nor nearer on the West side then St. Mary Overies Stairs and the Old Swan; upon the pain of imprisonment at the discreti∣on of the Lord Major, and Sx shillings eight pence to the Chamber of Lon∣don. 14. Item, That no Peter-man shall at any time hereafter fish or work with any manner of Net upon the said water Westward farther then Richmond Crane, unto which place, or near thereabouts, the water ebbeth and floweth, for that the Fishing beyond that place hath cau∣sed a great destruction of Fish; upon pain of forfeiture of Twenty shillings for every time they shall so offend, and farther punishment according to the qua∣lity of his Offence. 15. Item, It is ordered that no Pe∣ter-man shall hereafter at any time of the year take the Tides above Richmond, nor go in company together, it being found very prejudicial and hurtful both to the River and Fisher-men, and no∣thing available for the furnishing of any Markets, nor shall go to fish more then
five together in one company between Richmond and London-Bridge; upon pain of forfeiting for every time Ten shil∣lings, and imprisonment during plea∣sure. 16. Item, That no Peter-man, or a∣ny other, take any Flounders. or any other short Fish, which they have usu∣ally called Kettle-fish, not being six in∣ches of assize, being found to be to the great destruction of the Fish; upon the like penalty and pain. 17. Item, That whereas many in∣conveniencies have heretofore risen to the River of Thames by divers Fisher∣mens keeping of Boys, who had neither sufficiency to take the charge of Fishing, nor bound Apprentice to the same: There∣fore from henceforth it shall not be law∣ful for any Fisher-man to keep two Boys in one Boat, unless the one of them be at mans estate, or thought sufficient by the Water-Bailiff to take the charge, or else that one of them be an Owner: Nor that no Fisher-man from henceforth do take any Apprentice to the said trade of Fishing, unless he first enter his name into the Register-Book of the Wa∣ter-Bailiff of this City, kept for that purpose, nor under the term of seven years; and that, after the expiration of his said term, he likewise come a∣gain before the said Water-Bailiff, to be by him admitted a lawful Fisherman,
(as of ancient time hath been accustom∣ed;) upon like payment. 18. Lastly, That every Fisher-man upon the River of Thames, from London-Bridge unto Stains-Bridge, shall once e∣very year (viz. upon St. Paul's day, be∣ing the Five and twentieth day of Janu∣ary) appear before the Water-Bailiff of this City, at the Chapel of the Guild∣hall, by Ten of the Clock in the Fore∣noon of the same day, there to enter their several names into his Register-Book kept for that purpose: And farther, to hear the Orders and Institutions or∣dained for the preservation of the said River to be openly and publickly read, to the intent that they and every of them may the better perform the same; upon pain of Six shillings eight-pence for e∣very default so made. And if any man whatsoever, Fisher-man or other, shall contemptuously or stubbornly resist the Water-Bailiff, being Sub-Conservator under the Lord Major, in the due per∣formance and execution of his said Of∣fice, he shall make such Fine, or be im∣prisoned at the discretion of the Lord Major for the time being, as unto his Lordship shall seem most fitting.
Articles to be inquired upon by the Jury for the River of Thames Eastward. INprimis, You shall faithfully and tru∣ly present (without any respect) all such persons, Fishermen and others, as do prophane the Lords Sabbath in their unlawful Fishings, and going forth that day to their labour, being to the high displeasure of Almighty God, and a∣vaileth not to the furnishing of any Mar∣ket. And if any such Fisherman have gone forth to fish; having been at home, before Sunday at night Sundown, you shall faithfully and truly present them. 2. Item,Trincker-men. That no Trincke shall stand for Smelts till the One and twentieth day of October yearly, and so to continue until Good-Friday following. And to use no manner of Net for Smelts than full two inches in the fore-part, inch and a half in the second part, and in the third part, which is the Hose or God, inch and quarter wet and dry. And the Hose not to exceed eleven foot in length, and in compass sixty Meishes, and not above. And five Hoops placed a foot and a half asunder in the said God, the last Hoop to be placed within two foot of the end of the God, and each Hoop to be a foot and
a half over every way, upright within the Hoop, and not otherwise. 3. Item That no Trincke shall stand to Fish above Nine Tides in the week, viz. three Tides against Wednesday, three Tides against Friday, and three Tides against Saturday Market, and so likewise 3 Tides against Saints Eves & other Fasting days, and then to wash, hale up, & go home with their said Nets and Boats every Saturday morning to their own Houses. And in Lent time they may stand every day, the Sabbath day excepted. 4. Item, That no Trincke shall stand in any Byrth more than is allowed him to stand, but shall stand in all such seve∣ral places, and in such manner as here∣after followeth, and in no other place; That is to say, He shall keep his Coople∣ment At Blackwal Ferry two, one Breast or front, and no more. At Ley shelp two, and no more. At Woolwich shelp two, and no more. At Woolwich Town five, and no more. At Gallions nasse three, and no more. At Buzards-bush five, and no more. At the East and West end of Barkin shelp two at each place, and no more. At Dagnam shelp six, and no more. At the Carrick four, and no more. At Julian tree job three, and no more. At Dartford job three, and no more.
At the Bight at Ereth nasse three, and no more. At Stoke-fleet nasse, alias, Stakes end, five and no more. At Avely hole five, and no more. At Purfleet five, and no more. At Grayes Thorock six, and no more. At the two Thoroughs three, and no more. And every Trincke to keep his true Coople∣ment, and to stand no more in a Byrth. 5. That no Trincke shall stand to fish for Whitings till the Ember-week be∣fore Michaelmas yearly, and to come no higher then Purfleet, and to have the Hose or Cod of his Net full inch and a half. And upon Saturday Sun up to wash off his Net, hale up and go home, and not to return to his labour again till Monday morning day-light. And so likewise shall every Fisherman do from London-Bridge Westward, to Graves∣end-Bridge in the East, and not other∣wise. 6. Item, That no Trinckerman or o∣ther Fisherman shall buy any Trincke, or take to receive any Copy under the Seal of the Office of Majoralty until he be allowed and thought fit by the Lord Major of London, or by his Sub∣stitute, the Water-Bailiff for the time being, with the general liking and con∣sents of the said Company of Trincker∣men,
and seventeen Trinks allowed, and no more. 7. Item, That no Trincke shall stand to Fish before any breach mouth at the rising or sinking of any mother-fishes, or in the time of Spawn or Brood of Fish, and that every Trincke shall at all times and seasons take up and carry away his Anchor at the time of his leaving off from fishing, and not leave his said An∣chor behind him to keep his Byrth, contrary to the ancient Order and Cu∣stom. 8. Item, That each Trincke shall e∣very dark and foggy night hang forth out of his said Trinck-boat one Lan∣thorn with sufficient Candle light, for the better and safer passage of Ships, Boats and Vessels passing to and fro upon the said River: And that every Trincke Cable be no more then twenty fathom long at the most; or any Henbilt above twenty two fathom. And like∣wise to have a Warpe of forty fathom to sheer off and give way if any Ship, Crayer, or other Vessel shall chance to drive upon them. 9. Item, That every Trincker-man shall one week before his going forth to Fish come up to the Chapel of Guildhal, London, and there appear before the Water-Baliff, as well to receive leave and licence for their going forth, as also to hear the Orders and Institutions or∣dained
for the preservation of the said River, to be there openly and publick∣ly read, to the end that they may the better observe and keep the said Orders and every thing therein contained. 10. Item, That no Hebber-manHebber-man. shall fish for Smelts before the twenty fourth day of August yearly, and so to continue till Good-Friday: And that no Hebber-man shall fish in any Haven, Creek, Breach, or Issue with any Net of less Assize than three inches for Flounders, from the Feast of Easter, until the said twenty fourth day of August yearly. And shall likewise appear before the Water-Bailiff of London at the Chapel of Guildhall, there to receive leave and li∣cence for their said going forth. And that the Meish of their said Smelt-nets be full inch wet and dry, and not other∣wise. 11. Item, That every Hebber-man shall fish by the shore, and pitch their Pole at half Ebb, and shall have but forty fathom Rope allowed from the pitch of their Pole into the River, and not to lie a floring or flatting for Smelts between two Anchors in the middest of the stream, nor shall have any kind of weight of Lead, Iron, Stone, Barrel, Firkin, Kilderkin, Cask, or with any Wherry or other Device. Nor shall fish from Good-Friday till Bartholomewtide yearly, betwixt London-Bridge and
Graves-end with any Net under two in∣ches, except with a Wade-net for Bait only. 12. Item, That no Hebber-man shall work any higher for Whitings than Dartford Creck, and to work with no manner of Net for Whitings of less As∣size than full inch and half wet and dry: Nor shall go forth to take any of the said Whitings yearly until they be law∣fully licensed by the Water-Bailiff of London, before whom they are severally to appear at the said Chapel of Guild∣hall London, one week before Gang-tide yearly. Trawler-man.13. Item, You shall present the names and sirnames of every Trawler unto the Lord Major of London, or his Sub∣stitute, the Water-Bailiff for the time being. And that no Trawler shall fish above Holl Haven on the North-side, and Porsing on the South-side, till a fortnight after Michaelmas yearly, and all the Summer to use no Net for Soals under two inches and a half in the Cod, being two yards long, and the rest of the Net to be three inches. And no Trawler to work in Tilbury-hope after Michaelmas with any manner of Net under four in∣ches for Plaice all the Net over. And no Trawler to come upon any Trawl with any other Net at any time of the year.
14. Item, To present all such as have pitched, set, or erected any Riff-hedge, or Half-nets upon stakes or otherwise within the full sea and low water, be∣ing an Engine utterly to kill small fish, and what Landmen they be upon Kentish shore, or in any other place within the waters of Thames and Medway, that do or have used the same. 15. Item, That no Trawler do stay abroad to fish after Whitsontide against Wednesday Market till Bartholomewtide yearly, nor that no Trawler do fish in Tilbury-hope upon the Saturday after Sun rising, but to wash off, hale up, and go home, as all other Fishermen ought to do, and according to the old and ancient Custom of the River of Thames and waters of Medway. 16. Item, That every Trawler up∣on the River Eastwards, do yearly ap∣pear before the Water-Bailiff of London at the Chapel of Guildhall one week be∣fore their true times and seasons of go∣ing forth to fish, then and there to re∣ceive leave and licence for their said go∣ings forth, and to hear the Orders and Institutions ordained for the preser∣vation and government of the River of Thames, to be there openly and publick∣ly read, to the end that they may the better observe and perform the same.
17. Item, That no Trawler that hath or doth use to Trawl to take Soals, Chate, Plaice, or Thornback shall take or bring any such fish to any Market, or to any Country Town to sell, except they contain the assize as followeth; That is to say, every such Soal, Chate, Plaice, and Thornback to contain in length se∣ven Inches with the head and tail, and not under. 18. Item, That no Dragger-manDragger-man. that hath or doth use to drag for Shrimps, shall go forth to fish till the first day of November yearly, and to continue till Good-Friday: Nor shall use any such Drag at any time of the Year above Maggot Nasse on the Southside, and Stakie-Brake Creek on the Northside, and not otherwise. And that every Dragger-man shall upon the first day of November yearly, appear before the Water-Bailiff of London, to receive leave and licence for going forth. Shadders.19. Item, That all manner of Fisher∣men whatsoever that use to take Shads in Shadding time, shall observe and keep their true order of shooting a Droves length off from one another, and to pre∣sent what disorder is kept amongst them, both in going forth upon Sundays or o∣therwise. And that none of the said Shadders shall go forth to fish until they have received leave and licence of the Lord Major of London, or his Sub∣stitute
the Water-Bailiff for the time being, their true time of going forth to be the week before Easter yearly and not before. 20. Item, That no Peter-manPeter-men. what∣soever from London-Bridge in the West, as far as the River of Medway in the East, shall fleet for Flounders with any Rugge-net in the night time, from Sun going down until day light the next morning betwixt Michaelmas and Christ∣mas, because in the night time they make great destruction of small Flounders, and carry them away both unseen and unknown. Nor that no Peter-man do fish with any Hagan or Smelt-net be∣low London-Bridge at any time of the Year. 21. Item, That no Peter-man or o∣ther person whatsoever shall fish betwixt London-Bridge and Limehouse Nasse with any manner of Net to fleet, beat, or rugge at any time of the Year, except for Shads only; Nor that no Peter-man do rugge from London-Bridge to Black∣wall, and so Eastward, from Michaelmas yearly till Whitsontide, but only three Easts at high water, and three casts at low water in an out, and every Rugge-net is to contain two inches three quar∣ters in the Meish wet and dry, and every Bley-net two inches and a half through∣out wet and dry.
22. Item, That no Fisherman or o∣ther person whatsoever, shall lay down in the River of Thames Eastward any Smelt-leapsSmelt-leaps. before St. Paul's day year∣ly, and so to continue till Good-Friday next following, and no longer. Nor that no Fisherman or other person shall lay in the said River any more than only one wand of eighteen and no more, and not to lay them down until they be law∣fully licensed thereunto by the Lord Ma∣jor or Water-Bailiff, and none to use them but Fishermen and Housholders. 23. Item, That no Fisherman or o∣ther person shall lay in the said River of Thames any Eel-leapsEel-leaps. till fourteen days after Easter yearly, and so to continue until Michaelmas next following: Nor shall lay any more or greater quantity than only two dozen, and no more: Nor shall lay any of the said Eel-leaps until they be lawfully licensed thereunto as a∣foresaid, and not otherwise. 24. Item, That no Fisherman or o∣ther person whatsoever, shall use upon the River of Thames, at any time of the Year, any Spear called an Eel-spear,Eel-spear. or any other kind of Spear whatsoever, for that they are great destroyers of young brood and other kind of Fish in great abundance, and therefore altoge∣ther unlawful, no man to use them upon pain of Imprisonment, and further Fine at the discretion of the Lord Major.
25. Item, You shall further inquire,Fore-stalling. and true presentment make, of all such persons as do use to go down the River to buy up either Fish, Victuals, or other Commodities before the same cometh to Billingsgate and other Keys, being known and appointed places of sale, vent and discharge thereof; if you know any such, you shall present who they be, and how often they have so done. 26. Item, That no Fisherman or o∣ther person whatsoever,Fish out of season. shall work with any manner of Net or Engine whatsoe∣ver, to take or kill any Dace or Roch from the Tenth of March till the Tenth of May yearly, for that they do then shed their Spawn: Nor that they take or kill any of the said Dace, Roch, or o∣ther kind of Fish out of their due kind or season, nor except they contain in length according to the true scantling and assize, and not otherwise. 27. Item, You shall further inquire,Soil and Rubbish. and true presentment make, whether any Butcher, Brewer, Inn-keeper, or any other person or persons, as well within the City of London, as in any other Country Town or Village (as far as the Liberty of the Lord Major ex∣tendeth) have cast or put into the said River, any Panches, Grains, Horse-dung, or any other Rubbish, Soil, or Filth whatsoever, to the very great an∣noyance and hurt of the said River, on
pain of Imprisonment, and further fine at the discretion of the Lord Major of London: If you know any such you shall present them. 28. Item, You shall further inquire what Royal FishesRoyal fish. have been taken within the Iurisdiction and Royalty of the Lord Major of London, as namely, Whales, Sturgeons, Porpusses, and such like, and to present the name and names of all such persons as shall take them to the Lord Major of London for the time being. 29. Item, That no Fisherman or o∣ther person whatsoever shall lay in the said River of Thames any Lampern Leaps to take Lamperns before Bartho∣lomew-tide yearly,Lampern rods. and so to continue till Good-Friday, nor shall lay any more or greater quantity then only one rod of forty fathom, containing seven dozen of Leaps and not above: Nor shall lay any of the said rods until they shall be lawfully licensed by the Lord Major of London, or by his Substitute, the Water-Bailiff for the time being. 30. Lastly, Because the number of Fishermen do daily increase, and not only Fishermen, but also a great num∣ber of Cable-hangers and Trades-men, such as were never bound Apprentice to the craft and science of Fishing, to the great hurt of the River and hindrance of Fishermen, the said River being not a∣ble
to relieve and succour the multiplici∣ty of them being so great: It is now ordained, That every Fisherman dwel∣ling near unto the said River, that doth take and receive into his or their custody any Apprentice to the said Trade of Fi∣shing, shall within one Moneth next af∣ter, repair unto the Water-Bailiff of London to have his Indenture written and engrossed, to the end that after he may present him to the Chamberlain of London to be enrolled, according to an∣cient Custom. And not to receive any Apprentice under the term of seven years. And at the end and expiration of the said term, the Master of the said Apprentice do again present him to the said Water-Bailiff, to be by him ad∣mitted and allowed a Fisherman. And finally, You shall inquire and true pre∣sentment make, by the Oaths that you and every of you have taken, whether any Fisherman or other Person whatsoe∣ver they be, have with any manner of Net or Engine offended or misused him∣self in fishing within the said River, or whether they have any manner of ways made destruction of the brood and fry of any kind of Fish therein contained, con∣trary to the good and ancient Laws, Ordinances, and Constitutions of the said River of Thames. And to make a true, perfect and faithful Presentment of all other kind of Enormities, Hurts,
Offences and Annoyances, touching as well Fishermen, as any other person or persons within the said Iurisdiction, being any manner of waies hurtful or offensive to the same. At a Court of Aldermen the Tenth of July 1673. an Order was made as follow∣eth, viz. THis Court considering the great Decay of the Fishing Trade in the River of Thames, and conceiving, That drawing the Shores (of late so frequently practised) is the chief Ground thereof, as tending to the great Prejudice and utter Destruction of the Brood and Fry of all sorts of Fish, did there∣upon this Day strictly order and enjoyn, That no person do hereafter presume to draw the Shores in the River of Thames upon any pre∣tence whatsoever at any time or season of the Year, either with lawful or unlawful Nets, save only for Salmons in Rooms ap∣pointed and set out for that purpose by this Court: And that none do fish for Salmons in such Rooms, but only such as shall be impowered thereunto under the Seal of the Majoralty of this City: And also that none fish with a Net under six Inches in the Meash, upon pain that every Offender shall forfeit for every such Offence his Nets, and pay as a Fine the Sum of Twenty pounds, and suffer Imprisonment during the plea∣sure
of this Court. And to the end more diligent and strict Search may for the future be made upon the said River than hitherto hath been, or possibly can be by one single person, for such as fish with unlawful Nets, at unlawful Times, and in an unlawful Man∣ner; The Water-Bailiff for the time being is by this Court ordered and impowered, from time to time to authorize Two or more honest Fishermen, in such Town and Places as he shall think convenient, as well below as above the Bridge, to be assistant to him in the Execution of his Duty. And when they shall think fit, to go out and search for any such Offenders, and to take away their Nets, and give their Names to Mr. Water-Bailiff, that he may take effe∣ctual Care, that they be severely proceeded against according to Law. Wagstaffe.
The Title of the Lord Major of the City of London to and for the Conservacy of the River of Thames. INprimis, The Major of the said City for the time being, and all other his Predeces∣sors, Governours of the same City time out of mind, have had and exercised the room of Conservacy of the River of Thames, and the correction and punishment of all manner of Fishermen, and all other persons offend∣ing within the said River. Item, King Edward the Third by his Char∣ter hath granted, That the Citizens of London shall remove and take away all Ki∣dels in the Water of the River of Thames and Medway, and shall have the punishment to the King belonging thereof coming. Item, By the Statute made in the Seven∣teenth year of the Reign of King Richard the Second, it is ordained, That the Major of London for the time being, shall have the conservacy of the Thames, and put in execu∣tion the Statutes of 13 Edw. 1. and 13 Rich. 2. from the Bridge of Stanes to London, and from thence over the same water, and in the water of Medway.
Item, King James by his Charter to the City, Dated the 20th of August in the third year of his Reign, takes notice of the Lord Major's Right to the Office of Bailiff and Conservation of the River of Thames, in these words, or to this effect. Charta Jacobi Regis concessa Civi∣bus Londini de Conservatione Rivi Thamesis, inter alia geren' Dat' vigesimo die Augusti An∣no Regni sui Tertio. JAMES by the Grace of God of Eng∣land, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, &c. To all to whom our present Letters Pa∣tents shall come, Greeting; Whereas our beloved in Christian part, the Major and Commonalty and Citizens of our City of London, time out of memory of man, have had, exercised, and ought and have accustomed to have and exercise the Office of Bailiff and Conservation of the Water of Thames, to be exercised and occupied by the Major of the same City for the time being, during the time of his Majoralty, or by his sufficient De∣puties, in and upon and about the wa∣ter of Thames; That is to say, From the Bridge of the Town of Stains in the
County of Middlesex, and towards the West unto London-Bridge, and from thence to a certain place called Kendal, otherwise Yenland, otherwise Yenleet, towards the Sea, and East and in Med∣way, and in the part of the City of Lon∣don aforesaid, and upon whatsoever Banck, and upon every Shore and e∣very Wharf of the same Water of Thames within the Limits and Bounds aforesaid. And in, upon, and about all and every of them. And also for all the time aforesaid, have had and taken, and ought and have accustomed to have and take to their own proper use, by the Ma∣jor of the aforesaid City for the time be∣ing, during the time of his Majoralty, or his sufficient Deputies, all wages, re∣gards, fees and profits appertaining and belonging to the same Office of Bai∣liff, We therefore, to the Intent that the said Major and Commonalty and Ci∣tizens may more securely, freely, and quietly use, have, exercise, and enjoy the Office aforesaid, and the fees, wa∣ges, regards, and profits thereunto be∣longing to them and their Successors for ever, of our especial Grace and cer∣tain knowledge and meer motion, have granted, and by these Presents for Vs, our Heirs and Successors, do grant to the foresaid Major and Commonalty and Citizens, and their Successors, That they the aforesaid Major and Common∣alty
and Citizens, and their Successors, may exercise and execute the aforesaid Office of Bailiff and Conservation of the Water of Thames by the Major of the said City for the time being, during the time of his Majoralty, or his suffi∣cient Deputies, from time to time for ever, in, upon, or about the same wa∣ter of Thames; That is to say, from the aforesaid Bridge of Stains in the Coun∣ty of Middlesex towards the West, to the Bridge of London, and from thence to a certain place called Yendall, other∣wise Yenland, otherwise Yenleet, towards the Sea and East and in Medway, and in the Port of the City of London aforesaid, and upon whatsoever Banck, and whatsoever Shore, and whatsoever Wharf of the same Water of Thames, within the Limits and Bounds afore∣said, in, upon, and about every one of the same, and to have, receive, collect, and enjoy all and singular wages, re∣gards, fees, and profits to the same Of∣fice of Bailiff pertaining and belonging, to the proper use of the same Major and Commonalty and Citizens, by the Ma∣jor of the City aforesaid for the time be∣ing, during the time of his Majoralty, or by his sufficient Deputies, without the hinderance of Vs, our Heirs, or Suc∣cessors, or any of our Officers, Bailiffs, or Ministers, or of our Heirs or Succes∣sors,
or our Admiral of England, or of our Successors or any others of our Subjects, or of our Heirs or Successors whatsoever, or of any grant by Vs, our Heirs or Successors to be made to the contrary, To have, hold, and enjoy the aforesaid Office, and all and singular the Premisses, with all and singular Wages, Regards, Fees, Profits, and Appurtenances whatsoever to the said Office belonging or appertaining to the aforesaid Major and Commonalty and Citizens, and their Successors for ever, by the Major of the foresaid City for the time being, during the time of his Ma∣joralty, or by his sufficient Deputies to be exercised and executed without any Accompt, or any other thing to be ren∣dred or made thereof to Vs, our Heirs, or Successors, So as no other Bailiff or Conservator of the aforesaid Water, shall be or shall in any wise intermeddle in the Premisses.
THE COURT OF REQUESTS, Commonly called The Court of Conscience. THE first beginning of this Court was in the Ninth Year of King Hen∣ry the Eighth, by Act of Common Councel then made, whereby it was ordain∣ed, That the Major and Aldermen of the City of London should monthly assign and appoint two Aldermen and four Common∣ers to be Commissioners, to sit in the same Court in Guildhall, upon Wednesday and Sa∣turday in every week, there to hear, exa∣mine, and determine all Matters brought before them between party and party, Citi∣zens of London, where the Debt did not ex∣ceed forty shillings, which Act was to con∣tinue
two years and no longer. But being found beneficial for the relief of such poor Debtors as could not make present payment of their Debts, and also to be a great ease and help to such poor persons as had small Debts owing to them, and were not able to prosecute a Suit in Law for the same. The said Act hath since been continued by divers other Acts of Common Councel; and be∣sides the two Aldermen monthly assigned, the number of Commissioners was encreased from four to twelve, and by that authority the same Court continued till the first Year of the Reign of King James: And then di∣vers malicious people slighting the Autho∣rity of the same Court, and not regarding the expence, how great soever, if they might ruin their poor Debtors: And being often animated thereunto by divers Attor∣neys and Sollicitors, did frequently com∣mence Suits for petty Debts and Causes a∣gainst poor men (Citizens of London) in the High Courts at Westminster or else∣where, out of the said Court of Requests to avoid the Jurisdiction thereof, and to barr the said Commissioners from staying such Suits, and examining the said Causes, and thereby caused such poor men many times to pay ten times as much Charges as the principal Debt did amount unto to the undoing such poor men, their Wives, and Children, and also to the filling of the Pri∣sons with the poor so sued. For Remedy whereof, and for the strengthning and e∣stablishing
the said Court. An Act of Par∣liament was made in the third Year of the Reign of King James, Intituled, An Act for the recovering of small Debts, and for the re∣lieving of poor Debtors in London. The Te∣nor of which Act is as followeth. WHereas by virtue of divers Acts of Common Councel made with∣in the City of London, the Lord Major and Aldermen of the same City, for the Relief of poor Debtors dwelling within the said City, have accustomed monthly to assign two Aldermen and twelve dis∣creet Commoners to be Commissioners, and sit in the Court of Requests, com∣monly called the Court of Conscience, in the Guildhall of the same City, there to hear and determine all matters of Debt not amounting to the sum of xlx. to be brought before them: And where∣as at the Sessions of Parliament hol∣den at Westminster, the Nineteenth day of March, in the first Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Ma∣jesty that now is, for the further Relief of such poor Debtors, and more perfect establishing of the said Court, there was made and provided and Act, entituled, An Act for recovery of small Debts, and relieving of poor Debtors in London: And whereas since the making of the said Act, divers persons intending to sub∣vert
the good and charitable intent of the same, and taking hold of some doubtful and ambiguous words therein, do wrest the same for their own lucre and gain, to the avoiding the Iurisdiction of the said Court, contrary to the godly mean∣ing of the said Act. For the Remedy whereof, and to the intent that some more full and ample provision may be made for the Relief of such poor Debtor, Be it enacted by Au∣thority of this present Parliament, That every Citizen and Freeman of the City of London, and every other person and persons inhabiting, or that shall inha∣bit within the said City, or the Liber∣ties thereof, being a Tradesman, Vi∣ctualler, or a Labouring man, which now have, or hereafter shall have any Debt or Debts owing unto him or them, not amounting to Forty shillings, by a∣ny Citizen, or by any other person or persons being a Victualler, Tradesman, or Labouring man, inhabiting, or that shall inhabit within the said City, or the Liberties thereof, shall or may cause such Debtor or Debtors to be warned or sum∣moned by the Beadle or Officer of the said Court of Requests for the time be∣ing, by writing to be left at the dwel∣ling house of such Debtor or Debtors, or by any other reasonable warning or no∣tice to be given to the said Debtor or Debt rs to appear before the Commis∣sioners
of the said Court of Requests, holden in the Guildhall of the said City: And that the said Commissioners, or a∣ny three of them or more, shall have pow∣er and authority by virtue of this Act, from time to time, to set down such Or∣der or Orders between such party or par∣ties Plaintiffs, and his or their such Debtor or Debtors Defendants, touch∣ing such Debts not amounting to the value of Forty shillings, in question be∣fore them, as they shall find to stand with Equity and good Conscience: All such their Order or Orders to be registred in a Book, as they have been accustomed, and as well the party Plaintiff, as the Debtor or Defendant, to observe, per∣form and keep the same in all points. And that for the more due proceeding herein, it shall be lawful for the same Commissioners, or any three or more of them, to minister an Oath to the Plain∣tiff or Defendant, and also to such Wit∣nesses as shall be produced on each par∣ty, if the same Commissioners, or any three of them or more shall so think it meet. And be it further Enacted by the Au∣thority aforesaid, That if in any Action of Debt, or Action upon the Case upon any Assumpsit for the Recovery of any Debt, to be sued or prosecuted against any the person or persons aforesaid, in any of the King's Courts at Westminster, or else∣where
out of the said Court of Requests, it shall appear to the Iudge or Iudges of the Court where such Action shall be sued or prosecuted, that the Debt to be recovered by the Plaintiff in such A∣ction doth not amount to the sum of Forty shillings, and the Defendant in such Action shall duly prove either by sufficient Testimony, or by his own Oath, to be allowed by any the Iudge or Iudges of the said Court where such Action shall depend, that at the time of the commencing of such Action, such Defendant was inhabiting and resident in the City of London, or the Liberties thereof, as above, That in such case the said Iudge or Iudges shall not allow to the said Plaintiff any Costs of Suit, but shall award that the same Plaintiff shall pay so much ordinary Costs to the party Defendant, as such Defendant shall justly prove before the said Iudge or Iudges, it hath truly cost him in de∣fence of the said Suit. And be it further Enacted, That if a∣ny such Plaintiff or Creditor, Defendant or Debtor, after warning given to him or them, in manner and form before in this Art mentioned, by the said Officer of the said Court of Requests, shall without some just or reasonable cause of Excuse refuse to appear in the said Court before the said Commissioners, or shall not perform such order as the said Com∣missioners,
or any three or more of them, shall set down, or concerning such Debts as aforesaid, That then it shall be law∣ful for the said Court, or any other of the Sergeants at Mace of the said City by Order of the said Commissioners, or any three or more of them, to commit such party or parties to prison, into one of the Counters of the said City, there to remain until he or they shall perform the order of the said Commissioners in that behalf. Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to any Debt for any Rent upon any Lease of Lands or Tenements, or any other real Contracts, nor to any o∣ther Debt that shall arise by reason of a∣ny cause concerning a Testament or Ma∣trimony, or any thing concerning or pro∣perly belonging to the Ecclesiastical Court, albeit the same shall be under Forty shillings; Any thing before con∣tained to the contrary in any wise not∣withstanding.
THe Lord Major and Court of Alder∣men do monthly assign such Aldermen and Commons to sit as Commissioners in the said Court as they think fit: And the same persons, or any three of them, make a Court, and do sit in Guildhall every Wednesday and Saturday in the Forenoon, to hear and de∣termine such Causes as come before them. A Cause may be brought and determined in this Court for 10 d. Charge, viz. Six pence for the Plaint and the Summons, and 4 d. for the Order: But if the Defendant do not appear the second Court day after Summons, an Attachment will be awarded against him, which will compel him to ap∣pear, and encrease the Charge. If any Citizen shall be arrested for a Debt under 40 s. this Court will grant a Sum∣mons for the Plaintiff in the Action; and if he appear not the first Court day after the Summons left at his House, will grant an At∣tachment against him, and force him to take his Debt, and pay the Defendant his Costs. And if any Attorney in London shall presume to go on in any such Suit after notice to the contrary, or shall refuse to o∣bey the Order of this Court, upon Com∣plaint thereof made to the Court of Al∣dermen, they will suspend such person.
In the Majoralty of Sir  Craven, an Attorney in the Sheriffs Court was sent for by the Commissioners sitting in this Court; and he refusing to come before them, they made Complaint to the Court of Aldermen, who thereupon made an Or∣der as followeth. Craven Major. Jovis 24o die Januarij Anno Do∣mini 1610. Annoque Regis Jacobi Angl' &c. octavo. THis day Sir John Jolls Knight and Alderman of this City, did declare unto this Court, That he and three dis∣creet Commoners of this City (a∣mongst others) assigned by this Court to be Commissioners for this instant Month of January for the Court of Re∣quests, commonly called the Court of Conscience, according to an Act of Par∣liament made in the Third Year of the Reign of the Kings Majesty that now is: And that they sitting in the said Court of Conscience in the Guildhall of this Ci∣ty yesterday last being Wednesday the
three and twentieth of this instant Ja∣nuary, to hear and determine Matters for the Recording of small Debts, and relieving of poor Debtors in this City, according as by the said Act of Parlia∣ment they are authorized, and only out of a conscionable Care to be certainly informed of the true state of a Case brought before them, and which was depending in the Sheriffs Court, where they were informed that Tho∣mas Hutton, one of the Attorneys in the Sheriffs Court, was retained for the Plaintiff in the said Court: And the said Hutton being in the Guildhall in the view of the said Sir John Jolls, and o∣ther the Commissioners, the said Com∣missioners commanded the Beadle of the said Court to go to the said Hutton, and require him presently to come to the said Sir John Jolls and the other Commissioners. And albeit the Bea∣dle went two several times to him, yet the said Hutton peremptorily and con∣temptuously made answer, That he nei∣ther could nor would come to them. The which being here examined in full & open Court, and the said Hutton called to an∣swer the same, was in part confessed by the said Hutton, and also proved by the Oath of the Clerk and Beadle of the said Court of Requests. And to aggravate the said Offence and Con∣tempt, the said Hutton here in open
Court, did affirm, That he knew not what Authority that Court had to send for him. The which Indignities and Contempts offered to Commissioners chosen by this Court, and established by Act of Parliament, and to an Al∣derman of the City of London by a Subordinate Officer of this City, This Court do generally hold the same in∣tolerable, and the said Hutton worthy of severe and condign punishment: And therefore do order and decree that the said Thomas Hutton shall be presently and absolutely dismissed, and this Court doth absolutely dismiss him of and from his said Place and Office of One of the Attorneys of the said She∣riffs Court aforesaid. And Mr. Dale, one of the Iudges of the said Court, was sent for, and being here private, was required to take notice thereof, and to publish the same in the She∣riffs Court, and to take private Or∣der that the said Thomas Hutton be not admitted hereafter to practise any more in the said Court.
The Clerks Fees of this Court. FOr every Plaint 2 d. For every Appearance 2 d. For every Order 4 d. For every Precept or Warrant to com∣mit to Prison 6 d. For every Search 2 d. For every satisfaction acknowledged up∣on an Order 6 d. Beadles Fees. FOr warning every person within the Li∣berties 4 d. For warning every person without the Li∣berties 6 d. For serving every Precept or Warrant 4 d.
THE SHERIFFS COURTS. EAch Sheriff holds a Court of Record in Guildhall, viz. every Wednesday and Friday, for Actions entered at the Woodstreet Compter, and every Thurs∣day and Saturday for Actions entered at the Poultry Compter. There is eight Attorneys belonging to these Courts, who of right ought to have three Fees in every Cause that is or shall be brought to Trial; viz. a Fee For the Ap∣pearance, a Fee at Issue, and a Fee upon Summons for Trial: But if the Cause shall be summoned more than once, he is to have a Fee upon every Summons. Note, That an Attorneys Fee in this Court is 1 s. 8 d. and no more. The Attorneys of these Courts are ad∣mitted by the Court of Aldermen, and must take the following Oath.
The Oath of the Attorneys of the Sheriffs Courts. YE shall swear that ye shall well and lawfully do your Office of Attorney, and well and lawfully examine your Client, and their quarrel without Cham∣party, and without procuring of any Iuries or any Enquest embrasing. And that ye shall change no quarrel out of his nature after your understanding. Also ye shall plead Ne ley, ne suffer to be plea∣ded or leyed by your assent no Forreign Release, Acquittance, Payment, Arbi∣tration, plain Accompt whatsoever it be to put the Court out of his Iurisdicti∣on, nor none other matter, but it be such as ye may find rightful and true by the Information of your Client, whose in∣formation and saying upon your Oath and Conscience ye shall think to be true. And ye shall not enform ne enforce any man to sue falsly against any person by false or forged Action. Ready ye shall be at all times to come and attend at the warning of the said Major, and of the Sheriffs of the said City, unless ye be letted about the business of this City, or for some other reasonable cause. The Franchises, Laws and Ordinances of this City you shall keep, and do to be
kept to your power. And that well and lawfully ye shall do all things that to the Office of Attorney pertaineth to do. As God help you. There is two Secondaries, two Clerks of the Papers, two Prothonatories, and eight Clerk-sitters belonging to these Courts. The Secondaries allow and return all Writs brought to remove Causes out of these Courts. The Clerks of the Papers file and copy all Declarations upon Actions in these Courts. The Prothonatories do draw and ingross all such Declarations. The Clerk-sitters enter Actions and At∣tachments, and take Bails and Verdicts. The Attorneys have not the custody of a∣ny Record belonging to these Courts; their business is only to take their Fees due to them in every Cause, and to give their Clients no∣tice of Declarations and Trials, and to ad∣vise them when and what to plead. All Subpoena's for Witnesses to appear in these Courts, are made by the Clerks be∣longing to the Judges of these Courts.
The Fees for a Trial in these Courts. The Action 0 4 The Arrest 1 0 The Attorneys Fee 1 8 The Declaration if general 1 4 The Court Fees hereon 0 8 The Deletur 0 4 The Issue and Attorneys Fee 4 0 The Summons of the Jury and Attor∣ney's Fee 4 8 The Subpoena 2 0 The Councel well deserve 5 0 The Juries Verdict 4 6 The Judgment 2 6 The Execution 1 4 If the Declaration be special the Pro∣thonatories Fee for every sheet draw∣ing and ingrossing is 0 8 The Defendants Fees for a Trial. The Attorneys Fee for Appearance, and the Court Fees 2 6 The Copy of the Declaration 4 d. per sheet. The Issue and Attorneys Fee 3 8 Attorneys Fee upon the Summons 1 8
After a Verdict obtained in either of these Courts, and before Judgment entered, the Defendant may stop Judgment by marking the Cause before the Lord Major for time to pay the Money recovered; which he may do by speaking to an Attorney in the Majors Court, and giving him 4 s. 10 d. for that purpose. My Lord Major sits only upon Saturday to hear mark't Causes; and if upon hearing both Parties, it shall appear to his Lordship that the Plaintiff obtained a Verdict for more then his just Debt, his Lordship may remit the Cause to Judgment for the just Debt only, and give such time to pay the same as he shall think reasonable: But his Lordship always orders the Defendant to give good Security to pay the Recovery at such times as his Lordship directs, and to pay the Costs in fourteen days. The Attorneys in the Majors Court al∣ways move for time, although the Verdict was in the Sheriffs Court, and his Fee for moving is 1 s. 8 d. The Plaintiff must pay for his Lordships Order, and entering it 2 s. 10 d. Which Charges will be allowed to the Plaintiff upon taxing of Costs. In these Courts may be tried Actions of Debt, Case, Trespass, Accompt and Cove∣nants broken; as also Attachments and Se∣questrations. If either party shall have a Witness that cannot stay in London till the day of Trial,
his testimony may be taken in writing, which will be allowed as good Evidence. The method for examining such Witness is thus; First, his name and place of abode must be delivered in writing to the adverse Attorney; and then he must be examined and sworn by the eldest Attorney in the Lord Majors Court, whose Fee for the Examinati∣on and Copy is 3 s. 4 d. After the Examination the adverse Attor∣ney may have a Copy thereof, for which he must pay 2 s. The two eldest Clerks in these Courts for the time being, are Attorneys of the Pye-powder Court held during the first three days of Bartholomew Fair, for the examining and trying all Suits brought for petty Mat∣ters and Offences there committed, contrary to the Proclamation hereafter mentioned. The Lord Major and Aldermen do Annu∣ally cause a Proclamation to be made for the better regulating this Fair. The tenour whereof is as followeth.
The Proclamation made on Bartholomew Eve in the After∣noon at the great Gate going into the Cloth Fair. THe Right Honourable Sir R. C. Kt. Lord Major of the City of Lon∣don, and his Right Worshipful Bre∣thren the Aldermen of the said City, streightly charge and command, on the behalf of our Sovereign Lord the King, That all manner of persons of whatso∣ever estate, degree, or condition they be, having recourse to this Fair, keep the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King. That no manner of Persons make a∣ny Congregation, Conventicles, or Af∣frays, by the which the same Peace may be broken or disturbed, upon pain of Imprisonment and Fine to be made after the discretion of the Lord Major and Aldermen. Also that all manner of Sellers of Wine, Ale, or Beer, sell by Measures ensealed, as by Gallon, Pottle, Quart, and Pint, upon pain that will fall there∣of.
And that no Person sell any Bread, but if it keep the Assize, and that it be good and wholsome for mans body, up∣on pain that will fall thereof. And that no manner of Cook, Pye∣halter, nor Huckster, sell, nor put to sale, any manner of Victual, but it be good and wholsome for mans body, upon pain that will fall thereof. And that no manner of Person buy nor sell, but with true Weights and Measures, sealed according to the Sta∣tute in that behalf made, upon pain that will fall thereof. And that no manner of Person or Persons take upon him or them within this Fair, to make any manner of Ar∣rest, Attachment, Summons, or Exe∣cution, but if it be done by the Offcrs of this City thereunto assigned, upon pain that will fall thereof. And that no Person or Persons what∣soever, within the limits and bounds of this Fair, presume to break the Lords Day in selling, shewing, or offering to sale, or in buying, or offering to buy, a∣ny Commodities whatsoever, or in sit∣ting, tippling, or drinking in any Ta∣vern, Inn, Alehouse, Tippling-house, or Cooks house, or in doing any other
thing that may tend to the breach there∣of, upon the pains and penalties con∣tained in several Acts of Parliament, which will be severely inflicted upon the breakers thereof. And finally, That what Persons soever find themselves grieved, injured, or wronged by any manner of Person in this Fair, that they come with their Plaints before the Stewards in this Fair assigned to hear and determine Pleas, and they will minister to all Par∣ties Iustice, according to the Laws of this Land, and the Customs of this City.
THE CHAMBERLAINS COURT OR OFFICE. THe Chamberlain of London keeps his Office in the Chamber of Guildhall, and is entrusted with Orphans Mo∣neys and the Cities Cash, he is An∣nually elected, and gives very good Securi∣ty to the Court of Aldermen to pay, and make good whatsoever Cash shall be delive∣red to him, and once every year gives an Ac∣count to Auditors appointed and chosen for that purpose. He is also entrusted with the Cities Leases; and all Bonds and Securities taken by the Court of Aldermen for Or∣phans Moneys. He attends at Guildhall usually every Fore∣noon to Inroll and turn over Apprentices, and to make such Free as have duly served
the full term of Seven years, and have not married nor taken wages in that time. Up∣on the admission of every Person into the Freedom of London, Mr. Chamberlain cau∣ses them to take the following Oath. The Oath of every Freeman of the City of London. YE shall swear, that ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, and to the heirs of our said Soveraign Lord the King. O∣beysant and obedient ye shall be to the Mayor and Ministers of this City. The Franchises and Customs thereof ye shall maintain, and this City keep harmless in that that in you is. Ye shall be contributary to all manner of char∣ges within this City, as Summons, Watches, Contributions, Taxes, Tal∣lages, Lot and Scot, and to all other charges, bearing your part as a Free∣man ought to do. Ye shall colour no foreign goods under or in your name, whereby the King or this City might or may lose their Customs or advantages. Ye shall know no Foreiner to buy or sell any Merchandize with any other Forein∣er within this City or Franchise there∣of, but ye shall warn the Chamberlain thereof, or some Minister of the Cham∣ber.
Ye shall implead or sue no Free∣man out of this City, whilst ye may have Right and Law within the same City. Ye shall take no Apprentice, but if he be free-born, that is to say, no bond-mans son, nor the child of any A∣lien, and for no less term than for seven years, without fraud or deceit: and within the first year ye shall cause him to be enrolled, or else pay such fine as shall be reasonably imposed upon you for omitting the same. And after his terms end, within convenient time (be∣ing required) ye shall make him free of this City, if he have well and truly ser∣ved you. Ye shall also keep the Kings Peace in your own person. Ye shall know no Gatherings, Conventicles nor Conspiracies made against the Kings Peace, but ye shall warn the Mayor thereof, or let it to your power. All these Points and Articles ye shall well and truly keep according to the Laws and Customs of this City to your power. So God you help. If any Master shall refuse to make his Apprentice free when the term in his In∣denture is expired; upon complaint there∣of made Mr. Chamberlain will cause such Master to be summoned before him, and if he cannot shew good cause to the Contrary, will make the Apprentice Free.
If an Apprentice shall be unruly or dis∣orderly in his Masters House, or commit any notorious Fault, upon complaint made thereof, Mr. Chamberlain will send one of his Officers for such Apprentice, and send him to Bridewell, or otherwise punish him, according to the nature of the Of∣fence. If any Master shall misuse his Appren∣tice by beating him unreasonably, or with unlawful weapons, or by neglecting to instruct him, or to find him necessaries, up∣on complaint thereof made, Mr. Chamber∣lain will send a Summons for the Master to appear before him; and upon hearing both Parties, will relieve the Apprentice, or leave him to take his remedy against such Master in the Lord Majors Court. If any Freeman shall refuse to appear be∣fore the Chamberlain, being duly summon∣ed, my Lord Major, or Mr. Recorder, up∣on complaint thereof made, will grant a Warrant to apprehend such Person, and compel him to appear; for which Warrant the Fee is 1 s. When an Apprentice is by consent of his Master to be turned over to another Master of the same Trade, it cannot be done by a∣ny Scrivener. But the Apprentice ought first to be turned over before the Company where he was bound, and then to be turned over before the Chamberlain: And it is to be observed, that if an Apprentice be tur∣ned over by the Company only, it is no Ob∣ligation
upon the second Master to keep such Apprentice, nor is the Apprentice compellable thereby to serve such second Master, but may depart from the Service of such second Master at his pleasure, by fuing out his Indentures against his first Master, which may be done without the privity or knowledge of the second Master; and therefore it is absolutely necessary that all Apprentices should be turned over before the Chamberlain, for thereby the first Ma∣ster is discharged from him, and the second Master obliged to keep him, and the Ap∣prentice will be obliged to serve the second Master the full term of the Indentures: Al∣though the same were made for nine years or more. It is the interest and advantage of every Master and Apprentice, when any difference happens between them, to refer the matter to the Chamberlain, who will freely hear both Parties, and decide the Controversie for three shillings Charge; viz. 1 s. to the Officer for the Summons, and 2 s. to the Clerk for the Order: Whereas if they pro∣ceed at Law for relief, it may probably cost both Parties 6 l. if not more, in Charges; and the Conclusion may be less satisfactory then if decided by such reference as afore∣said.
Fees due to the City upon the ma∣king Free and Inrolling Appren∣tices.   s. d. An Apprentice made Free, not Inroll∣ed, the Master pays 13 2 The Apprentice pays 1 0 If not turned over before the Cham∣berlain, then the Master or Mistress must pay extraordinary 2 0 If an Apprentice shall omit to take his Freedom within convenient time after his time is expired, Mr. Chamberlain may impose such Fine upon the Apprentice, as he shall think fit for such his neg∣lect. Fees due to the Clerk of the Chamber.   s. d. For every Copy of a Freedom, if by Service 2 6 To the under Clerk is usually paid 0 6 For every Copy of a Freedom, if by Nativity out of London 5 0 To the under Clerk 0 6 For every Copy of a Freedom, if by Nativity within London 4 0
To the under Clerk 0 6 For every Copy of a Freedom that is purchased or given 4 0 To the Clerk 0 6 For every second Copy of a Free∣dom 2 6 To the under Clerk 0 6 For every Copy of an Inrollment 2 0 To the under Clerk 0 6 For every Indenture that is lost 2 0 For every search 1 0 For every Inrollment 0 4 For every Turn-over 0 4 For every Order without a Refe∣rence 1 0 For every Order upon a Refe∣rence 2 0 For every Warrant 1 0 For every Summons within the Liber∣ties 1 0 For every Summons without the Li∣berties 2 0 Every Freeman ought to take particular care not to make an Apprentice Free of London, by testifying for his Service, un∣less such Apprentice shall have really ser∣ved him: For if he shall privately turn his Apprentice over to a Forreigner, and let the Apprentice serve such Forreigner, and te∣stifie to the Chamberlain that the Appren∣tice served a Freeman, in such case the Master and Apprentice may be disfran∣chised,
and fined at the pleasure of Mr. Re∣corder, and Mr. Chamberlain will in such case cause the Freemans Shop to be shut up. If a Master shall make his Apprentice Free, by testifying that his Apprentice served the full term of Seven years, when in truth the Apprentice did not serve so long, both the Master and Apprentice may be disfranchised for testifying an un∣truth: For it is contrary to a Freemans Oath; the words therein being, Ye shall take none Apprentice for no less term then for Seven years, without fraud or deceit. Ye shall make him Free if he have well and truly served you. And if a Freeman well considers his Oath, he will not do any act contrary thereunto for lucre, or to pleasure another. And for that most Freemen do in time come to be Constables and Scavengers, it may not be unnecessary to insert the Oath to be by them taken before they Execute such places.
The Oath of the Constables within the City of Lon∣don. YE shall swear, that ye shall keep the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King well and lawfully after your power: And ye shall Arrest all them that make Contest, Riot, De∣bate, or Affray, in Breaking of the said Peace, and lead them to the House or Compter of one of the Sheriffs: And if ye be withstood by strength of Mis∣doers, ye shall rear on them an Outcry, and pursue them from Street to Street, and from Ward to Ward, till they be Arrested: And ye shall search at all times, when ye be required by the Scavengers or Beadles, the common noisance of your Ward: And the Bea∣dle and Raker ye shall help to rear and gather in their Salary and Quarter-age, if ye be thereunto by them requi∣red. And if any thing be done within your Ward against the Ordinance of this City, such Defaults as ye shall find there done, ye shall then present to the Major and Ministers of this City: And if ye be letted by any person or per∣sons, that ye may not duly do your Of∣fice, ye shall certifie the Major and Coun∣cil
of the City of the name or names of him or them that so let you. Ye shall also swear that during the time that ye shall stand in the Office, and occupy the room of a Constable, ye shall once at the least every Month certifie and shew to one of the Clerks of the Majors Court, and in the same Court, as well the names as sirnames of all Freemen which ye shall know to be deceased with∣in the Month in the Parish wherein ye be inhabited, as also the names and sir∣names of all the Children of the said Freemen so deceased, being Orphans of this City. And you shall enquire of all and every the Offences done contra∣ry to the Statutes made 1, 4, & 21 Jac. to restrain the inordinate haunting and tipling in Inns and Alehouses, and for repressing of Drunkenness and other dis∣orders, and thereof due presentiments make, according to the same Statutes, And thus ye shall not leave to do, as God you help, &c.
The Oath of a Scavenger with∣in the City of London. YE shall swear, that ye shall dili∣gently oversee that the Pave∣ments within your Ward be well and sufficiently repaired, and not made too high in noisance of your Neighbours: And that the Ways, Streets, and Lanes be cleansed of Dung, and all manner of Filth, for the honesty of this City: And that all the Chimnies and Furnaces be of Stone or Brick, sufficiently and defensively made against peril of Fire. And if ye find any the contrary, ye shall shew it to the Alderman of your Ward, so that the Alderman may ordain for the a∣mendment thereof. And thus ye shall do, as God you help.
THE TABLE Containing the Principal Matters IN THIS BOOK. A ACtions in the Majors Court, how to be entred. Pag. 4. Actions of Debt Case Trespass Accompt ibid.
Actions of Covenants broken Debt at Chamberlains Suit Debt on a Penal Statute 5 Action in Major's Court continues in force for ever 6 Actions in Sheriffs Courts continue in force but sixteen weeks ibid. Action in Major's Court, Charge to try it ibid. Action not to be removed, if six weeks between Bail and Issue ibid. Action cannot be removed into the Sheriffs Court ibid. Action in Sheriffs Courts may be removed into the Major's Court, and how ibid. Act of Common Councel against Forreigners 7, 21 Act of Common Councel against imploying For∣reigners 15 Attachments in the Major's Court, the ad∣vantages of making them in that Court more than the Sheriffs Courts 19, 20, 33, 34, 35, 36 Act of Common Councel for regulating the Courts of Law in Guildhall 22 Appraisement of Goods, how to be made 39, 57 Appraisors Oath 39 Apprentices at what age may be bound 42 Apprentices to Inroll advantagious only to the Master 42, 43, 47 Apprentice, if misused, how to be discharged 44 Apprentice, after discharge, how to recover part of the Money given with him Apprentice 52
Accompt for Orphans Moneys, how to give it 83, 85 Attorneys in the Hustings 105 Auditors of the Chamber and Bridghouse Ac∣compts by whom elected 116 Aleconners, by whom elected ibid. Act touching Watermen 123 Act of Common Councel against Hawkers, and for Regulation of the Publick Markets 141 Act for Settlement of Tithes 159 Act of Common Councel for regulating of the Night Watches 173 Act of Common Councel relating to Widows and Orphans 72 Attorneys in the Major's Court in whose gift 122 Attorneys in the Sheriffs Court in whose gift 122 Articles to be enquired by the Jury for the River of Thames Eastward 209 Act for confirming and establishing the Court of Conscience in London 231 Attorney in the Sheriffs Courts absolutely dis∣missed from his place by the Court of Alder∣men, for disobeying the Commissioners of the Court of Conscience 237
B. BIll in the Major's Court, how to exhibit it 48 Bill in the Major's Court, form thereof 54 how to remove it 51 Bill in the Major's Court for the Son of a Free∣man, to recover his customary part of his Fa∣thers Estate 88 Bridgmasters by whom elected 116 Beadle of the Court of Requests in the gift of the Court of Aldermen 122 Balliage duty 135 Beadles Fees of the Court of Requests 240 Bailiff of Southwark in whose gift 123 Bailiff of the Hundred of Ossalston in whose gift 123 C. COmpurgators in what case, and how many 41 Condition of a Bond for exhibiting an Invento∣ry 56 Condition of a Bond to bring in Money or Secu∣rity 59 Condition of a Bond for payment of Orphans Por∣tions 61 Condition of a Bond to Accompt 66, 84 Custom of London for Widows and Orphans 80, 82
Condition of a Bond given upon allowance of a Writ of Error 111 Chamberlain by whom elected 116 Court of Common Councel 117 Committees Annually chosen by that Court ibid. Common Sergeant in whose gift 120 Common Clerk in whose gift 120 Common Crier in whose gift 120 Committees Annually elected by Common Coun∣cel 117, 118 Court of Aldermen 121 City Councel in whose gift 121, 122 Common Hunt in whose gift 121, 122 Comptroller of the Chamber in whose gift 121, 122 Clerk of the Chamber in whose gift 121, 122 Clerk of the City Works in whose gift 121, 122 Clerks of the Papers in whose gift 121, 122 Clerk-sitters in whose gift 121, 122 Clerk of the Bridghouse in whose gift 121, 122 Clerk of the Court of Re∣quests in whose gift 121, 122 Citizens Toll-free 132 Courts of Conservacy for the River of Thames 200 Court of Conscience 229 Chamberlains Court 250 D. DEed, how to be Inrolled 105 Dower ibid.
E. ELection of Burgesses 115 Election of Sheriffs 116 Error in Hustings 110 Essoign 115 F. FEes due for Orphanage business 86, 87, 88 Fees for Inrollment of a Deed 106 Fees for passing a Recovery 107 Fee for Vouchees Warrant 108 Fees to be taken in Sheriffs Courts 244 Fees to be taken in the Chamberlains Office 255 Fees to be taken in Court of Conscience 240 G. GAger, in whose gift 122 Goods may be attached or sequestred in the Major's Court 20, 21, 38
H HOtchpott, meaning hereof 82 Hustings Court 100 Hawkers 139, 141 J. JƲrymen for the Major's Court 46 Inventory how to exhibit 56 Judd's Law 72 Inventory false, how to remedy it 83 K. Keeper of Guildhall in whose gift 122 Keeper of the Greenyard in whose gift 122 Keeper of Newgate in whose gift 122 Keeper of Ludgate in whose gift 122 Keepers of the Compters in whose gift 122 L. LEgacies given to Orphans by Ʋnfreemen 81 Lord Major, how elected 115
M. MAjor's Court 1 Markets 142 Ministers Tithes 160 Measures 170 Meal-weighers in whose gift 122 Measurer in whose gift 122 N. NEts for Fishermen in the Thames, of what size 209 Number of Watchmen in the several Wards 174 O. ORphans Court 55 Oath of Allegiance 188 Oath of Supremacy ibid. Oath for renouncing the Covenant 191 Oath of an Attorney in the Major's Court 2 Oath of a Common-Councel-man 187 Oaths of Appraisors 39, 57 Oath of an Attorney in the Sheriffs Courts 242 Oath of a Constable 258
Oath of a Scavenger 260 Oath of a Freeman 251 Orders for the preservation of the brood and fry of Fish in the River of Thames 201 Orphans marrying without consent 70, 71 P. PRothonatories, in whose gift 122 R. REcorder in whose gift 121 Remembrancer in whose gift 121 Replevin 108 Rates for Watermen 128 Rulers of Watermen, by whom elected 123 S. Swordbearer in whose gift 121, 122, 123 Secondaries in whose gift 121, 122, 123 Sollicitor in whose gift 121, 122, 123 Steward of Southwark in whose gift 121, 122, 123 Sergeants in the Major's Court 5 Sergeant in the Sheriff's Court 122 Sequestration, how to be made in the Major's Court 39 Settlement of a Freemans Estate to avoid the Custom, void 82
Summons in Writ of Right 114 Supersedeas on a Writ of Error, form thereof 112 Sheriffs Courts 242 Sealers and Searchers of Leather, in whose gift 122 T. TIthes, how to be recovered 168 Toll not to be paid by Citizens 132 V. VOuchees 108 W. WAterbailiff in whose gift 122 Ʋnder-Waterbailiff in whose gift 122 Wager of Law in the Major's Court to an At∣tachment 36 Wager of Law there to an Action 40 Will contrary to custome, void 81 Writ of Right 114 Writ of Waste ibid. Watermens Rates 128 Warrant to distrain for the Balliage Duty 135 Warrant against Hawkers 139
Warrant to distrein for Tithes 159 Warrant to examine Weights and Measures 170 Wardmote Courts 185 Y. YEomen of the Chamber in whose gift 122 Yeomen of the Chanel in whose gift 122 Youngmen in the Lord Ma∣jor's House in whose gift 122 Yeomen of the Compters in whose gift 122 FINIS.
