L83B 99828244 32671
THE ALL-CONQUERING GENIUS OF THE Most Potent, and most Serene PRINCE JAMES II. KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, &c. DISPLAY'D IN A HEROICK STANZA Occasion'd by HIS happy Accession to the Crown. Whereunto his annexed A CONGRATULATION to both their MAJESTIES, By way of an ODE, exciting the Nymphs to per∣form their Duty as usual at Hymens. By T. R. d. L. LONDON, Printed by John Harefinch, in Mountague-Court in Little Britain. 1685.
Horatius de Art. Poet. —Tulit eloquium insolitum facundia praeceps Ʋtiliumque sagax rerum, & divina futuri, Sortilegis non discrepuit sententia Delphis.
To His Most Excellent Majesty JAMES the II. KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, &c. Dread SIR, 'TIS not a flattering Muse, appears before your Sovereign Throne; for she pays her devotion to Your Ma∣jesties Royal Person, rather than to Your Fortune. Her Theam is Your Princely MIND, exceeding the Pythagorean World-supporting Intelligence; by the Conduct of which Pilot Your Triumphant Argo, did at last overcome all dangerous Gulphs and Creeks, smoothly gliding into the harbour of a Fleece, far Richer than that of Colches. In a word, 'tis not the Hand-maid, but the Mi∣stress I adore, even Your Majesties All-conquering Genius, which by its Regular stedfastness, is able not only to Triumph over Fortune, but also to make it.
True it is, my Vein is shallow, not being embody'd in the more luxuriant Channel of Your British Parnassus; yet, since it breaths Devotion, I am apt (upon that score) to think, it shall not prove unwel∣com; because it will, though proceeding from the sandy and barren Pile, help (in some measure) to bear up, the Sovereign Ark of Your Majesties, unquestioned Grandeur. Perhaps. she cannot promise to this Divine Fabrick (for a support) a gold-streaming Hydaspes; yet she shall appear to flow as Loyally, as the Palm full of Water, pre∣sented unto mighty Cyrus, by you famous Persian Peasant; being poured out at the brink of Your twice-surrounding Ocean, by Dread Sovereign, Your Majesties most dutiful and most faithful Adorer T. R. d. L.
THE ALL-CONQUERING GENIUS OF THE Most Potent and most Serene PRINCE JAMES II. KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, &c. In a HEROICK STANZA, &c. I. AND now doth JAMES, in spight of Envy reign, Swaying his Scepter peacefully: If Art By false Reflexions; outward shew doth gain, The end shall shew, 'twas but a Mimick part. II. The Standard of his PRINCELY course, was MIND Rul'd not by Chance, but Vertue and the train Of Silent Patience; which in Him refin'd Did Fates and Fortunes poyson'd darts disdain. III. Thus riseth David, thus great CAESAR climbs To Scepters Glory; Thus an Ark depress'd: By stormy Waves, unto Ararat swims; Though to the Eye, with pregnant Sayls not dress'd. IV. For  by Judgment being over-sway'd Will shrink, and be discarded from its Rule, Yea all the Trenches it, against it ai'd Must prove a Bubble, and an empty Tool.
V. And if this, sometimes held in lesser bowels Whose active Lump, made Monarchies to start! It doubtless, must take place in Princely Souls, Where Jupiter, displays his chiefest Art. VI. No wonder then, that by His constant Wit Great JAMES or'came all Storms which Athens cou'd Blow on Miltiades; or that HE hit The White, without the crimson streams of blood. VII. His Soul Divine, did laugh at Mens device And Peace contriv'd, when they were most for War: Their Practices, not them, it did despise From Fierceness them, and not their Rights debarr. VIII. Like Jupiter, when Giants mountains heap'd To chase him out of his immortal Denn, HE from their boyling blood, no vengeance reap't But only turn'd it, into milder Men. IX. Ingratitude, could not His Mind exclude From th' Interest of theirs: Yea, tho they were Busy, by Fancies People to delude (Thus that Astraea, left her mortal Sphere X. For grief and just disdain: When Chattam groan'd For her Preservers spotted Laurel: When The Chain of Tames, her Darling's fate bemoan'd) He only strove to make them milder Men. XI. And being great, He clemently was tame When Fierc'ness He could use, He was but calm: With goodness HE did varnish Envies Frame Thus, to its Biter, Gilead drops Balm.
XII. Hence Angeronia, is now cut off From fair Volupia's Altar, where she stood Too long: And, justly is, by Charon's staff Convey'd for ever to the Stygian Flood. XIII. For tho great Jove, a Diamond string did make To knot both Joy and Sorrow; He did find A means whereby this Gordius to break; Greater than Thracian; JAMES'S Princely Mind. XIV. By this the Chain is cut; by this HE sways His ancient Scepter; And declares He will Press narrowly, His Predecessor's ways Supporting, Church and State establish'd, still. XV. And now black Malice, what canst thou presage? Thy Fears are vain! a KING hath spoke; Recall He will not! Spend thy force and teeth of rage On thy Pragmaticks; But let HIM be All. XVI. None can conceive a Change, as matters stand, But those, that would stir up Cadmaean bowels; And coveting the Fatness of the Land Instead of Salt do harbour miry Souls. XVII. JAMES doth not scatter painted words as Thou Who Protheus-like, dost but for Int'rest change: He, to all Circes Men, proclaims Adieu! And next to Conscience, doth his Impire range. XVIII. He hat's those Flatt'ries, Alexander prais'd; He hat's a Posture, moulded out of frame, And scorns Religion by Reflexion rais'd, Nay doth reject it, from his Diadem.
XIX. He for Obedience to his Crown doth look And knows; it can with th' inward Acts agree Of Conscience; which, as yet HE never shook Nor will a Rise to any for it be. XX. Permitting Pallas to spread into Streams Distinct in Taste and Nature, in each Vein, If she but pays due tribute to the beams Of Jupiter, and lets Him steer the main. XXI. Thy Peace, is th' onely Prize of all his toyl, Thy Fame and greatness, is his onely Thought; These, by new Fashions, He will not turmoyl, He knows, such Blessings, are by Concord wrought. XXII. Hence, Loyal Heart, in such a PRINCE rejoyce, Who leaves thee free, both right and left: whose eye Doth scorn a Changeling: Be glad in thy choice, Permitting others, to dream of their skies. XXIII. These that will gape at shadows, are but vain: Stick thou to Juno; And perswaded be Whatever, mischief, breeds a scatred brain; Thoul't scape the clashings of old Centaury. XXIV. For JAMES is good, His like, no Age did know; Yea, though Heav'ns would the golden Age restore, A better PRINCE, they never could bestow On Earth, nor bless it with a richer s XXV. And now, great PRINCE; My Muse to Wishes turns Short of Thy Worth; yet take them as they come They'r true: My Soul, with clear Devotion burns, Albeit Thy Splendor, doth my heat benum.
XXVI. Let Thy Triang'lar Kingdom be a Ring, In circular Proportion always spred: Till Lillies spin: And bowing to their King Inammel fearly, Rosy RUBIES bed. XXVII. Hence let Archimedes above, contrive That none thy pleasant Circle may outdare, But; if to shew his pow'rful skill he strive, Then, of a Circle let him make a Square. XXVIII. Let not Narcissus, think Thee void of Pow'r, For Jupiter, will by a single stroke, At thy request, shake Legions in an hour Of British Hearts, from old Dodona's Oak. XXIX. If quiet was the charm of some; 'Tis not Thy Mind, to wear a Crown at such a rate: An active Soul hath fallen to Thy Lot; Thy Conquests, and Thy Arm, shall make Thee great. XXX. Undaunted England is now train'd to bear The Toyls of Mars, and to improve their Arms To make the Cont'nent, tremble at Thy Spear, And make their Rocks, to shrink at Thy Alarms. XXXI. Methinks I hear Thy Warlike Captains shout, I hear the Britain Lyons fiercely roar, I see the Martial Wheel now turn'd about, And German Eagle, by Thy help, to soare XXXII. When Thracian Fields, shall be but chasing Plains, Then shall Great JAMES'S ammunition ground Become a Martial Camp; His fatal chains Shall bring his Captives, more than string'd; for, bour'd.
XXXIII. Great JAMES is known: His Valour many felt, His Courage shook both Sea and Land: His Spear Made Belgick Lyons, trembling heart to melt Like Butter in the Sun, for Pannick fear. XXXIV. Yea Lillies fainted without JAMES his hand, And were defended by His Sovereign Steel, Why may not they be now brought to a stand And be transplanted, like Navarra's Wheel. XXXV. And when Thy Trumpets sound, Thy Lions roar, Thy Drums are beating on the Continent Let fair Lucina, be on th' English Shoar And morning Rainbow, by Lucina sent. XXXVI. Let th' first bring PRINCES from th' HESPERIAN Rib; The second, Plenty on Thy pleasant Land: Let HIM, whose Royal Cradle was a Crib, Unto them both, their Watching-word command. XXXVIII. Till Time expires, let not Thy Empire fall, Let JAMES his Hand all stubborn Giants shake, His Triumphs, may have then a Funeral When Water, Skie and Earth by flashes break. XXXVIII. Thus, long live JAMES and MARY great! Let Fame Cry loud Your Grandeur, Riches and Renown; Till Jove conveys You by the milky stream To Caesar's Soul, and Ariadne's Crown.
AN ODE Inviting the Nymphs to congratulate the Accession to the Crown of England, Scot∣land, France and Ireland, of their Most Excellent Majesties, JAMES the II. and MARY His Royal Consort. I. YOU smooth Neptunian Daughters, come to shore, We wait on you; and do allure Your high Ligurian Pile. Let not swift Ganges, by his golden store Keep you secure, Nor PO, by whirlings, discompose your file. II. Tread on a breast, sweet Nymphs, and bring the Lyre, You must strike up a charming Tune, For JAMES and MARY are New-marry'd: Therefore Candor do inspire Into the Moon, And let Latona's Off-spring keep the Rear. III. They Married are unto a Three-fold Crown, A three-fold Hymen therefore sing; You'l here with Roses meet, Nor will the Thistle tear your Numbers down; And Ireland's string Will make your Harps in harmony run sweet.
IV. But when you'r past the Pyrenaean Hill, Bring each of you a Lillies stalk, They hither do belong: By this exploit you'l all Pretences kill, And freely walk In Thames's bed, and sing an endless Song. V. Repeating always, Long live Queen and King, Of England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Great MARY and Great JAMES, Let Caesar dare a Pompey; let His String Make Cockrills dance, And let Sequana bow to mighty Thames. FINIS.
