M116 13118661 97788
A FARTHER ACCOUNT OF The ACTIONS OF THE INNISKILLING-MEN.
LICENSED, June 17. 1691.
A FARTHER IMPARTIAL ACCOUNT OF THE ACTIONS OF THE Inniskilling-men. CONTAINING The REASONS of Their First RISING: Their Declarations, Oaths, and Corresponden∣cies with several Parts of the Kingdom. Together with many other Remarkable Passages of Their Behaviour and Management, not yet Published. Written by Capt. WILLIAM Mc-CARMICK, One of the first that took up Arms in Inniskilling, for the Defence of that Place, and the Protestant Interest. LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-Yard. MDCXCI.
A TRUE AND IMPARTIAL ACCOUNT OF THE ACTIONS OF THE Inniskilling-men. I DO Protest, That I in no ways under∣take this with a design of Reflecting upon Mr. Andrew Hamilton (who hath writ on this Subject before), he being a Gentleman that I have, and ever had a very great esteem for; my whole in∣tention being only to make the truth of some things appear, that either hath slipt Mr. Hamilton's memory; or that he hath not been rightly informed in. About the beginning of December, 1688, we were alarmed, as most of the Protestants of the Kingdom were, by a Letter sent us from the Earl of Mount-Alexander, directed to him from an unknown hand, acquainting him, That there was a Design of a general Massacre of the Protestants, Man, Woman, and Child, throughout the Kingdom of Ireland, to be Acted by the Irish Papists and their Adherents, the Ninth Day of the said Month: This Letter, what its operation was in other Places, I know not; but it made so deep an impression on the minds of most in and about Inniskilling, (the Cruelties of
the Irish in Forty one, being yet fresh in many of their Me∣mories) that several of the Countrey sent in their best Hous∣hold Furniture and Papers to Iniskilling; thinking them more se∣cure there, than with themselves: And we observing that the Irish were gathering themselves together on all hands in great Numbers, having for a long time before employed all the Smiths of their sort, in making Skeens (viz. a kind of sharp∣pointed Baggonets) and Pike-heads, wherewith to Arm them∣selves privately; we were struck into great Consternation; but resolved not to have our Throats Cut asleep, the most of the Townsmen the Day and Night of the designed Massa∣cre, keeping strict Guards with what sort of Weapons they had; and there being a Friary then in Town, one Anthony Mur∣ry Guardian of the Friary, a Cunning, Subtil Felow, making his remarks of our keeping Guards, went out of Town in the Morning, about Four Miles, where a Multitude of his sort met him, to hear a Sermon as they alledged; where in the end of his Discourse, he acquainted his Hearers, that Innis∣killing-Men were taking up Arms, and going to Rebel; that he see a great many of them in Arms in the Streets that Morn∣ing, Headed by one Mac-Carmick, a great Rebel, as he termed him, but he hoped ere long to make them quiet enough. Several of the Friars being afraid, slipt out of Town; but this Impudent Guardian stayed, and did not stick to say, That he would have a Red Cross very soon, at every door in Town. And truly I believe was instrumental, in causing two Foot Companies of Soldiers, viz. Capt. Nugents, and Capt. Shirlo's, belonging to Sir Thomas Nucoman's Regiment, to be sent to Garison upon us: But as the great Providence of God would have it, our Provost (that's the Chief Magi∣strate in Town) the second day after the Massacre should have been committed, received a Letter by the Lord Tyrcon∣nel's directions, then Lord Deputy of Ireland, from Secretary Ellice, ordering him to provide Quarters for two Foot-Com∣panies. A thing never practicable before, to send Orders
for providing of Quarters, ere the men that were to Quarter, shewed their Patent. But had it not been for this, these Two Companies had been in our Town, ere we had known of their March. But this struck deep upon our spirits; we did then begin to consider the dangerous condition we were in, and did think it high time to use our diligence in endeavou∣ring the preservation of the Protestant Religion, as well as our Lives; it being either already, or suddenly like to be, crushed in most Parts of the Kingdom; therefore resolved (if possible) to support it in that Corner. The Townsmen upon this, were called together, where it was debated, Whether we should refuse entrance to the two Companies, or not; there were various opinions, both Arms and Ammunition being wanting; but in the general, it was thought advisable to consult one Capt. James Corry, a very leading-Gentleman in that County, in this so weighty an af∣fair, he living within a small Mile of the Town. But he not willing to countenance us in this, neither to assist us with his Advice, we again assemble our selves; but being still divi∣ded in Opinion, we could conclude on nothing. There was one William Browning, Robert Clark, and Willi∣am Mac-Carmick, got privately into a Back Room, where came to them James Euart, and Allen Cushcart. These Five resolved, in spite of all opposition, to deny entrance to these two Companies of Soldiers, and defend the Town with their Lives: To that purpose dispatched Expresses, in name of the Townsmen, about midnight, to most of the Gentlemen of the Country, acquainting them of their Resolution, and desiring their Assistance; and that they would give us timely notice which Road the Soldiers Marched, that we might put our selves in a posture of receiving them. In the mean time Mac-Carmick gets Timber brought into Town, and sets Carpenters a work to get up the Draw-Bridg upon the East-end of the Town; the Bridge being newly built of Stone, and the Draw not put up.
Next Night, about Midnight, came an Express from Danid Eccles Esq with this following Letter. GENTLEMEN, PAssing all Complements of Thanks; We are so assured that two Companies of Foot are Marching to Inniskilling, that Capt. Nugent, with other Officers, are in Clownish this night on their March thither; but as for their Soldiers, though they were expected there, it's thought they will go by Newtown-Butler, and it's sup∣posed they are in Drum. We Pray God bless you, and can only tell you, That a Troop of Dragoons came to Ardmagh Saturday last, where the Inhabitants offered them Candle, Fire, and Salt; so that if they expected any further necessaries, they were to pay before-hand; whereupon the Lieutenant Marched to his Capt. Coll. Bryan, Mac-Maghow at Charlemont, and the Townsmen went to Church with their Arms, of which two Centinels were placed on the Steeple, to Pire their Firelacks, and Ring the Bells, as a signal to the Countrey, if they had offered any thing ill; of which we had no further ac∣count. As to what other things you propose, assure your selves, we shall be as ready to offer all Testimony of Friendship, as may be expected from such as are not wanting to pray for you; and are expecting a particalar Correspondence from you, as you shall have from us, &c. To Mr. William Mc-Carmick at Inniskilling. This came no sooner to hand, than Mac-Carmick went to the Provost, and some others of the Townsmen, intreating them as soon as Day appear'd, to set the Carpenters again to work at the Draw-Bridge, getting a Horseback himself, and Rides immediately to Cornet Gustavus Hamilton, a Gentleman that liv'd on the West side of the Town, in the Barony of Maghre∣boy, about five Mile from the Town, to know his and the other Neighbouring-Gentlemens Resolutions; who were all very ready and willing to joyn in the Defence of Inniskilling; se∣veral
of them, together with Cornet Hamilton, coming into Town with Mc Carmick, but upon the way were met by an Express from the Provost, with this following Letter. Dear Sir, MR. Latournall came just now from Captain Corry, and in his coming into the Town, commanded the Carpenters to leave off working at the Drawbridg, and also came to me and begged I should send for my Brethren, and disswade them from the Reso∣lution of denying the Soldiers Entrance, and to provide them Quarters as speedily as I could. My request to you is, That you will immediately give the Gentlemen in these parts an Accompt of my design, which is to give them entrance, and that you will make all the haste you can home to assist me, is all from Inniskilling, Dec. 13th. 1688. Yours to serve you whilst I am, PAƲL DANE. To Mr. William Mc-Carmick, These. By this you may see how strangely mens minds were hur∣ried, and what a hard task it was to unite a divided multitude; yet this Letter hindered not our coming into Town, where Captain Corry, and several other Gentlemen, livers on the East side of Loghearne, were assembled. Things again were deba∣ted, but most were for admitting the two Companies, alledg∣ing the strength of the Irish in that Country, they being well armed and provided in Ammunition, having all the Arms, Ma∣gazines and Garisons of the Kingdom in their hands, save Londonderry; we wanting both Arms and Ammunition, wan∣ting Soldiers amongst us, and the uncertainty of a headstrong multitude, being likely that they would as soon throw down their Arms as they took them up, when they either see an Ene∣my, or were reduced to any hardships or want; yet all could not do, the Townsmen with the Gentlemen that came out of the Barony of Maghreboy, stood firm to the Resolution of neither
submitting themselves to be slaves, nor to assist the making of others so; Carpenters were set to work again at the Bridge. And indeed though Captain Corry would not at all comply with our Resolution, yet when we sent for the Chains and Irons that had formerly belonged to the Bridge, he sent them in to us; we soon got up the Draw-bridge, and again sent to all the Neighbourhood, intreating them to joyn with us both for their own preservation and ours, promising them free quarter in Town both for themselves and Horses; upon this several of the Country came in, being thereunto much incou∣raged by the industrious solicitation of one Mr. Kelsy a Non∣conformist Minister, who indeed laboured both publickly and privately, in animating his hearers to take up Arms, and stand upon their own defence, shewing example himself, by wear∣ing Arms, and marching in the head of them, when toge∣ther. Our next Care was to turn all Papists out of Town, seizing Anthony Murry the forenamed Friar-Guardian, and commit∣ting him to the Castle, where he continued Prisoner a good while, and after by a Rope made his Escape over the Wall, so got off in a Boat; but although the Rope set him at liber∣ty then, yet it may send him to another world ere long. Upon Saturday the 15th of December, Mr. James Baird and Mr. James Johnston were sent on Horseback to view and bring intelligence of the Enemies approach, who return'd upon Sunday about Ten of the Clock, with assurance of the Ene∣mies being within four or five miles of the Town; most of the Inhabitants being in Church, got immediately to their Arms; our number not two hundred Foot, and they not near half Armed; our Horse about 150. such as they were; who took the field with a resolution to fall in upon the Ene∣mies Reer, if they had offered to enter the Town by force; but they coming within a mile, and meeting several of their own sort that were turn'd out of Town, acquainting them that we were resolved to fight, and indeed magnifying our num∣ber,
the Soldiers were so discouraged, that they immediately Retreated, the most of their Officers being at Dinner in Cap∣tain Corry's; upon intelligence of which our Horse, with three∣score Firelooks pursued them; their Officers perceiving our Horse to move towards them, fled likewise after their men; we hearing that they had several Horse-loads of spare Arms, and Ammunition good store along with them for arming the Country, were resolved to have them, these being the chief things we wanted; but our Horse being met by Captain Corry, were perswaded to return, to the great dissatisfaction of the Foot; he having, as we were told, past his word for the Ene∣mies safety while they were in our Country; they marched that night to Mc Guiers Bridge, eight miles from us, and there stood upon their Guard all night, next day to Newtown Buttler, where in the night time they had like to have seised three Gen∣tlemen of ours that we sent to observe their motion, and to know if any of the Country joyned them, viz. Mr. William Browning, Mr.  and Mr. James Corry, who lighting in their Quarters, and assuming other Names, after finding out their number, strength, and resolution, having discoursed several of their Officers, were discovered to be In∣niskilling men; and ere they could well mount their Horses, were surrounded by a strong Guard of the Enemy; but our men made their way through them, and escaped to the Coun∣ty of Cavan, where they stayed in Captain Sanderson's, while the two Companies marched past them to Cavan, then return∣ed; the two Companies stayed some small time in Cavan, then marched to Firmah, twelve miles further, being alarmed that the Inniskilling men were coming to disarm them. Gustavus Hamilton during their being near the Town, kept at a place called Portoragh, within a quarter of a mile of the Town, with near a hundred Horse, to support and assist the Townsmen if any force had been offered them by the two Companies; but as for carrying meat or drink out of Town to treat them, or sending any of our number to perswade
them to return, there was no such thing; it's true indeed, they did not shew their Patent, nor once desire to be admitted into Town. After this, we always kept strict Guards; and being sensible that a Body without a Head seldom lives long, our next care was to make choice of some Gentleman to Command us, the Irish indeed every day growing more insolent than usual, and gathering themselves together in Companies, Exercising, and learning to handle their Arms; yea, and taking away the Pro∣testants Cattel both publickly and privately; nay more, they were grown to that height of Impudence, that upon the 16th. of December they took from an honest man of the name of Fos∣set, his Cattel; he followed, and overtaking the men that were driving them away, the Rogues seised the honest man, and in a most Barbarous manner ripped up his Belly, and tore out his Intestions, and so left him; this measure in all probability we should have met with, had not the Almighty God put it in our hearts to refuse a Popish Garison into our Town. The Townsmen Assembling themselves, Sir Michael Cole, Proprietor of the Town, being then in England, made choice of Gustavus Hamilton Esq to be our Governour, a Gentleman ve∣ry well descended, and one reputed to be of just and good Princi∣pels; but ere this Election, or his coming to take the charge upon him, we had a Randezvous of all the Country that would joyn with us, upon Thursday the 20th. where came Sir Gerard Ervin and the forenamed Captain Corry, and seeing Mr. Willi∣am Browning coming into Town in the head of a party of Horse, they caused him to be seised, and was writing his Mit∣timus to send him to Goal, for appearing in Arms, thinking by this to fright us from our Resolution of holding out the Town; but we soon set him at liberty, and sent in one Lieute∣nant Smith, an ancient Gentleman, and Justice of Peace in the County, to Sir Gerard and Captain Corry, to tell them, that we took it unkindly their offering to secure any of our number, or to fright or deject the spirits of those that were willing to
joyn in defence of their Lives and Religion; desiring them immediately to leave the Town, and give us no farther trou∣ble, else we must be forced to send them where they were a sending Mr. Browning; this Message startled them; they called Quarters, and immediately took their Horses, and left the Town; yet Captain Corry made it his business after, to hinder his Tenants, or any other he had influence upon, to joyn with us; but we were not long troubled with him, for he left the Kingdom the March following. This was not the only discouragement we met with; for Mr.  , a Servant of Sir Michael Coles, whose Town Inniskilling is, dwelling at that time in Sir Michael's Castle, the only strength of the Town, refused us entrance into it, or to deliver it, or any of the Arms in it up to us, while Mr. Henry Smith, and Mr. Malcome Cathcart, both Captains in the Army since, took it by surprize; so we got possession, and kept a strong Guard in it ever after. Notwithstanding all Difficulties and opposition we met with, we stood firm to our first intention, and Gustavus Hamil∣ton being, as I said before, elected our Governour, he em∣braced it, and removing his Family, came into Inniskilling Ca∣stle to live. The first thing he did, calling the Towns-men together, he thought it advisable (Londonderry at that time likewise hol∣ding out, having refused entrance to the Lord Antrim's Regi∣ment) to settle a true Correspondence betwixt Derry and us, and likewise to know, if possible, my Lord Mountjoy's Incli∣nations towards us; and to procure some Arms and Ammuni∣tion at Derry; to which purpose Mr. Allen Cathcart, and Mr. William Mc.-Carmick were sent; but ere they got the length of Londonderry, they had capitulated with Lord Mountjoy, and admitted six Companies of his Regiment into their City, what Papists were in the said Companies being first turn'd out; we were very kindly receiv'd by the Citizens, they promising
us help of Ammunition and Arms, and to bear a true and constant Correspondence with us, as we promised to them. Then our Messengers returning, deliver this following Letter to my Lord Mountjoy at Newtownstewart. YOVR Lordship cannot but know what dreadful Apprehensions we were struck with, when from several parts of this King∣dom we received the sad Account of a designed Massacre of the Pro∣testants; in the midst of which fears, to heighten our sorrows, we had news of two Companies of Foot, all Papists, ordered to garison upon us; and further, to deject our despairing Spirits, the Threats of the Officers of these Companies, of treading us in the Kennels, and dragging of our Intestins about the Streets, was assured us; nay more, my Lord, the frequent assembling of the Irish in great Com∣panies on all hands of us, their restless pains in making Skeins and Pikes; insomuch, that a man, and he of a mean Fortune, di∣spers'd in one Week threescore; and having likewise the intelligence of your Lordship's being confined, for only desiring that the Protestants might have liberty to buy Arms for their own defence, did create in us so great fear, that we could not propose safety, or the preserva∣tion of our lives in any humane probability, but by refusing these two Companies entrance into our Town. My Lord, our Resolutions are firm and fully fixed to preserve this Place, as a Refuge for many Souls to fly to, if any Massacre should be attempted, which we daily fear and tremble to think of. These things seriously considered, and seeing so great and appa∣rent Dangers hovering over our heads, we can do no less than una∣nimously resolve not to admit any Popish Garison here; which we hope your Lordship will represent favourably to the Government; We return very humble and hearty thanks for your kind and prudent Message by Mr. Marvin, and do assure your Lordship, That we will demean our selves with all the sobriety imaginable; neither did it ever enter into our thoughts, to spill one drop of Blood (unless we be thereunto forced in our own defence) or to take from any man
the value of one Farthing; which we intreat your Lordship to be∣lieve from, Decemb. 21. 1681. My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and Obedient Servants, The Inhabitants of Inniskilling. My Lord, after perusing this Letter, enquired what strength we might be of; and being answered, he said, we must re∣ceive a Garison of the King's Soldiers. Mc-Carmick replied, That we knew not how far that could consist with our safety, or the general preservation of the Protestant Interest in Ʋlster; Inniskilling being the only Inlet from Connought to that Province, from whence they would as an Inundation overflow our Coun∣try; and they having no other Pass for above Forty Miles over Longhearne, we did believe we could not in any way be secure, if we admitted a Popish Garison there. My Lord answered, the King will protect you. But Mr. Cathcart sharply replied, that he could not protect himself; At which my Lord turn'd, and walked a good while without speaking; then told us, That we might return home, and desired, that his Service might be given to our Towns-men, whom he would come and converse with on Wednesday following; in the mean time intreated, that we might be cautious of falling into blood; which we promised, and so parted; but in place of my Lord's coming according to his promise, he sent Mr. Marvin to excuse him; he going to Dublin (being sent for by Tyrconnel) and so into France. At the Return of our Messengers, we began to form Com∣panies, Captain Allen Cathcart, William Mc-Carmick his Lieute∣nant, Ralph Picking Ensign, raising the first; and Captain Malcome Cathcart, the second, (most consisting of Nonconformists, as they term them; that party effectually espousing our interest, and never declined us in the most dangerous times.) The Go∣vernour
a Company of Foot in the Country, where he had lived, and a Troop of Horse in and about the Town. At this time We were put to great toil, in breaking the Ice round our Town every Day; it standing in an Island, and ha∣ving no other Walls save the Water, which Frose so ex∣treamly up, that Both Foot and Horse might March over it with safety. Toward the latter end of December, we had an Express from my Lord Blany, with advice, not rashly to admira Gari∣son of Papists into our Town, but rather to continue in the condition we were in, while we knew what measures were taken by the Nobility and Gentry of the Counties of Antrim, Down, Ardmagh, and Managhan, and a Letter inclosed, sent to his Lordship from Belfast, which was this. My Lord, WE herewith send you a Copy of the Capitulation betwixt Lord Mountjoy, and the City of Derry: Whereupon that Place was put into the hands of Lieutenant-Collonel Lundy: We also send your Lordship a Narrative of what past betwixt my Lord Mountjoy and a Gentleman we intrusted from hence, to manage both with his Lordship and the City; by all which your Lordship may per∣ceive, that Lord Mountjoy proposeth managing the Protestant Interest by less hazardous means than was intended: And we are unwilling to suspect his Lordship's sincerity, and think it may be prejudicial to us as yet to thwart his Lordship; whereupon we think it most adviseable for us, to defer putting any thing in execution, till a new notice is given; and that in the mean time we may take care that his Lordship be discoursed herein; and we thereby judge what are the measures most proper for us to pursue. We believe your Lordship hath wrote to Lord Granard, and Lord Kingston; and we now desire that you will, with the utmost speed, give them and other our Friends intimation of this our altering our resoluti∣ons, with the motives thereunto; we also desire that you would acquaint Lord Granard, that we do however rely so much on him,
that if he judges our method best, and either hath or will make any step towards countenancing thereof, so as to think his Honour in the least ingaged, that we will all unanimously stand by him. Your Lordship perceives, that it is likewise intended, that Inniskilling submit as Derry hath done; we refer it to your Lordship, to consi∣der if means ought to be used, that they at least delay so doing: and for your Lordship to Act therein, or Prevent it, as you think fit, &c. Belfast Decem∣ber 26. You see by this, it was concluded, That the Holding out Inniskilling was thought convenient, and indeed we had firm∣ly resolved it; but wanting Ammunition, Arms and Com∣missions, we in January sent Mr. Hugh Hamilton, and Mr. Allen Cathcart into England, with an Address to the Prince of Orange, hearing King James had left that Kingdom: And in their way to Donoghadee (where they were to take Ship∣ping for Scotland, toward their more secure passage) to di∣scourse the Lords and Gentlemen of the North-East; to whom we wrote this following Letter. My Lord. WHILST we and all the Protestants of this Kingdom, groaned under the fear of approaching Misery; and there was nothing, but an universal dread of eminent Ruin suggested to our thoughts, and that we see our Religion, our Laws, Liberties, Lives, and our all at stake, so that nothing could be added to our danger, but our willingness to lye under whatsoever was imposed upon us; the Law of Self-preservation (one of the Ancientest of the World) constrained us, rather to chuse an hazardous Ʋndertaking, than a vo∣luntary Slavery; to which we were the more provoked, by the In∣sulting Menaces of those, who under pretence of Quartering upon us, came to Pillage us, and designed to make this their en∣trance to the Devastation of this part of the Province. So that not being willing to be inslaved, and help to make others so
too, this Pass being the only Inlet from Conagh to Ulster, from whence, as by an Inundation, it must have been overflowed; we stand upon our Guard, and do resolve by the blessing of God, rather to meet our Danger, than expect it. We doubt not, but your own Considerations hath suggested thoughts of this Nature to you also, which we do believe may induce you to a necessary Defence of your Selves and Neighbours; and therefore do humby intreat your can∣did and sincere advice in the management of this great Affair, which is too weighty for our weak Shoulders to bear alone, since we are sure to be the first that shall meet with the dangerous, and highly incensed, revengful Hands of our Enemies; our great hope is, That God will incline you to our Assistance, and give us Courage and Success in this so just an Ʋndertaking; we intreat Credit may be given to our Messengers, who are well-acquainted with the Proceed∣dings of those that shall not fail to continue To the Right Honourable the Earl of Mount-Alexander, Lord Viscount Massarine, Sir Arthur Reiden, or any of them, &c. Your Lordships most Faithful Humble Servants Gustavus Ha∣milton, and the rest of the In∣habitants of Innikilling. We had a very kind and favourable return to this Letter, from the Honourable Persons it was sent too; we now dili∣gently applied our selves in raising more men, Capt. Rob. Clark, Capt. Will. Browning, Capt. Alex. Archison, Capt. Robert Ste∣venson, Capt. Robert Corry, Capt. Hen. Smith, Capt. Archi∣bald Hamilton, each raising a Company; Sir John Hume who indeed did from the beginning effectually espouse our Interest, raised and armed two Foot Companies, and a good Troop of Horse; joyning always with us, when occasion; Fortified and Victualled his own House, so that it was capable of contain∣ing and maintaining a very considerable Garison; and sent into England for his Eldest Son, who had been formerly in the Army there, a very hopeful young Gentleman, who headed his Horse: This Garrison was no small support to Inniskilling;
it lying three miles below the Town, on Conaught side of the River, and a great defence to the Country about it. In the beginning of January we received a Letter sent us by Mr. Charles Lesly from Glaslough, a place in the County of Mo∣naghan where he lived, it was in Characters, and shew'd the Intentions of the Irish Priests and Friars, whose restless spirits left nothing unattempted to drive on their Hellish designs a∣gainst the poor Protestants: The Letter was thus, M17t27 McK2nn1, 945r S2lf2 t4g2th2r 553th R4b2rt & 34hn 7t51rt c1pti3n 453nd4n 553ll31m 224rth 1r2 15th4r3726 89 92 c45nc2ll 4f 658l341 t4 72372 5p4n ch1rl2s l27l32 1n6 34hn kn4k7, cap∣t3ne 34hnst4n, th2r2 1r2 1ll74 74m2 c4ntr3526 6273gn7 li36 3n pr1ct37 t4 75rpr372 92ch5rch22 4f 1rdm1gh l5rg1nl37n|1g1r592 & 18452 4n 7c4r2 4f 92 pr3nc3p1ll Chr5ch27 4f 3r2l1n6 & all 92 pr274n2r7 1r2 t4 82 71f2 k2pt 543ll f5rth2r 4r62r7 h45 252r g2ntl2m2n 915 1r2 t4 72171 1ll 3n gl17|l45gh Ch5rch pr27n2r7 & r1372 5p 1ll 92 tr5gh t4945r 1737t|1n72 th2r24f 945 m57tn44 f13l2, 17 945 553ll 1n7552r2 3t 53th 92 l472 4f 945r l3527 3f 252r 92 554rl6 t5rn7 17 3t 553ll 3f 92 p4p2 c1n 72n6 57 1n 1rm32. Fr2611th 62c2m82r 92 26. F1th2r G1rl2n. F1th2r 61l9. This Letter was intercepted by Sir Nicholas Achison, and sent by him to Mr. Lessly, from whom we had it wrote over thus: Mr. Mc Kenna, YOur self, together with Robert and John Steward, Captain Ovindon, William Betagh, are Authorized by the Coun∣cil of Dublin to seize upon Charles Lesly, and John Knocks, Captain Johnson; there are also some contrived designs laid in practise to surprize the Churches of Ardmagh, Lurgan, Lisna∣garvy,
and above one score of the principal Churches of Ireland; and all the Prisoners are to be kept while further orders: However Gentlemen, you are to seize all in Glaslough Church Prisoners; and raise up all the Trugh to your assistance; thereof you must not fail as you will answer it with the loss of your lives, if ever the world turn, as it will if the Pope can send us an Army. Tredagh Dec. the 26. Father Garland. Father Daly. About this time came another to us out of Conaught in these words. SIR, THE occasion of this trouble to you, is to tell you, That we have undoubted and repeated advice, that many hundreds of men, Foot and Dragoons, are Arming themselves in the County of Ruscommon and Mayo, with an intent to fall upon our Friends in Boyle, and this County; and consequently pursue their design down towards you. We have therefore agreed unanimously to secure this Town, and bring in the Country people to our aid, but before we stir in what we have said, there is a party of fifty or sixty to go hence; who are to joyn in the County of Roscommon, with some more to be commanded by Captain Coot, upon a very important design, which if please God may be effected, will be of great consequence to us all, and of no small disadvantage to our Enemies, that if possi∣ble is to be done within two or three days; now it is the desire of Captain Coot, that all, or as many of the Protestants as may unite, may gather into Ballishanan, and Dunnigall, where you may be in a readiness not only to secure your selves against the Blow that is designed to be given, but also to be in a condition to relieve us, if by the multitude we be oppressed: Matters are come to a great height in our neighbouring Counties, there being no less then 24 Captains in one Barony in the County of Mayo; therefore as you tender your welfare, slight not this matter, communicate it with all prudence to Mr. Folliat, Mr. Whitway, Lieutenant Smith, and Mr. Atkin∣son,
and the rest of your Friends: What else is done here you shall know it; we hope to have all done by Thursday, for we find time is not to be slipt; Lord Kingstone and Captain Coot comes hither; it's their desire that you should send an Express immediately to Derry to know if we may have any help of Arms and Ammunition from thence, for it is the only thing we lack, when at the same time our E∣nemies are well stored. Pray desire your Friends to tell what quan∣tity of Arms we may expect, and the sorts, and how much Ammuni∣tion, that we may immediately send for them; this design is not to be Communicated to any but to those you are sure of: Lord Granard is now in the Country; Lord Kingston went to him yesterday, and this night or to morrow morning we expect to know how his pulse beats. Let us know how Matters are with you: We are told Derry is sur∣rendered. Sligo, Decemb. 27. 1688. This Letter was directed, to Mr. John Delap of Bellishannon, and by him sent to us: By these frequent admonitions from se∣veral parts, any man may see what reason we had to stand upon our Guard, and yet how we might have been discouraged, having neither number sufficient, Arms, nor Ammunition fit for the Number we had; but God Almighty gave us an Heart with Courage and Resolution, that supplyed all our wants. We now every Day wrought hard in Fortifying the Town, making Bulwarks and Rampiers at each place, where the Ri∣ver was fordable; and appointed a certain Number of Offi∣cers, together with Mr. Kelsey the Nonconformist Minister, to sit in Counsel every Day, to consider what measures were most proper to pursue for our Preservation; the first things done, were these following orders. 1. A Book to be made, to insert all Orders that were con∣cluded upon; and these to be Signed by them that were ap∣pointed to take inspection, and conclude upon matters fit, so firmly obeyed by all.
2. That the Country were to do duty, by watching their turns in Town; whereby to secure that place as a sure refuge for them to fly to, if any mischief should be offered to them by the Natives; and while they were upon Duty, to have free Quarters. 3. That Locks be forthwith Provided for the Bridges, and they to be Locked up at a convenient Hour, and the Keys car∣ed to the Governour, or to the Captain of the Main Guard, if the Governour should think fit. 4. That Expresses be immediately sent abroad, to engage a True Correspondence with the Gentlemen in the adjacent Counties, so to receive from them frequent Intelligence of their knowledg, or what their Resolutions or Observations were. 5. That a considerable quantity of Provisions, viz. Beef, Butter, Cheese, and Meal, be laid up in Store to subsist the Garison, if a Seige should happen; and that the Countrey be encouraged to send in, and lay up their Provisions, of Grain or other things, in Town; fearing lest it might be surprized by the Enemy, and so made use of against us. 6. That good store of Pikes and Sythes, fixed in long Poles be made ready, and kept in store to Arm all the Countrey, if occasion were. 7. That a Horse-Guard be kept, for scouring the Country in the night time, for fear of an Ambush or sudden Attack; and to see that the Watches there be duly kept. 8. That all the Boats and Cotes upon Longhaven be secured, and brought to the Castle of Inniskilling; so to prevent the Ene∣mies having the advantage of surprizing us by Water. 9. That all the fire Arms that may be had, together with all the old Musquet-Barrels that are now in the Castle, be im∣mediately fixed up, and made fit for Service. 10. That the four small Brass Pieces now in the Castle, be put upon Carriages, and made fit for Service. 11. That the Papists and Natives of the Countrey, be not
admitted into Town upon Markets-Days, with Skeens or Half Pikes, neither allowed to stay in Town all Night. 12. That a General Randesvouz of the Country be appoin∣ted, where lists may be taken of all that joyn with us, the better to know our strength, and there to be form'd into Com∣panies and Troops, Officers made to Command and Disci∣pline them, and they obliged to obey their Officers. Having thus in some measure prescribed our selves some method to walk by, we put the former Orders punctually in execution, every man observing what he was Commanded, as duly, as if we had all been under Pay; no man in the least grudging to perform the hardest Duty; so unanimous we were amongst our selves. Sir James Caldwell coming about this time to Town, brought with him by Water from Belturbet, some Gunpowder for the better defence of the Country where he lived, and left us about Sixty Pounds, which we looked upon to be a great matter at that time. In January also came to us from Conought, Thom is Lloyd, and Dan. Hudson Esq with their Families, both Ingenious Gen∣tlemen; and I may say indeed, in a good time for us; for all that we did after, worth taking notice of, was under the Conduct and Command of Mr. Lloyd; Mr. Hudson by his sound and good Advice in Counsel, contributed much to our advantage; we shall have occasion to speak more of Mr. Lloyd hereafter. We likewise about this time had sent us from my Lord Blany, by Captain Thomas Cole, a Copy of the Proceedings of the Lords of the North East; the Papers were these. IT being notoriously known, not only to the Protestants of the Northern Counties, but to those throughout this whole King∣dom of Ireland, That the Publick peace of this Nation is now in great and eminent Danger; and that it is absolutely necessary for all Protestants to agree within their several Counties in some method, besides those ordinarily appointed by the Laws, for their
own defence; and the preserving as much as in them lies, the pub∣lick Peace of the Nation, which is so much endeavoured to be di∣sturbed by Popish and Illegal Counsellors, and their Abettors. And for that Ʋnity, Secresy, and Dispatch, are necessary to the effecting of the said Design: Therefore we the Persons here under Subscribing our Names, Do in behalf of our selves, and Protestant Tenants, Authorise and Impower Sir Arthur Reidon Baronet, Sir Robert Colvil, James Hamilton of Newcastle, John Hawkins, and James Hamilton of Tullimore Esq or any three of them, to Assemble at such Time and Place, and as oft as they shall think fit, and to Consult, Advise, and Determine of all matters which re∣late to the Publick Peace of this County and Kingdom. And we the said Persons hereunto Subscribing our Names, Protestants in the County of Down, do hereby engage for our selves, and as far as in us lies, our Tenants aforesaid, To Perform and Execute all such Orders, Commands, and Directions, as shall from time to time be made publick, or given by the said Persons, or any three of them as aforesaid. In Witness whereof we have hereunto Subscribed our Names, this 17th. of January, 1688. In Witness of the Acceptance of the above Trust; we have hereunto put our Hands. M. J. H. &c. A. R. R. C. J. H. J. H. J. H.
By the Council of Five of the Counties of Down and An∣trim, pursuant to a Trust reposed in them by the Nobi∣lity and Gentry of the said Counties. HAving an intire Confidence of the Conduct, Valour and Fidelity of the Right Honourable Hugh Earl of Mountalexander, We do hereby impower his Lordship to Com∣mand all such Forces as shall from time to time be raised by us, and other the Inhabitants of the said Counties of Down and Antrim, for preserving the Publick Peace of the said Counties, and other parts of this Kingdom, in these distract∣ed Times, wherein no Lawful Government is established in the Kingdom of Ireland. In witness whereof we have here∣unto set our Hands this 18th Day of January, 1688. Antrim, A. R. R. C. J. H. Down, J. H. J. H. The forenamed Capt. Cole had Directions from my Lord Blanii, to prevail with us to Regiment our selves: So to u∣nite in their Association, and to send One or Two of our Number to the Council of Five, then at Hilsborough, there to reside, to receive such Orders from time to time as the said Council should think most convenient, and to be dire∣cted in our Undertakings accordingly. Upon which the Gentlemen of our County had several Meetings, but could not fix in any solid Method, nor jump in Opinion; so that Capt. Cole, returned to Lord Blanii with this following Let∣ter from the Townsmen of Iniskilling. My Lords, YOurs we have, for which we return humble and hearty Thanks. The Methods of your Proceedings we likewise received by Capt. Cole, a Messenger from Lord Blanii.
We have had several Meetings with the Gentlemen of this County, to joyn our selves in your Association; and now look upon our selves obliged to deal plainly with your Lordships: When first this poor Corporation unanimously joyned in a firm Resolution of refusing a Popish Garison, having a regard to the Consequence of this Place, and the general preservation of this Countrey; we addressed our selves to all the Gentlemen in it, to joyn with us, and stand by us, in this so necessary an Ʋnder∣taking; but found the most Leading Men, not only to refuse us, but to oppose our Resolution to that degree, as to apprehend some of us, with intention to commit us to Gaol (if admit∣ted). When this failed, they used their Interest and Power in hindering the Countrey to joyn toward our preservation and their own, and endeavoured to represent us ill to the Govern∣ment, as we are credibly informed: Yet notwithstanding these Discouragements, Gustavus Hamilton, a Gentleman of our Countrey, took us by the Hand, and hitherto hath used his diligence and uttermost endeavours to support us: He hath now Ten Companies of Foot in Arms, each consisting of Se∣venty Two Private Men; a very good Troop of an Hundred Horse, well armed with Carbines and Pistols: And by an In∣strument under our Hands, we have elected him Governour of this Place, and Colonel of our Forces. The Gentlemen that at first opposed our Intentions, have had of late several Meetings, and now shew a willingness to joyn, provided Sir Gerrard Ervin may be made Colonel of Horse, and our Governour his Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain Cor∣ry Colonel of Foot, so consequently our Governour here, who is the Man of the world we most doubt, we having several Ad∣monishments from very good Hands, That our Fears are not groundless. VVe hope your Lordships considering our weak Rise, the great Dangers we are now in, the extraordinary kindness and favour we have found from Gustavus Hamilton, and the
Reasons we have to doubt the Sincerity of others, that your Lordships will be pleased to continue us in your favour, and believe that this is the true State of our Condition: we doubt not but evil inclined Spirits may set us forth otherwise, which we hope your Lordships will give no Credit to, but allow us the Liberty of subscribing our selves, Your Lordships faithful humble Servants, The Inhabitants of Iniskilling. Immediately after this we issued this following Declaration. WE the Inhabitants of Iniskilling, with our Associates, having regard to the great and eminent danger hang∣ing over our Heads; Receiving frequent Intelligence from all parts of this Kingdom of Ireland, That the Irish Papists are with all Diligence and Celerity arming themselves (as is believed) to our destruction; and being, with the Assistance of Almighty God, resolved to stand upon our Guards, we there∣unto encouraged by a Declaration set forth by the Nobility and Gentry of the Counties of Antrim, Down and Ardmagh, satisfying us, That they have taken up Arms in their own de∣fence, we therefore think fit, and do hereby admonish all Pro∣testants of this County, and the Countrey adjacent, to do the same: And for their future security and preservation, we de∣sire, that all the Inhabitants of this County, and the adja∣cent parts, may assemble themselves here with their Arms and Horses, on Monday next, to joyn with us in this so necessary an Ʋndertaking; and there to be inlisted, to the end that Men may be appointed to Command them. VVe further de∣sire, That all the Neighbourhood may bring in their Provisions to be secured for them in this Place, as a sure Refuge for them to fly to in time of Trouble; And those that do not now
lay up Provisions for themselves and families, shall not be ad∣mitted to inhabit here, or relieved from hence hereafter. Dated at Iniskilling the 27th of January, 1688. A Copy of this, together with the following Letter, and a Copy of the Declaration of the Lords of the North-East, was sent to all the Gentlemen in our Countrey. SIR, WE have here inclosed the Resolutions of all the Gen∣tlemen of the Counties of Down, Antrim and Ard∣magh, together with what we resolve to do: This day we had by Express, from an eminent Person in this Countrey, Dire∣ctions to be upon our Guard, and ready in Twelve Hours warning: Our earnest Request to you is, That you may give the same Instructions through your Countrey, and to appear here on Monday next, with what force you can raise, both Horse and Foot, to the end they may be inlisted, and Officers appointed; where we will discover more to you, and consult what further Measures may be taken for our preservation, ac∣cording to the Emergency of Affairs. Your Diligence and Compliance in this is not doubted, by, SIR, Dated Jan. 27. 1688. Your loving Friends, GƲST AVƲS HAMILTON, And the rest of the Inhabitants of Iniskilling. According to our defire in the above-Letter, we had a General Rendezvous of our whole Countrey that joyned with us, where we had a very pretty Appearance: Gusta∣vus Hamilton, our Governour, continued Colonel, and Mr. Thomas Lloyd was made Lieutenant Colonel of our whole Forces. After this we enjoyed a considerable quiet,
endeavouring to carry on our Fortifications, the most part of January and February, notwithstanding the Winter. All this time we had frequent Correspondence with my Lord of Kingston, who had raised a very considerable Force, both of Horse and Foot, in the Counties of Roscom∣mon and Sligo, and had made Sligo his Garrison, which he endeavoured with all diligence to fortifie, with a firm Re∣solution of holding out that Place against all Opposition; but Ammunition being scarce with him, and receiving in February, Encouragement from Colonel Lundy, who at that time commanded all, to desert Sligo, and march his Men to Derry, where he should be accommodated with Provisions for his Men, and forage for his Horses: He left Sligo, and marched as far as Ballishanon, towards Derry: He had no sooner left his Garrison, than the Enemy was in it; but he, brave Gentleman, met Assurance at Ballishanon, that there was not any forage to be had at Derry for his Horses; therefore constrained to continue where he was, quartering his Men along the Frontier, upon the North side of Lough∣hearne, while April following. In March we had intelligence, That King James was by the Convention of Estates in England, Voted to have Ab∣dicated, and had placed King William and Queen Mary in the Throne, who upon the 11th of March we Proclaimed, with all the Joy and Solemnity we could. Immediately, upon this, we received a Letter from Colo∣nel Lundy, with one inclosed, from the Lords of the North-East. Colonel Lundy's was in these Words: Gentlemen, THE Inclosed is accompanied with several Letters, in∣timating the March of the Irish Army Northward: To oppose which we are making all the Preparations possible, al∣tho our Scarcity of Arms, Ammunition and Moneys, render
us not so fit as we ought for the Ʋndertaking: But we will do what we can, and leave the Issue to Divine Providence, which orders all Events. On this occasion it is likely that you and all our friends may be alarmed, if not formally attack'd by their Forces, were it but to keep you from affording us your help, or from giving them diversion in their Attempts: wherefore you would do well to be strictly on your Guards, and if possible, (by Espi∣als) to open their Counsels and Designs; and what you know, pray communicate to your friends in this Countrey, and round about you, who, we hope, will observe the like Care, and conti∣nue a constant Correspondence with all friends in these dange∣rous Times. I am resolved to march hence within a day or two, with what force I can raise in this Countrey, to Donganan, and desire you to have all Men ready to march that were designed for it, that as soon as I write for them, they may come immedi∣ately to the place assigned for our Rendezvous. I remain, For Sir John Hume, and the rest of the Gentlemen of the County of Farma∣nagh, These. Gentlemen, Your faithful Servant, ROBERT LƲNDY. The inclosed from the Lord Mountalexander, and other Gentlemen of the North-East to Colonel Lundy. Dated at Lough-brickland, March the 9th, 1688. was as followeth: SIR, SInce our last to you, dated the 6th, we have this day re∣ceived the inclosed; and Mr. Osburne was here himself, and confirms the Contents, with several Circumstances, which perswades us of the Truth of it: And therefore we most ear∣nestly intreat you to march up towards Nury, with all possible diligence, with what Men you can, with as much Provisions
and Necessaries as can be carried; and let us know by Express of their March, and their Numbers. We remain, Sir, You are desired to give notice to all Friends. To the Honourable Col. Lundy, in Derry. Your Humble Servants, Mountalexander. James Hamilton. William Cunningham. Richard Johnston. Mar. Midleton. Mr. Osburn's Letter to Lord Mountalexander. ON the 6th instant, I was introduced by my Lord Gra∣nard, to my Lord Deputy's Presence, in the Castle of Dublin: I have his Pass to come and go through and back from Ulster. And tho I have not his Excellencies express Commission, yet I assure you, I am at least permitted by the Lord Deputy, to acquaint the Chief, and others of the Ulster-Association, with his discourse to me; which was to the effect following: Viz. That his Excellency doth not delight in the Blood of the Protestants of the said Province; but how∣ever, highly resents their taking and continuing in Arms; the Affront done by them to Him, and His Majesties Government thereby; and by some Indignities done to the late Proclamation of Clemency, issued and dated Notwithstanding whereof, is willing to re∣ceive the said Province into Protection; Provided, they immediately deliver to his Army, to His Majesties Use, their Arms, and serviceable Horses; and provided they deliver to his Excellency these Three Persons; Viz.  if they stay in the Kingdom, and they may be had. And for further mani∣festation of his Design to prevent Blood, is willing to grant
Safe Conduct, even to the said Three Persons, or any of their Party, from his Excellency, and to and from Lieute∣nant General Hamilton, Commander of a part of his Army, if they intend any Peaceable and Reasonable Treaty: But withal, will not, upon the said Account, or any other, stop the March of that part of his said Army, no, not for an Hour: And if it shall appear in such Treaty, that they took up Arms meerly for Self-preservation, he will pardon even the said Three Persons: But is hopeless that any such thing can be made appear, being many of them have accepted and received Commissions from the Prince of Orange, and displayed his Colours in the Field, as he is credibly inform∣ed. If these Terms be not immediately agreed to, he will, with a part of his Army, fight them; which part he in∣tends shall be at Nury on Monday the 11th of this Instant, which will from thence march to Belfast, and from thence to Colraine and Londonderry, as his Excellency intends: And that the Countrey Irish, not of the Army, Man, Wo∣man and Boy, now all Armed with Half Pikes and Baggo∣nets, in the Counties of Cavan, Managhan, Tyrone and Londonderry, &c. will, on the Approach of the said part of the Army, and Resistance thereunto made, immediately en∣ter into a Massacre of the British of the said Counties; which Force and Violence of the Rabble, his Excellency says, he cannot restrain. These are the Heads of what I can offer to you from his Excellency's own Mouth: But I intend to be at Hilsborough to Night. Alex. Osburne. These Two, as I said before, came inclosed in Col. Lun∣dy's, directed to Sir John Hame, Bar. to be communicated to the rest of the Gentlemen in the County of Farmanagh. Haste. This, you may believe, put us upon our more strict Guard;
but Col. Lundy, in place of moving, as he mentions in his Letter, ordered the Garrison then kept at Donganan, to de∣sert that place, and march down to the Lagau: Upon which all the British in that Country fled to Strabane, the Lagau, and Derry. He likewise wrote Letters to us (as he did to the County of Cavan Gentlemen that were then in Arms), im∣mediately to bring off the Women and Children, and re∣pair to the Lagau: But we had fixed our Resolution other∣wise, being highly sensible, that holding out that Place of Iniskilling, was the only Let to hinder the Conaught Forces joyning with those of Ʋlster; and consequently all the Support that Derry could expect: For had we deserted that Place, all Ireland then was in the Papists Hands, save Lon∣donderry, which of it self could not possibly subsist, or be able to hold out against the whole Power of the Irish Na∣tion: Whereas, on the other Hand, our keeping that Place would, at least, (if we could not assist to relieve Derry) be a great means of diverting their Force from uniting a∣gainst it. The Gentlemen of the County of Cavan, about the 20th of March, the Weather being very stormy, and the Ways extreme deep, scarce-passable, all, in a most distracted and confused manner, deserted their Countrey, and fled to Inis∣killing; telling us, that they had received positive Orders from Col. Lundy so to do, leaving the most part of what they had behind them; And the poor People, in a most starving and deplorable condition, throng'd into our Town, filling all Corners full, so that there was above 200 Families forced to get into the Church, the Sessions-house and School-house being likewise filled. Their Officers used their utter∣most endeavours to perswade our Governour to do the like; Viz. to desert Iniskilling; and indeed some that we expect∣ed better things from, were likewise of Opinion, that it was our safest way: Which, had this Advice been followed, it
would certainly have ruined the whole Protestant Interest in Ireland, and given the Irish Army the opportunity of passing into Scotland or England at their pleasure; but Ma∣jor John Rider gave so weighty and forcible Reasons of the Necessity of holding that Place, that he over-ruled all, and confirmed several (that were really wavering) to be firm in our former Resolution: But when we had fully pryed into the Reasons of the County of Cavan Gentry so desert∣ing their Country, being a good Party of Men, and having several Strengths that they might have held out, we found, that it was more out of fear of a Party under the Command of the Lord Galmoy, that had marched into their Country, than any thing else that had brought them off, altho I be∣lieve they had a Letter from Col. Lundy to that purpose. The Lord Galmoy indeed, with the best part of his Regi∣ment of Horse, some Dragoons, with the Rabble of the Countrey, came as far as Belturbet, surprising by the way Dean Dixey's House, taking his Eldest Son, who was Capt. of a Troop of Horse, and one Edward Charleton, his Lieu∣tenant, Prisoners. The County of Cavan Men stayed Three Days at Inis∣killing, in which time Lord Galmoy marched his Men as far as Lisnaskey, a pretty Village within Ten Miles of us, where there is a tolerable strong Castle belonging to Charles Bel∣fore, Esq. The Night e'er he came there, he sent a Summons to Iniskilling, commanding them to deliver up the Place, their Arms and serviceable Horses to him, for the King's use, who, as he said, was then in Dublin; and to receive Prote∣ctions: Which if we refused, he was come with an Army to reduce that Country to the King's Obedience, which he would do by Force: And if we now denied to receive these Conditions, we should not be favoured with the like here∣after. Upon Receipt of this Summons, the Governour called all the Officers belonging to the Town together, who with
a unanimous Voice, resolved to defend the Place to the ut∣most, and return'd an Answer immediately to the Lord Gal∣moy, That they owned no Power save Their Majesties King William and Queen Mary, that they had lately Proclaimed, and that for their use they would hold out the Town to the last Man. Then we prepared, as indeed it was ever our intention, to meet Galmoy, and fight him e'er he came near our Town, desiring the County of Cavan men to joyn with us in giving him a Brush; then, if they had a mind, they might march on to Derry; but they absolutely refused it, getting out of Town with all speed imaginable. We then made, by the Governour's Orders, Proclamation, That all those who left the County of Cavan, and were now upon their march to Derry, should take their Wives and Children along with them; else any that were left, should be turned out of Town. This occasioned the stay of Three or Four Companies of Foot, most of them having Wives and Children, and not able to get them off; but all the rest, both Horse and Foot, went off, with some of the Officers of these Companies that stayed. Our Governour then drew out what Force we had, with a resolution to meet Lord Galmoy, and fight him; upon the intelligence of which he retreated to Crum, a Castle holding out for us, lying upon the East side of Loughearne, Three Miles below Belturbet, which he besieged, drawing on Two Peices of Battering Cannon, as was supposed, with great Noise, and imaginary Difficulty; which coming to our knowledge there was a Detachment of about 200 Fire-locks immediately ordered by the Governour, for the re-inforcing Crum-Garrison, while the other Forces could be in readiness to march to their Relief. These were sent, some by Land, some by Water, marching by Night; but Day appearing e'er they got the length of the Castle, the Enemy used all their endeavour to hinder our Mens landing, firing small shot ve∣ry
thick upon them, but killed none, save one Boteman: Our Men likewise, together with those in the Castle, fired thick upon the Enemy, killing several of them, and by force got into the Castle, who when they were joyned, immedi∣ately sallied out, beat the Enemy off from their Trenches, killing 30 or 40 of them, and took their Two great Guns, which proved to be Boxes of Tin about Two Foot and an half long, Five Inches Diameter, well bound about with pitched Canvass, and small Cording. They had fired one of them with a Wooden Bullet, and burst out her Britch: Our Men got some Arms, two Suits of Armor, and several other things of value. Lord Galmoy upon this retreated to Belturbet. E're Galmoy came the length of Lisnaskey, a cursed fellow, one Kemp, with some of the Rabble of the Country, his Consorts, burnt that pretty Village, to the great loss of the Inhabitants, and the worthy Gentleman that owned it, as al∣so a prejudice to In is killing, it being capable of quartering above a Regiment of Men, and of being made a Frontier to us, we being much straitned in In is killing for Lodgings. But e're the Town was burnt, we had brought from thence a many Tuns of Iron, belonging to Mr. Belfore, and most of the Lead of his House, which proved very serviceable to us, both to Horse and Foot. The Lord Galmoy having retreated to Belturbet, sends to Lieut. Col. Creighton, Commander at Crum (whose House it is), he having one Bryan Mac Guier, a Captain amongst the Irish, Prisoner; and intreats that Mac Guier might be sent him, obliging himself upon his Honour to send Capt. Dixey in exchange for Mac Guier. Lieut. Col. Creighton, upon this, sends Mac Guier to Belturbet; but the honest Lord in place of making good his obliged Honour, called a Court Marshal, where he had both Dixey and Charlton tried, and condemn∣ed, for levying Men by the Prince of Orange's Commission, which was found in their Pockets. They, as it is said, were
offered their Lives, if they would turn Papists; (which if they had done, I presume they would have been served as formerly these sort of people used to serve Protestants, who at any time, through the fear of Death, would turn Papists for the preservation of their Lives, which was to hang them when in a good Mind, as they call'd it): But they (altho young men) refusing so to do, were both hanged upon Mr. Russel's Sign-post, and after, their Heads cut off, and kickt about the Streets for Foot-balls. About this time we sent again a Party of Horse to Derry, for a supply of Arms and Ammunition, having intelligence that good store was arrived there from England; but all we could procure from Col. Lundy, he having the sole Com∣mand of that Place was, Threescore old Musquets, most with∣out Stocks or Locks, and Five small Barrels of Gunpowder, which came safe to Iniskilling. We soon fixed up the Arms. Now was the Army under the Command of Lieut. Gen. Hamilton, upon their march to the North-East, where they met but with small resistance, Sir Arthur Reiden being the on∣ly man, as we were informed, that endeavoured to give them opposition at Drummore, from whence he was constrained (having but a small Party with him) to retreat to Hilsborough; but coming there, and finding that the Lord Mountalexan∣der, with those under him, had deserted that place, and fled to Donoghadee, the ready Port for Scotland, Sir Arthur made the best of his way to Antrim, and from thence to Colraine, where Lieut. Gen. Hamilton followed, meeting with no resi∣stance while he was there, opposed by Major Gustavus Ha∣milton, who beat him back, and forced him to retreat to Ballimony; but he after, with his whole Army, past the Bandwater, at a place called Portglanone, so got into the County of Londonderry; upon which Alarm, Col. Lundy, and the other Officers at Derry, held a Counsel of War; the Result of which was as followeth.
Londonderry, April the 13th, 1689. AT a General Counsel of War, resolved unanimously, That on Monday next, by Ten of the Clock in the Morning, all Officers and Soldiers, Horse, Dragoons, and Foot, and all other Armed Men whatsoever, of our Forces and Friends inlisted, and not inlisted, that can, and will fight for their Country and Re∣ligion against Popery, shall appear in the fittest Ground near Clady-Ford, Lifford, and Long Cassiway, as shall be to their several respective quarters, there to draw up in Battalions, to be ready to fight the Enemy, to preserve our Lives, and all that is dear to us, from them; and all Officers and Soldiers of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, and others that are Armed, are re∣quired to be then there, in order to the purpose aforesaid, and to bring a Weeks Provision at least with them for Men, and as much Forage as they can for Horses. Fra. Hamilton. Kil. Brasier. Jo. Richardson. Will. Hamilton. J. Barry. Will. Stewart. Nic. Atkinson. Robert Lundy. Blany. James Hamilton. Hugh Montgomery. This was sent us to Iniskilling, accompanied with a very pressing Letter, acquainting us of the Enemies passing the Band, urging the necessity of our leaving that Place, it not being tenable; and the inavoidable danger we were in, if the Irish Army prevail'd at Clady, where, he said, he resolved to fight them. The like was sent to my Lord Kingston, who lay 20 miles below us, since his being brought off from Sligo, with this following Letter. My Lord, YOu see the Result of our Counsel of War, and we hope your Lordship will give us your help and assistance. In haste, I am, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant, April. 1689. Robert Lundy.
We at In is killing resolved not to stir; but my Lord King∣ston receiving Lundy's Letter about. Twelve of the Clock upon Sunday at Night, at Ballishanan, where his Lordship then lay, his men lying quartered abroad in the Country, marched with a few Horse, as early as he could, next morn∣ing towards Clady, leaving Orders for the rest of his Horse and Foot to follow him: But e'er he got that length, the E∣nemy had past the Clady-water, put all Lundy's Party to the rout, and were upon the pursuit; so that my L. could not joyn them, to make any opposition; therefore counter-marched. And now Lundy beginning to be suspected by most men, and believing by his Treachery, that all would be lost, many Gentlemen; nay, people of all sorts, endeavoured to get out of the Kingdom: my Lord of Kingston left the Kingdom likewise, but sent to Iniskilling Two Troops of Horse, and Six Companies of Foot, all brave men. This was a considera∣ble Addition to our Strength. Now we resolved firmly, as we ever had done before, to stick by that place whilst a man of us were alive. When Lundy sent his last Letter to us, to in∣treat us off from Iniskilling, there was one sent from an un∣known Hand, directed to Lieut. Carmick, which was this: Dear Sir, WE know that there are some Expresses gone from hence last night and this day, that gives an account of the ill success that attends our Forces; and that it is to be feared it will be hard for any to escape from Colraine hither; it is likewise belie∣ved by most, that advice is sent to Iniskilling to desert that place, and retire to Derry, which will tend to the ruin of all the Prote∣stant Interest in Ulster, and, for ought we know, in the whole Kingdom. There are many well wishers to your Town and Inte∣rest, that believe it were better to stay there than retire. It is a nice point to advise a friend in: what is to be done, must be with ex∣pedition, either to come away immediately, or resolve to defend that place. Take speedy counsel, and God of his infinite mercy di∣rect you, that you may escape the cruelty of your Enemies. This place will be so thronged, that the Walls will not contain the peo∣ple. Sir, I am yours.
We were fixed in our resolutions e're this came, and indeed had some doubts of Lundy's Sincerity: Whether he deserved it, or not, I can't say, yet his usage to my L. Kingston was sus∣picious-like; for after bringing him off from Sligo, as I said before, promising him Provisions both for Horse and Men, and then receiving Orders for his staying at Ballishanan, al∣ledging he had no Forrage for his Horse, the Enemy having possessed themselves of Sligo as soon as my Lord left it, cre∣ated our first Jealousie: but to palliate his so doing, e're Lieut. Gen. Hamilton past the Band, he wrote this following Let∣ter to my Lord. My Lord, YEsterday I received a Letter from the Earl of Shrewsbury, by his Majesties Command, giving encouragement of sud∣den Aid from England, and expressing his Majesties great Con∣cern for us, and the Zeal of both Houses, and full compliance with his Majesties gracious intentions, I have formed a Garrison here, and will provide your Lordship and Capt. Coote accom∣modation for 80 Horse, if you please to come over hither, where it's likely there will be occasion very soon, if you come and bring Garrons with you. You would do well to cause your men to load, and bring hither as much Sheaf-Oats, and as much other forrage as you can, which shall be preserved for your own men. I am in haste, My Lord, Londonderry, April 11, 1689. Your Lordships most affectionate humble Servant, Rob. Lundy. You may see by this how Lundy dealt by that brave and Honourable Person, first promising him Forrage for all his Horses, and Provisions for his men, while he perswaded him off from Sligo; then but for 80 Horse; Whereas my Lord had at least Ten full Troops, Two of Dragoons included. This occasioned my Lord's stay at Ballishanan; for unless he brought Forrage with him, as you may see by the above-Letter, he could expect none, when all Lundy's Promises ter∣minate in this, to secure what Forrage my Lord should bring with him, for his own Men.
About the middle of April we of Iniskilling having intelli∣gence brought us, that the Enemy were about settling a Ga∣rison in Trillick, a place nine miles wide of us, upon the stode to Derry, we did believe they would be but unneighbourly Guests, therefore thought it convenient to prevent their set∣tling there, and to that purpose, being well reinforced by my Lord Kingstones men, we marched in the night under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Lloyd (under whose Con∣duct we never failed accomplishing what we designed, but without him, could not, or never did any thing) and came to Trillick very early in the morning, where we discovered a Party marching towards us, our Horse advanced with what speed they could; and our Lieut. Col. alighting, led the Foot through the Bogs and Mountains, the nearest way he could; with a resolution to have attack'd the Enemy, but they disco∣vering us retreated, leaving all their Cattle and Baggage be∣hind them: The Lieutenant Colonel perceiving this, immedi∣ately detached an hundred Fire-locks, commanding Lieute∣nant Mac Carmick to lead them on with all speed, to try if possible he could force the Enemy to a stand, while the Body could get up; the Country being so bogy that there was no marching for Horse, but by the Roads; but after near six hours hard pursuit, we were constrained to make an halt, the Enemy dispersing, and every man shifting the best way he could for himself, we preyed all the Country, and so return∣ed with a considerable Booty, which was divided amongst the private men. We thought it now time, the more to prevent both the in∣solencies of the private Souldiers, and to take away all pre∣tentions in the future, that any man might have for declining our interest, to bind ourselves by Oath, the one to the other, and to this purpose, at a general Randevous, we were all sworn as followeth,
The Oath administred to the Governour. I Gustavus Hamilton do swear by God, and the Holy Contents of this Book, That I shall Truely, Sincerely, and Faithfully execute and dis∣charge the Office and Place of Governour of Iniskilling, according to my utmost Power and Ability, and that I shall with my Life and Fortune de∣fend the Protestant Religion and Interest, together with the Inhabitants of this Town, and all others under my Command, and that I shall not act nor do any thing contrary to the Consent and General Advice of the Offi∣cers under my Command, but shall from time to time and at all times stand by and support the said Interest; neither dissert it, nor this Place without being by Force beaten from thence. So help me God. The Oath of the Officers. I A. B. do hereby testifie and declare, and upon the Holy Evangelists swear, That I will own and acknowledge Gustavus Hamilton, Esq Chief Governour of this Town of Iniskilling; and shall give due obedience to him in all his lawful Commands; and shall to the uttermost of my Power and Ability protect and defend him and this Place, with the Coun∣try adjacent, together with the Protestant Religion and Interest with my Life and Fortune, against all that shall endeavour to subvert the same; and that I shall be Just and Faithful, in giving my Sincere Opinion and Advice, in all Counsels whereunto I am called, for the General Good and Preservation of the Interest aforesaid. So help me God. The Oath of the Private Souldiers. I D. H. do hereby Testifie and Declare, and upon the Holy Evangelists Swear, That I will Own and Acknowledge Gustavus Hamilton, Esq Chief Governour of this Town of Inniskilling; and shall give due Obedi∣ence to him and my Superiour Officers in all his and their Commands and shall to the uttermost of my Power and Ability, defend him, them, and this Place, with the Country adjacent, together with the Prote∣stant Religion and Interest, with my Life and Fortune, against All that shall endeavour to subvert the same. So help me God, and the Holy Contents of this Book.
These Oaths were Administred to every Individual person according to their respective posts; and upon the 28th, of April, we hearing that there was a Garrison of the Irish put into the Castle of Ougher, a very considerable strength, with a good Baunwale and Flankers, lying upon the Road to Char∣lemont, eighteen miles from us; we again were drawn out under the Conduct of Lieutenant Colonel Loyde, and in one night marched to Ougher, coming in early upon Sunday morning, yet notwithstanding our private and speedy march, the Enemy had notice of our approach, and disserted their Garrison taking away with them what they could carry; we (seizing what Cattle they had, not being able to over∣take them) Preyed their Country, Burnt their Castle, Levelled their Fortifications, and so left Ougher; Taking our way through the Mountains, to a place called Shannake, another strong House they kept Garrison in, neer to Clownish, be∣longing to Daniel Eccles, Esq the Gentleman that first gave us notice of the two Companies approach to Iniskilling, whose House we had a great desire to save, and place a Garrison there of our own men; upon Munday at night we came within a mile and a half of it (being toyled with our long march, and the boginess of the Mountains) we rested three or four hours, with a resolution of falling in upon the Enemies Garrison by break of day, but they having notice of our approach, by some of the Country Irish flying be∣fore us; e're we could possibly fall in with them, fled and set the House on Fire, burning to the ground both it and all the Office houses belonging to it; we pursued them hard into the County of Managhan, but could not over take them; we Preyed all the Country about, fetching off both from the County of Managhan and part of the County of Canau, a great deal of black Cattle, many Horses, which we loaded with the growth of the Country, as Meal, Malt, Wheat, Oats, Butter, Bedcloaths, and the like, a considerable number of Sheep, and so return'd to Iniskilling the second day of May;
Black Cattle was not at all deer with us, nor any other sort of Provision during the whole time of our Troubles; but this made them much cheaper than formerly: For now we could have bought a good milk Cow for sixteen or eighteen Pence, and a dry one for six pence. We had rested but one day, when there came an Express from Captain Falliat Commander of Ballishanan, a Town with a strong Castle twenty miles below us, standing likewise up∣on the side of Loughcarne near the Sea; that there was a con∣siderable Party of Horse and Foot from Conaught, sat down before it; the Enemy had Summoned them to deliver the Town and Castle, which Summons he sent to us, desiring speedy relief; Lieutenant Col. Lloyd marched next morn∣ing with a considerable Party both of Horse and Foot to raise the Seige: The Enemy hearing of our approach drew off the greatest part of their Strength, both Horse and Foot to a place called Bellick, three miles nearer us, and there posted themselves very advantagioufly, there being but one narrow Pass by which they could be attacked, a Bog running from the side of Loughearne all the way to Bandruse, seven miles to the left hand, not known to be passable in any place save where the Road led through it, close to the Lough side; this the Enemy had strongly barrocaded, and before their Works had broke down a Bridg, and so raised the way that it could not be passed, Col. Lloyd espying this, caused Faggots to be cut immediately for making the Bog passable, and so drew up against the Enemy, they making great Huzza's, and invi∣ting us to come on and fight them; our Stomacks were as good as theirs, if not better for that Trade, and as we were advancing to force our way, God Almighty sent a man, from whence I know not, that offered to lead us safe through the Bog, towards our left Hand, and that our Horse should not need to alight, nor to use their Faggots; he was as good as his word: when we had past the Bog our advance Guard, led by Capt. Atchison, indeavoured to get, if possible, the Right
Flank of the Enemy, so to prevent their escaping to the Mountains; but they espying it, and our Body coming on, began to move orderly towards their Right, as if they de∣signed to prevent their being flanked, we observing their motion marched extream hard, but e're we could come with∣in shot the Enemies Foot broke, and run clear away to the Mountains: The Horse which were upon the Left of the Foot, betwixt them and the Lough, stood while our Horse were ready to charge them, then wheeled to the left, and so ran for it without firing a shot; our Horse persued seven miles, and had not the Night come on I presume few of them had escaped: There was none that fought save one Fitzgerald, who being overtaken upon his flight, by one Lieutenant Moloye of our Party, fired his three shot briskly upon him, and had certainly killed him had he wanted his Armour; but when his shot was spent they fought it with their Swords, while some of our men came up and took Fitzgerald Prisoner; he was very much wounded, but because of his courage was carefully looked after, and brought to Iniskilling, and re∣covered: There were killed in the persute and hundred and ninety Horse. Our foot marched unto Ballishanon, where they took about sixty Prisoners in the Fish Island and about it, knocking some others on the head that were left to continue the Siege, they not knowing that their Army was broke, while our men came upon them; we had the Plunder of their Camp, which was but beggarly; got several good serviceable Horses, two small Canon, some good Arms, and a small quan∣tity of Amunition; and having fully done what we went about, returned to Iniskilling; this was the first Ingagement (if it may be so called) that we had with the Enemy, where we lost not one man, nor any wounded save Cornet King, that had a shot in the Face receiving a Carabine from one of the Irish Horse after giving him quarters, but the Horse-man was immediately killed by one James King, a friend of the Cornets, who soon recovered of his Wound.
During the time of our Ougher and Clownish Expedition, the Governour began a Fort upon a Hill at the East end of our Town, a very regular Fortification, laid out by Major Hart and Major Rider, both good Mathematicians; which was carried on very effectually by the diligence of Major Rider, who spared no Pains while he finished his Work June following, with a Line of Communication from it to the East-Bridg, it commands the whole Town, and clears the Roads leading to it on that end. Soon after our Return from Ballishannon, we had Intelli∣gence that the Irish were endeavouring to get to a head in the County of Canau, keeping a Garison at Redhill, a strong and large House belonging to Francis White, Esq and a∣nother at a place called Ballinacarig, to remove which, we again marched under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Lloyde, where upon the Road Crum Garison joyned us, we were twenty two pair of Colours, and a strong Party of Horse: when we had marched up to Wattle-bridg near the Borders of the County of Canau, we espied the Enemy on the other side, and did expect they would have disputed that Pass, the Bridg being down, and the Water deep; but upon our Approach, seeing us resolved to force our way, they withdrew to the next Hill, so we past the Ford without Opposition, and marched up towards them again; but they still retreated from place to place, while they came to Redhill House, where they left part of their Number to defend it, the rest going off to Ballinacarig, we immedi∣ately drew up against Redhill House, altho late in the Evening, and upon Summons, they surrendred upon mercy; there was not any thing taken from the Prisoners save their Arms; neither did we prejudice the House out of tenderness to the Gentleman that owned it, he himself being in England, and his Brother commanding a Company of Foot in our Party at that time.
Next Morning early we marched to Ballinacarig Castle a very strong House well valted, that had held out a long time in the former War of Ireland, what Prisoners were took at Red hill, we had along with us, we drew up against it about four a Clock in the Aftenoon, and upon Summons, the Garrison surrendered, upon Condition of set∣ting them, with what Prisoners were taken at Red-hill, to∣gether with the Women and Children at Liberty, with only their wearing Cloaths along with them, which was per∣formed and they Convoyed safe off; leaving the Castle, their Arms and Ammunition, with abundance of Provisions, Houshold goods, and much Rich plunder; when we had re∣moved all was in it, we undermined the House, set it on fire, and levelled it with the ground; it lying a great way from Iniskilling in the Enemies Country; therefore not con∣venient for us to keep a Garrison at such distance. In this Expedition we scoured the Country near as far as Kells and Finnah, where we drove off betwixt five and six Thousand black Cattle, a many Sheep, and five Hundred and odd Horses, most of which we loaded with Meal, Wheat and Malt, so returned to Iniskilling. Soon after we had intelligence, that our approach so near Dublin (for we were within Twenty seven miles of it) had put that place in a great consternation, imagining we would have marched that length, our Number consisting in their opinion of Fourteen or Fifteen Thousand men, and indeed if the Protestants there, had received any assurance of our coming, so to have been in a readiness to have joyned us; I do not know but we might have gone a great length in taking that City, there being but few of the Irish there at that time; yet our Number being small, and wanting Arms and Ammunition, we thought it more adviseable, to return then run so desperate a Riske. Collonel Sarsfield at this time lay incamped at a place called Manor Hamilton, in a stone Deer Park of Sir William Gors, with some six or seven Thousand men; upon the West side
of us, at sixteen or seventeen miles distance; he sent a Drum with Proposals of Exchange of Prisoners, which our Governor embraced, expecting to have had Sir Thomas Suthwell, and those taken with him enlarged; to that purpose he sends a List of the Prisoners taken at Ballishanan, intimating his de∣sire to Sarsfield, but he excused himself, alledging that Sir Thomas was to be taken into England, to be exchanged for some there; and having no Prisoners with him of ours, he seises all the protected Protestants, that lived near Slygo, clap∣ing them into Goal, urging them to Petition our Governour for their enlargement; which the Governour at first refused to do; they not being taken as Prisoners of War, but for∣ced out of their own private dwellings, to be made servisable in redeeming these that we had taken in actual Armes; but some of their Wives having liberty to come to us, but in a sad enough Condition, intreating every day for the Redemp∣tion of their Husbands out of misery; our Governor at last consented; and the exchange agreed upon: Captain Francis Gore, with a party of Firelockes, Gonvoyed the Irish Priso∣ners Eight miles, where he met a party of Sarsfields men, with the poor Protestants; whom he brought back with him, and one Captain Jackson being amongst them; upon his coming to Iniskilling, had liberty to inlist the others that were brought off with him, of whom he made up a good Company, who were Armed immediately. About the beginning of June, there were two Troops of Horse, viz; Captain Francis Gores, and Captain Arnold Casbies sent to Garrison at Trillick, a House nine miles off us, upon the Road to Omagh, where they had intelligence of the Ene∣mies Dragoon horses belonging to the Garrison of Omagh, were slightly Guarded, whereupon they sent for Captain Henry Smith, and Captain Robert Corry, who Quartred at Newport Town, within four miles of them, these two Cap∣tains with their Companies, joyned the two Troops, marched in the night to Omagh, where they surprised, and brought off the Horses belonging to two Troops of Dragoones, and
some black Cattle without opposition, the Enemy not dare∣ing to obstruct them, although in view. Soon after this, we had an Account of the miserable con∣dition the poor Inhabitants of the City of Londou Derry were in, and that for want of Provisions, they would be forced to deliver up that place, a Dogs head and Pluck at that time (as we were assured) yeilding two Shillings and six pence, all the Horses they had being already eaten, with old Hides, Tallow, Starch, and what else of that nature, they could purchase; and knowing very well, that our safety and standing depended much upon that place, for if Derry had been taken by the Irish; we could not possibly hold out against the whole power of the Irish Nation having so small a quantity of Ammunition, so few Arms; no Cannon; and a Town weakly fortified; we therefore resolved to see if possible we could any way relieve Derry, we did not believe our selves able to raise the Seige; nay there were we resolved to perish in the attempt; all we proposed to our selves, was to march with what Provisions we could down to the East side of Derry River, opposite to the City, and there beat up the Enemies quarter, viz. Those of them that lay on that side; for their Army lay on the West side of the River, which is the side the City is on; so to Convoy Provisions into Town, and to leave them some Horse, the better to assist their Sallies; but indeed we resolved, when come to that length, that if they thought it advisable, all to pass the River and give the Enemy a Brush. To which purpose what force we could make, were drawn out, and the Governor would himself march in the head of them, although contrary to the advice and desire of all the Party; we doubted not the security of the Town, leaving Lieutenant Col. Lloyde there, but rather our own success under the Governors conduct; having never done any thing to our Advantage, where Lieutenant Col. Lloyde was wanting; and where the Lieutenant Col. Commanded, we never failed in
accomplishing what we designed; we marched that night to Trillicke nine miles; next day in the afternoon, towards O∣magh upon our march, there were some free Booters, that scoured on before knocked on the head, amongst them one Mr. Rowland Betty a very honest Gentleman, who was shot dead off his Horse; as we marched the Country came into us, one all hands both Horse and Foot, what Brittish were in it, so that by the time we came to Omagh, we were double the num∣ber we were when leaving Iniskilling; indeed we had but a small quantity of Powder, yet enough to have carried us to Derry, where we might have been plentifully supplyed; we lay that night within a mile of Omagh: The Enemy upon our approach, burnt all the Houses, upon or near the Road; next morning we marched into the Town, there being no Garrison save what lay in a House of Captain Marvins, at the end of the Town, the House was pretty strong, with a Banewall clear round it; we drew up our Foot in view, and within shot of the Enemies Fortification; our advance Guard of Foot, led by Captain Atchison, and Captain Galbreth, Pos∣sessed themselves of several Gardings, Ditches, and Walls of Houses that the Enemy had burnt, which lay near Captain Marvins House, so fired at the Walls; the Enemy fireing out very thick, both at them and the body of Foot that stood in view of them; there was a Trumpet sent down, with a Summons to Surrender the House; they sent back an An∣swer in Wrighting, that they knew no authority we had either to bear Arms, or Summon them; therefore they would defend that place, unless they see an order from King James to the contrary, and withal told the Trumpet to come no more with such Messages, else they would wellcome him with their Firelockes. This while some of our Horse scouting abroad, brought in five Prisoners, taken upon the Road leading from Don∣ganan to Omagh, who when examined told us that they be∣longed to the Lord Clankarty, who lay at Donganan the night
before, upon his march with two Regiments of Foot, one of Horse, and one of Dragoons, to reinforce the Camp be∣fore Derry, and that he would be at Omagh by three of the Clock in the afternoon. Its true we very well knew e're our coming abroad that Colonel Sarsfield lay in Sir William Gores Deer Park; and did not know but he might attack Iniskilling in our absence, but when the intelligence was given us, of the Lord Clankar∣ties approach, which was very true, there was a Counsel of War call'd, to se what was fit to be done; and finding that we had not one ounce of Provision for our selves, much less to relieve our Friends in Derry, there not being one Hoof driven along with us, by whose mistake I wont say; and that Clankarty coming in our Rear, we might precipitate our selves into the same Straights that Derry lay under, unless we could be assured of beating the whole Army that lay before it, and that immediately too, which we could not imagin our selves capable of performing, therefore upon these grounds it was thought more adviseable, to return to Iniskilling; but had we brought Provisions along with us to have put into Derry, and sustained our selves while our return, all the whole par∣ty were extreamly willing to have gone the length of Der∣ry with the Provisions, had there been any; and when Derry had been supplied, to have retreated the Mountain way, and shunned engaging King James's Army; but in place of that as I told you before we had not a Morsel for our selves, when we had marched but Eighteen miles, yet we had two and twenty more, e're we could come at Derry the nearest way; so we retreated meanly to Iniskilling, with∣out doing any thing, we might have burnt Omagh, but out of the value we had for Captain Marvin, the worthy Gen∣tleman that owed it; although it was a relief to the Ene∣my we forbore; but they burnt it to the ground, at their going off from the Seige of Derry, so it had been the same thing to Captain Marvin.
Our next Expedition was under our former conducter Col Lloyde, which proved more Successful, and Advantagious to us, as all his undertakings did, for the sixteenth of June, we received intelligence from Lieutenant Colonel Creighton out of Crum Castle; and Captain William Wishart (who at his own Charge, had Raised and Armed a brave Troop of Horse, and maintained them upon the Frontiers of our Country, during all our Troubles) that there was a powerful party of the Enemy, come the length of Belturbet, under whose Command they knew not, but did believe they would soon be with us; upon which intelligence, Lieutenant Colonel Lloyde, with what strength we could make, both Horse and Foot marched that very night, with a resolution of being in with the Enemy are they could have notice of our ap∣proach, but coming to Lisnaskey Ten miles from Iniskilling, that night and near half way to Belturbet, next morning was so great a Rain, continuing all day, that we could not possibly march, and keep our Armes dry; our Cloaths be∣ing but ordinary: The Eighteen, we marched very early up to Newtown Buttler, where we drew up, to allow the Men to eat something; upon our halt, intelligence was brought us by one Vitch who had come from Belturbet, that the party there was Commanded by one Brigadeer Sutherland, who he said had intelligence sent him of our march, very early the day before, and that we were Fourteen or Fifteen Thousand men; so that he was marched off with all speed towards Managhan, with most of his Men, and two peece of Canon, leaving a small party at Belturbet, for defence of that place; Lieutenant Colonel Lloyde upon this notice, called the Officers immediatly together, where it was proposed, whether we should strive to ingage Sutherland, or march directly to Bel∣turbet; but a Troop of Horse returning, that the Colonel had sent upon the gallop to discover the Enemy, and giv∣ing assurance that by that time, they would be near Manag∣han, sixteen miles from us, and that they marched very hard
and in great fear, having left some of their Buncarts and Carriages upon the Road, it was resolved to march directly to Belturbet. This Resolve was immediately put in practice, Captain Vaghan and Capt. Galbreth marched with their Dragoons as an advance Guard, the Horse followed; then Lieut. Mac Car∣mick with his Company, consisting of an hundred Men, as the Advance Guard of Foot, Major Wood's followed with eight pair of Colours, Capt. Francis Gore with fourteen pair, and in the Rear two Troops of Horse. The Dragoons when they came within something more than a mile of Belturbet, were beat back by the Enemies Dragoons who had lined the Hedges; but our Horse coming up, and our Dragoons alighting taking the inside of the Hedges, and our Horse the Lane, they soon drove them from thence, pursuing them all the way, killing some of them e're they got to Town: Then these Dragoons that were routed, together with what of their Men were in Town, got all into the Church and Church-yard, our Horse surrounding them at a distance to keep them in while the Foot would march up, who marched extream hard, having Express upon Express to hasten them, fearing least the Enemy should sally, and so escape into the Woods; but the Foot coming up, the Enemy fired very hot from the Church-yard; some of our men getting into the Town fired out of the Houses, and particularly from the Arch-bishop of Dublin's House, which was high over∣looking the Church-yard, from whence they wounded seve∣ral of the Enemy. The Lieutenant Colonel as soon as we were drawn up and ready to storm, sent a Trumpet with a Summons to surrender, and upon condition that their Lives should be saved, the Officers not stripped, and allowed to keep Ten Pounds of money a man (but they had not Ten Pounds amongst them all) they surrendered; Mr. Mac Car∣mick was then commanded to enter the Fort, which he did, disarming all the Officers, the private Souldiers grounding their Arms and marching clear of them, their Arms were
secured, themselves taken to the Bishop's House, in num∣ber about three hundred, where they were strip'd and kept Prisoners that Night; there was not a Bullet found about any of them, nor in their Arms, but what was chawed. The Officers, being sixteen in number, one Lieutenant Colo∣nel Scot, alias Albanagh, commanding in chief, were put into another House under a Guard. We got in this Expedition near seven hundred new Arms, (brought to arm a Regiment to be new raised) besides what the Souldiers had that were taken Prisoners, two large Barrels of Gun-powder, fifty three Horses with their Accoutrements, about twenty Tuns of Provision, viz. Bread, Flower, Wheat, Malt, and the like, which together with the Officers taken Prisoners, were sent by Water to Iniskilling, the private men by Land there were near two hundred turned off and allowed to escape together with the Women and Children, the rest were taken to Iniskilling, where for their meat they were made to work at the Fort we were then a building. The Arms and Powder here got did us a singular kind∣ness, both arming our men that wanted before, and adding to our number several that did no Duty for want of Arms, besides an additional store of Powder, which we had better Supplies of very suddenly after, and unexpectedly, on this manner. About the beginning of July we received a Letter from one Mr. Brown, Chaplain of the Bonadventure, a Frigot sent about from Lough Sully near Derry to Killibeggs, com∣manded by Captain Hobson, advising us that Major General Kirk was there with some Forces sent from England to supply that Garison with Provisions, and to raise that Siege if possible, therefore desired to know what condition we were in, or if we wanted any thing that he was capable of supplying us with, and desired that some of the Townsmen might be sent to give them assurance of our state; for it was then
confidently reported by the Irish Army, as it had been se∣verally times before, that Iniskilling vvas taken and all put to the Sword that was in it. I presume any man will believe this was the most ac∣ceptable News that ever we had in our Lives, hearing at last that England had us in their minds; for several times before in the night we assembled, making of Bonfires, and firing of Vollies, (which was more than we could well spair of Ammunition) and drinking King William and Queen Mary's Health; this did amuse the Enemy and per∣swaded them several times to believe the English were landed to our assistance. Upon the Receit of Mr. Brown's Letter Lieutenant Colonel Lloyde was sent to give Captain Hobson a particular account vvhat state and condition we vvere in, and with him some Troops and Companies of Foot to guard what Ammunition or Arms vve should receive. When our Officers vvent on board they were very kindly received and treated by Captain Hobson; and after giving him the state of our Affairs he sent us thirty barrels of Gun-powder, and some few Fire-locks, and assured Colonel Lloyde that we should be very soon relieved from England. A vvhile before this the Duke of Berwick, vvho kept a flying Army most of the time Derry was besieged, vvhich they vvere constrained to do fearing always that Iniskilling-men would fall in upon their Camp, marched over Barnsmore and came upon Dumigall early in the morning, the Garrison held out for us, and e're our men could be in a readiness, vvho were commanded by Captain Edward Johnston and Capt. Hugh Cudwell, a Son of Sir James Cudwell's, the Enemy was in the Town; our men were forced to betake them∣selves to the Castle, from vvhence they fired so briskly upon the Enemy, killing several of them, that they immediately retreated, burning the Town e're they went off, yet our men kept that Garrison during the vvhole Troubles.
About the fourth of June the Duke of Berwick vvith his flying Army, having joyned to him Brigadeer Sutherland with what forces he took off from Belturbet, all consisting of about six Regiments of Foot, four Regiments of Dragoons, and two of Horse came toward Iniskilling, we had intelligence of his approach, and marched out to meet him; but e're vve could come up, he retreated to Trillicke, burning Mr. Andrew Hamilton's House upon his Retreat. Mr. Hamilton perhaps did imagine that this hardship vvas shewn him for being in∣strumental in bringing off the Dragoon-Horses from Omagh before-mentioned: I could give the Reasons of his being so dealt by, and I do verily believe had they got him they would have put him to death; but he is now dead, and I carry a regard to his Reputation, therefore desire to be excused if I say no more. During the Dukes incamping at Trillicke, we kept strong Guards upon the Road, sometimes skirmishing with parties of his Men. But upon the thirteenth of July, he with his whole Party came on towards Iniskilling; before day in the morning our Scouts bringing certain intelligence of his approach, all got to Arms, the Governour getting on Horseback. Here I cannot but observe, that Mr. Andrew Hamilton in his Relation of this Passage, is either forgetful, or hath been misinformed, where he says that the Governour sent two Companies to a Pass near the Mill of Iniskilling, by which the Dukes Army must pass before they could come near the Town, and might have been easily defended by a few men; when in the mean time the Governour was getting the rest of his men together to second them, but the two Companies coming to the Mill and seeing no Enemy near, after some stay they advanced near a mile further than their Post, and coming to a hallow betwixt two Hills, were on a sudden surprized with the whole Body of the Enemies Horse and Dragoons coming upon them.
These are Mr. Hamilton's words, I am sorry he should have been so misinformed, for when this Ingagement was, (there∣fore not an Eye-witnesh, nor Actor in it) he was in the Lough of Derry, as will appear hereafter. But now to the Truth of the Action, which was thus: As I said before, We having the Assurance of the Enemies Approach, by our Scouts, we betook our selves to Arms; the Governour being on Horse-back, came to L. Mat-Carmick, he having the Company under his Command drawn up in the Street earlier than others were got to Arms, and desired the Lieutenant that he would immediately march his Company and make good Corngrad-House; this House stands upon a Hill within a quarter of a Mile of the Town, near to the Rode the Enemy were to march, being but a thatched House, and no way tonable, altho invironed with a Bane Wall, save the side the House stood on; but no Port-holes for the Men to fire out at, and too high by much to fire over, so that we could not possibly annoy the Enemy out of it; and they with the firing one Pistol might set the House on fire, the whole Court being full of Thatch and Straw, the Men could not escape being burnt alive: He therefore retreated to the Mill of Inniskillin, (without Command) being a very strait Pass, and under the Cannon-shot from the Fort, there posted him∣self and his Men. The Governour a while after, came up with two Troops of Horse, and 30 Foot of Capt. Hudson's Company; the Horse commanded by Capt. Hugh Montgo∣mery, and Capt. Francis King; the 30 Foot by Lieut. Robert Starlin, and Ensign Williams: The Governour called L. Mac∣Carmick, and taking him by the Hand, desired that he would join Lieut. Starlin, and lead on the Foot as far as the Hedg led upon the left Hand of the High-way towards the Enemy, telling him, that these two Troops were going to Charge. The Lieutenant replied, that the Foot were too small a Party, being in all but 102 Men, whereof the third part were Pikes, which signified nothing to the Lining of the Hedg, and that he had no great Confidence in the Horse,
but did believe they would desert him if engaged. The Go∣vernour swore he would warrant the Horse not fly one foot, and that he would send a powerful Party of Foot should be there as soon as they. The Lieutenant answered, that he would go every step as far as commanded, if he died; but desired the Governour to mind his Promise in sending a spee∣dy Supply of Foot, so marched on the Men: He meeting one Lieut. Campbel on Horse-back, who told him, the Enemy were at Hand: He desired him to post after the Governour, and mind him to send more Foot. And again, meeting Capt. Webster on Horse-back, who had been viewing the Enemy, he prevailed with him to ride hard after the Governour, and mind him of his Promise in sending more Men. When Lieut. Campbel got up to the Governour, he was got into the Town, forgetting or neglecting to send away Reinforcement, altho all the way as he went was full of armed Men, and more in the Fort than it could well contain; Lieut. Campbel telling him, that Mac-Carmick was close upon the Enemy, and must immediately Ingage: His Answer was, Let them Ingage, he would send Boats to bring them off; and when Capt. Web∣ster came up to him, he was got into the Castle of Inniskillin; he putting him in mind of his Promise of sending speedy Supplies, the Governour bid Webster to go and command one Capt. Henry Smith, who was marching his Company to Por∣sorah-Castle, upon the other side of the Lough, above two miles from us, to march back again to our Relief; I say, our Relief, because I was in the Action, and had reason to know every Circumstance of it: And whereas Mr. Hamilton says, the Foot were surprized in a Bottom betwixt two Hills, with the whole Body of the Enemies Horse and Dragoons, it is a great mistake, for we were upon a Hill in full view of the Enemy, and saw every step they made towards us; so that there was no surprize, neither did their whole Body move, only 600 Dragoons on Foot, and two Troops of Horse; when they came up, we fired upon them so hotly, killing se∣veral of them, that the Dragoons turned their Backs and fled,
leaving their Colonel, viz. Lutterell, behind them: Then our Horse, without firing one Shot, as if they had designed to invite the Enemy to a second Charge upon the Foot, ran clear away to give them the better opportunity: Which Lut∣terell seeing, called out aloud, They run, they run; their Horse are fled. The Dragoons facing about, and seeing our Horse fled, came on again, where we had a sharp Engage∣ment; but two Troops of their Horse charging up, and sur∣rounding us, we were cut to pieces. We lost in this Action Ensign Williams, with above fifty private Men; Capt. Ful∣ton, Lieut. Mac-Carmick, (who had his eldest Son killed by his side) Ensign Picking, two Sergeants, and 20 private Men taken Prisoners, and carried along with the Enemy. Mr. Hamilton says, that by the time we were broke, the Governour was on his way to our Relief, which caused the Duke's suddain Retreat; whereas there was no such thing, for he ne'r came one step towards it, neither sent one Man; it was so far from that, he went, as I said before, strait to Inniskillin-Castle; and one Lieut. Fort, a Lieutenant of Horse, meeting him, told him there was a Party of Horse willing to go on to second us, if he would appoint who should Com∣mand them. The Governour's Answer was very peevish; Don't you see the Enemy before you? Can't you go and fight? Lieut. Fort replied, If that be your Answer, I'll fight none to day. Indeed Capt. Atkinson, and Capt. Robert Corry, with their Companies, when they heard us engaged, and see our Horse fly, came from the Fort, without Command, to our Relief; but were too late, for the Action was over, and the Enemy retreated before they could come up. Mr. Hamilton likewise says, That the two Companies go∣ing beyond their Post, was the cause of burning Capt. Cor∣ry's House, and several Houses about the Town; whereas all the Houses that were burnt near the Town, were burnt in our view e're the Ingagement, viz. Mr. Paul Danes the then Provost of our Town, and Mr. Lautournal's, and Capt. Cor∣ry's House was not burnt while three a Clock in the After∣noon,
by which time the Enemy were in their Camp nine Miles off. I admire that Mr. Hamilton speaks nothing of the two Troops that were to second the Foot going beyond their Posts; he says, they wheeled off without fighting. Now if they stood at this Pass at the Millen he speaks of, there was no need of their wheeling from thence, for the Millen was under the Cannon-shot from the Fort, and the Enemy never came within Cannon-shot of the Millen, nor so much as once in sight of it; if they went on with the Foot, sure if the Foot disobeyed Command, they did the like, which he mentions not; but perhaps their running away ex∣piated their Crime. Now by what has been said, You may see it was not any fault in these that were commanded to line the Hedge, (un∣less fighting bravely against an Enemy be a Fault) for they went not one Step further than they were commanded; and would have routed the Enemy, had the Horse but stood by and look'd at them; but in place of that, or doing as Men ought to do, they basely ran away; which encouraged the Enemy to come on again, after they were once put to the Retreat. Mr. Hamilton likewise, says, That we were the only Prisoners that were taken, and received Quarter by any of the Irish Army, and not murdered after; which he attri∣bures wholly to the Governour's writing a threatning Let∣ter to the Duke, that he would be revenged on the Prisoners then in his hands, if they offered us any Violence. I know nothing of the Governour's writing any such Letter; but this I am sure of (although I do not speak this in favour of the Irish, for I hate them, and have as much Reason for it as any Man) that when I was taken Prisoner by one Burke a Captain of Horse, the same that had formerly taken Sir Thomas Suthwell and his Party Prisoners, he immediately brought me to the Duke of Berwick; where I told the Duke, that it was his fortune to get the better of our small Party that Morning, and that his Officers had been pleased to give
some of us Quarters, which I hoped he would confirm: he answered, We should have very good Quarters, and call'd out twice or thrice as loud as could, that no Man upon pain of Death, should touch a Prisoner, or take any thing that he had from him, and gave particular Orders to Capt. Burke, to command the Guard to have a particular Care of us: and I am sure this was before the Governour could write, or know that we were Prisoners. And while we were kept Prisoners, which was near three Weeks, (and had been there still for ought I know for all our Governour, had not Col. Woolsely released us) we were kindly dealt by, and well provided for; here is the truth of the whole Action: But we now found the want of Lieut. Col. Lloyd, our brave and vigilant Conducter, for had he been with us, who was now at Bal∣lishannon, we had undoubtedly routed the Duke and his Army to Derry Camp; for Col. Lloyd was a good Sort of Man, he was vigilant, careful, active, of a great Soul, ve∣ry observing, slipp'd no Opportunity that offered to gain his End; and besides, a Man of unwearied Industry, and good Intelligence, and for his Personal Valour; few went beyond him. Mr. Hamilton says, That the Duke next day after this Engagement, went to the Camp near Derry; whereas the Duke stirred not from Frillick next day; indeed upon Monday following, he marched as far as Omagh, upon Tuesday to Castlesin, upon Wednesday to a Deer-Park called Cavan, which is but three Miles from Castlesin, where he left his Horse and Foot; but he himself with a Party of Dragoons went upon Friday near to Lutterkeny, on Saturday to Rath∣mollan, where he had an Engagement with some of Maj. Gen. Kirk's Men, and was worsted; upon Sunday he re∣turned to the Park at Cavan, and there continued while the Siege of Derry rose; so that he never went near that Camp after leaving Inniskillin. This I certainly know, being Prisoner with him, and marched along upon foot to all these Places.
Soon after this Sir Gerrard Ervin joined with us, and headed our Horse in an Expedition against Col. Sarsfield, who had removed from Sir William Gore's Deer-Park, and lay encamp'd at a place called Bendruse, betwixt Ballishannon and Sligo upon the Sea-side, where he had posted himself so advantageously, and so well flanked with Cannon, that our Men could not move him; nor he durst not draw out to engage us, although many more in Number than we were; so we marched back to Inniskillin. We began now to understand, though we doubted Sir Gerrard Ervin in the beginning, that he had been no bad Friend to us, but rather had been a Means of hindring any of the Irish Army coming against Inniskillin while we recovered Strength, and were pretty able to cope with them; but the Methods he took for doing this caused our Suspi∣tion; for he wanting Arms and Ammunition in the begin∣ning, and likewise knowing it was our want also; he made application to the Government, who gave him compleat Arms and Accouterments for a hundred Horse, with A∣mmunition, believing he would have reduced Inniskillin to their Obedience; whereas his Resolution was, if he had got his Arms safe down, to have joined and declared himself publickly for us, but the County of Cavan Gentlemen, seized them upon the Road, and took them all from Sir Gerrard, so rendred him incapable of arming his Men, and appearing as he would; this was the cause of his so long lying quiet, yet he fortified his House very well in the beginning of our trouble; and when the Duke of Berwick came to encamp at Frillick, he demanded his House to have placed a Garison in it, which Sir Gerrard absolutely refused. After the Duke's going off from Frillick, he raised a good Troop of Horse, with which he marched to Dundalk Camp, doing good Service there under General Schonberg, and was in very much fa∣vour and esteem; but contracted a Fever before the raising of that Camp, and there died.
During Col. Lloyd's stay at Ballishannon, he sent Maj. Ri∣der, and Mr. Hamilton by Sea about to the Lough of Derry to satisfy Maj. Gen: Kirk what Condition Inniskillin was in, and to sollicit for Arms, Ammunition, and Commissions. When the Maj. Gen. knew how things were with us, he sent us Arms and Ammunition, Bullets and Match, with Commissions for a Regiment of Horse consisting of 16 Troops, a Regiment of Dragoons of 12 Troops, 3 Regi∣ments of Foot each consisting of 18 Companies, and some very good Men for our Officers, viz. William Woolsely Col. of Horse, and Commander in Chief; Will. Barry his Lieut. Colonel, and Charles Stone Major; James Winn Col. of Dragoons; and for the Foot, Col. Tiffany our Governour, and Col. Tho. Lloyd; for Aid Maj. General, Capt. Price; for Ingenier, Capt. H. Johnston. The Officers came by Sea to Ballishannon the 26th of July, from thence by Water to Inniskillin, where they landed the 28th to the great satis∣faction of all there; we having with a longing Desire many a time pray'd for the landing of the English, and now when we see some of them come to our Assistance and Relief, it may be judged how much overjoyed we were. But they were no sooner come, than they had Work cut out for them; for that very Night came an Express from Lieut. Col. Creighton, giving an Account that Lieut. Gen. Mackarty was with an Army come before Crume, there forming a Camp to besiege the Castle, and had brought Cannon with him to batter it: Next day came another Ex∣press, assuring us, that Lieut. Gen. Maskarty had made his Approaches very near the Castle, and play'd hard upon it with his Cannon. They therefore desired we would en∣deavour their Relief, with what speed we could; they having no Cannon in the Castle, only small-shot, with which they killed several of the Enemy. Col. Woolsely returned answer, That he would endeavour to relieve them upon Wednesday following; and immediately sent to Ballishannon for what of our Forces were there that
could be spared, who marched up to Inniskillin upon Tues∣day the 30th of July, 20 long Miles, and next Morning 15 Miles e're they fought the Enemy. Which was on this Manner; Lieut. Col. Barry was sent upon Tuesday to Lisnaskey, a Castle ten Miles from Inniskillin, and toward the Enemy, there to place a Garison if tenable, otherwise to burn it: but when he had viewed the Castle, he found it so out of order, that it was not fit to put a Garison in, neither could it signify much to the Enemy, so he left it without burning, and that Night lay Abroad with his Men; next Morning marched on two Miles further toward the Enemy, where his Scouts brought him Intelligence of the Enemies ap∣proach towards him: He not thinking it advisable to engage with so small a Party as he had with him, retreated towards Lisnaskey, but the Enemy prest so hard that they disordered several of our Men; and had not Lieut. Col. Barry several times faced about with a Troop or two of Horse, which al∣ways put the Enemy to a stand to draw up, they had certainly routed us to Inniskillin; but our Horse getting through a Ri∣ver below one Mrs. Lenard's, about a Mile from Lisnaskey, toward Inniskillin, at a very Boggy deep Pass; and Capt. Malcome Cashcart coming up with about 120 Foot: The Horse by the Industry and Persuasion of Capt. Martin Armstrong rallied; Capt. Cashcart came to the Officers of Horse, and promised that if they would stand by him, and not serve him and his Men as they had served Lieut. Mac-Carmick, he would beat back the Enemy; and if they would not stand by him, to deal plainly with him. The Officers of Horse protested that they would assist him, and not a Man of them would turn their Backs; upon which Capt. Cashcart places an Ambush of about 18 or 20 Firelocks in a Thicket of Bushes on the Ene∣mies Flank, as they must come on to charge, on the Enemies side of the River; commanding them not to fire a Shot while he, and they that were with him, first fired: then he ranked the remainder of his Men along the other Bank of the River,
as much in Covert as he could. The Enemy by this time were come up, and seeing our Horse Rally and draw up, and our Foot to make good the Pass, resolved to force it: To that purpose Col. Anthony Hamilton commanded a Regiment of Dragoons to alight; he led them on, firing very thick as they came on, while within forty Yards of the River; then Capt. Cathcart commanded his Men (who had not yet fired one shot) to fire; at which Volley they killed several of the Ene∣my, and wounded Col. Hamilton: then these in Ambush be∣ing close upon the Enemies Flank, fired, killing some of the Enemy. Hamilton being wounded, went off, sending another Officer to command the Dragoons; but Capt. Cathcart plied them so warmly with his Shot, that Officer being killed, the Dragoons were commanded to face to the Right-about, to draw them further out of our Shot: But as soon as they fa∣ced, they ran for it; our Horse and Foot immediately char∣ged through the River, which the Enemies Horse perceiving, fled likewise; we had the pursuit of them three miles, all which way the Road was filled with their dead Bodies. By this time there were fresh Recruits of the Enemy coming up; which our Men perceiving, being weary with so vigo∣rous a pursuit, retreated to the Mote of Lisnaskey, where they met Gol. Woolsely with the rest of our Forces. Col. Woolsely returning Thanks for that Morning's Work, which was a good Introduction to gaining the Battel in the Afternoon, immediatly assembled the Officers to consult what was farther fit to be done, telling, that their Resolves must be speedy, the Men that came along with him having made such haste up to the Relief of their Fellows, that scarce any of them had brought a Meal of Meat along with them, it was immediately concluded amongst the Officers, that it was fit to go on; and the Question put to the Souldiers, they unanimously cried out, to march and fight the Enemy, for in∣deed they had never been accustomed, when they saw an Enemy, to turn their Backs, save the ill-managed Business at Omagh, and the run-away Horse in the Ingagement with the
Duke of Berwick, which was occasioned by one Horse-Officer. Col. Woolsely finding the Men so willing to ingage the Ene∣my, immediately formed the Foot into three Battalions; the Right and Left Wings led by Col. Lloyd (who never yet had failed in any thing he attempted) and Col. Tiffon, a worthy Gentleman, and an excellent Souldier; the main Body he led himself; the Horse he ordered a Detachment for an Advance Guard, who marched on before at a little distance, some Troops to second the Right and Left Wings; and the main Body of Horse in the Rear, led on by the Lieut. Col. and Ma∣jor; the Dragoons divided in two Parties to assist the Flanks; so marched on towards Newtown-Butler. Lieut. Gen. Mac-Carty hearing of our Approach, drew off his Men and Cannon from Crum-Castle, near to a place called Newtown-Butler, betwixt it and Wattle-Bridg, where he po∣sted them very advantagiously; his Cannon in a Lane, facing a narrow Pass through a Bog, that not above one Horse could could come abreast; his Foot upon the Right and Left of the Lane, all under Covert, that not a Man of them could be seen save those that were about the Cannon; his Horse upon the Right of all, drawn up upon a Hill. When we had marched within half a mile of Newtown-Butler, we discovered some of the Enemy drawn up on a Hill before us; so that the Foot upon both Wings marched through a Bog to come in with the Enemy; the Horse were forced to keep the Causway, which was but narrow; and Col. Woolsely with the Body moved slowly on: The Enemy fired very hard, but before we came in shot of them, they re∣treated orderly: We advanced apace, having command not to break our Ranks. As the Enemy retreated through New∣town-Butler, (which they did very orderly, firing always in the Rear as they went off) they set the Town on fire, and so went to their main Body. When we marched up near them, our Pikes and Colours were left in a Body by them∣selves, being near a third part of our Number, and only the Fire-arms marched on as formerly, taking the Bog upon the
Right and Left Hand of the Road, the Horse not being able to advance, by reason of the narrowness of the Road, and the Enemies Cannon playing so hard upon them. When our Foot were advanced through the Bog, the Enemy fired ex∣tream thick upon our Men, notwithstanding we could not see a Man of them; but when we came close upon them, we fell a firing where we saw their Smoke rise, and soon was in with them, beating them out of their Covert, killing many of them; our Foot immediately seized their Cannon, where one lusty Man that formerly had belonged to my Lord King∣ston, finding one Fellow with a Hatchet, repairing somewhat about the Cannon, snatch'd the Hatchet out of his Hand, and laid so well about him, that in the twinkling of an Eye he killed seven or eight of those that were guarding the Cannon, some with the Edg of the Hatchet, and some with the Head of it; our Horse seeing their Cannon seized, charged eagerly through the Pass; which their Horse perceiving, wheeled off and fled amain towards Wattle-Bridg; their Foot betook them∣selves to the Bogs, most of them throwing away their Arms; our Horse pursued the Enemies near Cavan, which is about ten miles from the Place of Battel; but the way being so narrow, leading through very great Bogs, they could do the Enemy little Prejudice; but what they did not do, our Foot made up, for they were as good of Foot as the Enemy, slaying abundance of them in the pursuit; and many took the Lough and were drowned, for they took the Water in se∣veral parts, especially near Wattle-Bridg, where six or seven hundred of them in a Body thought to have escaped: but our Horse having left a good Guard to prevent their escaping that way, the Enemy drew up in order in a Meadow near the Bridg, and marched briskly towards the Horse as if they de∣signed to force their Passage over; but some of our Foot com∣ing up, and our Horse charging down upon them, they, with∣out firing, (many of them having thrown away their Arms before) all in a Body took the Water together, where they every Man died save one that swam through. Their Lieu∣tenant-General,
after their Cannon was seized, and one Capt. George Cooper with a Party of Firelocks left to guard them, charged in upon the Cannon, with a small Party of Horse with him, but our Men soon brought him down, killing his Horse; but by the goodness of his Armour he escaped, having received several Shots, some whereof upon his Armour, one through the right Thigh, one in at his left Loin, through the lower part of the Back-bone, and out at the right Thigh, and one in the Groin, which would certainly have killed him had it not been for his Watch, which the Bullet beat all to pieces; and the Wheels of the Watch cut the Bullet into many parts, whereof one entred his Groin a little; so had Quarter given him, and the others that were with him. Our Men followed the Pursuit all that Night, and till near ten of the Clock next Day; by which time they had scarce left any alive that fled towards the Lough. Upon their return, they gleaned up several amongst the Bushes that they gave Quarter to. Lieut. Gen. Mac-Carty, and some of the Officers, were sent to Inniskillin by Water, the other Prisoners by Land, to the number of 300 and odd. Their whole Party was reputed to consist of 6000 Men, and these the Choice of the Irish in that Kingdom, & the best fitted-out Army with all things necessary; but we could never learn that 2000 of them got off. We took seven Cannon, 12 or 13 Barrels of Powder, all their Colours, Drums, and abundance of Arms, with the Pillage of their whole Camp, and several Carts and Waggons. When their General was taken, altho he had no Money in his Pockets, there was a Letter found in them writ from Col. Sarsfield, two or three days before, acquainting, that he lay near Inniskillin, attending his Lordship's Motion; that if his Lordship and the Duke of Berwick, would attaque Inniskilling on the East, he with those under his Command, were ready to attaque it on the West. But here you see, that by the great and never-fail∣ing Mercy and Providence of God, we were delivered from them, and they prevented of their Design, and received from a handful of Men, not without a Miracle, that which they
came with a Resolution to give others. Our Loss being so small in this Action, that we had but one Capt. Corry lost, and he supposed to be killed by his own Men; and one Cornet Bell, with not half a score private Men, and very few wounded. This Action gave the greatest blow to the Irish that ever they had met with, for their whole Dependance was in a manner upon this Part of their Army, being so brave Men, so well fitted in every thing necessary, (save Courage) and having so excellent a General as they looked upon Lieut. Gen. Mac-Carty to be. Next day we returned to Inniskillin, where Lieut. Gen. Mac-Carty desired to have liberty of sending to K. James, to acquaint him vvhat Condition he was in; which was gran∣ted him. The King sent one Dr. Connor a Physician, and Mr. Huben a Chyrurgeon, to attend him, vvith Money, Wines, and other Necessaries fit for one in his Circumstan∣ces, also Monies to the other Officers taken with him. Upon Friday the second of August, we marched towards Ballishannon, with a Resolution to Ingage Col. Sarsfield who lay still at Bandruse upon the Sea-side: But as we marched, we met an Express sent by Capt. Folliot, giving an Ac∣count, that Col. Sarsfield hearing of Lieut. Gen. Mac-Car∣ty's Defeat, had raised his Camp and retreated to Sligo; al∣so telling us, that the Arms and Ammunition sent by Maj. Gen. Kirk, were landed at Ballishannon. Upon this Col. Tiffon, and Lieut. Col. Gore, with a Party of Horse and Foot, were sent to Ballishannon, to secure that Place in case Sarsfield should return and attempt any thing against it: As also to take care in transmitting the Arms & Ammunition to Innis∣killin: The rest of our Men marched back to Inniskillin, where the certainty of the Irish Army marching from Der∣ry, and burning the whole Country as they went off, was as∣sured them; for our Men that were taken and kept Prisoners by the Duke of Berwick, being now by Col. Woolsely exchan∣ged, returned Home, who had seen the Irish Army march off.
Col. Woolsely upon this Intelligence sent a Troop of Horse, under the Command of Lieut. William Charlton, to observe the Enemies Motion in their March, fearing lest they might make Incursion into our Countrey; but he going as far as Castle-Caulfield, saw the Rear of their Army pass that Place, which is within seven Miles of Charlemont, near 30 from us, so re∣turned and gave that Account. We now having Quiet on all Hands from the Attempts of our watchful Enemies, set a Day apart, as it was our Duty, to return Thanks to the great God of Heaven, who had manife∣sted his Power in our Weakness, and so miraculously delivered us, beyond all Human Probability, being but a handful, out of the Hands and Power of our numerous and merciless Ene∣mies, &c. After this Maj. General Kirk sent to Col. Woolsely for 500 Horse and 200 Dragoons, for the more safe marching the Foot, under his Command to join D. Schonberg, who was landed at Carickfergus; and desired likewise that our Men should take 200 of the Irish Prisoners down to Derry to assist the poor People there in cleansing the Town, and emptying the Store-ships. Our Horse and Dragoons marched down ac∣cording to the Maj. General's Order, taking the 200 Pri∣soners with them. Upon our Mens arrival, the Maj. General march'd to join the Duke by the way of Colraine, and came to Carickfergus without any Opposition. Col. Sarsfield after his leaving Bandruse, stayed not long at Sligo; for Col. Tiffany resolving to have him out of that, not liking his Neighbourhood, sends Lieut. Col. Gore with a Party of Horse and Foot to scour the Country as near Sligo as they could, and if possible, to discover what Strength Sarsfield might be of, and how posted. Lieut. Col. Gore upon his march, takes an Irish-man Prisoner, who he set at liberty again, designedly to amuse the Enemy, telling him that all the Forces that Maj. Gen. Kirk had brought out of England together with Derry and Inniskillin Men, were marching to fall in upon Sligo: This so alarm'd the Country
that they all ran with their Cattle to Roscommon, Galloway, or Athlone, and the Army under Sarsfield did the like, taking little or nothing with them. Sarsfield being forced to follow, so Lieut. Col. Gore march'd into Sligo without Opposition, getting there several of the Enemies Cannon, and other things they had left behind. In September, D. Schonberg commands Col. Woolsely with all the Horse belonging to Inniskillin (Col. Lloyd's Troop ex∣cepted) Col. Winn's Dragoons, Col. Lloyd's, and Col. Tif∣fany's Regiments of Foot, immediately to march to Dundalk Camp, which they did: Col. Woolsely first sending Col. Lloyd with his own Troop of Horse, and six Companies of Foot of Col. Hamilton's Regiment, with some of Sir Albert Cun∣ningham's Dragoons to Sligo, for the Defence of that Place. Col. Lloyd had not been long there, e're he received Intelli∣gence that the Enemy were drawing to a Body at Abby Boyle, a Town belonging to my Lord Kingston, and as it was his na∣tural Inclination never to be idle, he resolves to give them a Visit, and if possible to prevent their getting to a Head; he to that purpose marched what Force he had from Sligo by Killowney, so to Ballinafad, and over the Curlues, with as much privacy as he could, marching in the Night, and falling down near Boyle in the Morning early, where he thought to have surprized the Town: but in the place of that he found the Enemy both Horse and Foot drawn up in very good Order to receive him, and far exceeding his Number; he was not long e're he with his accustomed Fortitude engaged them, and as soon put them to the Rout, killing about 300 of their Foot, and several of their Horse, who he had the Pursuit of near to Roscommon. Upon this Victory he march'd immediately to James-town, where the Enemy had a Garison, and took it; together with Col. Mac-Donnel's House, a strong House cal∣led Drumsnaw, near to James town: Here he got a vast Prey of black Cattle, Sheep and Horses, with all the Growth of the Country. Col. Lloyd upon this sends an Express, and ac∣quaints D. Schonberg of his gaining so great a Part of the
Country, and desires to know what to do, he having no Men to Garison these Places he had taken: The Duke sends him a positive Command not to lose one Foot of Ground, and that he should be soon supplyed with what he wanted. Col. Lloyd, in obedience to the Duke's Command, was forced to divide his Men to Garison James-Town, Drumsnaw, and Abby Boyle, going himself to Sligo; sending several times to Innis∣killin for Ammunition, but none being sent him, and the Duke not sending Supplies early enough, our Men a while after (being divided in so small Parties, and not capable of getting together) were beaten from all these Places by the Irish; our loss of Men I confess was not great, yet we lost one Lieut. Casbcart, and Capt. Wiere, commonly called Leird Wiere, a valiant brave Fellow; and indeed his loss was much lamented, for we had not a more forward Man amongst us. The Duke after sent a Detachment of Horse, together with Col. Winn's Dragoons, and some. Foot and Granadiers, under the Command of Coll. Russel to reinforce Sligo; but Col. Sarafield making as good haste back as he had made away, came up to Sligo ee the Party sent by the Duke was able to get that length: Col. Russel who had Authority to Command in Chief at Sligo, with some few came in there late, the Night e're Sarsfield came; our Men drew out in the Morning to meet him, what of them were there, but they being so small a Number, and wanting Ammunition, Sarsfield with an overpowring Party, being at least ten to one, fell in with them, and beat them back into Town. Our Horse were forced to retreat to Ballishannon, our Foot got into the Fort of Sligo, Maj. Woodes having saved a small Cask of Powder for the last Extremity, which he brought into the Fort with him; they held out three Days, killing abundance of the Enemy, sallying out, and bringing in Provisions for themselves by Force, while at last they had what Conditions desired; then they surrendred, marching out with Drums beating, Colours flying, Arms loaded, light Matches, and every Man took along with him what he had; Col. Sarsfield treated the Offi∣cers very kindly with a Dinner, performing his Articles fully, so sent them safe to Ballishannon, and here ended the Actions of Inniskillin-men. I know I might have enlarged this Discourse in several Places, and upon several Occasions, but here you have a Brief of all that happen∣ed, with a great deal of Sincerity and Truth. FINIS.
