M2034 14507444 102432
MYSTERIES IN RELIGION VINDICATED: OR The Filiation, Deity and Satisfaction of our Saviour asserted, against Socinians and Others. With Occasional Reflections on several late Pamphlets. By LƲKE MILBOƲRNE, a Presbyter of the Church of England. , Barnab. Ep. , Tatianus contra Gentes. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in S. Paul's Church-Yard, 1692.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON, Dean of the Chappel Royal, and one of the Lords of their Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. MY LORD, I Pretend not to do Honour to Your Sacred Character by the little Ad∣dress of an obscure Writer, but by representing Your Lordship to the World as treading in the glorious steps of antient Saints, Martyrs and Bishops, Your great Predecessors in the Govern∣ment of the Church of God. When busie Ignorants are doing their Fathers Work, and scattering their Tares among the good Seed of Evange∣lical
Truth, it's time for those in Your Lordship's station not only to Counte∣nance those who oppose encroaching Error, but to scatter these Midnight Workers with a just severity, and to frown effectually on such as the most condescending Laws have thought fit to exclude from any interest in them. That Your Lordship's Sentiments are agreeable to Mine, I conclude from Your declar'd Willingness to accept so small a Present; yet small as it is, it's offer'd with the greatest Affection to our Holy Mother the establish'd Church of England, which that it may recover it's pristine Lustre in spite of all the ma∣lignant influences of Heresie or Schism, and Your Lordship live long as its Zea∣lous Supporter, is the hearty Prayer of, MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble, Faithful, and Obedient Servant, LƲKE MILBOƲRNE.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Christian Reader, IF any wonder the subsequent Discourse should be so near the Form of Sermons, and tho' large should little answer its own Title, let him know that the Author's circumstances would allow him to reduce it to no better Method, and were enough to discou∣rage him from any Ʋndertaking either useful∣ly close or laborious. If making Brick without Straw, labouring hard without so much as the Reward of a com∣petent Livelihood among a People not over∣fond of Learning, might make his Intellectuals move like the Egyptian Chariots with their Wheels off, very slow and heavily, none but those who are lazy, ignorant or better provided for can wonder at him. But whatever measure He has had, He knew himself
Originally dedicated to the Ser∣vice
of the Church of God; that however his Hearers might be careless or ignorant of their own Good, he was still their Watchman, to give notice carefully of approaching Dangers, and to make use of those Talents God had en∣trusted Him with to prevent Superstition, false Doctrines and Heresies from over-run∣ning His Congregation. This sence of Duty made him vigorously op∣pose the Ingress of Popery in the last Reign, it made Him too contribute his Handful of Wa∣ter to quench the growing flames, and freely to expose himself to the Anger of an unhappily Bigotted Prince, and the impotent disgusts of hot-headed Renegadoes from the Church of England. This made him as jealous of that impudent Pamphlet assuming the Title of the Naked Gospel, which finding very busily scattered abroad, he designed it a particular Answer: when a very Reverend Prelate of our Church— —Cujus Nomen—semper acerbum, Semper Honoratum, sic Dii voluistis ha∣bebit— giving him notice of Dr. Sher∣lock's excellent Performance, and Dr. Jane's Promise with a peculiar respect to that Pam∣phlet, He stopt his Pen, as judging Himself too mean a Second for so learned and able Ʋn∣dertakers.
But the News of increasing Socinianism and a clear apprehension of the Pestilent and Ir∣rational Nature of that Heresie made Him cast his thoughts that way again: and since it would  be Pushing out, He believed his Pains could not be ill spent in Exposing what the Wisdom of the Nation thought fit to except from their too much abus'd Indulgence. He thinks too many Hands cannot be em∣ployed in so necessary a Service, and since our Ʋnitarian Zealots by their numerous Pam∣phlets are opening the Way, in Conjunction with other Sects, for Atheism and Irreligion, and so many Beaux Esprits, the would-be Wits of the Age, try to cloak Atheism under the Pre∣tence of asserting The Rational Religion, He should think himself very guilty, were He silent when He had any thing to say against them. The Refutation of these daring Errors is said to be Ʋndertaken by several of the Reve∣rend London Clergy, Men doubtless of suffi∣cient abilities to baffle a thousand such little Whifflers in Reason as We are now pestered with: But while they delay the Work too long, the Author of this will think it happily publish'd if it serve only to excite their pious Zeal, and oblige Them to make up the Defects of this by their more accurate and Learned Arguments. It has affixed no small scandal upon some otherwise Venerable Names that they have made their Converse too cheap to the bold Spreader of Socinian Papers, and while He takes Courage to break Laws under Covert of their Patronage, They can no way better vin∣dicate the Church of God or their own Repu∣tations, or repress Impudent Ignorance, than
by a vigorous and speedy opposition to his Per∣nicious Endeavours. As for his own Performance in the follow∣ing sheets, the Author has endeavoured to give its due force to a Text He thinks very plain for the eternal Deity of our Saviour, and to expose Socinian Criticism on that and other places of Scripture, and has laid open some of those pitiful Artifices they make use of to per∣vert the Word of God. He has essayed to set Humane Reason in its true Light, to give it its just Weight in Re∣ligious Matters, to shew the influence Divine Revelation ought to have upon it, and yet after All, He believes not that any Divine Revela∣tion does or can supersede any truly Rational Principle. Many are taken up as such, which yet in∣validate themselves by that Opposition they meet with from Others of as Acute Parts as those who first vend Them, only such wherein all Discursive Souls agree can properly be called True Principles of Reason, and these too are only such in the particular Parts of Knowledge to which they belong, an Euclidean Demonstration can have no Place in Metaphy∣sicks, Nor can the Assertion of a Trinity prove the impossibility of squaring a Circle. Weak Eyes are ill Judges of the various Mo∣difications of Light, and Deaf Ears of the delicate Harmony of Sounds: Reason in the Soul may meet with as many Obstructions from the different Organization of that Body in
which the Soul acts; and however large the Minds of Socinus, Crellius, or his present Nephew may be, T. F's Capacity must be very well tenter'd e'er it can comprehend all their Niceties, or see clear Reason confirming every one of their ill-connected Heterodoxies. Tho' the incomparable Bishop of Worcester has managed that Subject, as He uses to do All, with the greatest Clearness and Learning, this Author too had endeavoured to prove My∣steries not unreasonable in Religious Mat∣ters, and it being done before the preaching of that Great Man's Sermon, He was unwil∣ling to Expunge it: The Author thinks He too has proved in some Measure that there may be a God, tho' We cannot comprehend Him, that there may be such a thing as Religion, tho' God should be somewhat Wiser than Men, and that, though Ignorance be no Mother of true Devotion, yet Men of improved Ʋnder∣standing may meet with some Religious Mat∣ters above their reach, and that it is pos∣sible, the more a modest Man knows, the more truly sensible He may be of his own Ig∣norance. He has proved Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, the manner of his Filiation is debated out of its proper place, and indeed was not de∣signed at all, had not some Anonymous Pam∣phleteers given occasion for it, who coming to his Hand after the former part was finished, He was obliged either to croud it in elsewhere, or else to omit it altogether.
The Argument inserted to prove Scripture the Word of God to those who acknowledge such a Being is indeed a , yet He hopes not wholly useless, We have too many pretended Christians who doubt it, and He justly questions whether Socinus's Discourses De Authoritate SS. Scripturae, or such like are sufficient Proof that He thought the Books of the Old and New Testament were written by Inspiration. Whatever He did, his Atheistical Confe∣derates own their suspitions, but veil their madness under a more plausible Name, and this Author can scarce distinguish between an Uni∣tarian and a Deist; if our sparkish Wits, or Gentile Haberdashers of Paradoxies, or Fop Despisers of the Tribe of Levi will but stand to that Deism they Profess, the following Discourse may afford them somewhat of Rea∣son to believe the Book known by that Name is really the Word of God. From that Disquisition the Author enters more directly on the proof of our Saviour's Di∣vinity, and shews what He ought to have been, and therefore what He was. He's apt to think several Writers Antient and Modern have drawn some Texts into the Service imperti∣nent enough and quite beside their Original sence; but believes He has named some, and could have added more, which unless we re∣nounce understanding mens Minds by their Expressions, must prove that our Redeemer was true, was perfect God.
Those of the Roman Communion have not more tricks and wretched subterfuges from clear Texts and rational Arguments urged a∣gainst Transubstantiation or Idolatry, than our Unitarians make use of to elude plain Assertions, and the common Notions of the Antient Jewish and Christian Churches. If the Old Testament afford good Evi∣dence in the case, the New does so much more; And the Evangelists and Apostles were a company of Trapans and ill designing Men to tell us stories of Christ's Words and Actions which should make us believe Wonders of Him and conclude Him a partaker Essentially of the divine Nature, when He was really no more than a meer Man, moved but in a com∣mon sphere, lived Innocent by the infused activity of Divine Grace, and without that Influence ab Extra might have sinned and in∣curred Damnation as well as others. What He himself did in his Own, and what his Apostles did in His Name, was of so tran∣scendent a Nature, that should the same things be done now by any other Person, or in his Name, the World would in spite of all the Uni∣tarian Arguments conclude such a Person True and Real God: We see the Lycaonians for one Miracles sake were so possest with the Di∣vinity of Paul and Barnabas, that a Socinus or a Crellius, with all their pretty Pleas to that purpose, might have met with Pentheus's fate among them, and have dyed the Martyrs of unplausible Sophistry.
The Author has given a short account of the Primitive Faith in the Point under de∣bate, and nothing but extreme Ignorance could make any of our Unitarians pretend to true Antiquity for his fancy. Our late Putney Convert indeed could find Transubstantia∣tion among the Rabbins, and our great Ra∣tionalists have sometimes dream'd of proving our Saviour's meer Humanity by the suffra∣ges of the glorious Anti-Nicene Fathers. It was not his Happiness to have read Mr. Bull when he wrote this, nor indeed had He, living in an obscure quarter of the World, at that time heard of that learned work; Dr. Whitby's came out since it was finished; if this weak Attempt give any farther Light to any thing, or has touched on what was prae∣termitted by their greater Industry, it may add somewhat to the Tale, and Socinian ill-ground∣ed Confidence may begin to shine with the more notorious Lustre. He has insisted more largely on the General Practice of Praying to our Saviour and make∣ing Him the Ultimate Object of our Reli∣gious Adorations, and thinks he has demon∣strated the impossibility of defending that pra∣ctice on the supposition that our Saviour is no more than a meer Man, the Notion of a made God ridicules it self, and no Contest fairer or more diverting can be set on foot than between an honest zealous Papist and a Socinian Reason-Monger concerning the Obligation of the first and second Commandment.
That particular end of our Saviour's Incar∣nation, viz. That He might destroy the works of the Devil, is perhaps no inconside∣rable Evidence of his Superiority both to Angels and Men, The debate concerning the Abrogation of the Jewish Law evinces the same Truth, and by the common tracks of Sence and Reason, which the Socinians pretend to appeal to, leads us to understand the necessity of our Saviour's being True and Eternal God as well as True Man, an inferiour Person could not have consummated the Types, nor could a meer Man, however alledging a Di∣vine Commission, have repealed what Almighty God himself had setled and commanded under the most terrible Penalties in the World. In conclusion, the Author proves the Ne∣cessity of our Lord's giving satisfaction to his Father's Justice for the sins of mankind, and is Himself so fully convinced of it, that He takes it for granted Those who reject it, either take Salvation in general for a fond Chimerical Whimsey, or would obtrude upon us some new and uncouth Idea of the Divine Nature, or think Mankind capable of Per∣fection in this Life and meriting Salvation for themselves by their own supererogatory Sanctity. He generally turns their own Evi∣dences against themselves, and imagines He has no where misrepresented their Sentiments in the things under debate between Christians and Ʋnitarians.
He has, as Occasion offered, touch'd upon some Anonymous Pamphlets of the late As∣serters of Socinian and Arian Paradoxes; it was not worth his while to pursue them , there is little in them but the twice boil'd Crambe of the Racovian Club, commonly worse drest than in the Originals: nothing but Sophistry and Confidence runs through them; the Conscience of which made them employ a pert smatterer in Ignorance as their Hawker to disperse their new fangled Theo∣logy about the Countrey, as if it were fit one employed so much in the dispose of Publick Cha∣rity should, to keep the Ballance even between Heaven and Hell, while he supports their Bo∣dies, pervert and poyson the Souls of the im∣pertinently curious, unthinking and injudici∣ous part of Mankind. If they have offered any new Reasons in defence of Errors, Apparent rarae nantes in gurgite vasto, it's almost lost labour to hunt for them, and the Quarry scarce worth stooping for when found. It may be some may think those things considerable which He has reflected upon, if so, it's what He wished for, presuming his Reflections might pass for a sufficient Refu∣tation; at least He hopes He has placed some things in so fair a Light, that others may the more easily baffle their Novelties and secure the Foundations of our Christian Profession from the insolent attacks of Libertinism and pre∣vailing Heresie.
If what the Author has done may be any way acceptable to the Pious and Learned World, it will encourage Him to proceed far∣ther, and in due time to vindicate every Ar∣ticle of our Faith from the Insults of Soci∣nians and Atheists, and to offer them some∣what else wherein the Church of England is immediately concerned, and which He hopes will do her no disservice, however drooping her present Looks may be; Otherwise He begs Pardon for what He has done already, and will for the Future either Write better, or leave that Work to those who are better able to de∣fend the Cause. If He has offered any thing New or Solid in vindication of our Antient Faith, it will tend extremely to his Satisfaction. If He have err'd in any Matter of weight, He begs his Holy Mother's Pardon, to the Censure of whose Lawful Governours He humbly submits All He has written, and can conclude his Preface with nothing more apposite than that Petition of our Sacred Mother in her Litany, From all false Doctrine, Heresie and Schism, from Hardness of Heart and Contempt of thy Word and Commandment, Good Lord, deliver us.
IMPRIMATUR. Guil. Lancaster R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Lond. à Sacris Domesticis. Octob. 17. 1691.
1 Tim. 3.16. And without controversie, great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh. IT'S our business and design for the se∣curing of those, who shall read this discourse, from damnable Errors: for the glory of the eternal Son of God, whose Divinity we find boldly impeach'd and blasphemously deny'd by a pestilent crew of subtle and insinuating Hereticks: for the confirmation of that Faith in Christ which we profess, and in which we hope to dye: to encounter several of those Ar∣guments thro' God's assistance, which those enemies of Christianity assault the World with. To which end, it will be absolutely necessary to clear the sense of these words from those artificial clouds which some have endeavour'd to obscure them with, and here we find the Socinians not so much disputing about the meaning of the first as∣sertion, without controversie great is the my∣stery of godliness; as about the connexion of these words with the particulars follow∣ing. For if they can prove that the Incar∣nation of the Son of God is no part or mem∣ber
of our Faith, or no mystery of our Reli∣gion, they deprive us of one of the best and plainest Texts of Scripture for the main∣taining of his Divinity. Again, if they can so bafflle all mysteries in Religion, that no∣thing must be regarded but what can easily be comprehended by weak and corrupted reason, our holy Religion stands upon a lower ground than the wretched Systems of Pagan Divinity; and God must stand reprov'd him∣self, if he speak any thing by inspired Pro∣phets, which the meanest person cannot fully and clearly understand. In our entrance therefore on our intended discourse, we must first remove these difficulties before we speak to the particulars. And here we cannot but take notice that the Socinians generally profess abundance of respect for the Scriptures, and seem to take a great deal of pains to assert their authori∣ty; and it is upon the pretendedly genuine explication of that Word of God they build those Heretical Opinions, with which they disturb the Church. Socinus makes it a strange thing that any man professing Chri∣stianity should make any doubt of the au∣thority of the books of the Old and New Testament,Vid. Socin. de author. Scrip. op. v.
1. p. 265. especially the last, since the Writers of it were men of reputation and exactly acquainted with those things they writ about; since the Writers were very well known, since the books themselves are not corrupted or depraved, and because  there are no full or clear testimonies to be found that those books deserve not that cre∣dit we commonly give them.Catech. Sect. 1. c. 2. The Racovian Catechism asserts the sufficiency of Scripture to make men wise to Salvation.
Eousque sunt sufficientia ut in rebus ad salutem neces∣sariis iis solis acquiescendum est, they are so sufficient to that great end, that we ought to depend upon them only in matters of Salva∣tion. And for their assertion they add this among other reasons, That it was not likely in so large a book, and where so few things were absolutely necessary to Salva∣tion,Ibid. those very few things should not be fully laid down; or that in a book where God had ordered so many things unnecessa∣ry, he should have forgotten any thing that was absolutely necessary to Salvation: And farther they avouch the integrity of Scri∣pture, that those holy Books are not cor∣rupted or alter'd, and that principally be∣cause they say it's inconsistent with God's Providence and goodness to permit those writings in which he had declared himself and manifested his Will, and shewed the way to eternal Salvation, and which as such were immediately received and approved by all good men, to permit such Writings to be any way corrupted: besides that there were so many Copies of those Books transcribed at first, in places so far distant one from another, and they were translated into so many several languages presently,  that if any corruption or alteration had been attempted,Ibid. c. 1. it had been impossible they should all have conspired in the same read∣ing: and therefore we may observe where the least change has been made, the Copies disagree. In this observation we close with them, and by their own rule the better answer their cavil with this Text. For they tell us that some Copies read this Text not as we do, , God was manifest in the flesh, but which was manifest in the flesh, with∣out any mention of God at all. Erasmus was the first in this observation, Grotius follows him and tells us  God is wanting in the vulgar Latin,Grot. in loc. the Syriac and Arabic tran∣slations, and that St. Ambrose takes no notice of it, and that Hincmare Bishop of Rhemes says it was foisted into the Text by the Nestorians. Curcellaeus tells us the same, and of an old Greek Copy mentioned by Mo∣rinus, wherein part of the word was writ∣ten by a later hand. This Critical observa∣tion the Socinians with one consent lay hold on, by that means endeavouring to avoid so plain a Text for the Divinity of the Son of God. So Volkelius tells us plainly that our Text is one of those Scriptures,Volkel de d elig. Edit Am l.
5. p. 462. c. 1. quas ad errorem suum stabiliendum detorquent adversarii, which those who believe Christ to be God wrest to the maintenance of their own error, for the name of God is not in all the Greek Copies, as may be seen by the  vulgar Latin and Syriac Versions, but all the following particulars are to be referr'd to the Mystery of Godliness mentioned be∣fore, which mystery of Godliness was ma∣nifested in the flesh: and this Grotius before cited on the place, takes to be very good sence. Crellius on this place observes the same thing, yet owns Quod Graeci constan∣ter pro ö legunt Θεὸς, that the Greeks, whose the Original is, read the name of God unani∣mously in the Text, tho' some Versions want it. He tells us a story of Macedonius the Patriarch of the Pneumatomachoi, or those Hereticks who deny'd the divinity or personality of the Holy Ghost, or of some other of that name of which more hereafter, that he attempted the depraving of this passage, and that there is no question but he inserted the controverted word into the Text afterwards. He refers us to an abridg∣ment of the case of Nestorius and Eutyches,Crellius i loc. Bibliot. fr. Pol. in∣ter opera Cr. v. 2. p. 18, 19. written by Liberatus a Deacon of Carthage, who tells us that Macedonius Bishop of Con∣stantinople was deprived by the Emperour Anastasius as a falsifier of Scripture, and particularly for inserting the word God in this place of S.
Paul: He tells us indeed that, In eo consentiunt omnes malam manum huic loco fuisse adhibitam, fraudemque à Ma∣cedonio attentatam. All agree in this that some foul play was offered to the Text, and that Macedonius was concern'd in the cheat; but for this we must take his word, for he  gives us no other authority: and all this is repeated in the Racovian Catechism,Catech. Raco. p. 55. Sect. 4. c. 1. and the short note of Andreas Wiscoveatius upon the question about the sence of our Apostle. Schlicktingius another of the same Tribe, and a great hearer of Crellius, yet here con∣tradicts his companion and tells us boldly and roundly,Schlicktin∣gius in lo∣cum. oper. t. 2. p. 150. Contin. Ir. Ir. p. 106. par. 58. that several Greek Copies read it otherwise than we do, i. e. they omit the word God, but proves it only by the forecited translations: and to name no more, Zwicker in the defence of his Irenicum Ire∣nicor. against Comenius, calls this Text locus dubiae lectionis, a place read several ways. Now the inference these Hereticks make from this Criticism is, That this Text is in∣deed no proof of any thing: for since we know not how it was written at first, by rea∣son of the difference among the Copies now extant, it's not to be admitted as a proof; so
Crellius,Crell. ubi supra. Cum nemo ambigat tentatum esse aliquid circa hunc locum, varientque hodie lectiones, nil ex illo solidi, ad aliquod in Re∣ligione Dogma stabiliendum duci posse certum est, Since none doubt there has been some∣what attempted about this Text, and that the Copies at this time differ one from an∣other, no solid argument can be drawn from thence, for the confirming any Tenet in Religion. With him agrees the Raco∣vian Catechism in express terms: but here we may answer them, according to their own position before mentioned, That since  the original Greek Copies, in which Lan∣guage the new Testament was written by the inspired authors, do all agree in reading this Text as we do in our Bibles, we need not trouble our selves about the disagree∣ment of two or three Translations, since, having to do with men highly pretending to reason, we may rationally conclude God's goodness and providence would take more care to secure the Originals than those Tran∣slations, and that he really did preserve the Originals unperverted on purpose to pre∣vent the ill effects those imperfect transla∣tions might otherwise have had: for who but a proselyte of Rome or a Socinian would run to an uncertain stream, when he might with the same ease drink at the fountain head where every thing is pure and clean? But if we examine the matter more strict∣ly, the whole pretence of different Copies is false or impertinent.Vid. Go∣thofr. in Poli Synop. Gothofredus in a particular discourse on this Text could find no difference in the original Books, and all Grotius and Schlicktingius, and Curcel∣laeus and
Crellius have said, amounts but to one among 1000. and that one very que∣stionable too: The Syriac translation in∣deed does want the word in our Poly∣glot Bibles, but the Arabic version has it God appear'd in the flesh: nor do I find any various readings there. The vulgar Latin has not the word  indeed: but when Grotius, and from him the rest tell us that St. Ambrose read it not, they shew more craft than sincerity; that Father reads the text without God in it, but he interprets it as we do, that the mystery here spoken of was Christus in carne, Christ appearing in the flesh.Ambros. com. in E∣pist. 1. ad Tim. Edit. Par. 1549. p. 2056. Tamdiu aspe∣ctu humilis visus est per carnem, quamdiu de∣victa morte resurgeret à mortuis & videretur majestas ejus qui natus ut homo non erat totus homo: He appear'd humble in his flesh so long till having conquer'd death, he rose again, and that his Majesty might be seen, who tho' he was born as a man, was not meerly a man, i. e. he was God as well as man. Not to take any notice that St. Am∣brose really was not the author of those Com∣mentaries on St. Paul's Epistles printed commonly among his works, but Hilary the Deacon a stout adversary of Arianisme in the fourth Century. As for Crellius his story of Macedonius, it's loose and imperti∣nent. Macedonius indeed who was thrust into the chair of Constantinople by the Ar∣rians upon the death of Alexander in the year 342. was Heretick enough, and conse∣quently like enough to attempt an ill thing. But that Macedonius mentioned by the Dea∣con Liberatus, was thrust out of his See by the Emperour
Anastasius for his not com∣plying with Hereticks in the year 515. when it was too late to attempt an innovation in Scripture, and who beside could have no  design in so doing, since he held no peculiar opinions about our Saviour, to which such a corruption could be subservient.Brev. c. 19. Concil t. 5. p 762. Libe∣ratus indeed tells such a story in his abridg∣ment, but it's so impertinent, that even Crel∣lius himself concludes he was mistaken in it, and we may go farther and pronounce it wholly false, since a Manuscript Copy of the new Testament presented to Charles the first of blessed memory, by Cyrill then Patriarch of Constantinople, reads, as we do at this day: and that Copy being about 1300 years old, was written long before the latter Macedo∣nius was born: so that there was no need of running himself into danger by inserting that word into St. Paul's Text which was there before; the Socinians, tho' daring e∣nough to impose upon the world, could not but see the absurdity of their own pretence: therefore they try to weaken the force of this Text by another artifice. For so they tell us, that allowing the word God in the Text, it's not to be understood of Jesus Christ, but of God the Father; and in this they have Grotius, tho' at a distance, their Leader too, who gives us this general interpretation of the Verse: We are not here concern'd about any ordinary truth, but about that part of it, which no man of himself was able to make out, which has an extraordinary faculty to generate true piety in our hearts,vid. Grot. in locum. a part of truth in comparison of which all the Precepts and Principles of
the Mosaic Law and of Philosophy are idle and of no effect, and this mysterious truth amounts to this, That the Gospel was pub∣lished not by Angels, but by poor, infirm and inconsiderable men, as our Lord and his A∣postles seem'd to the World; so the great mystery was manifest in the flesh: this Go∣spel was justified in the spirit, i. e. it was ap∣prov'd to the World by many Miracles, these being wrought by the influence of the spirit: it was seen of Angels, and that with the grea∣test admiration, for Angels came to the know∣ledge of the Gospel by the means of Men; it was preacht to the Gentiles, not only to the
Jews, who before were God's peculiar people, but to the Gentiles who were meer strangers to the true God; it was believ'd on in the World, a great part of Mankind entertaining it, and it was receiv'd up in glory, i e. it was exalted very gloriously, because it introdu∣ced a far greater degree of Holiness into the World than any former Opinions did. So much pains did that learned man take to ob∣scure a plain Text of Scripture, and his gloss upon it was but impertinent and absurd at last. He's mighty willing to let the Verse pass without that emphatical word in it, but his fancy about the Gospel's being manifest in the flesh, and seen of Angels, being justified in the Spirit and receiv'd up into glory, are so poor and dilute, as became not a man of learning and sense to obtrude upon the world: therefore his Socinian followers, tho' they  touch upon this gloss of his; yet they quit the Gospel, which he insists upon, and take God the Father in its room. So Volkelius as∣serts, Deum Patrem in carne manifestatum fu∣isse intelligendum esse, that by the Text we are to understand that God the Father was ma∣nifest in the flesh, and pursues that assertion with this Paraphrase of the whole, That God by Christ and his Apostles, who suffer'd ma∣ny things on that account, did more clearly then ever discover himself and his will un∣known to all precedent Ages. In the mean time tho' he reveal'd these things by inconsi∣derable men, he took care by that divine po∣wer he shew'd in them, to evidence his own justice and truth, and to have his will ap∣prov'd: that at that time and not sooner, this will of his was known and understood by the very Angels, and the extraordinary wis∣dom of God which shines in it, lay open be∣fore them; that this same will of God was preach'd to foreign Nations unacquainted with him before, and destitute of divine re∣velation;vid. Volke∣lium ubi supra cum reliquis. that the World in all parts gave credit to it, and that it was openly receiv'd by Men with a great deal of Honour. So far
Volkelius, with whom agree Crellius, tho' di∣lating more largely upon the place. Zwicker, and the Racovian Catechism. Schlicktingius, goes along with Grotius, and will by no means admit of the word  or God, and in plain terms tells us,Schlicktin∣gius in loc. Deum manifestatum esse in carne dicere, nugari est; it's meer fooling to say,  God was manifest in the flesh, and that God∣liness and God manifest in the world were very different things. But this we shall have occasion to animadvert upon afterwards. As for this , or the great my∣stery mention'd in the Text, Suidas inter∣prets  by , holy rites of a se∣cret nature,Vid. Suid. in Lex. v. 1. Vid. Vossii Etym. ling. latinae & Dieterici Lex. nov. testam. or not commonly known, that they were so call'd , because those that heard them stopt their mouths, that they might not divulge or explain them to any. Vossius and Dieterichus from Casaubon and Hornius chuse rather to derive it from the Hebrew word which signifies to hide or to conceal, from hence comes a concealment or a place to hide one in: so that whencesoever its deriv'd, they agree it signifies somewhat of a secret nature not ea∣sily to be found out, In Ecclesia ea vox gene∣ratim accipitur pro re Sacrâ naturae lumine in∣comprehensibili, says
Vossius, as us'd by Eccle∣siastical Writers, it's generally taken for ho∣ly things incomprehensible by the light of nature, tho' sometimes it has a more re∣strain'd signification relating to Symbolical rites; and so the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper are frequently call'd mysteries: but in the Text where we are told the mystery of Godliness is great, and that assertion prov'd by the following particulars, we learn that the whole affair of the Incar∣nation of the blessed Jesus with its conse∣quences,  by which the Redemption of Man∣kind from the slavery of sin and death was effected, is a deep and profound mystery, or secret, not to be comprehended by any hu∣mane understanding, and yet so necessarily to be believ'd, that no man can rightly as∣sume the name of Christian, or pretend to give a due credit to the doctrine of the Go∣spel, without embracing and fully belie∣ving it. But here we lie open again to the insults of our Socinian adversaries, for they seem very unwilling to allow any such things at present as mysteries in Religion: for tho' they do believe there were in former ages, as particularly before our Saviour's time, many things tending to humane salvation, which yet to humane understandings were inscru∣table and never to be found out; yet these things are now reveal'd, and consequently comprehensible enough by sound reason, and certainly to be fathomed by discourse and sense. Thus Schlicktingius in his disputation against the Doctrine of the Trinity, oppos'd to Meisner, a Lutheran Divine,Schlicktin. in Meisner. de Trin. &c. p. 70. Mysteria Di∣vina non idcirco mysteria dicuntur quod etiam revelata omnem nostrum intellectum captum{que} transcendunt, sed quod non nisi ex revelatione cognosci possint: Divine Mysteries are not therefore call'd mysteries, because they tran∣scend our understanding after they are re∣veal'd; but because they cannot be known without divine Revelation. For what need is
there of a Revelation, if they are no more intelligible afterwards than they were be∣fore? wherefore Humane reason may deter∣mine concerning divine Mysteries when they are once reveal'd, nay it ought to do so: for how should it give any credit to them unless it had first passed a judgment upon them? And so soon as ever our reason has pass'd a true and uncorrupt judgment upon them, it always finds those mysteries to be very true. Thus He. Elsewhere he asserts, that our ignorance of divine mysteries proceeds not from the corruption of our nature through the fall of Man, but from the extraordinary sublime nature of those Mysteries;Disput. pro Socino. p. 101. 1 Cor.
15.51. De verâ Relig. l. 1. p. 344. and therefore af∣ter they are once reveal'd to us, whether by God's word or by his Spirit, Tantas habemus vires, ut eas animo comprehendere valeamus, we have so much strength of mind that we are able to comprehend them. The same Do∣ctrine he preaches in his Commentary on that of the Apostle, Behold I shew you a mystery; and Crellius speaks to the same effect. But this reasoning is not such as should make us much admire our own faculties with respect to the mysteries of Religion: It's true in∣deed our reason may serve us so far as to convince us such or such a truth is reveal'd, our eye sees it in that Book which we call the word of God, our ear hears it; therefore by discourse we conclude that that Truth stands so reveal'd there, and our reason enables us to judge whether the revelation be authen∣tick  and fit for us to depend on or no. But according to their acknowledgment, wretch∣ed man involv'd in sin, could with all his wit and sense discover no remedy for his misery, the more he discours'd with himself, the more plainly he'd find, that He who had of∣fended a Being wise, knowing, and powerful to punish, could rationally expect nothing but punishment from one so offended: Mer∣cy could take little place in Man's thoughts in the case; he could see reasons enough why he should be punish'd for his sin, but no rea∣son why he should be pardon'd, since he had sinn'd: God now had decreed a remedy for him, but God's decree was secret and indiscoverable. As man could not naturally feed himself with any reasonable hopes that such a remedy should be: neither could he contrive how that remedy should be effect∣ed, or by what means he an offender should escape the stroke of Justice; since Mercy as well as justice must have some ground or reason to move upon: the means then as well as the decree was hitherto mysterious. Well, Almighty God in his wonderful com∣miseration of humane weakness was pleas'd to promise somewhat comfortable to our first parents, in the strength of which pro∣mise they were enabled to live, tho' under the weight of those calamities sin had laid them open to: God afterwards besides these extraordinary promises of the same nature made to the Patriarchs, inspired se∣veral  holy Men, who spake as influenced by him, and they foretold man's redemption by a Messias, one that should be Anointed to that purpose. Here then the mystery was reveal'd, and what man before could not rationally have hoped for, he was now as∣sured of by God himself. But did not the whole matter continue a Mystery still? Nay, was not the Mystery now more inscrutable than before? Could Man give a reason, or comprehend the matter in his Soul, why an exceedingly provoked God should express such love or pity for those who had pro∣voked him? If they could have done so, they might have done it as well before, and con∣sequently have concluded, that tho' they had incensed God, yet his wrath would certainly be atoned, and therefore there was no need of a Revelation: or after this Revelation, could Man tell certainly what the meaning of this Messiah was? They saw him sometimes described by the Pro∣phets under all the glorious characters of a mighty King, nay, equall'd with God himself in his titles and in his name. Some∣times they saw him character'd as very mean and contemptible, as riding on an Ass in∣stead of a triumphant Chariot, as one who had no form nor comliness in him, no beauty for which he should be desired, nay, despi∣sed and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. Could common reason so easily discover what manner of  person he should be in whom these parti∣culars so seemingly contradictory should meet? If so, what made the Jews, who had enjoyed a greater portion of divine light than the rest of the World, what made them stumble so extreamly at the person of the Messias when he appear'd, or think it so im∣possible to reconcile Prophecies so seeming∣ly contradictory to one another? were the Jews the only persons utterly deserted by reason, or grown brutes on the suddain? What shall we say to the existence of a God, one supream Being who manages all things? That there is a God, tho' the Socinians de∣ny it, Nature, and the various works of the Creation teach us; for reason will perswade us that the Apostle speaks plain enough to that purpose, when he makes it a reason why the Heathens should be inexcusable, because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has shewed it unto them, for the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen,Rom. 1.19.20. being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and God∣head: This same existence of a God is re∣veal'd to us in Scripture, but in the mean time we must own that by Scripture we re∣ally know no more of God than Nature and the works of Nature had discover'd before: for that which may be known of God was visible in them as the forecited Text in∣forms us; nay, had not Nature imprest upon  our Souls some Idaeas of the divinity, had not we been able to read his eternal power and Godhead in them, all the revelations in Scripture would have appear'd very im∣pertinent and unsatisfactory, since all the discourse in it concerning God might easily have been interpreted into a religious ficti∣on, contriv'd meerly to get reputation to that Book of which God was the pretended Author. But after Nature and revelation have done so much, are we able to compre∣hend the nature of the Almighty? is not every thing that bears the character of infinity dark and mysterious still? we know God is, we know that he is a rewarder of those who diligently seek him, but can we tell by what methods his prudence manages the universe? can we tell how he is infinitely wise, just, good, merciful, true, &c. or tho' we know God is so, can we tell what it is to be so? No, we know the positive part, but for us to go farther would argue us Gods and not men: But does the re∣velation of a certain truth that was my∣sterious, change its nature? is not that which was a mystery before, a mystery still? The Christian Religion or the Principles on which it was built were once mysterious, a Socinian will assert, they were so before Christ's coming into the world: but, if we may give any credit to our Apostle who wrote after the Ascension of our Saviour into Heaven, the mystery of Godliness is  great still, and it will continue so as long as Heaven and Earth endure? But here for our better procedure in countermining the Socinian Heresies, it will be necessary briefly to discuss that question how far humane reason is to take place in matters of Divi∣nity: For Smalcius tells us positively,Smale. Hom. 8. in c. 1. Joan. p. 89. Nul∣lam esse religionis particulam, quae cum ra∣tione non conveniat: & quae cum ratione non convenit opinio eam etiam in Theologiâ nullum locum habere posse. That there is no little point of Religion which does not agree with reason; and whatsoever opinion does not agree with reason can have no place in Theological matters. Now for the better clearing this matter, I shall lay down these Propositions. That the Reason of Man is the Candle of the Lord, according to that of Solomon.1. Prov.
20.27. Its the real Image of God in man, given to Man, that he might be able to discourse with him∣self, and argue concerning the nature of every object laid before him. It's that whereby he is able to distinguish between things, to judge of what tends to his own happiness, and what may any way be pre∣judicial to it. It's that whereby Man comes to see God in his Creatures, from the frame and contexture and management of which he understands the wisdom and power of him that made them, and to observe his own dependence upon that Almighty Sove∣reign.  It enables him to argue from obser∣vations upon himself concerning the good∣ness and mercy of God, and how fit it is for all created Beings to adore and magnifie the Creator. It shews how fit it is that those who so intirely depend upon him should devote all their services to him, how they should all seek to him in every distress, and worship him, so as may be acceptable to him. When I give humane reason so high a character, I understand it only as imparted to him in his first Creation, when he was equally clothed with native beauty and innocence, his discursive faculty was then so high and clear, that we, miserable creatures, have at present only some poor defective glimpses of it; or we see it like some glorious light indeed, but fix'd at so prodigious a distance, that we cannot with all our present skill take it's true magnitude. As it was then, it fitted Man for that mighty Sovereignty over the inferiour parts of the Creation, which he was then invested with; it taught him to cultivate the garden of the Lord, so as became a faithful Ste∣ward and Servant; It gave him such a view of the Divine Nature, that nothing could possibly seem more absurd or shameful, than any thing he could do that might offend God. And so true an insight into that which we call Natural Philosophy, that the nature of every creature was obvious to him at first, and he capable of naming all things  according to that nature. So that it was really not a want of reason which made him sink under the temptations of Hell, but it was carelesness, not standing duly upon his guard, nor adverting seriously to the tenour of what was offer'd. He had the weapon, but he made no due use of it: he was crea∣ted indeed in a state of perfection, but his passions and affections were alterable, his body passible, nay, his reason it self capable of a countermine when the design of oppo∣sition center'd in a being created to as great advantages as himself. And when parties of equal strength and courage are engaged in a contention, the first that's guilty of an inad∣vertency must certainly be foil'd; had not love and beauty like the pipe of Mercury, lull'd the hundred eyes of original reason into a fatal sleep, death could never have found entrance into the world, nor sin have been the dreadful harbinger of its ruines. But we see Sin and Death have over-power'd and prevail every day more and more upon us without any considerable opposition, which had reason retain'd its primeval vi∣gour, it would certainly have met with, therefore we conclude,
That reason stands now extreamly impair'd by the fall of man, and in a great measure in∣capacitated for prosecuting those noble ends for which at first it was bestow'd. It's true, reason is the very form of the Soul, the Soul it self  a substance pure, immaterial, Divine, but it's immerst in a body of a grosser nature, or∣ganized indeed originally exactly for its re∣ception, and every way fit to be actuated by it, and by vertue of that exact preparation of its subject, it moved originally with ease and freedom: but forms may admit of alte∣ration, and sin has effected such an alterati∣on in the Soul, it has not quite extinguish'd that candle of the Lord, but it has made it burn very dim and uncertainly; it has not entirely separated reason from the Soul, but it has made it slow and unactive, or else on∣ly perversly active; and whereas the body was exactly fit at first for the operations of an unpolluted Soul, that body it self is much disordered now, and even where the Soul would act better, it finds it self oppressed with that body of Death which sin has loa∣ded it with: that Death as its preparative has thousands of diseases and distempers, many of which extreamly impair that little reason we are still possest of, not that the Soul is immediately prejudiced in it self by them, but as the curious Artist can yet do nothing without his tools, so the Soul moves, heavily because the body is wholly unfitted for its exerting its activity: and so farther as we observe the Artisan's work is worse or better according to the excellency of his tools, so daily experience teaches us, the mind applies it self more nimbly to work, is more curious in its fancy, more large and
various in its inventions, more calm and so∣lid in its judgment, according to the temper and constitution of that body it resides in. Hence we conclude that those we call Ideots or Fools have Souls immortal and rational as well as our selves, but those Souls have no proper organs to demonstrate their innate reason by: these unhappinesses are all the fatal consequences of sin, and we could hard∣ly believe that sin had had any ill conse∣quences at all, had not reason suffer'd by it: for if we can, as really we do, observe, that reason teaches every one who now adverts seriously to it, to aim at quiet and happiness; so had not sin clouded it strangely, it had been impossible any temptation whatsoever contrived by Hell or its emissaries could have baffled it. But it's plain that by our present incapacities to answer the sophistry of the tempter, we are continually betray'd to sin: reason in its height and purity would have convinced us of the madness and folly of every thing that's ill, reason as it now stands perverted suffers us, unless prevented with a great deal of industry, to embrace ill un∣der the notion of good, and it's no small argument of a great weakness in our ratio∣nal faculties to be so impos'd on: We often∣times now entertain our capital adversary the Devil as an angel of light, we misprise vice for virtue, falshood for truth, sophistry for solid arguments, novelty for antiquity, superstition for devotion, noise for sense,  interest for zeal, confidence for great parts and ingenuity: and reason it self as now it stands, when we have a few lucid intervals, shews us the extreme ridiculousness of those mistakes, and the abilities which some have to expose the follies of others, and at the same time to betray their own, is unanswe∣rable evidence of the imbecillity of humane reason in general. It's doubtless possible for some of excellent constitutions to argue themselves into a strong perswasion that there is a God. It's again possible, nay we see it too too common for men of delicate intellectuals to pretend to answer all the ar∣guments brought to prove the being of a God, and they do it so plausibly, as to get proselytes, and to make abundance of room for horrid Atheism. We make no question but that we have proofs really unanswerable of the Divinity of the Son of God; the So∣cinians with whom we are now concern'd, deny it, and pretend to demonstrations of the contrary, and all from principles of rea∣son or Scriptures rationally interpreted; and many well meaning men think they are in the right, and therefore close with them: These oppositions of Reason could never have happen'd, had the Soul or mind enjoy'd its original freedom and activity; for nothing could possibly have been offer'd in opposition to reason wholly clear and perfect, that ha∣ving been incapable of stooping to mean arts and trifling sophistry. But we need indeed  no more but to reflect a little on our first Parents, and on our selves, to prove the truth of this conclusion. It's impossible to over∣look the prodigious difference there was be∣tween Adam as a knowing Monarch, giving names to all Creatures according to their na∣tures, and Adam sowing Fig-leaves together to hide his nakedness from Creatures whom some conclude irrational; and flying to the shelter of the Trees of Eden for a security from the presence of an all-seeing God; one argued excess of wisdom, the other the ex∣travagance of folly: and for our selves, as the Jews proved themselves dull and senseless, who could not be convinced or reduced by him, who spake as never man spake; so we cannot without extreme difficulty find any impressions of good made on our Souls by the most forcible discourses: whereas reason in its primitive glory could admit of nothing, but what was holy, just and good; all this notwithstanding we conclude, That Humane reason corrupted as it is, has yet so much of light and strength, as to shew and convince us of a general necessity of Reli∣gion: This we assert of the light of nature, which really is nothing but meer reason, as it stands at present affected. Now if the works of nature are such, as according to the asser∣tion of the Apostle, do evidence the Almigh∣ty's power and Godhead, this evidence must be clear to somewhat that's able to compre∣hend
it; and if it be so very full and plain, that they who neglect it are altogether inex∣cusable, then that reason which we now en∣joy, which alone is capable of apprehending natural evidence, must still have that strength that those who by its conduct cannot find out a God, and their general duty to him, are therefore not to be excus'd. God has made the World, and all things therein, and gives to all life and breath,Acts 17.24, 25, 26, 27. and all things, and has made of one blood all Nations to dwell upon the Earth, that they might seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after him and find him: but it would have been very ill argued of the Apostle from such Topicks, if such observations had not really been enough to guide those who search after God to make a discovery of him. And here the Socinians seem to act by very strange measures, they conclude as before I observ'd from Smalcius, that there's nothing to be admitted into Re∣ligion but what's agreeable to reason; but we cannot tell what's agreeable to reason, unless we can fully and clearly comprehend it: for otherwise we may be mistaken, and sup∣pose that agreeable to reason, which really is not so. But at the same time, Socinus himself looks upon the light of nature as not suffici∣ent to impress on Man the notion of a God,Socin. prae∣lect. Theol. c. 2: but will have that general opinion of the ex∣istence of God to flow only from traditional knowledge, or from revelation: yet after this assertion of his, Crellius one of the most
learned of his followers and defenders, goes about in his Book de Deo & ejus attributis, to demonstrate the being of a God from the works of the Creation. But if Man has not sense enough, by considering the works of na∣ture, to argue to the being of a God, such a demonstration is extremely impertinent.
Socinus would prove his opinion among o∣ther things by that of the Apostle, He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those that diligently seek him, which is prefaced with that: That without faith it is impossible to please God.Heb. 11.6. But this is no proof at all, for Men may by considering circumstances come to the ac∣knowledgment of some supreme power; and yet never believe in him, nor ever own or practise their duty to him: and therefore St. Paul takes notice of some holding the truth in unrighteousness, who when they knew God, glorified him not as God: tho' they were con∣vinced of his existence, they were not careful to perform the duty of Creatures or servants to a Supreme Creator; they were not thank∣ful but became vain in their Imaginations,Rom. 1.21. and their foolish hearts were darkned, &c. Now those St. Paul there reflects on were Heathens in general, who being under a ne∣cessity of believing that there was a God by rational discourse, yet out of a supine lazi∣ness, troubled not themselves to improve rea∣son so far as they might and ought to have done; and therefore, without any considera∣tion  of the divine Nature, fell to worship Idols, or to respect the Creature more than the Creator; yet even that Idolatry it self is an uncontroulable evidence of the general notion of God's existence, since no man possibly could be drawn to adore several, if he really believ'd there were no God at all. Nor farther does it follow, that because I'm satisfied there is a God, therefore I must necessarily be acceptable to God; for tho' my sence of his Divinity may of it self be pleasing to my Maker, yet if that sence have no operation upon my life and conversa∣tion, my continuance in sin must cancel all those advantages I could hope to receive upon an inevitable conviction. Nor does Scripture any where tell us of such as believe there is no God.Ps. 10.4. Ps. 14.1. It's true, we read of some in all whose thoughts God is not, of the foolish body saying in his heart there is no God: but wicked men, even assisted by Di∣vine Revelation to the knowledge of God's existence, may forget him; nay the very best of men do so when they fall into sin: and for a wicked man to say in his heart, there is no God, i. e. to wish heartily there were none, and to believe there is none, are very different things. Caligula that Roman Emperour said in his heart there was no God, when he would needs supply the worlds defects by assuming Divinity to himself; but Caligula own'd that he was otherwise convinc'd, when upon a thunder-storm  he sculk'd into vaults, and hid his head from the fury of an angry Superiour. And we have now a-days but too many Atheistical wretches, who employ all their witts to prove to themselves and others that there is no God, who yet when death approaches, or some terrible distemper shakes their bodies, tremble at approaching judg∣ments, submit to old innate notions of a God which they had long endeavour'd to have stifled, and are ready to cry to the
mountains to fall upon them, and to the rocks to cover them from his wrath whose very being they formerly pretended to de∣fie. Nor yet are there really any Nations discover'd who are wholly without such notions of a God as flow from a due con∣templation of Nature.vid. Blavii Atlant. maj. in America Braslianā. Nay the very Bra∣silians themselves to whose story Socinus refers us, tho' of all other nations the most ignorant and barbarous, are not so wholly Atheistical, but that, if we may believe Geo∣graphers, they believe the Souls immortality and existence after its separation from the body, a thought alone which must be at∣tended with the owning of a God: and hence Crellius well enough observes,De Deo & attr. l. 1. c. 3. Quod sacri libri non semel ad rerum in naturâ ex∣istentium contemplationem nos vocant ut Di∣vinae Majestatis radios in eis relucentes & admirandarum ejus proprietatum vestigia illis impressa lustremus. That the holy Scriptures do more than once call upon us to medi∣tate  on the various parts of Nature, that we may see the rays of Divine Majesty shine∣ing in them, and the footsteps of God's power wonderfully impressed upon them. For not only all the works of Nature in a body, but every single thing gives us a par∣ticular argument of the being of a God. But supposing we pursue the opinion of So∣cinus recommended by Smalcius to the Uni∣versity of Heidelberg; if withal we observe what the Racovian Catechism asserts, that Man's free will is not impair'd by Adam's sin, and conclude, what's very natural, that the other faculties of the Soul are no more weakned than the Will, it will plainly fol∣low, that Man even in the state of Inno∣cence was not capable naturally of knowing there was a God: and therefore Socinus fairly refers his knowledge in that kind to God's revealing himself at first to him. And certainly that natural light which even in primaeval purity could not reach to the bare existence of a God, must be at this time very insufficient to judge of every thing God has reveal'd, and to comprehend every mystery which is concern'd in man's salva∣tion. Farther, if such as the
Brasilians or Indians are really wholly without the apprehension of a God, it will appear from thence, that Traditional knowledge may be worn out; but as for divine Revelation as extant in the Word of God, it can have no credit among Heathens till they are first  convinc'd there is a God whose that Word is; therefore there must be arguments drawn by discourse from the worlds structure, that must first prove that principle, and then that there are really divine Revelations; and that those writings which we call the Word of God contain those Revelations, will be demonstrable enough.Tertul. de resur. car∣nis. For as Ter∣tullian says, Praemisit Deus naturam magi∣stram, submissurus & prophetiam, quo faci∣lius credas Prophetiae, Discipulus naturae, God sends Nature as a mistress before, designing to assist it with revelation or prophecy, that being first the disciples of Nature we might the more readily give credit to revelation. Therefore S. Basil calls the school of Na∣ture, , the school of ra∣tional Souls, and the disciplinary of the knowledge of God. And the antient Monk Anthony answered the inquisitive Philoso∣pher very well, when he asked him how he could live without books.Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 23. : My book is the nature of all existent things, a book which is always ready when I would know the words of God. Though the words of Tully a Heathen, are more directly oppos'd to Socinus,De Divi∣nation. l.
2. Esse praestantem aliquam aeternamque naturam, & eam suspiciendam adorandámque hominum generi pulchritudo mundi ordoque rerum coelestium cogit confiteri:  That there is some excellent and eternal nature, and that to be ador'd and admir'd by mankind, the very beauty of the world, and the curious order of coelestial bodies, will force us to confess. If then an Hea∣then by natures light could discover not only the being of a God, but the necessity of worshipping him, it's sufficient evidence of our conclusion, That humane reason or the meer light of Nature may shew us the general necessity of Religion, notwithstand∣ing those decays it has undergone by Sin. For if that notion naturally imbib'd that there was a God urged men to serve him by several methods of Religion, it's plain that notion enforced Religion in general upon all mankind; we conclude That humane Reason as it now stands cor∣rupted, when it applies it self industriously to Religion or the adoration of a God meerly on general notions, as a reward for that industry, certainly meets with divine assistances, by which means those intentions which at first are honest and sincere are made really effectual to Gods glory and the improvers happiness. Humane reason no sooner discovers the existence of God, but upon a farther pur∣suit of that notion in enquiry after God's nature, it finds it self lost in a vast abyss, nothing but immense infinity being the ob∣ject of a faculty unquestionably finite and limited, must of consequence confound it,
unless there be some guide or director found out for it. This made Simonides of old, (who was not only Poet a suavis, verum etiam caetero doctus sapiensque,Cicero de Nat. Deor. l. 1. p. 27. as Tully calls him, a sweet Poet, but a man otherwise learned and wise) when Hiero King of Si∣cily ask'd him what God was, require a days time to onsider of the question, when the day after Hiero repeated his question, he desn'd two days, and when he askt still more and more time, and Hiero wondring askt him the reason, Quia quanto, inquit, diu∣tiùs considero, tanto mihi res videtur obscurior, because, says he, the longer I consider of the matter, the more obscure I find it. Tully seems indeed to impute this to his general Scepticism: but since he own'd a God, and had no other guide but Nature, it shew'd his wisdom to acknowledg the deficiency of that principle in carrying him farther. It was Socrates's modesty which made him confess he had only learn'd this, that he knew no∣thing. And it was
Simonides's prudence which made him own his ignorance in so my∣sterious a particular. Reason teaches a man that has lost his eyes how great inconveni∣ences he's lyable to by that loss, when he knows his helpless condition, tho' Reason with all its arguments cannot restore his eyes, reason can teach him to seek for a guide who can see, and will satisfie him how far the kindness of the guide may re∣pair his misfortune. The same Reason in  matters of Religion, tho' it find out a God, yet shews Man his natural blindness in rela∣tion to the consequences of that principle. Now the Soul being always covetous of knowledge, hoping y it o repair in sme measure the ruines of the f, i a M but follow its iation, con to apprehend the and to seek for one qu p. Here then we must own, God hs call'd upon mankind so earn ome to him, and has promis'd that those who do so he will by no means reject, and that he will assist such by the gifts of his Spirit, that they may improve the farther in divine knowledge; we must own that it would be inconsistent with these engagements and promises, and consequently with Go's ve∣racity, if he should not be ready to rewd with sutable assistances all such who acco∣ing to their abilities diligently seek : As a full proof of his readiness in the case, he has imparted his Will to mankind in Scripture; the reading of books is the or∣dinary means of attaining knowledge, or at lest a due converse with such who have leisure and capacity to read and understd them, such reading is useful even to inspid persons,1 Tim. 4.13, 14. whence St. Paul advises Timothy an Evangelist to give attendance to reading, as well as to exhortation and doctrine, and not to neglect the gift that was in him. And howsoever some may contemn th
ane  learning which they cannot reach, we have no reason to believe that S. Paul was pre∣judiced in his Apostolical abilities by having been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, or by having bestowed some time in reading the Poems of Aratus or Epimenides. That God himself might comply with this ordina∣ry means of acquiring knowledge, He com∣mitted his own Will to writing, and that in such a manner that the weakest might not complain the book was wholly unintelligible, nor the wisest make their boast that they comprehended every thing contained there. The man that seeks to improve his reason by reading, in search of books must act very irrationally if he pretermit the Book of God; For he that believes there is a God, and takes him for a Being infinitely superiour to himself, when he thinks it worth his while to converse with humane writings, cannot but judge it much more so to examine a book which carries the name of God him∣self as its Author in the frontispiece: Hee'd read it, tho' it were to no other end, but to find whether it were agreeable to that august title it bore, and what real characters of the Divinity were to be found in it. But when such a man comes once to read it seri∣ously, tho' he's not able to comprehend all he reads, yet his rational faculty must run very low if he find not more improvements of it there than in all other writings whatso∣ever. It's observable of the Mariners that
carried Jonah for Tarshish, that when the storm sent by the God of Israel lay hard up∣on them, the Mariners in their fear called every one upon his God; they believ'd in general there was such a being, but a mul∣titude being adored by the greater part of the world, instead of one, every one had his particular idol to address to.Jonah 1.4, 5, 9, 10.14, 15, 16. But when Jonah, sensible of his crime, and that ven∣geance which pursued it, had confess'd the truth and perswaded them to throw him overboard, and they tho' unwillingly com∣plyed with him, they, before they would do an action so severe and extraordinary, applyed themselves to the true God; and finding the storm to cease upon their Prayer, they offered Sacrifices to him, and made vows; thus Pagan Mariners grew a kind of converts to true Religion. So when Men in consulting Scriptures, especially at first, find their Souls disturb'd under a sence of former ignorance, and meet with advices in that sacred book sufficient to extricate themselves out of that perplexity; promises of the true God's readiness to hear and to assist those who desire to know him, occur frequently too: as particularly that of the Psalmist in the old Testament,Ps. 69.32. Your heart shall live that seek the Lord; and that of Wis∣dome, I love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall find me.Prov. 8.17, 20, 21. I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment, that I may cause those that love me  to inherit substance, that I may fill their trea∣sures, i. e. that I may furnish them with solid knowledge, and make them rich in un∣derstanding: and that more clear yet of our Saviour, when the Spirit of truth is come,Joh. 16.13. he will guide you into all truth. The Reader of these promises though very dubious in him∣self before, will be apt to send up his pe∣titions to that God who made these promi∣ses; who will be as ready to hear such, as he was to hear the ignorant Mariners before. Thus light may shine into the Souls of those who are soberly inquisitive, and that so great and clear, as may be very unaccount∣able to the receivers of it, but extremely pleasing. It was such an industrious reading and a real desire to understand, tho' at that time he confest his ignorance, that prepar'd the Aethiopian Eunuch for the instructions of Philip, sent unto him on that particular errand. And tho' God do not presently send an Evangelist to convert every one that seeks after what's good, yet he has a thousand ways as efficacious to draw men to a sence of true Religion, and what mat∣ter is it to us what way God makes use of, provided he do but work the same glorious effect in us at last? God takes delight in those that honour him, as those who seek him certainly do. Sincerity and humility are required indeed as preparatives in the case, yet no more than what's requisite in those who study books of humane learning.  For he that does not seriously desire to pro∣fit by study, never will profit; and he that's too opinionative of his own sence, can ne∣ver make any advantageous use of what he meets with in the discourses of other men: and there's no reason we should expect to improve in those things which concern the weightiest matters in the world, viz. our eternal future happiness or misery, upon lower terms, than in those really of a fri∣volous and inconsiderable nature. But to encourage men to a right application of their reasoning faculty we conclude, That the farther a man advances in the study and practice of true Religion, the more clear and comprehensive his Reason grows, and comes so much the nearer to its primitive acute∣ness, and consequently, is able to dive so much the farther into divine Mysteries: And this indeed is what true Religion aims at; We have lost our Innocence, by that loss we have impair'd our Reason; that we may assure to our selves that happiness our first Creation had sitted us to, God has found out for us those ways, that we endeavouring to retrieve our Innocence, may retrieve our Reason in a good measure too: And having howsoever the infinite merits of a Saviour on our side, at last may attain to the first intended happiness. Reason is certainly a talent bestowed upon us, not to lay it up in a napkin, but to use and to make
the best of it. Had such a Book as Scripture been deliver'd to Adam before his fall, I make no question, but it would have been in every point intelligible to him: as things stand now we may and ought to exercise our reason about it, but not so as to limit Scripture by our reason, but to limit our reason by Scri∣pture. It's true, Scripture may by meer rea∣son be prov'd to be the Word of God, but that operation is very slow, and requires a very unusual application; therefore God in the infancy both of the Jewish and Christian Church made use of Miracles to work more strongly and swiftly upon the Soul, not that he design'd to supersede our reason, but to quicken it and to set it so much the more in∣dustriously on work, and withall, by a redu∣cing it to an acknowledgment of its own de∣fects, to make it submit the more entirely to him whose power was able so far to out∣reach its utmost capacity; Miracles were the common objects of Mens senses, and indeed appeals to them: and when the Jews had known a Man from his Child-hood that was born blind, and when they saw him about forty years of age blest with sight, they had no reason to distrust the truth of that, of which they every moment saw the effects; where there was lodged a power sufficient o produce so extraordinary an effct, and the kindness and usefulness of the mi wrought would vindicate it from
of any malignant spirit, it   conclude, that in the same person was cen∣tred a veracity agreeable to that power, and consequently it was reasonable to believe what ever was delivered by so great and so benign a Power. But after all, as reason could not possibly give an account of the manner of working so sensible a miracle, but by resolving all into omnipotence, nor was it necessary it should: so neither was it ne∣cessary reason should comprehend every thing that was spoken by God, and yet it lies un∣der a necessity of believing every thing true that's so spoken, and that again upon a ra∣tional principle, viz. that He who speaks, being
God, can neither deceive nor be decei∣ved. But as those who engage themselves in the study of any particular Science, under∣stand but little at first of its reason, but by assiduity and diligence come to see throughly into it; so it is in matters of religion, he that's but a Babe can bear no stronger nou∣rishment than milk, he that's stronger can digest substantial meats, i. e. the beginner in those studies must pretend to nothing farther than what's very plain and easie; but when by continual meditation be has made those plain things familiar to him, there will some consequences offer themselves, not so plain, but every whit as true as the first principles, and that reason which at first was ready to stumble at the most obvious noti∣ons, will afterwards digest those at a grea∣ter distance, and be as strongly convinced of  them as of the former; but in the chain of consequences somewhat will occur at last beyond the reach of the largest unbeatified Soul. Thus that Man is naturally miserable. is a truth undeniable by reason of our every days experience, natures light has confirm'd the World in the truth; yet Man is very apt to stumble and perplex himself at the occasion and ground of his being so: doubts arise in the case from some weak reflections upon God's justice and goodness; yet its uni∣versally believ'd, and the reading of Scri∣pture farther confirms the truth; that Man, miserable as he is, making use of such and such means, may be happy, is a truth reveal'd, and without revelation imperceptible; yet now its once reveal'd, reason can properly argue, that the same things or qualificati∣ons which would have secur'd happiness to Man at first, must do so now, and the attain∣ment of Innocence, was that original mean, Innocence the indispensible qualification; But reason proves again that that primitive Innocence is really unattainable now, and it will proceed thus far further, that either there must be some way discover'd to make up that unhappy defect, or else Man must sink in his natural misery, and all the care he can take to prevent it will do him no service: here divine revelation goes along with him too, and what reason, as now af∣fected, could never have dream't of, we have a revelation relating to the making up  of this defect, and that by the Incarnation and Passion of the Son of God, but there Faith rests upon Revelation alone, and gets no assistance at all from reason, but only from that distant principle, that the revea∣ler cannot deceive nor be deceived: reason can come no nearer, nor can it judge of the revelation by any other principle, yet the Man who believes not this, how little so∣ever he can understand of it, is in a state of damnation. The wonderful wisdom and good∣ness of Almighty God appears in this, as acting in the most difficult case and in the kindest manner, but to suppose the wisdom and the goodness of God in so prodigious effects should not surpass our discursive fa∣culty, is absurd, as reducing divine perfecti∣ons to humane rules; but it never can be un∣becoming to an ordinary Christian to express himself in these things, as the Apostle does in what relates to them, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!Rom. 33. how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! where Schlicktingius himself tells us his judgments are unsearch∣able:
Quod eorum causam ac rationem & illa ipsa nemo perscrutari possit, because none can find out either the cause or reason of God's judgments, or the judgments themselves: and afterwards, Idem ille qui solus haec potest fa∣cere,Schlickt. in locum. solus etiam potest cognoscerè, He alone can understand these things who can do them, that is, onely God: yet these consi∣derations  should be no discouragement to any, from improving their reason, even in matters of faith, since tho' reason can never in this life comprehend them all, yet many of those things which appear very strange, uncouth or mysterious to a young unexperi∣enced Christian, are very clear and intelli∣gible to those who have their senses exer∣cised. As the very doctrine of the Cross, absurd and foolish to a novice, appears so necessary to one experienc't in Christianity, that he knows not how to reconcile it to true sound reason without it; since Philosophy aims at something of that nature, and Chri∣stianity, if truly asserted, must infinitely tran∣scend Philosophy in the excellence and use∣fulness of its instructions. Maximus there∣fore answers well to that objection of Here∣ticks against the use of reason in matters of a Divine nature, , &c. But there are some things in them which transcend our understanding: I own it, but let us learn this too from Scripture, that there are some things to be searcht after by our reason, be∣cause they are attainable. For as it argues no piety to be prying into every thing, so it argues as little to look into nothing: what we adore we all know,vid. Vede∣lii ratio∣nale. The∣ol p 766. according to that Text, we know what we worship but to enquire how great, what his nature , how or where he exists, is direct mad our Rule therefore with respect to chosen
hs  reveal'd, must be this, Not onely to believe what's laid down there, because we under∣stand it, but because we believe it as laid down there, therefore to endeavour to un∣derstand it; so reason comes into its proper place, it owns its imperfections and its po∣wers both; it puts it self into the way of di∣vine assistance, and grows capable every mo∣ment of improvement towards perfection. But we conclude, That this perfection is not compleatly attain∣able till all our enquiries after happiness are compleated in the enjoyment of it: as the good Christian is ever growing in grace, so he's ever growing in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, which knowledge despises not the use of reason, but considers it, ,Strem. l. 6. as
Clemens of A∣lexandria calls it, as the lowest step of the ladder of Christian philosophy, the lowest step indeed, but yet a step which they that would clime higher must make use of; and if they would but carefully observe how in all Christian improvements reason has still its share, that it grows stronger and stronger in its aspiring after what's good, that faith it self as it finds reason treading in its foot∣steps, grows more vigorous and unconque∣rable, that yet at best there are a great ma∣ny clouds hanging upon it arising from that mortal and declining state we are in in this world: These observations would reduce the  extravagant hopes of some in this life, and excite in them the more earnest longings af∣ter the perfections of a better; and who, when he sees the glorious image of his Ma∣ker blotted and defaced, and knows there is a time to come when it shall be restored to its pristine integrity, would not think it extreamly reasonable to long for that sea∣son? Faith and Hope and Charity are Chri∣stian Graces, the wings, if I may so call them, on which the divinely originated Soul soars towards Heaven; yet great and necessary as they are, the two first expire with mortality, the last immortal Charity survives beyond the limits of time.Heb. 11.1. For Faith which is by the Apostle described as the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, can have no place when we come to en∣joy all we long for in the beatisick vision; we are to live by faith while on earth, that bearing us up above all those troubles and perplexities which attend us: but those are all past, and not to be repeated by all the malice of Hell it self, when we come to the Celestial Canaan, that land of everlasting rest. And as for Hope it respects futurity, and somewhat greater than we yet enjoy, but as that Apostle argues, Hope that is seen is not hope; for what a man sees,Rom.
8.14. or is in possession of (for that's the meaning of the phrase) why does he yet hope for? In Heaven we see and are in possession of unallay'd bliss, we hoped for it here, we have it there, so  Hope having no farther object, dyes too, but Charity survives still. The life of Heaven is nothing but peace and joy and love: all other passions which distract the Soul, have had their periods before; all that promote its blessed state continue still: but let Charity bear never so glorious a Character, Reason meerly Humane in that glorious state out∣vies it still, and comprehends it as the grea∣ter does the less. We see there, beyond possi∣bility of contradiction the reason of all God's dispensations towards Mankind, those intricate providences, which have so puzled our Intellectuals here below, will then be plain and intelligible, nay fully and actually understood by all the Souls of just Men made perfect; all the unfitnesses of a corrupt car∣case will be then removed, and a glorified body answer readily and naturally all the motions of the glorified Soul. And since we look upon knowledge as the end and per∣fection of the rational Soul, we may be as∣sur'd that in a state of bliss, it shall have at∣tain'd that perfection,1 Cor. 13.12. for as St. Paul teach∣es us, We now see through a glass darkly, but then face to face: now we know in part, but then shall we know even as also we are known: and as St. John agreeably with him, though it does not yet appear what we shall be: for we see but darkly now and in part, yet we know that when our Lord shall appear at last,1 Joh.
3.2. we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And when reason once comes to use  sense so far, as to see God as he is, infinitely happy, infinitely good, infinitely glorious, it has gone far enough. And thus far have I given an account of Humane reason, or the light of Nature, for I think I may well e∣nough use them, as Synonymous, and how far it may be useful in matters of a Divine na∣ture. I shall draw onely a Corollary or two from thence; and then proceed.
We conclude from what has been dis∣cours'd concerning Humane reason, That our obligation to Almighty God is infinite, in that He who might have taken from us wholly that natural light, because we had so extremely slighted it, was yet pleas'd to continue it so far, as that rightly apply'd, it might still be useful to us even in matters of salvation: It's true, we cannot examine things with that clear∣ness and satisfaction, which Adam's first en∣quiries were accompany'd with: our under∣standings are somewhat parallel to that Earth, which fell under a Curse for the sin of Man: It was naturally fertile before in good things, but then it was to bring forth onely bryars and thorns; yet Man might eat bread from it still, onely it must be in the sweat of his brows, He must take pains for that now, which he might have had with∣out any trouble before. So our Natural rea∣son was clear and free at first, common oc∣currences needed no deep meditations, nor extraordinary passages any tedious study to  apprehend them in every circumstance. The case is now otherwise, our reason busies it self naturally about trifles, and onely puzles and perplexes it self in matters of no weight or moment; yet still it may move to good purpose, but it requires abundance of care and pains to cultivate it so, as it may pro∣duce any thing that's good; and even with a great deal of pains too, sometimes it makes conclusions onely vain, troublesome and mi∣serably false: this unhappiness is the conse∣quence of our own follies at first, and it's God's unmerited goodness, that we can yet by making use of due means distinguish in some measure between truth and falshood, at least in the more obvious parts of religi∣on: and his goodness yet appears farther, in that where our decrepit reason fails, he's pleas'd to interpose with the influences of his blessed Spirit, and to preserve the Modest and Humble from falling into damnable Er∣ror: that our Reason may have a subject profitable to employ it self upon, God has given us his Word, blessed are they who meditate on that word day and night: he calls upon us to apply our selves to the Law and to the testimony, to search the Scriptures, to search them with the same care and diligence as those who work in Mines seek for the golden Ore. Whereas he lays in his Word several Commands upon us; He would have us examine them so as we may be con∣vinced that they are not grievous, but Ho∣ly  just and good: These Commandments therefore must be examin'd by the rule of right Reason, which whosoever follows, will be infinitely satisfied in them. In his deal∣ings with mankind he calls upon them to examine their own ways, by the same rule he enters into arguments highly rational with mankind himself, he bids them to judge in their own causes between himself and them, and see if discussing things ra∣tionally, they must not necessarily fall upon that confession, That God's ways are e∣qual, but the ways of men unequal. When he recommends his mercies, when he would terrifie with his judgments, He appeals to Humane Reason still, or that share of light which we are now partakers of. Now he that will employ that light he has upon such noble subjects, if he be not prejudiced with wicked principles before, or puff'd up with self-conceit, must necessarily be a very re∣ligious man; for, the clearer any mans ra∣tional faculty is, the more pious he must be; only men of very low abilities can be either Atheists or Hereticks. It's confest indeed some Hereticks, as the Socinians in particu∣lar, with whom we are at present concern'd, pretend highly to Reason, but they only sham us with fond pretences, and their rea∣son is all empty and sophistical; and A∣theists are the Men of sence, if we may be∣lieve fools and madmen: but there is a vast difference between a flashy Wit and a ridi∣culing  Humour, and sound judgment, and solid and weighty argument. But God who knew before what artifices Hell and wicked men would make use of to pervert truth, calls upon us to exercise our reason farther, in discovering and baffling those cheats the enemies of our Souls would fain put upon us, wherein, as Hereticks and Schismaticks generally make their appeals to God's Word, and we have warning in that very Word, That in those doctrines where there's any shew of difficulty, those who are unlearned and unstable wrest the Scriptures to their own destructions: We are warn'd to try the Spirits whether they be of God; and Scripture being the rule of tryal, we are oblig'd to study the true sence and meaning of that. To which end our rational faculty carries us along in study∣ing the original Languages, in which Scri∣pture was written, and finding out the true meaning and import of words and phrases in other authors, and the modes and cu∣stoms of countries to which any Texts re∣fer. Reason goes with us in comparing text with text, and matters of faith or practice laid down in one place with those laid down in another, in observing the force of those arguments drawn from such and such Texts, their real dependance upon or direct consequence from the places alledg'd, and the general consistency of opinions offer'd with the end and design of those positive
truths laid down in Scripture, Reason has here a large field to exercise it self in. And whereas we are urg'd by some to abjure that utterly with respect to those points of faith or practice that are under debate, pretending they'd insist only on the letter of Scripture, Maximus tells us well in the formerly cited discourse of his, , they drive you from examining Scripture too strictly, insinuating that it's dangerous to pry too narrowly into secrets,
,Maximi disceptatio inter opera Athan. T. 2. p. 296. but disswading it indeed that they might avoid the reproof of their Errors from thence: where he takes farther notice, how such persons if they meet but with a word that at first hearing sounds favourably to their fancies, they run away with it without ever consi∣dering the design of the inspired Writer, or examining the agreement of their own shallow glosses with the general tenour of Holy Writ: an humour that prevails with too many still, who prefer the sound of words before the truth and pertinency of texts of Scripture; and therefore imagine themselves to argue very piously and agree∣ably to God's word, when all their talk is nothing to the purpose. But mysteries, the great mysteries of Religion are reveal'd in Scripture: it proves God's goodness yet farther, he has by that means given Reason a task proper for its exercise. For tho' our  Reason be not able to fathom all the depths of those mighty revelations; yet as Chy∣mists seeking after their great Arcanum, tho' they miss the main design, yet by the way they make a thousand useful experi∣ments, never otherwise to have been found out. So those who take due measures, and industriously insist in the searching the na∣ture of mysteries in Religion; though they can never in this life reach their utmost ex∣tent, yet they attain many things in their quest, of a very useful and a very comfortable kind. Thus we see the Weeks of Daniel, the Visions of Ezekiel, the whole book of the Revelation have given abundance of em∣ploy to the best and wisest Christians, who yet have never been able to come to any considerable agreement in the Interpretation of them; yet the learned labours of many have been so far from lost, that many excellent truths have been fully clear'd, many pious Souls wonderfully supported, and many controversies happily resolv'd to the secu∣rity and edification of the Church of God. And we have found plainly that some have seen into those mystical secrets much more clearly than others, which argues their quicker apprehensions, and their more power∣ful assistances in their studies, and is with∣al a great encouragement to others to pro∣secute the same studies with patience; since tho' their progress is not great, it may be sure, where something is attained to, more  may be; and we believe it was not with∣out reason that the author of the Apocalypse in particular begins his Visions with that,Revel. 1.3. c. 22.7. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein, and to conclude them to the same purpose. And in his Vision of that beast with seven heads and ten horns to whom the Dragon impart∣ed of his power which arose out of the sea, and of that other which came up out of the earth, that had horns like a Lamb and spake like a Dragon, he gives a kind of challenge to humane Reason, Here is wisdom,Rev. 13.18. let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast, for it is the number of a Man, and his number is 666. i. e. Here's a task fit for a man to engage himself in, here's e∣nough for him to exercise all his abilities upon. But it would be no such extraordi∣nary blessing for a man to read a book, of which he could hope to understand nothing at all; and it would be no great evidence of a man's extraordinary wisdom, to spend his time in poring after the interpretation of a mystic number, and to find out to whom it belong'd, if the whole was never design'd to be in the least intelligible. No, God never set man at work in any inquiry, but he intended the profit should at least be worth the pains. It must be confest that what Schlicktingius asserts is very true, Pro∣phetae novi Testamenti, Christo jam exorto,
arcana Dei ita explicarunt ut ab omnibus in∣telligi possint; & quae in novo Testamento scriptae extant futurorum praedictiones, claris verbis conceptae sunt: That the Prophets of the New Tastament after Christ's appea∣rance explain'd the secrets of God in such a manner as that they might be understood by all. And the predictions of future things in the New Testament are express'd in plain words: plain words may express very hard matters, and there's no need of uncouth Hyperboles, or aenigmatical or ambiguous expressions to make a thing mysterious. Our Saviour preach'd in as plain a manner as ever any did or could; yet how did the Scribes and Pharisees,Schlicktin. in 2 op. Petri c. 1. v.
21. nay, how did the Disciples themselves stumble at his fami∣liar Parables? and tho' we have them in some measure interpreted to us in the Go∣spel-story, yet many learned and good men disagree in explaining several particu∣lars contained in them still; And I have not yet found that our adversaries them∣selves pretend to an infallible exposition of any considerable difficulties: and the fore∣named Author speaking concerning the book of the Revelation, tells us it was laid down in Visions and representations, Non tam ut Christiani distinctè cognoscerent quid fu∣turum esset, id enim nec Ecclesiae, nec divinis consiliis expediebat, quin potiùs ut ex eventu praesignificatum id esse quod evenit, intellige∣rent: not so much that Christians should  know what was in future times to come to pass; for that was neither agreeable to the Churches necessities nor to Gods designs, but only that by the event of things Chri∣stians might be able to understand, that what hapned had been foretold long since. This very comparing of predictions with events would require no small intention of our rational faculties; yet here he owns these Visions and representations to be my∣sterious so long till the event unriddle them. And there's no truth of so profound a na∣ture, no expression in Scripture so difficult, but that futurity will make it all plain and delightfully intelligible to the Souls of just men made perfect: yet here's constant work for the soundest head, and the more such a one discovers of the mysteries of Religion, the more he'll be sensible of the defects of his own understanding, and he'll find the more reason to bless the name of God who has yet continued to him the ruines of a compleat understanding: and given him such subjects to exercise it upon as may gra∣dually raise it towards its original strength, till heavens glory gives it a consummate perfection. But as we are obliged to be thankful to God for giving us the use of Reason, so we must take care
To use our Reason in all debates about mat∣ters of Religion with that sober and humble Modesty as becomes Creatures so much decay'd  as we are in our most glorious endowments. It has been the abuse of reason, and a strange confidence in that which in it self at present is extreamly weak, that has introduced so many Errors and Heresies into the Church of Christ, a humble and a modest Christian would always secure himself with the fa∣mous resolution of St. Augustine, Errare pos∣sum, Haereticus esse nolo, I may fall into an Error, but I will never be an Heretick,
i. e. I'le never be obstinate in any singular opini∣on of mine own; too much diffidence of our selves makes us slaves to every one that has boldness enough to contradict us; too much confidence renders us incorrigible in our fol∣lies, even when much wiser Men would un∣dertake to instruct us; and nothing can pro∣voke God more to baffle us in all our inqui∣ries, than that innate pride which makes Men value themselves above what is fitting, for as St. James tells us, God resisteth the proud,Jam. 6.4. but he giveth grace unto the humble; there are some things which relate to Reli∣gion, wherein God has deliver'd himself so, as to let us know words and names, but has not reveal'd enough to give us an insight into the matters which are intimated under them, Men need not trouble themselves too curiously about such things; Moses taught the Israelites very well,Deut. 29.29. The secret things be∣long unto the Lord our God: and the Son of Syrach gives an excellent lesson, Seek not out things that are too hard for thee, neither search  the things that are above thy strength,Ecclus. 3.21, 22. but what is commanded thee think thereupon with reve∣rence, for it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes the things that are in secret. What if among such things I should reckon Mens over-curious enquiries into the nature of God's decrees, which enquiries have produ∣ced a great many foolish and uncharitable controversies even among good men; there is employment enough for a good Man's whole life in things more needful to be known: I will not say it's absolutely un∣lawful to be prying into what God has thought fit to express himself very obscure∣ly in, but this I'le say, that whosoever will be walking in those private paths had need to tread with a very gentle foot, to look frequently backward, and on each side, as well as forward, to be very distrustful of his own ability, very submissive to the judg∣ment of Superiors in office, age or gifts, ve∣ry earnest and indefatigable in his prayers to God for his assistance, as he shall see fit to impart it on such an occasion; very ten∣der of imposing his own judgment upon o∣thers, and of being too positive in those opinions he takes up: since the corruption of our reason, a man frequently thinks he has made a very great discovery in some weighty point, and hugs himself with the plausibility of his thoughts, he imagines, (as we are generally apt to be very fond of the products of our own brains,) every thing he
has laid down, or methodiz'd in his thoughts, to be so very plain and clear, that it's impos∣sible any man of sense should not immedi∣ately be his proselyte; and some perhaps are ready to flatter such a one in his over-ween∣ing conceit, by a pretended concurrence in their sentiments with him: after all, it hap∣pens as often, that another of as great natu∣ral abilities, and as searching a head, disco∣vers a great many mistakes in the others beautiful Scheme of thoughts, and baffles the whole invention the other had admired him∣self for: such things ought to make all, espe∣cially in religious matters, where it's dange∣rous jesting or innovating, to act with a∣bundance of circumspection; and indeed rather to confine themselves to lower studies than to hazard the over-setting their own In∣tellectuals, by engaging into boundless en∣quiries. Those things may in themselves be lawful, which yet cannot be very conveni∣ent: Some such curiosities are very idle and ridiculous, as disputing what God did be∣fore he made the World; Whether He could have pardon'd Mens sins without a Mediatour, &c. He was fatally answer'd to such a Question, who asking an Eminent Christian, what the Carpenter's Son, mean∣ing Christ, was then a doing, was told, He was making a Coffin for such a lewd Inqui∣rer as himself, who dy'd in a very few hours after.Ecclus. 3.23. The Son of Syrach advises well, Be not curious in unnecessary matters: for more
things are shew'd unto thee than men under∣stand. i. e. God has laid open such infinite treasures of Divine wisdom before us, and our understandings are so very short, that we need not look out strange subjects of our meditations, it's enough if we can in some tolerable manner comprehend those sacred truths that are deliver'd to us: and we are more concern'd to endeavour to do so, than some are ready to imagine. For though a Socinian may tell us, God has declared se∣veral things in holy Scripture, that are no way necessary to Salvation, the assertion is absurd and false; that old Axiome, Deus & Natura nihil faciunt frustra, That God and Nature never do any thing in vain is enough to refute it: for since the end of Scripture is the making Men wise to salvation, it's very bold to say God knew not how to frame such a Book, without abundance of impertinen∣cies, when we see many Men, setting much slighter ends before themselves, will yet pro∣secute their discourses in so close and exact a manner, that the most critical judgment may perhaps find what to add, but cannot find what to take away from their writings; there is therefore no positive truth asserted in holy Writ, but what is really useful to Man's Salvation, since there's nothing throughout the whole, but what serves to illustrate God's goodness, and mercy, and truth, &c. or Man's misery by Sin, or hap∣piness by Grace, or lays down rules of life  and practice, or gives us examples of Vir∣tues or Vices in others, from all which some∣thing very instructive may be drawn; nor can we believe that even the genealogical Tables in Scripture were, as a late Writer impudently suggests, design'd onely to amuse and confound us, but to set us in a way to find how all the ancient Prophecies centred in Jesus Christ, the promised Messias. As the positive assertions, so their true and ge∣nuine consequences are in some sort, and to some Men necessary to salvation, God, ha∣ving given greater capacities, and larger Souls to some than he has to others, expects proportionable improvements from them, and a Man of wisdom and learning cannot be saved onely on the same terms on which a person of low and mean endowments may; therefore those of greater parts are bound to look into every thing divinely reveal'd, and to what may be regularly deduced from it; but as perfection in good works is re∣quired in every one that is to be saved, and yet many are sav'd, tho' none are perfectly good; so it is in relation to things contain'd in Scripture, every one is bound to study them: things of common practice are plain and obvious in them, things at first to be believ'd are taken for granted, but Man is for his life-time employ'd, and to be so in farther search into the meaning of those things that are more obscure. Could Man once in his life-time attain to a perfect un∣derstanding  of every thing set down there, there would quickly be an end of all sacred study; but since the wisest find in the Word of God more than they can understand; and yet find they every day by study understand more and more; and the mean∣est wits upon a due care and industry find proportionable advances, there is always enough to excite mans utmost diligence and care; and as in practical piety, so it is here, he that improves his time best to get knowledge, tho' he cannot reach to all he should, his defects shall be pardoned for his sake, who in himself contains consummate wisdom. But it remains still true, that it could not reasonably be requir'd that a man should engage himself in the study of the whole Book of God if there were any thing positively asserted there, the knowledge and understanding of which would be lost time, as the studies of all impertinencies are. But howsoever necessary these studies are, if they are not prosecuted in a due manner, i. e. with an humble sense of our own natural defects, with a sober and sub∣missive judgment, and with all that modesty which becomes one who is desirous to learn; they'l prove but mischievous, and make Hereticks, Schismaticks or Atheists, in∣stead of knowing and improving orthodox Christians. It's true, that nothing ought to be admitted into Religion which is con∣trary to reason, but it must be understood,  which is contrary to reason in its primitive integrity, for that which we call reason now we every one find extremely subject to mistakes: and for me to measure those truths which are reveal'd by an infallible God, by the standard of that sense or judg∣ment which I know to be mistakeful and fallible, is unreasonable, with any sober discourser, to extremity: and it argues too great a pride in our low condition to ima∣gine, that because once we were made per∣fect, that therefore we should in any respect continue so, though we had sought out to our selves many inventions. Many are de∣ceived by their own vain opinion,ver. 24. says the Son of
Syrach, and nothing can certainly be more prejudicial to a Man in his disquisitions after truth, than a great conceit of his own abilities to find it out. God commonly blasts such fond pretenders to ingenuity, and makes them take a great deal of pains only to pro∣cure infamy and perpetual disgrace to them∣selves. Such mischiefs would be avoided, yet Humane Reason have it's due use and esteem if the Apostles injunction were well obey'd, that no man should think of himself more highly than he ought to think,Rom. 12.3. but to think soberly according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith. Men ought when they meet with any difficulties in di∣vine Writings, not to make their Reason the measure of Truth, but to make Truth the measure of their Reason; and rather to  suspect their own apprehension of it, than the weakness, or ambiguity on the defective∣ness of the authors assertions or expressions. And so much for the use of Humane Reason in matters of Religion; it's a great bles∣sing to us still tho' impair'd by sin, and if soberly and modestly used will by di∣vine assistance rise to a greater strength and vigour, and be able to comprehend every day more and more of the mystery of Godliness, till it comes in a glorifi'd state to comprehend every thing that can any way contribute to its consummate happiness.
Having gone thus far in the debate con∣cerning the use of Humane Reason in mat∣ters of Religion, and declared how care∣ful we should be not to indulge our selves in vain and useless curiosities; for the vin∣dication of our selves as Christians we are to consider, that a full proof of the Divi∣nity of the Son of God is a task that comes under no reproof in the case. That the blessed Jesus the great captain of our Sal∣vation is God as well as Man, that he is God of God, light of light, very God of very God, as the Nicene Creed expresses it; that he is perfect God, not a factitious or an aequivocal God, as some would have him; but that He who is God the Son is infinite in all his Attributes, God over all blessed for ever, as God the Father is, is Articulus stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiae, such an Article of our Christian Faith, so essential to the  Mystical Body of Christ, that while it's embrac'd, the Church has a real Being; when it's laid aside, the very Being of the Church expires at the same time. It's so necessary an Article of Faith, that except a man keep it whole and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly: for he that be∣lieves in such a Messias, such a Saviour who is not God, is really an Idolater, as fixing his belief in one that is not able to save. For Man's misery is too great to be reliev'd by any inferiour power; and the blood of Bulls and of Goats might as well have serv'd for the expiation of Humane guilt, as the sufferings of one who was a meer man, and consequently could have no proper merit to plead for us, no inherent power where∣with to assist us. Some of those Hereticks who deny the Divinity of the Son of God, have been so sensible of this, that they have maintain'd and preach'd it in those Con∣gregations where they have been concern'd, That it's as lawful to pray to the blessed Virgin, or to any other Saint, or any An∣gel, as it is to pray to the Son of God: and that all those are really guilty of Ido∣latry, who make any such Prayers or Sup∣plications to him. Now tho other
Socinians call these blasphemers on this account: they are really injurious to 'em; for if that which they all agree in be true, viz. That Jesus Christ is not the most high God, then who∣soever worships him as God, breaks the  first and second Commandments as much as those of the Church of Rome do, and are as notorious Idolaters, as we shall hereafter have occasion to prove. In quest then of the truth of this doctrine, That Jesus Christ is the true God, we are to bend our Reason, and to meet and baffle those great pretenders to it with their own weapons, and to prove to them that tho we think the mystery of godliness to be great, as the Text asserts it, to be
, as S. Chrysostom ex∣presses it, to be unexpressible and wonder∣ful and incomprehensible; yet we receive some considerable advantages from its be∣ing revealed: for by that means we know the , the positive truth, that he who ap∣pear'd in the flesh visible to humane eyes, and so far humbled to atone for humane Crimes, was really God: hence to be ador'd by us, hence able to perform the work he came about, and to save to the utmost all those that come to the Father in and by him; and this we firmly and stedfastly be∣lieve, tho' we cannot comprehend the , or the manner how so great a miracle of Mercy should be brought about: and those proofs by any particulars whatsoever laid down, of this truth, using reason with that sobriety and modesty which we ought, we may examine and try throughly, and judge how far they come up to those things they are designed to make good; and so our Faith it  self may be rational and thence invincible, tho' every particular of it be not intelli∣gible to us in its full extent. With rela∣tion to the Text then we assert That the Mystery of Godliness which the Apostle tells us is great, cannot be apply'd to the several particulars laid down in the latter part of the verse: for let us with Grotius, by the
mystery of godliness understand the Gospel, as we commonly understand it, and which we own does contain the mystery of godliness. That the Gospel was preach'd by weak Men we own, nay, that our Savi∣our himself in his state of exinanition, or in his humane nature appear'd weak and contemptible enough we own too: but that the Gospel appear'd in the flesh, or cloath'd with flesh, which is the proper im∣port of the Apostles phrase, we deny as ab∣surd. That the Gospel was justified in or by the Spirit, the miraculous effusions of that, confirming the truth of the Gospel preach'd, we may own well enough; but that the Gospel was seen of Angels is scarce sence, that it was never known before it had been declar'd by Men is false, for the Angels could not be unacquainted with the several Pro∣phecies of the old Testament concerning the Messias to come; nor could they be so far to seek in the meaning of those Prophecies, many of which they had been instrumen∣tal in delivering: and the Angels them∣selves  were indeed the first preachers of the Gospel; So the Angel Gabriel tells Zacha∣rias concerning the Son that should be born to him, Many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the chil∣dren,Luke 1.16, 17. and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. The same Gabriel afterwards tells the blessed Virgin; Behold thou shalt con∣ceive in thy womb and shalt bring forth a Son, and shalt call his name Jesus.v. 31, 32, 33. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the high∣est, and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David. And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. It was an An∣gel that appear'd to Joseph in a dream,Matth. 1.20, 21. and told him that his espoused wife was with child of the Holy Ghost, And she shall bring forth a Son, says he, and thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins. Again, an Angel of the Lord tells the Shepherds who were watching their flocks by night,Luke 2.10, 11, 13, 14. Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people; For unto you is born this day in the city of David, a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. To which Gospel a whole Choir of Angels subjoyned their Eucharistical Hymn, Glory be to God on high, in earth peace, good will towards men.
These instances are enough to prove that Angels knew the Gospel before men preacht it: not to mention their administring to our Saviour in the wilderness, when entring on his prophetical Office, and their pub∣lishing his resurrection, the great confirma∣tion of the Gospel before his Apostles had any apprehensions of it. The Gospel was indeed preach'd unto the Gentiles, and be∣liev'd on in the World; but it was far from being receiv'd in glory: for it was scorn'd and derided, and cruelly persecu∣ted both by Jews and Gentiles: the Devil raising all the powers in the world as far as possible, for the extirpation of what was so great an enemy to his Tyranny; the Gospel then will not answer all those parti∣cular marks set down in the Text. Neither yet are they applicable to God the Father, as several of the Socinians would have them, for to say God the Father was manifest in the flesh, because his will was preach'd by Men, who were but flesh and blood, besides that such an assertion quits the Suppositum, or Subject which was God the Father, unless God and Gods will be one and the same thing, which cannot be asser∣ted, It's so uncouth an expression, as is no where to be parallel'd either in Scripture, or any Ecclesiastical Writer. We read not any where that God the Father ever appear'd in the flesh, or assum'd Humane nature, nor did
ever any dream of such a thing, unless we recur to the ancient Patropassians, so call'd, because they believ'd it was really God the Father, who being Incarnate suffer'd death on the Cross, for the sins of Mankind, but of that we have no foot-steps in holy Writ: nor was the Deity it self ever made manifest in the flesh, but in the flesh of the blessed Jesus,Col. 2.9. in whom
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily: not in his doctrine, as the Socinians would have it, but in himself;Vid. Schlicktin. in loc. and according to their own demands on the like occasion, we would have them shew us some other clear place of Scripture, wherein God the Father is said to be manifest in the flesh, or to be manifest in Christ and the Apostles, and then we may the better consent to their interpretation: Again, it's as odd and un∣usual to say, God the Father was justified in the Spirit, for what need was there of any such justification? his Eternal Power and Godhead were visible in the Universal fa∣brick of nature, and all the Miracles done by our Saviour, (which Socinians refer to the influence of the Spirit,) were done that Men might know he was the promis'd Messias; and those done by the Apostles after his as∣cent into Heaven, carry'd along with them the same respect; but we never heard of any publick declaration made by the Spirit, for a more peculiar conviction of the World, that the most High God, was God indeed, or the true God: we may understand things  thus, as the Socinians say, but we may a great deal better let it alone, and not run into such interpretations of God's Word, as we can neither reconcile to truth nor sense. If we go farther, the matter is not mended at all, when we say God the Father was seen of Angels, for what novelty was there in that? had not they stood continually before his face from the instant of their first Crea∣tion? or should we flie to God's will, was not that known to his peculiar Ministers, till such time as they came to learn it by the preaching of mortal men? who can imagine so short a Text of Scripture, and design'd to make known the greatest mystery in the world, should lash out into such absolute im∣pertinencies? but to proceed, God the Fa∣ther was preach'd to the Gentiles, but where? he's mention'd often doubtless as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in those Epistles written by the Apostles, to their Gentile Converts, but the Gospel it self is stil'd the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Apostles pretend to preach, nay to know nothing among their Converts, but Jesus Christ,1 Cor. 2.2.
and him crucified, as St. Paul expres∣ses himself, if we must say God the Father was preach'd, he was certainly preach'd most to the Antediluvian World by Noah and the elder Patriarchs, or he was preach'd to the Jews, of whom we acknowledge that they had no such distinct notions of the Trinity, as we by the Gospels assistance have at pre∣sent;  but yet both among Jews and Gentiles he was declar'd by other names, than that of God the Father: and if, according to our common Logical notions, Relatives do mu∣tually suppose or remove one another, if Jesus Christ was not really and actually the Son of God, pre-existent to his incarnation, the name of Father could not properly have been apply'd to the supreme God, nor he be preach'd to the World under that chara∣cter; so that in fine, we conclude that the preaching of God the Father to the World, was no part of the Mystery of Godliness: Nor is it properly so to say, that God the Father was believ'd on in the World, for that too was nothing newly effected by the appearance of our Saviour, the World in general from its first original believ'd there was a God, if there were any who from those apprehensions they had of the existence of a God, set themselves to live virtuously, as considering that God under the notion of a knowing and severe Judge, and one capable of rewarding men according to their works, such Persons believ'd in God according to our own sense, when we repeat the Creed: Now that some did thus believe before our Saviour's appearance in the flesh is unquesti∣onable; all those who liv'd religiously be∣fore the promulgation of the Mosaic Law, did thus believe in God, and are some of them remembred as the great Heroes of Faith, in the beginning of the Eleventh
Chapter to the Hebrews: If then this were a Mystery, it was of a very ancient standing, and discovered long before the coming of Christ. The application of the particulars thus far failing, we have some reason to be∣lieve, that neither will the last agree any bet∣ter to that imposed sense; He was received up in glory, or into glory: Here our adver∣saries flie to God's will again, so confound∣ing God and God's will, as if they were not to be considered as distinct, but this we have consider'd before, where we observed that contradiction the Gospel met with in the World: As to God the Father, where or when, or how, or by whom was he receiv'd up in glory, the holy Scriptures give us no intimation of his having descended at any time from Heaven to Earth, and He that's receiv'd up into glory ought to be so receiv'd by some Being superior to himself, which a Socinian knows God the Father cannot have, now as the Apostle teaches us, He that de∣scended,Eph. 4.10. is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things: but God the Father never that we hear of in Scripture descended, therefore God the Fa∣ther who ever of himself was surrounded with infinite glory, never was by any receiv'd up into glory: And thus have we shown the vanity of those glosses, which the Socinians, and others have fixt upon this Text; we shall now show to whom the particulars in the Text do properly and unquestionably be∣long.
And here, since Scripture makes it very plain, that the whole method of serving God in an acceptable manner, is laid down by our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: That, as himself tells us, He is the Way, the Truth,John 14.6. and the Life, and no man comes to the Father but by him: The whole mystery of Godliness or of true Christian Religion can consist in nothing, but what refers to him, who is the author of it, that is the blessed Jesus; con∣cerning whom, and whose doings and suffer∣ings for us, there is nothing reveal'd in the Gospel, or in the foregoing prophecies, but what's mysterious: He was indeed God ma∣nifest in the flesh, God blessed for ever, yet for the sake of wretched Sinners descending to Earth, and taking our Nature upon him, being cloth'd with flesh, and all those in∣cumbrances and infirmities attending upon a mortal state, sin onely excepted; He is that eternal Word which was in the begin∣ing with God, nay that Word that was God,John 1.1.14. and that Word was made flesh, and dwelt a∣mong us, as we learn from St. John: Now if Christ really was God, the most opinionative of the Socinians would conclude the Text plain enough, for that Christ was certainly and literally made flesh: but if we cannot read this Text of the Apostle truly without inserting the word God: And Smalcius one of the great promoters of the Socinian he∣resie declares;Smalc. de verbo in∣carnato. c.
18. Nos Graecum textum Vulgatae longe esse anteponendum censemus, is vero ha∣bet  Deum in carne esse manifestatum, We look upon the Greek Text as far to be preferr'd before the Vulgar Latine, and the Greek reads it,
God was manifest in the flesh: and if neither the Gospel, nor the will of God, nor God the Father can properly or truly be said to be made flesh, and yet God was manifest in the flesh, then that Jesus who was truly and literally cloth'd with our flesh, must be that God; the farther proof of Christ's real and eternal Divinity belongs to another place: but his true and indisputable huma∣nity is the first plain and most obvious asser∣tion of the Apostle here: This same blessed Jesus was as plainly justified in the Spirit, since not onely the miracles he did justified him in the sight of all Mankind, and prov'd that he could be no cheat or Impostor, as the Jews were willing to have him thought, but at the time of his Baptism by John in Jordan, while he was praying, the Heaven was open'd, and the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape, like a Dove, upon him, and a voice came from Heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son,Luke 3.21, 22. in thee I am well pleas'd: Now the Holy Spirit would not in so open a manner have descended on him, who had pretended to that relation to All∣mighty God, which really never belong'd to him: Therefore John the Baptist makes a right inference from that descent; I saw, says he,Joh. 1.32, the Spirit descending from Heaven like a Dove, and it abode upon him: And I  knew him not,v. 33, 34. but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Ʋpon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw and bare record that this is the Son of God. Our Lord himself makes it one of his last instructions to his Disciples, that when the Comforter, that Holy Spirit whom he would send, should come, he should, amongst other things, convince the world of righteousness; because He, the blessed Jesus, went to his Father, and the world should see him no more:c.
16. v. 8. 10, 14. and that that Holy Spirit should glorifie him, for he should receive of his and shew it to men. And thus effectually that Sacred Spirit when he was so plenti∣fully according to promise pour'd out on the Apostles and their companions, enabled them to prove that Christ was the Son of God: and to confirm their rational argu∣ments and deductions from the Old Testa∣ment by a thousand signs and miracles, such as made the most stubborn of mankind bow their necks to the yoke of Christ, and own that He was truly what he call'd himself, the Son of God, and the Saviour of the World. If we proceed according to the Apostles method, Jesus Christ God Incar∣nate was seen of Angels, seen with the greatest admiration, since even Angelic in∣tellectuals could never have reach'd so far as to imagine God's love to mankind,  which yet they knew to be extraordinary, should shew it self in so prodigious a conde∣scension: Yet when he was pleas'd to stoop so low, the Angels saw, and knew, and prais'd him tho' wrapt in swadling clothes and lying in a manger: they ador'd him, and administred to him, tho' tempted forty days and forty nights by the Devil in the wilderness; they attended him with their ministerial comforts, when in that bitter agony in the garden when praying more earnestly his sweat was as it had been great drops of blood falling down to the ground;Luke 22.43, 44. They attended his sepulchre, when he shook off the fetters of Death,Matt. 28.2, 3, 4. Acts 1.10. and broke through the confinement of the grave, stri∣king terror on the trembling Watch, but bringing comfort to the women whose ear∣ly zeal brought them first to the sacred Se∣pulchre; and they waited as diligently on his ascent into Heaven, so that they saw him, and admired that immense love which appeared so glorious in his humble, and so powerful in his exalted state. This Saviour of the world, that he might really be so, was preach'd unto the Gentiles, the Word of God was now confin'd no longer to the Jewish nation, that vail of the Temple rent in twain when he gave up the ghost upon the Cross, took away that wall of separa∣tion which was between those Jews and the rest of mankind, and through him both Jews and Gentiles have access by one Spirit untoEph.
2.28.  the father: Now of himself, in this case He taught his disciples after his resurrection, That thus it behoved Christ to suffer,Luke 24.46, 47. and to rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations be∣ginning at Jerusalem. Thus Philip preached Christ in Samaria, Paul preached him every where in the Synagogues; Paul declares to the Corinthians, We preach Christ crucified,1 Cor. 1.23, 24. to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness: but unto them which are call'd both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. And many Texts we meet with declaring the same thing, and teaching us, that it's the great incumbent duty on all those who call themselves Pastors of the flock of Christ, to preach him, and him only to the world. For he who was so preach'd to the Gentiles was indeed believed on in the world; The three Eastern Sages, who adored our Saviour in his infant age, were the first fruits of the Gentile world, and even Samaritans were profelyted to his Doctrine while he converst with the world; to believe in him was that condition with∣out which Salvation could not be attained. So he teaches Nicodemus,John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him should not perish but have everlasting life.v.
18. He that believeth on him is not condemned, but he that believeth not is condemned already: because he hath  not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. It was a just sense of the indispensible nature of this condition, that made men submit so readily to the first preaching of the Apostles, and fly out so eagerly and so early into that Question, What shall we do to be saved? 'Twas that which in Judaea brought multi∣tudes daily into the Church, of such as should be saved: and enabled S. Paul to preach the Gospel fully from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, and that with extra∣ordinary success: and gave Tertullian in the Second Century a just ground to boast of the vast multitudes of Christians in every quarter of the Roman Empire. And to this day the same blessed Jesus is the only rational hope of all that dwell on the earth, and of those that remain on the broad Sea. To conclude this explication of the Text, this same Jesus after he had done and suffered so much for our sakes, while he converst with and blest his Disciples,Luke 24.51. he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven: He had at last that Petition answered which in the days of his flesh he put up to his Father.
Now O Father glorifie thou me with thine own self,John 17.5. with the glory which I had with thee be∣fore the world was! And if it was glorious for Elijah to be carried up to Heaven in his fiery chariot while Elisha was a spectator of his translation; how much more glorious was it when our Saviour in the open view of  all his followers, had the clouds themselves humbly bowing to his feet to raise him thi∣ther, where he sits continually at the right hand of his Father making intercession for us miserable sinners. Having thus given the true interpretation of the Text, take its full meaning together in this Paraphrase, S. Paul still speaking to and instructing Ti∣mothy as in this Verse he does.
It's not without great Reason that I have given thee, who art thy self a Bishop in it, such directions about those whom thou art to admit as Ministers in the Church of God. That Religion our blessed Master has be∣queathed to us, has nothing in it but what is Holy and Pure, too pure to be touch'd with unclean hands, and not fit for every unlearned and presuming Novice to meddle with. The whole Body of our Faith is founded upon such things as are infinitely true, but of so sublime and surprising a Na∣ture, that the strongest Humane Reason can never wholly comprehend them all: let me but name them as reveal'd, and all mankind will soon agree, that the most soaring and capacious Soul must falter in its enquiries after them. The eternal Son of God, God equal with his Father, the great Creator of all things; rather than perishing man should be eternally lost, resolv'd to atone divine vengeance with his own sufferings, and since without blood there could be no remission, and the immense Divinity could not suffer  so, He took flesh and blood, our weak and passible nature upon himself, and in our na∣ture offered himself a sacrifice to his Father for us. This glorious Sacrifice produc'd the great effect, and reconciled our angry Judge; but that undertaking was too great for man, tho' so deeply concern'd, to be∣lieve; the chasm between an holy God and polluted man too wide and hideous deep ever to be made up. It's true, when God himself was mention'd as the undertaker of so great a work, even despairing man might entertain some dawning hopes; but when they saw a poor Carpenter's Son, one who had not so much as where to lay his head, assume yet the glorious title of the world's Redeemer and Saviour, their hopes slagg'd, their almost grasped joys seem'd just vanish∣ing into empty air: When the Holy Ghost, God too, infinitely good, and powerful, and wise, interpos'd, and attended that humble Man with so much vigour and con∣stancy, that He, by a thousand glorious actions, and by a close and perpetual cor∣respondence with Heaven, visible even to vulgar eyes, prov'd the entire Union that was between himself and his Father, and that Sacred Spirit: and justified himself in the thoughts of very aliens themselves, who could not but acknowledge, of a truth, that, for all his mean appearance and his scandalous Passion on the Cross, He was the Son of God. But could men have  doubted still, the happy Angels those purer and more discerning Spirits saw him too, they saw him and knew him, and ador'd him, they saw their mighty Lord, tho' veil'd in all the rags of poor mortality: And tho' sin might have made a former breach between those blessed Spirits and polluted man; yet now where their Lord loved they lov'd too, and always look'd, and always waited on him while he wrought the worlds redemption: while he was so justified and so attended on, divers gave up themselves absolutely to his service, whom he lov'd, and taught, and protected, and endued with miraculous knowledge, elo∣quence and courage, and sent them on that blessed errand to preach to the
Gentiles the glad tydings of Salvation in his name: They boldly undertook the work, and tho' they had ignorance and prejudice, and malice and cunning to contend with: meer men contemn'd before, but then inspired, broke through all opposition, and the forsaken Gentiles heard the gladsome sounds of peace; and tho' there were too many enemies to their own good, yet those laborious mes∣sengers of Heaven preached with that power and efficacy, that men began every where to call on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Nay, the more men of perverse minds cross'd the designs of that Gospel preach'd in the name of the Son of God, the more those who believed in him were  multiplied. As for himself, when he had finished that stupendous work, and by his own Death had conquered Hell and Death; He broke those fatal chains, and rose again, no more lyable to humane rage. His Al∣mighty Father who had viewed all the pro∣digious efforts of his Love to mankind with an ineffable complacency, reach'd out his holy arm to receive that very humane Nature in which his beloved Son had done and suffered so much: from him the chearful clouds were sent for a Chariot, and he went upwards flying upon the wings of the wind, while jcund Angels, those ministerial flames, wait∣ed on his triumphs, and taught his wondring followers what they were afterwards to ex∣pect from their Redeemer: These are those mighty mysteries, on which our most holy faith is built, their truth, however unintelli∣gible to us, is our security, and the sincerity of our faith will necessarily show it self in an holy conversation and godliness. The Verse I have explain'd, then imports, That without Controversie the Mystery of Godliness is great; or in more words, That the Basis or foundation of that Religion introduced into the World by the Doctrine of Christ's Go∣spel, is indisputably and agreeably to the na∣ture of Religion, to Humane reason extremely profound and unintelligible. To prove this, we shall enquire, Into the Ʋniversal agreement of all persons, of what Religion soever; That Mysteries are essential to Religion.
Whether our Saviour intended the entire a∣bolition of all other Religions, for the settlement of his own, or rather to unite what was good in every distinct Religion into one, and to sub∣lime or perfect that so, as it might tend most to God's glory, and Man's happiness, and whether that could be effected, Men standing in their present corrupt state, without the retaining of old, or instituting of new Mysteries in his Re∣ligion. What considerable advantages can accrue to Religion, from those Mysteries it's founded upon? Then we must enquire into that Ʋniver∣sal agreement of all persons whatsoever, that Mysteries, or some principles or circumstances of a more secret and abstruse nature, are essen∣tial to all Religion: But here to prevent all mistakes, it must be remember'd, That so much as concerns the practical part of Re∣ligion, as contain'd in the Word of God, is so clear and evident, that the words of St. Paul are justly apply'd to them, If they be hid, they are hid to those that are lost, whose eyes the God of this World hath blinded, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ should not shine upon them:2 Cor. 4.3, 4. The words whereby all things necessary to be done to∣ward the attainment of eternal life, are ex∣prest, are such and so plain, that the simplest Christian may understand them: And that person who goes about to involve the pra∣ctical duty of a Christian, whether in respect
of his communication with God or man, in obscure and mysterious terms, crosses the end of the Gospel, which is to instruct the weakest understanding in an easie and intel∣ligible way how to live godly, righteously, and soberly in this present evil world; yet it must be acknowledged, that, even in rela∣tion to practice, there are some apparent dif∣ficulties; and notwithstanding all that plain∣ness apparent in God's word, a Man has a very hard task sometimes to distinguish be∣tween what's lawful and what's unlawful; such cases are commonly known by the name of Cases of Conscience, or such matters wherein so many arguments, seemingly strong and plausible, appear on both sides to the understanding, that it knows not which way to act, and all that hesitancy or doubtfulness arises onely from a fear of of∣fending God: These generally respecting Christian practice, create a great deal of trouble, frequently to very good Men, (for others are seldom troubled with such reli∣gious fears) and these are sometimes by various and unusual circumstances rendred so very intricate, that the wisest and most discerning Men are often at a loss to clear and resolve them to the Querent's satisfacti∣on: Here the Jews were order'd to have re∣course to their Priests, whose lips were sup∣pos'd to preserve knowledge, and the Priests when there was any thing of a more inex∣tricable nature, had the Ʋrim and Thummim  to appeal to: The Heathens had some e∣mergent doubts, as to matter of publick management of themselves, which some∣times perplex'd them too, and they had their imaginary wise Men the Priests, attending their desecrated altars, who would assume, as if they had the art of resolving doubts; those who profess Christianity have still a severer task in these matters, as having no Oracle immediately to consult, and having doubts more numerous and obscure to contend with. But here learning, and study, a strict fami∣liarity with God's Word, and an exercised experience carry the Christian Priest thro' a great many vexatious enquiries, and a mo∣dest consultation with others, who are blest with such qualifications, tends much to the settlement of dubious minds; but after all, these are properly no mysteries, for the rules of Scripture, by which such inquiries are ul∣timately determined, are very plain and ob∣vious to every understanding, their nature being like that of a Light in a dark place, which serves to guide and direct Travellers in the way they should go; but the occasion of these doubts is the misapplication of rules to matter of fact, the misapprehension or misrepresentation of circumstances,
&c. wherein the distempers of the Soul are much like the diseases of the body, if the Patient can give a just and rational account of those parts about him which are griev'd, and how he finds himself, the Physician easily under∣stands  the disease, and is able to apply the proper medicines: but if the Patient gives a broken and uncertain account of his con∣dition, even a skilful Physician may grosly mistake the disease and its remedy to the Pa∣tient's ruine; so when doubting Christians understand not the state of their own Souls, nor the first motives or occasions of their fears, or where they are afraid or ashamed to lay open themselves with all sincerity to him, from whom they expect relief, it's not to be wondred at, if excellent advices fail of their proper effect, whereas a true insight into a Man's self makes the greatest seem∣ing difficulties easily and certainly determi∣nable.
As for matters of Faith they are of ano∣ther nature, and (tho' matters of practice, so far as practice is religious, depend upon what the Christian believes altogether and are so very plain as I shew'd before) yet those objects of faith, are so far beyond the reach of reason, as it is from Earth to Heaven; nay, that very faith without which, as we are sufficiently assur'd, it's impossible to please God, though it be inherent in the pious Soul, is absolutely mysterious and in∣explicable. We feel the prodigious force of it in those acts whereby it raises the Soul to a contemplation of Divine things, but it is as the Prophets of old felt the inspiring energy of the sacred Spirit, when they spoke what it dictated, but could give no account  of the methods of its operation in them; the Apostle when he tells us of it, that it's ,Heb. 11.1. the substance of things hoped for, and that it's  the argumental evidence of things not seen; tho' he gives us doubtless an authentick description of that necessary grace, yet shows the unintelligible nature of it by his very expressions: for what dif∣ference is there among Learned Men, and how much pains taken to clear the meaning of this description? It imports indeed that true faith is of so efficacious a nature, that tho' it have respect onely to things which are at a distance, yet it represents them to the Soul so plainly and so powerfully, that the Soul reaps equal satisfaction from that distant view as it would from an immediate possession. Meginhardus the German Monk writes well of it, when he says, Faith is called the substance of things hoped for by a figure, not that it's really their proper substance, but because that faith which works by love, by which the just live, and by which power is given to us that we should be call'd and real∣ly be the Sons of God, that faith in the trou∣blesome pilgrimage of this life meditates on the reward of eternal happiness with so firm and certain an hope, Ʋt in corum cordi∣bus qui charitate, quae per spiritum sanctum in eis diffusa est, dilatantur,Vid. Di∣ctericum in voce.
jam nunc per ineffa∣bile desiderium ea faciat subsistere, that even at this time by that ineffable ardency of de∣sire  they are possest with, it makes them subsist in their hearts who have hearts en∣larged with that charity or Love which is pour'd into them by the holy Spirit; and Jaeobus Capellus in our Criticks explains the same Apostolical expression thus, Fiducia est velut in statione manens ac rem promissam expectans cum animi submissione, habénsque simul vim & statuminandi sperantem, & si∣stendi rem speratam; i. e. This faith is a confidence well fixt and setled, waiting for the thing promised with a due submission of mind, and having a force in it self suf∣ficient to support him that hopes, and to bring to hand the thing hoped for. Again, it's the evidence of things not seen, there∣fore out-going humane reason in this life, for if humane reason were clear enough to prove to us those things undeniably which we expect in a future state, there would then be no need of any other evidence, at least we should not by the Apostle be referr'd to an evidence naturally more obscure, when reason, that by which we do or should most commonly act, could give us what was much more plain and obvious; but our reason be∣ing notoriously defective in the case, our firm belief that there is an Heaven of joys, and an Hell of woes to be met with here∣after, is an argument not to be answer'd, that there are really such things; for the Soul of Man is not easily carried out of it self in∣to violent longings after a meer phantastical  good, nor is it ordinarily terrified with ap∣prehensions of Mormoes or bug-bears, but where it runs out most into fabulous or fi∣gurative expressions of its expectations, there's somewhat real and sound in the bot∣tom; so those that talk of infernal Judges in Hell, and various kinds of sensible pains to be there felt, and of Furies torturing Souls, &c. all agree certainly in that, that vengeance does certainly attend ill actions, and that tho' Men may escape plausibly in this world, they shall certainly suffer terribly in the next, tho' they cannot make a tole∣rable conjecture how a guilty Spirit should suffer to such extremity: In the same man∣ner, those that tell us of Elysian fields a∣dorn'd with variety of beautiful Flowers, blest with a serene Air and a continual Spring, where those that have done well, happy in each others society, shall live in un∣disturb'd pleasures beyond the reach of fates malice, or times consumption, All such prove their certain belief, that there is and shall be a reward for the righteous, that is an unal∣lay'd felicity to be attain'd; but what a kind of felicity that is which is infinite and eter∣nal, who can tell? nay who would value them as the Saints do, if they could possibly com∣prehend them? No, it is because eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entred into the heart of man to conceive how great those things are, which God has prepared for those that love him, Therefore the holy and the wise are  always panting after those enjoyments, as the thirsty Hart pants after the water brooks, therefore they are willing to undergo every thing that a malignant World can lay upon them, as being certainly assured, that what∣soever the joys of Heaven are, all the afflicti∣ons or sufferings they can meet with in this World are not worthy to be compared with them; Impressions looking toward these things are so natural to the Soul of Man, that all the artifices of wickedness are not able to efface them, and yet the consequen∣ces of these impressions are so great and my∣sterious, that all the wit of Man cannot possibly comprehend them, yet faith goes through with all, and is not, cannot be mi∣staken in its confidence at last.
If Faith it self, the continual security of the Soul, be so dark and undefinable, what must we judge of the objects of it, they being generally so vast, that Faith it self, soaring as it is, can go but a very little way in its Idea's of them: that the objects of Faith are real and true, is evident from what has been said, that their Nature is incom∣prehensible, and their Reasons inscrutable to created Beings, is as true, but not at all to be wonder'd at; since there are a thou∣sand common effects of Nature, the truth of which we are beyond contradiction con∣vinced of: but why they should happen so or so, the cunningest Philosophers are no more able to resolve than despised Ideots  or Naturals. Agreeably to what I am urging I instanc'd before in the being of God, a truth which Men cannot balk tho' they take never so much pains to that purpose; that this God, this supreme Governour or Manager of all things must some way or other communi∣cate himself to his Creatures, for that other∣wise they could neither pretend to a well be∣ing, or a being, is as clear by rational dis∣course: but how God should communicate of himself to these creatures, where there is so vast a disproportion in their Natures, is a riddle which we have not yet found any Apollo subtle enough to resolve; and yet that God does communicate himself to his creatures is as plain, and undeniable. Those who engage themselves into enquiries about these things do but lose themselves in inex∣tricable Labyrinths, and indeed, according to the genuine rules of right reason, do but take pains to no purpose; it was that ge∣neral sense which mankind all along has had of these things, that has made them endea∣vour to frame some short Idea's of the Deity to themselves, and so, tho' they could con∣ceive nothing adaequate to his Nature, yet they have run high as words can carry them, when they stile God a being infinitely just, powerful, good, merciful, wise, &c. These general notions of theirs in some measure influenc'd the lives of many, but much more all the external and visible parts of their re∣ligious Devotions: And when they have
shewed their utmost skill in contriving Schemes of divine Worship, those men have done best and most sutably to the nature of Religion, who have contrived the outward parts of it so, as they might a little shadow out the necessary apprehensions of the di∣vine Nature, and yet so too that the Devo∣toes, who made the nicest observations of things, might be sensible, that those exter∣nal religious shews referred to a great deal of a darker and more inintelligible nature, and which no Symbols whatsoever could possibly illustrate or represent; and those Divine Oracles which were spoken of in all parts of the World, as they rendred Re∣ligion more August and Venerable to the eye of the World, so the nature of those Oracles convinced the World yet more strongly of the defectiveness of humane un∣derstanding, the certain knowledge of fu∣turity where men imagine themselves free agents, being Essential to the Deity, but one of the most puzling things humane Rea∣son can possibly fix upon: This the Romans and their predecessors the Latines repre∣sented by a Janus with two faces, the He∣trurians by a Janus with four, which might, as some tell us, refer to the four parts of the year, but more genuinely it represented the Deity looking every way, so that no∣thing past, present or to come could possibly avoid its knowledge; and the Prophets of old had that character as communicated to  them from the inspiring Deity, that they knew, ,Didymus in Hom. Iliad. 1. v. 70. it being as Didymus tells us, , the part of a compleat Prophet to understand exactly the three differences of times. Men are apt to be presuming enough on the depth of their own understanding, but we find Heresies, since the propagation of Christi∣anity, have taught men much more confi∣dence than ever Nature did; and therefore as we find Philosophers of old the more rati∣onal the more modest, but that those who set up for senceless Paradoxes made it their business to hector every body into their own notions, and to make up their want of argu∣ment by face and metal, as we may see in Lucretius his Epicurean Poem, So Schisma∣ticks and Hereticks in the Christian Church, the farther they fly from the genuine pra∣ctice of ancient Christians and the Doctrine of the Gospel, the more positive and daring they are in their assertions, the more close Communion they pretend to hold with God, and to be the very privadoes of Heaven; as the profligate Gnosticks of old pretended to know every thing, when indeed they knew nothing; and some wretched Ignorants of late years, when they have been led Captives by the Devil at his will, have yet talked of being godded with God and
Christed with Christ: And our followers of Socinus who run violently against the stream of Reason,  bear themselves for the greatest rationalists in the world: Whereas Nature tho' cor∣rupted taught Men modestly to own their own ignorance, to confess their inability to comprehend all those mysteries attendant on the Deity, to look upon shadows and represen∣tations of things at a distance, as the best way of imprinting reverence upon Mens minds, and therefore to satisfie themselves with such shadows and figures, lest by pretending to more they should fall into absurdities, and by that means render themselves and Religion contemptible and ridiculous. God took a particular care of the Jewish Nation, and instituted all those Rites and Ceremonies which they made use of in their worship, all which Rites and Ceremonies were either so many
remembrancers of things past, as the great goodness and mercy of God shewn to the people of Israel, and his justice or vengeance on their enemies; or otherwise they were so many types and sha∣dows of things to come, and particularly of that Messias or Saviour of the world to be born into it in fulness of time: Now the manner of Gods avenging himself on his own and his peoples enemies was uncouth and prodigious; but the birth of a Saviour, one who by his interest with Heaven should visit and redeem his people, to procure Sal∣vation for the whole world, was altogether a mystery, a means of procuring the worlds happiness, which all the Witts in it could  never have pitched upon. There was not among the Jews the least garment belong∣ing to those who officiated in holy services which had not something mysterious in it, I own these Mysteries were not like those wherein our Faith is so deeply concern'd, but they were Mysteries still, tho' of a lower fourm: and such Mysteries as the generality of the Jewish people were very far from diving into; yet Reason would have gone a considerable way in teaching the Jews what God insinuated to them by such pre∣scriptions: All the circumstantials of Jewish worship were render'd the more considerable by those never-failing Oracles issued out from between the Cherubims, and by Pro∣phets raised up among them by God him∣self frequently, till such time as they lost the glory of their Nation by Captivity and Slavery to prevailing strangers: Those Re∣velations which such Prophets had, extend∣ing particularly to future events of things, were such as really entangled the
Jews strangely, and they, who, among Mysteries reveal'd, had unhappily pitched upon a wrong interpretation of things, were un∣capable at last of applying events to Pro∣phecies and so ruin'd: It's true the Priests themselves at first understood the meaning of things well enough, but time corrupted them, and introduced ignorance among them as well as among the vulgar; but what∣soever the Priests understood at first, or how  much soever of the true meaning of things they understood at last: they were yet not to cast pearles before swine, nor holy things to dogs, they were not to prostiture Mystical matters to every common enquirer, tho' at the same time ready to teach Gods statutes and judgments to every one that humbly sought for information; but as to the manner of God's delivering their Law to Moses in Ho∣reb, and his writing the Ten Command∣ments with the finger of God on the stone-Tables, his guarding and directing them by a Cloud all day, and by a pillar of Fire all night, his Glory shining at particular times and on particular occasions in the Ta∣bernacle of the Congregation, his deliver∣ing his Will from the Mercy-Seat, and be∣ing said to dwell peculiarly between the Che∣rubims, his oracular resolution difficulties by Ʋrim and Thummim, &c. These were matters of so profound and inextricable a Nature, that neither Priests nor people were ever able to give any considerable account of them. If among the divine Institutions of the Jews there were so many matters of a mysti∣cal Nature, it's not to be wondred that Their Worship, who had no assistance by divine Revelation, should be more than or∣dinarily encumbred with them; the Notions which the
Gentile world had of a Deity, tho' positive and uncontroulable enough, were, according to the means they had for  acquiring divine Knowledge, much more obscure than those of the Jews: if yet they would have a shew of any Religion, they were under a necessity of suiting it with some circumstantial rites, which when they had try'd their utmost skill had a meaning, but that meaning was very obscure: We may believe that many of their Priests en∣deavour'd to make as deep impressions as they could of Religion upon the minds of those men they were concerned with, but the greatest satisfaction they had in their own inventions was but this, that the no∣torious obscurity of their publick Rites, was very exactly representative of that God whom they acknowledged a Being infinite and in∣comprehensible, and those things which were mysterious even in the sence of their first Inventors, were much more so when they fell into the hands of their Successors, who being blind Leaders of the blind, all sence of true natural Divinity was quickly lost both among Priests and People: thus we have reason to think the Hieroglyphical Theology of the Aegyptians was in a great measure rais'd from those hints they had taken of Man's duty to the World's Creator, from their converse with the Jewish Patriarchs, that the first contrivers of it were capable of making it considerably useful and instructive to the World, and from thence those seeds of Moral Virtues, which bore some fruit in ancient Heathens, had their originals;
but when sloth and negligence took place among their degenerate posterity, and the cruelty of Cambyses King of Persia destroy'd all the Priests of that Nation without di∣stinction, the whole body of their Divinity was lost, some of its characters may be still remaining among old pillars or obelisks and other ruines of their ancient magnificence, but as unintelligible to us as the Chinese writing is to a common labourer, or the squaring of a Circle to one that never heard of Mathematicks. All Men from the world's beginning acknow∣ledged God's Ʋniversal Sovereignty by offer∣ing Sacrifices. That Men offer'd Sacrifices and of living creatures too, very early, is apparent by the History of Cain and Abel,Gen 3.1, 2, 3, 4. where we are told that in process of time, i.e. as soon as they were in a capacity of doing so, Cain who was a tiller of the ground brought of the fruit of the ground an offering to the Lord, and Abel who was a keeper of sheep brought of the firstlings of his flock and the fat thereof: But that these were the first Sacrifices offer'd, we have no reason to con∣clude, since Adam had the same sence of things, and the same motives to offer Sacri∣fices which They had, and doubtless set them an example of so doing. Eusebius of Cae∣sarea, tho' observed to be singular in the case, gives much the best and most rational account of this Sacrifice. I take, says he,
the ground of this action not to have been meer chance, or a device meerly humane, but to have risen from a divine thought: for whereas good Men who were illuminated with the divine spi∣rit, and lived in a near familiarity with God, plainly saw there was a necessity of some extra∣ordinary means for the expiation of damning sin, they concluded it necessary to offer to God the giver of the Life and Soul something by way of a ransome or redemption price to pro∣cure their own Salvation, and since they had nothing which they could offer to God better or more valuable than their Souls, instead of them they Sacrificed beasts,De De∣monstr. E∣vang. l. 1. c. 10. so , offering the Souls of others in lieu of their own, and this was cer∣tainly the best Sacrifice and most significant of their apprehensions: Where that reason given by Eusebius, and made use of by Justin Martyr, and the author of the Answer to the Orthodox, printed among Justin's works, and by St. Chrysostome and other ancient Christians, and by Rabbi Moses ben Maimon and his followers among the Jews, why Cain and Abel should pitch on offering Sacrifices, and Abel particularly of living creatures, viz. their wisdom and near converse with heaven, suits yet more exactly with Adam himself, who had converst with God in a state of perfection as well as
imperfection: And tho' we know the ruines of reason to have been very great in Adam by his fall, yet they were not so great in him as in the rest of his  posterity, and Adam having a right appre∣hension of that promise concerning the seed of the woman, without which right appre∣hension he could have derived very little comfort from it; to fix in his own mind and in the mind of his posterity the true mean∣ing of that promise, he offer'd, as soon as without prejudice to the multiplication of Creatures he could, such Sacrifices as might shadow out the promised redemption, and make so early a faith in the promised seed, that Lamb who was slain from the beginning of the world, appear and really be rational: nor was there any need of divine institution or command in the case, where original rea∣son yet retain'd so much strength and vigour; And whereas some learned Men have writ∣ten whole discourses to prove that Men were allowed to eat flesh before the flood,Vid Maii Hist. ani∣mal. sacror. l. 1. c. 2. p. 32, &c. I am so far from being convinced by what I have met with to that purpose (building my contrary opinion on that vast difference be∣tween God's commission given to Adam, Gen. 1.29, 30. and that given afterwards to Noah, Gen. 9.2,3,4.) that I conclude one of the violences the Gigantick race were afterwards guilty of was their trans∣gressing their first limits in that matter, and that Adam seeing living Creatures fixt in an higher state, as being exempted from that servility to which Plants and Fruits and the Herb of the field was subjected, and yet observing a certain Dominion over
those nobler Creatures invested in himself, he concluded he could no way more ratio∣nally exercise his government, nor express his expectations of a Saviour, than by kil∣ling of those Creatures, not for his own luxu∣ry, but to offer them in Sacrifice to that God whom he had before so ingratefully of∣fended: Thus Gods power and Mans neces∣sity were acknowledged both in one and the same Sacrifice: I conclude farther, in re∣lation to the first custome of offering beasts in Sacrifice, that what Reason taught Adam to do, God set his Seal to and approved it, by sending fire from Heaven to consume it, which was an unquestionable evidence of God's acceptance, an encouragement to Adam to proceed in that course, and to his posterity to imitate him: And this I am the more confirm'd in, because I find both Jewish and Christian Writers generally concluding, that the visible difference which God put between the Sacrifice of Cain and Abel was, that he consumed Abel's with fire from hea∣ven, but not Cain's, by which means Cain was able to judge of his brothers acceptance and his own rejection; and he might be the more certain in his judgment, because he had often seen his Father's offerings so con∣sumed before. That Adam was a Priest in his own family as every Father is, and that Cain and Abel were so in theirs, and the rest of the ancient Patriarchs, is un∣questionable, but when upon the World's
encrease Men began to unite into larger So∣cieties, private and family devotions or reli∣gious observances were not look'd upon as sufficient to shew mens deference to the su∣preme Lord of all things, God was to be reconciled and rendred propitious to publick Societies as well as to private members of such Societies, which considerations in pro∣cess of time were the occasion that particu∣lar bodies or numbers of Men were set apart to attend more peculiarly on the services of Religion, which bodies of Men took care to settle the methods of those services, wherein according to the clearness of their understandings those methods were more or less obscure or incoherent. God taking a peculiar care of the seed of Abraham taught them not to leave off sacrificing, but to or∣der their Sacrifices in so holy a manner, as might best agree to that end for which they were appointed,
i. e. to foresignifie that great mystery of the worlds redemption by the sacrifice of the death of Christ: But the Devil Tyrannizing over the greater part of the world beside, and under the same reli∣gious pretexts of atoning an angry God and acknowledging his sovereignty, soon conver∣ted all that worship and those Sacrifices in∣tended to the true God, to himself: So that great enemy of Souls, got to himself the name of God, he was adored as the author of all good, and revered as the executor of vengeance upon all wicked Men, He made  use of diverse artifices to maintain his usur∣pation, among the rest he made special use of ignorance as the mother of Devotion, a principle which the Church of Rome has made great use of of later years to the same purpose; his Priests, urged by interest, were excellent Agents in his curst designs, and by his direction loaded every part of Idolatry with such a Mass of Mystick rites and Ceremonies, necessarily so, lest their lewdness and scandalous nature should have made them generally odious, that it was impossible for the greatest part of Mankind to see through the clouds and dust they had rais'd about themselves; with these Myste∣ries all the whole rabble of Deities were con∣tinually accoutred, all which false Gods were but one Devil, who assum'd so many names to himself, partly that he might the better suit himself to the various humours of Men, partly that he might entrench as much as possible upon that honour due to Almighty God, by assuming all the Divine Attributes to himself, and partly that if he happen'd to lose that Honour he had usurpt under one name, he might at least preserve it under another. Hence arose the strange rites of Isis & O∣siris so much celebrated among the Aegypti∣ans, the Eleusinian, so famous over all Greece, among the Athenians, wherein so strange an obscurity was affected, that the very Rules and Orders for their publick performance
were unknown to common worshipers, and not under pain of death to be divulged to any, unless initiated for five years together in them, which course of initiation once past, there seems to have been no great fear the initiated should make them publick, the world at worst not having been bad enough to have approv'd such abominations; But the Religion of Sacrifices went farther, and those who were sensible how just God's an∣ger was against the World for Sin, conclu∣ded the most precious Offerings must needs be the most acceptable to God for their ex∣piation, therefore they came to pitch upon Humane Sacrifices, thinking a rational Soul the most proper , or ransome for a ra∣tional Soul: Hence grew those Enthusiastick extravagancies of the Priests of Baal, who when they found their God deaf to all their invocations, and insensible of their Sacrifices, and themselves derided for their folly by Eli∣jah,1 Kings 18.26, 27, 28. They cried aloud and cut themselves af∣ter their manner with Knives and Lancers till the blood gush'd out upon them: And that was pretty fair for their own personal zeal; but this was not enough; therefore in a pressing extremity we find the King of Moab taking his eldest Son, who was to have reigned after him,2 Kings
3.26, 27. and offering him for a burnt-offering up∣on the wall of his besieged City: The misery he was reduced to required something of ex∣traordinary to allay it, and nothing could show a more eager desire to atone his angry  Gods, to whose displeasure he imputed his present calamity, than to offer a
Sacrifice so dear and valuable to himself to atone them. Where before I pass on, I cannot but take notice of that passage in the contents of the now Cited Chapter in our English Bibles, viz. The King of Moab by sacrificing the King of Edom's Son raiseth the Siege: In which pas∣sage they follow the opinion of Junius, tho' without any ground at all: For how came the King of Moab, so streightly besieged, to get the King of Edom's Son into his possession? We read of his desperate attempt to break through to that King of Edom with 700 valiant Men, v. 26. But the consequence of his at∣tempt was, He could not effect what he de∣sired, the failure in which bold design made him, in the extremity of his despair, flie to as astonishing a remedy; besides (not to men∣tion it, that the King of Edom in those days was but a Deputy, a Viceroy, and his Go∣vernment not hereditary) We find the con∣federate Kings raising their Siege upon that strange action, but had Moab so cruelly sa∣crificed the Heir of Edom, reason will teach us it must have exasperated the more, and made them press the Siege the more streight∣ly, to have been revenged on so extreme a barbarity: Again, some would perswade us with as little sense, that that great Indigna∣tion which is said to have been against Israel, was from the King of Edom, enraged to see the Jews prosecute the Siege so far as to cost  the life of his Son: For indeed that anger against Israel was from God, who having formerly given them a charge not to dis∣possess the Children of Ammon or Moab, as being the Posterity of Lot, Abraham's Ne∣phew, was displeas'd now to see them carry on a War so far, as to make a considerable Prince commit in his extremity so great an abomination: Their inveteracy against him forced him to it, and God required mercy from them to their kindred, and therefore the Israelites, though late, sensible of God's anger and the reason of it, rais'd their Siege and gave over so inhumane a War; Nor yet could it have been reasonably accounted so dear or precious a sacrifice to have offer'd the blood of an enemy, as that of an onely Son, as we may conclude from the aggravating cir∣cumstances of that severe command to Abra∣ham,Gen. 22.2. to take his Son, his onely Son, the Son whom he loved, and to offer him a burnt sacri∣fice; and from God's accepting nothing less than the death of his onely begotten Son, for the Redemption of Mankind from the damnati∣on of Hell: Besides this unhappy Prince, the Israelites themselves, tho' so often caution'd against such things, are justly charged by the Psalmist, That they offered their Sons and their Daughters unto Devils,Psal. 106.37,
38. and shed Innocent blood, even the blood of their Sons and of their Daugh∣ters, whom they sacrificed unto the Idols of Ca∣naan, and the Land was defiled with blood: Where God's own people fail'd, it's no won∣der  the Gentile world fell into such mad∣nesses,Praepar. Evang. l. 4. c. 7. therefore we find the Carthaginians and Phoenicians burying Slaves alive on some extraordinary exigences, as Eusebius from Porphyry informs us, or offering them to Sa∣turn: The Romans running into the same follies in the second Punick War, in obedi∣ence, as they pretended, to the Sibylline O∣racles; Now all these and the like Sacrifices were suppos'd to have some secret meaning, and to represent imperfectly some mighty future events, being things the vulgar might gaze and wonder at, but could never under∣stand; yet they shewed that general sense of Mankind, that Religion could not subsist without Mysteries, and the Devil he made too good use of those natural notions, fur∣nishing the Heathen world with such Mystick Rites, as might keep Men at the greater di∣stance, lest too plain discoveries of himself should have undeceiv'd thinking Men, and have taught them to turn to the worship of the true God. That the Devil might ape God the more exactly, and over-aw Men the more securely, as Idolatrous Priests in Scripture pretended to receive answers from their Gods; so he in several places, under several names, had his Ammonian, Delphian, Pythian, Dodonian, Ephesian, Paphian Oracles, where he used to return ambiguous and puzling answers to such as came to enquire of him concerning the events of things, by his
ambiguous ex∣pressions  he endeavour'd to conceal his want of omniscience, and secured himself from the accusations of his deluded worshippers, he likewise had his Prophets, such as inspired with a Devilish fury raved out obscure and insignificant non-sence, which yet were gene∣rally receiv'd with the greatest veneration, and preserv'd as rules of practice for Men in their necessities to have recourse to, out of which if in an exigence they were able to pick any thing, they were ready to admire his veracity whom the Sons of Wisdom knew to be the Father of lies: Such Prophets were Tiresias and his daughter Manto, and Am∣phiaraus and Calchas, the answerers from the Delphick Tripos, from the Sibyls Cave, and from Trophonius his Den, &c. These fill'd weak heads with mighty wonders, that the Gods should so freely impart their secrets to Men, whose sanctity they admired as much as Cyrus of Persia is said to have done that of Bell and his Priests, in the Apocryphal story, and were as grosly cheated.
But tho' by these Devices of Satan the far greater part of Mankind were miserably a∣bused, as to the object of their Devotions, yet the reason and design of their Devoti∣ons was good and true, nothing could blind them so far, or lay them under so deep a stu∣pidity, but that they plainly observ'd their own unhappy and defective state, they were able still in many moral cases to distinguish between good and evil, virtue and vice, and  having a true sense of the existence of a God, they had still so much natural Logick as to infer from their own extraordinary inclina∣tions to wickedness, or to be guilty of Im∣moralities, that Heaven must be atoned, that there must be some way of Mediation found out between God and Man, otherwise they must be wholly miserable, therefore they kept up their Sacrifices and solemn Devo∣tions, as some shadows or weak representa∣tions of that mediating work; but even while they did so, reason prevail'd and act∣ed them so much farther that they conclu∣ded, an upright, a sincere and well purged mind was much more acceptable to the Ʋ∣niversal Sovereign than their sacrifices for any intrinsick worth could be, and this truth was so firmly fixt in the hearts of Men, that the Devil himself never durst undertake to oppose it, though it were so cross to his own wishes, lest Men should have been rouz'd from their dead sleep by such irra∣tional and damnable insinuations, and so have seen with horrour and amazement what Gods they worshipped; Yet neither could the more sagacious part of Mankind be satisfied with these things, they saw the distance between God and Man was too great to be made up by any typical or representing Sacrifices, and that a compleat purity was far beyond the reach of meer humane na∣ture, therefore the Gentiles, who had some sense of that weight which opprest them,
groan'd and long'd earnestly to be freed from the slavery of corruptions, by some means sufficiently powerful to that end, and so to be brought in to the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; hence rose those frequent discourses of the Gods assuming Humane shapes, coming down to earth and conversing with Men, which though we find most frequently men∣tion'd in Poetical Writings, yet unquestio∣nably had its foundation from those accounts in the Writings of Moses concerning the ap∣paritions of Angels, as particularly to A∣braham, and Lot, and Jacob; hence grew that prevailing rumour, about the times of Augustus Caesar, that an universal King should be born in Judaea, to whom all other Mo∣narchs should be forc'd to bow, and who by wonderful means should make up the breach between God and man; this too had a far∣ther confirmation from the translation of the old Testament into the Greek Language, and from some fragments of the true Sibyl∣line Oracles not unknown to Tully or Virgil, and from Balaam's predictions, as plain as any Jewish Prophecy whatsoever, which he being of another Nation would certainly acquaint his own Country-men with, from whom it quickly might be spread over the whole World: From some or all these Ori∣ginals arose the Expectation of those Eastern Sages, who no sooner saw that prodigious Star shining at Noon-day, but they conclu∣ded, that glorious Light which was to lighten
the Gentiles, and to be the glory of God's people Israel, was then risen; but though Men did generally apprehend the necessity of those things, and lived in continual expectation of them, yet how such things should be, how such prodigious, but excellent effects, should ever be produced, was a Mystery hid from all ages, a dark, obscure, unfathomable abyss of Divine goodness and wisdom, ne∣ver offer'd to be explain'd to any, because incomprehensible by all. As it was the unhappiness of the Gentiles to be encombred with a great deal of Igno∣rance, so it must follow, that their Myste∣ries, where clearest, had but a very indi∣rect aspect to their acknowledgments and expectations. But the Jewish solemnities and predictions had a more exact and di∣rect aim at the coming of the promis'd Mes∣sias, their Prophets were more numerous, their prophecies better attested, and more commonly known and enquired into, their Rites and Ceremonies all of Divine appoint∣ment, and consequently not one of them in∣significant or superfluous, till they were va∣cated by the appearance of the Messias him∣self, in and by whom they were unridled and accomplished. Yet their Religion was
Mysterious still to the most understanding Persons among them; their prophecies, tho' so much inquired into, yet like a Book seal'd to them, and they as unable to conceive how the Son of God should take upon him  humane nature, how he should put an end to all Typical Sacrifices, though of never so Di∣vine an Institution, by offering himself one perfect and all-sufficient sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction for the sins of the whole World, which so should really effect that mighty re∣conciliation which all other did but imper∣fectly hint at, they were as unable to con∣ceive of these things, as a People who had long sate in darkness could have been, as by their prejudices against him, and their ab∣surd fancies about him appear'd, when no other Messias could serve their turn, but some powerful temporal Prince rais'd up by the hand of God, as Moses, Joshua, or the Judges of old had been, to free them from the slavery they then lay under, and once more to restore the Kingdom to Israel: The result then of all is this, that the World has known no Religion or Religious worship but what has had some circumstances and fundamentals too, not obvious or easie to be understood either by the unthinking vulgar, or by the more curious and inquisitive understandings, it's enough for my design, if the World con∣cur in that one principle, That something may be necessary to be believ'd, which yet no meer humane reason can comprehend: Nay, I may proceed farther, and say, That some points of faith are so very sublime, that even revelation it self cannot make them intelligible to Men, as Moses when he had seen the back parts of God, the shadow
or reflex of his glory was as far off compre∣hending his full glory as before; and the A∣postles when in their transfigured Master they saw a glorified body, yet were unable to express what they saw but by very weak re∣semblances; and S. Paul when ecstasied in the third heavens, could no more compleatly comprehend the felicities or glorious visions of that place than he could before: Since then natural reason led the Gentiles to be∣lieve mystick truths, and God led his own people of Israel to the like, from both toge∣ther we may conclude, That Religion it self cannot subsist without them, and that those things which are called mysteries in Religion are not therefore to be rejected, because they are mysteries indeed, i. e. because every little pretender to sence cannot comprehend them. And so we come to the second enquiry pro∣pounded in the beginning of this discourse, and that is, Whether our Saviour intended the entire abolition of all other Religions for the Settle∣ment of his own, or rather to unite what was good in every distinct religion into one, and to sublime or perfect that so as it might tend most to God's glory and Mans happiness, and whether that could be effected Men standing in their present corrupt state without the re∣taining of old or declaring of new Mysteries in his Religion? where for our better satis∣faction we must again examine these things.
What Sentiments Men generally had of the ends of Religion before our Saviours appea∣rance in the world? How far they had depraved or perverted those ends? The reason of these enquiries will appear afterwards. We enquire then what Sentiments Men generally had of the substance and ends of Re∣ligion before our Saviours appearance in the world? And here, if we would give Religion as it's true, a definition, we may take it thus, Religion is the worship of God in such a manner as is most agreeable to those revelations he has made of himself to the World, this the Jews confirm, The Author of the book Kosri, or a Dialogue between the King of Cosar and Rabbi Isaac Sangar concerning Religion, infers from a prece∣dent discourse,Libri Cosri pars 3. p. 234. That Men can have no access to God, i. e. they cannot be admitted as true worshippers, but by the commands of God, i.e. by Worshipping him according to his prescripti∣ons, and we cannot come to know the commands of God but by Prophecy or Revelation: Or we may rest in the Apostles definition, that true Religion is the acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness in hopes of eternal life;Tit. 1.1, 2. But if we respect Religion in general, as taken up by all Nations we may describe it, as, The method of worshipping God by all men suitably to those notions they had of him
and of their own duties: As for the Jewish Nation they were once the sole professors of true Religion, and for the hardness of their hearts were loaded with abundance of Ce∣remonial institutions, but yet in the law of Moses, and in the Prophets, we find sincere and hearty obedience to the moral Law very much urged and insisted upon, as the best evidence of true and unfeigned piety; and where God expostulates sharply with his people for their rebellion and disobedience, He tells them plainly,Ps. 50.8, 9, 13, 16, 17, 23. I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, or thy burnt offerings to have been continually before me. I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goat out of thy fold. Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats? No, these things God could pardon, But unto the wicked, God says, what hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant into thy mouth? the reason of the expostulation fol∣lows, thou hatest instruction and castest my words behind thee, by which words the great folly of those is exprest, who pretend them∣selves the servants of God and instruments of his glory, and yet live disagreeably to their profession, wherefore it's added, Who so offereth praise glorifieth me, and to him that or∣dereth his conversation aright will I shew the salvation of God. Thus again, God by the Prophet Samuel argues with Saul,1 Sam. 15.22. Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the Lord:
Behold to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams: So the Pro∣phet Isaiah,Isa. 1.11, 13, 16, 17, 18. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats, Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination to me, it follows, wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your do∣ings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widows: Well, what should be the effect of all this reformation? as much as a wretch∣ed sinner could hope for from the most be∣nign Being, Come now and let us reason to∣gether, saith the Lord, tho' your sins be as scar∣let they shall be white as snow, tho' they be red like crimson they shall be as wool: So the Prophet Micah,Micah 6.6, 7, 8.
Wherewith shall I come be∣fore the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt-of∣ferings, with calves of a year old, will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or ten thousands of rivers of oyl? shall I give my first-born for my transgression, or the fruit of my Body for the sin of my soul? No, God requires not these things at our hands, but He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good, and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Nay, Solomon himself, who was so personally profuse in his offerings, that a man would have suspected he had fixt  the whole substance of Religion in such ex∣terior services, when he comes to draw up what was incumbent upon Man in a few words, passes sacrificing by as inconsiderable in respect of this sincere obedience,Eccl. 12.13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. Thus far the wri∣tings of the Old Testament receiv'd by the ancient Jews shew us the ends of Religion, viz. That where it really had a place it ne∣cessarily produc'd purity and sincerity of mind, without which no sacrifice tho' never so costly could be accepted with God; Da∣vid teaches us the lesson plainly,Ps. 51.6, 7, 10, 19.
Behold thou desirest truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom, purge me with hysop and I shall be clean, wash me and I shall be whiter than snow. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me, and much more to the same purpose, then he concludes all, Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteous∣ness, with burnt offering and whole burnt-of∣fering, then shall they offer bullocks upon thine Altar. But since the Jews are for the most part hardned against their own greatest interest, and so may be thought to have now changed their minds, being known for such bigotted ce∣remonialists, I shall add the confessions of one or two modern Jews: So Rabbi Isaac Sangar in the book Cosri before cited,Cosri. pars 3. p. 157. for thus he tells the King he converses with: A holy and  pious man is not the rigid man for every cere∣monial punctilio, but he who, where he dwells, with a prudent and impartial hand gives every one their right, who loves justice, oppresses none, defrauds none, nor bribes any to be his slaves or tools upon occasion. Again, Because the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole earth, therefore the holy man neither does, nor speaks nor thinks any thing, but he believes the all-seeing eye of God to be upon him, ready not only to reward for what's well, but for what's ill done too, and to visit for eve∣ry perverse and wicked word or action,p. 168. &c. To him I shall add Rabbi Moises ben Maimon, who in his More Nevochim,More Ne∣voehim, pars 3. c.
28. p. 419. or explainer of difficulties, teaches us, that every precept of God, whether it be affirmative or negative, aims at these things, first, that it may take a∣way all violence from among men and beget good manners necessary for the conservation of political Societies: and secondly, that it may instil true principles of faith, such as are in their own nature necessary to be known, for the expelling of wickedness and encouraging honesty and virtue. Now if these sober and necessary virtues, which are of no value if not sincere, be the ultimate intention of all God's Laws; it follows that those virtues are more accounted of with God which are inward and affect the Soul, than all outward performances how pompous soever, as much as the end of a thing is more excellent than the means conducing to it: The Son of Si∣rach  agrees admirably with this truth, He that sacrificeth of a thing wrongfully gotten,Eccl. 34.18, 19. his offering is ridiculous, and the gifts of un∣just men are not accepted, the most high is not pleased with the offerings of the wicked, nei∣ther is he pacified for sin by the multitude of sacrifices: and thus much may suffice to shew us whereon the Jews laid the whole stress or weight of their Religion. Nor did the Heathen world among their wiser thoughts much deviate from the same paths of truth, to this we find the whole Doctrine of the Stoick Philosophers inclining, as it's summ'd up by the learned Gataker in his preface to Marcus Antoninus. For they believing and maintaining That there was really a God, who did take a constant care of worldly affairs, and that his Providence did concern it self with the actions of single men, as well as of entire Societies, from thence very rationally concluded, that He alone ought to be adored by man, invocated to all humane undertakings, that He should possess all our thoughts, over-rule our words, terminate our actions, that Men should give themselves en∣tirely to the celebration of his name, and that by a simple voluntary and compleat obedience whithersoever his Providence is pleased to lead us, without any tergiversation or mur∣muring, and should endeavour to adorn that vocation he is pleased to fix us in by solid vir∣tue, and that with an inflexible courage, tho' by so doing we should incurr the hazards
of a thousand deaths: This is so rational that it looks almost like Christianity it self: Plato declares himself excellently, speaking concerning the uselessness of any great pomp in religious sacrifices, , &c.Plato in Alcibiade. vid. Cragii resp. Lace∣daem. l. 3. p. 180. For it would be a very hard case if the gods should respect only or principally the nature of our gifts and sacrifices, and not our souls whether they be holy and just; but I think they much more regard these, than all the pom∣pous expence of sacrifices, in spite of which a man either in a private station, or as a pub∣lick magistrate, may in one years space be guilty of a thousand trespasses both against the gods and men: The same
Plato, who was himself an Athenian, tells us this remarkable story, There being long and continual wars between the Lacedemonians and Athenians, the Athe∣nians were always beaten both by Sea and Land, the Athenians extremely troubled at their misfortune, and debating among themselves by what means they might prevent the like for the future, thought it was worth their while to consult the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon, and amongst other things the messengers were to enquire of the Oracle what the reason was, that they gave the Lacedemonians continual victories rather than themselves, for the case was plain, that the Athenians always offered the most and the best sacrifices of all the Gre∣cians, and enrich'd the Altars of the gods with the noblest presents, and spent more money  upon their august annual religious solemnities, than all the Grecians put together; whereas the Lacedemonians tho' every whit as rich, never troubled themselves with any such cares, and were mighty sparing in their sacrifices, to all which plea the Oracle very briefly an∣swer'd, that the , or the sincere and honest devotion of the Lacedemonians was more valued by the Gods than all the costly Sacrifices of the Grecians: Thus sometimes would the Devil himself speak what was rational:Suidas in verbo. p. 1101. Suidas in his interpretation of , touches upon this story, and infers from it, , That sin∣cere piety is a matter of no burdensom expence, no extreme curiosity, but full of modesty: Thus too Philostratus, a man otherwise of design bad enough, in the life of Apollonius Thya∣naeus, one whom he would equal for sancti∣ty and miracles to the blessed Jesus, brings in that Apollonius discoursing with the Priest of Aesculapius, and telling him, That the Gods acting with infinite justice, , where they find any man of a sound mind and uninfected with wickedness, they reward him not with a golden Crown, but with all internal good, but where they meet with one stigmatized and corrupted with sin, they reserve him to punishment, and are but the more angry when such miscreants dare to enter their Temples and attend their Services: Then turning to
Aesculapius the  pretended God, He tells him, Thou O Aescu∣lapius doest wisely and as becomes a God, not permitting wicked men to approach thee, tho' loaded with all the riches of the Indies, or of Croesus, for such do not sacrifice nor make their offerings out of reverence to thy Divinity, but because they have deserved punishment for their Impieties, they'd buy it off with mony, which divine justice will by no means admit of: The same Apollonius afterwards to a Cilician Prince that seem'd afraid to approach the Altar,Philostra∣tus in vita Apollon. c. 8, 9. and to admire Apollonius his happi∣ness in being so familiar with the God, speaks thus, My love to and studying of vir∣tue has procured me this freedom, , and if thou wilt take but the same care to be honestly virtuous, come boldly to the God, and petition freely for whatsoever thou canst wish for. I shall not seek into later Philosophers, such as Seneca, or Plotinus, or
Arrian, or Hierocles, whose noblest Sentiments I look upon as drawn, not from Zeno, or Plato, but from their converse with Apostolical Writings, or the Books of the Eldest Christian Fa∣thers, whose Doctrines they endeavoured to transfer to the reputation of declining Idolatry: Onely we may take notice that not onely Philosophers, whose grave studies might promise as much, but the loose Scenes of a Plautus or a Terence will inform us, That they must be men of the best lives to whom the Gods would bend the gentlest ears, that others  may importune Heaven to no purpose, while the innocent Soul shall compel the Gods themselves to be obsequious: How agreeably all this to that of the Son of Syrach, the offering of the righteous maketh the Altar fat,Eccles. 35.6, 7, 10. and the sweet savour thereof is before the most High, the sa∣crifice of a just Man is acceptable, and the Memorial thereof shall never be forgotten: Do not think to corrupt with gifts, for such God will not receive, and trust not to unrighteous sacrifices, for the Lord is just, and with him is no respect of persons; and a Man would al∣most think that old Tragedian cited by Por∣phyrius and Clemens Alexandrinus had some such passages as these in his eye, when he cry'd out, , &c. i. e. What Man can be so weak a fool, so supinely credulous, as to ima∣gine the Gods are pleas'd with bones quite bare of flesh, and stinking vapours, things which hun∣gry Dogs would never care for? or who would believe that Gods would take themselves to be highly honoured, and obliged to abundance of gratitude to thieves, or pickaroons, or tyrants,vid. Gatak in Antonin. l. 10. p. 360. when making gaudy offerings to them? No, let but the hand free from guilt be lifted up to the Altars of the Gods, not the most rich or costly hecatombs shall sooner reconcile the angry Dei∣ties than those. I shall add no more to shew that sense the
Pagans had of the ends of re∣ligion, but onely make a short reflection, upon God's justice in dealing with Mankind, as set down by St. Paul, He tells us, God will  render to every man according to his deeds,Rom. 2.6, &c. to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honour and immortality eter∣nal life, but to them that are contentious and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish to every soul of man that doth evil, to the Jew first and also to the Gentile; Now that the Jews and Gentiles, who stood upon no equal ground, yet should suffer equally in case of disobedience, seems to some very harsh, but if again it be considered, that that God who gave the Jewish Nation such great advanta∣ges, required of them proportionably great returns, whilst the Gentiles who had been partakers of less light, were onely required to walk in that light they had, to come up as near to a perfection in faith and virtue as that would admit of: This consider'd, the Gentiles were every whit as guilty in neglecting their duties which were lighter and fewer, as the Jews in neglecting theirs which were more numerous and
difficult, since the disobedience to the Divine commands is as notorious in one case as in the other; and this reflection reaches farther, and teaches those, who are more weak and ignorant, not to presume too much upon God's mercy be∣cause they know so little, since it's as rea∣sonable they should perform that little they know, as that we, who know more, should do our duties, and their negligence and pro∣portionable unfruitfulness in good, and ours,  proceed from one and the same damnably offensive principle; for as the Apostle urges it,v. 12. as many as have sinn'd without Law shall perish without Law, and as many as have sinn'd in the Law shall be judg'd by the Law; This every Man must acknowledge to be the grea∣test equity in the World; the faith and works of the
Jews and so of Christians shall be can∣vas'd and examin'd by those rules of faith and practice extraordinarily imparted to them; the Gentiles had no such Law, but the light of Nature was their guide, there∣fore their works shall be tried by that and by no other light, now a defect in obedience to the innate light of nature, is as much a contempt of God, and so as criminal, as a defect in obedience to the written Law of God, and consequently as justly punish'd; now how far this natural light extends, as these passages I have quoted from Heathen Writers considerably evidence, so the Apo∣stle tells us, That the Gentiles which have not the Law, i. e. the same Law that was given to the Jews,v. 14. do by nature the things contain'd in the Law, they not having the Law are a Law unto themselves: This proves that truth, that God's written Law is not a disannulling, but a confirming and enlarging upon the Law of Nature, in the manner of a Com∣mentary upon an intricate Text, to illustrate and explain it; well then, The Gentiles shew this natural Law written in their hearts by the witness of their consciences, and their thoughts  in the mean time accusing or excusing one ano∣ther;v. 15. for having as I shew'd before clear ap∣prehensions of the Being of a God, and ha∣ving made very considerable discoveries of his nature so far as legible in the works of the Creation, they cannot upon a serious debate with themselves, and weighing their own actions by their own notions and rules, but have an infallible certainty of the recti∣tude or pravity of their actions, and this is as much as a Jew or Christian can do by his publick Laws, and an exact scanning of them: Now if my Conscience can certainly inform me of things essentially and eternally so, whether they be good or bad, the same Con∣science will give me as infallible a certainty that God is and must be just when he re∣wards me according to my actions, whether they be good or evil; he calls me to account for what I do know, not for what I do not know, and punishes me for transgressions within the reach of my understanding to have avoided, and not for those that were unintelligible without a positive revelation, and this even corrupted Reason will own is agreeable to the strictest rules of equity and justice. We are to enquire, since we have seen what Jews and Gentiles, before our Savi∣our's birth into the World, understood con∣cerning the nature and ends of Religion, which every one for himself supposed to be true (since none can be thought mad enough
to trouble himself about that religion he certainly knew to be false) We are to en∣quire how far both Jews and Gentiles had deprav'd and perverted those ends, and what care they took to manage themselves ac∣cording to that knowledge they really had, when our Saviour appear'd in the flesh; And here again we may begin with the Jews, a∣mong whom if we find an extraordinary de∣generacy, we can the less wonder at it a∣mong the Gentiles; If then we examine the state of things among them, we have it thus; It was once among them, Do this and live, i. e. Live here on Earth in a strict obedience to those things commanded you in the Law, and you shall be rewarded with an happy future life; Now when the terrors and glories of Mount Sinai were fresh in memory, and Parents, according as they were order'd, took care to inculcate God's power, justice and good∣ness particularly exerted toward the People of Israel into their Children, and gave a∣greeable examples in themselves, obedience was the common study, and peace here, and a glorious expectation hereafter, the com∣mon consequence: But when a new gene∣ration arose who had not seen God's won∣derful dealings with his people, and the too prevailing examples of neighbouring Idola∣ters, taught the Israelites a wicked ingrati∣tude, the Law of God was slighted, and (as it is among us at this day) the Man who could defie Heaven with the greatest auda∣city,
was the most set by: And though fre∣quent judgments over-took their Impieties, there was no thorough purgation made among them, but they went on to add sin to sin, so that among the Scribes and Pharisees, the great Zealots of the Law at the time of Christ's coming in the flesh, things were at that pass, that the blessed Jesus had reason when he told his Auditors, that Except their righteousness should exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,Matth. 5.20. they should in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: If therefore the very best among the Jews, as they were generally esteem'd, were utterly uncapable of eternal happiness, what may we think of the multitude who were instru∣cted by them? and what reason may we con∣clude our Saviour had to admire the Centu∣rion's faith,Matth. 8.10. and to declare, he had not found so much, no not in Israel? It's needless now to look back upon that gross Idolatry, which once, like some subtle poyson, had infected every vein of that unhappy Nation, though other lighter punishments had fail'd, the Captivity of Babylon had pretty throughly purged out that folly, nay so far, as made that head-strong people flie out into the o∣ther extreme of a
superstitious aversion even to ornamental Statues, and where there could be no danger, of which humour Josephus gives us several instances: But about our Saviour's time, though not the same, yet Errors every whit as fatal and pernicious  had over-spread them, they were not vi∣sible Idolaters, they worship'd not the Host of Heaven, nor the ridiculous Idols of the adjacent Nations, but they idoliz'd the em∣pty figments of their own brains, making void the Law of God by their own traditions,Matth. 15.9. and teaching for doctrines the Commandments of Men: Their different Sentiments in Re∣ligion had divided the whole Nation into factions, and all Men were grown the fol∣lowers of the Pharisees, or Saducees, or Es∣senes, and among the several Parties, Reli∣gion it self was almost crusht to nothing: As for the Saducees, tho' they made a pow∣erful Faction in the State, yet their Opini∣ons were so gross and absurd, as virtually overthrew all the reason of Religion; they deny'd the Resurrection of the Dead,Acts 23.8. an opi∣nion taken up by some professing Christia∣nity in Tertullian's time, whom therefore he calls, Propinquos Saducaeos Christianorum,De carne Christi. Vid. Dru∣sium de tribus Se∣ctis. l. 3. p. 138, &c. the Christian Saducees, and Partiarios sen∣tentiae Saducaeorum, followers of the opinion of the Saducees; of whom since that Father speaks somewhat dubiously, if I might put in my own conjecture, I should conclude, they maintain'd the same Error which some now adays are propagating, viz. That we shall not rise with the same bodies with which we die, but something of a finer composition, which is in effect to deny the Resurrection it self; for such a thing as they propound is not a resurrection, but a
new creation or a new for∣mation  at least of somewhat which was not before, so that indeed it's onely Saducisme, a little more cunningly insinuated; In that the Saducees deny'd the existence of a Spirit, they asserted of consequence the Corporeity of God,Belli Ju∣daici l. 2. c. 12. and deny'd the Soul's immortality: , says Josephus, They deny the permanence or continuation of the Soul; they deny'd any rewards or punish∣ments hereafter, so the same Historian,  They take away all punishments and rewards after Death, and Origen more at large;Fragmento in Mat∣thaeum. Saducaei censent post hanc vitam nihil homini repositum praemii, sive ad virtutem profecerit, sive nunquam vel studuerit à vitiorum terminis excedere, The Saducees hold, that after this life, whether a Man live virtuously, or make himself a slave to vice, it's the same thing, since there's no re∣ward attending either: Now adding to these, what Scripture charges them with,Elncho Trihaere∣fews Se∣trarii, c. 16. ad num. 120. that they say there are no Angels, (a passage which puzles the great Scaliger extremely, because the Saducees are said to receive the five Books of Moses as Divine, in which Books
Angels are often mention'd,) for any to be Religious where there's nothing to be ho∣ped for from it, no effects to be found ei∣ther of God's anger or his love, is what seems very irrational, and takes away the whole design of the Messiah's coming, and vacates all the promises to piety in the Go∣spel. Such absurdities made the Saducees  odious to those who had any sence of Reli∣gion among their brethren, and they were generally look'd on as unfit for any to hold communion with, therefore we may ob∣serve, that whereas our Saviour owns the Scribes and Pharisees as sitting in Moses's Seat, and commands his disciples to hear them, i. e. to obey their prescriptions, so far as agreeable to the Law of Moses, He utterly excludes the Saducees, whom he charges with Ignorance of God's Power and his Word, from any such Prerogative, and bestows very little pains to confute such absurd and pal∣pable Heresies. As for the Essenes they were the spawn of the Pharisees, a very severe Sect, if we may believe Jewish authors;Scaliger in Elnek c. 25. we find 'em no where mentioned in Scripture by name, of which some imagine the reason to have been because they liv'd privately in the Coun∣trey, not concerning themselves at all in civil or publick affairs, by which means they escaped our Saviours reproofs; and well they might, if Scaliger's account of them be true, That they were not an ambitious crew of cheats, as the Pharisees, nor grosly impious, as the Saducees, however having so scandalous ancestors as the Pharisees, we may rationally conclude they were somewhat tainted with their vain superstitions: Nay, if Josephus the Jewish Historian were any way prudent in his choice, the
Essenes must have been the more superstitious of the two parties, or  some other way the worse, since Josephus, who knew the Essenes very well, and ob∣served their customes and their manners throughly, chose rather to associate himself with the Pharisees than with them: their publick tenets were for the most part good, according to those accounts now extant of them, but whereas their Ascetick life seem'd to recommend them much to the common vogue, and that no where commanded, we may conclude, that when our Saviour de∣nounces so many woes against the Hypocrisie of the Scribes and Pharisees, they were not without their shares in the intention of his reproofs; for indeed we find the
blessed Je∣sus generally reflecting upon those who were the guides of the Jewish people in matters of Religion, they being blind and leading the blind both fell unhappily into the ditch: and such blind guides were those as well as others; otherwise they who have the character of being in extraordinary manner ,Josephus ubi supra. or extraordinary lovers of one another, would certainly have taken greater care to instruct the vulgar in the real import of that Law, of which they themselves had so venerable an opinion: and a sort of men, who were so very eminent for their virtues themselves, would by their Doctrines and examples have prevented the vacating the Laws of Mo∣rality so grosly, by the silly niceties of im∣pertinent Traditions: And Men who had their minds so wonderfully adapted for the  most sublime matters, would certainly have clos'd very readily with our Saviour, who spoke so incomparably, and taught with so unusual and therefore surprising an autho∣rity: but we meet with no such extraordi∣nary effects of their pretendedly divine Phi∣losophy, but the Jewish people generally cor∣rupted, and none of these admirable men taking any pains to stay the deluge of pub∣lick impieties. But,Non enim eadem sacra colu∣êre, nec iis∣dem sacri∣ficiis deo litárunt. howsoever silent the Scripture may be concerning these devout and applauded Schismaticks, we meet with the Pharisees often enough, to their eternal ignominy; They were, besides their pretences to ex∣traordinary knowledge in the Law, and a supererogatory purity in their lives, great intreaguers in affairs of state, and finding the Saducees a powerful and encroaching faction, they countermined them, and ta∣king the advantage of Queen Alexandra's superstitious humour (who had a particu∣lar charge from her dying husband to close with them as powerful and indefatigable,De bello Judaico. l. 1. c. 4. and therefore the more capable of support∣ing her authority) they engrossed almost all publick interests into their own hands, as Josephus teaches us: so they assumed a kind of Papal prerogative, would be infallible in opinion or judgment, and supreme in dig∣nity, and so be truly
Custodes utriusque ta∣bulae, the great guardians of the whole Law of God, as respecting both matters of faith  and of practice. A long habit of fear got∣ten into mens minds, makes them at length forget how they came to be possest with it, and that which arose from the force and vio∣lence of those whom they found able to com∣pel them to any thing, grows in tract of time to an apprehension of some great in∣trinsick merit in the person whom they fear; thus when the Pharisees were clambring to that height of power they grasp'd at, the steps they mounted by were visible and odi∣ous, but their powers too great to be re∣sisted; when they had gotten a long and quiet possession of Authority, the people, who had forgot their former ill practices, and violence, grew into a strange opinion of pharisaick sanctity; they found themselves no better than slaves to a prevailing faction, and were willing to hide the scandal under the plausible pretext of only being admirers of and therefore servants to the Saints of the most high; That these wretches might stand the higher in the worlds opinion, the com∣mon people were perswaded to believe, That if but two were destin'd to inherit eternal happiness, the one must be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee, now the Scribes were not all ne∣cessarily Pharisees, tho' some of them were, the account given of their difference by To∣status,Petavii animadv. in Epiph. 1. tom.
1. ad Haere∣sin, 15. as quoted by Petavius in his notes on Epiphanius, is very good, and it's this, Tho' the Scribes and Pharisees are joined in the same Gospel text, yet as distinct one from  another, its to be observ'd, that they are not distinguished as the Pharisees and Saducees, i. e. as if they were direct opposites, for no Saducee can possibly be a Pharisee at the same time he is a Saducee: but they are di∣stinguished one from another, as a Gramma∣rian and a Logician may be, for though its one thing to be a Logician, and another to be a Grammarian, yet the same person may very well be both; so its one thing to be a Scribe, another to be a Pharisee, for he that's a Scribe must be a man learned in the Law of Moses, he that's a Pharisee must enter himself into a particular Sect, and engage in a peculiar me∣thod of living, but he that is a Pharisee, that is a Sectary, may be a Scribe too, i. e. a man learned in the Law at the same time: With these we have Lawyers named by our Savi∣our, but their employment being to explain the Law to the people, which was the em∣ployment of the Scribes too, they seem to be one and the same sort of men, and the case is the plainer, if Maldonate's opinion be true,Maldona. in Matth. c. 2. That some Scribes were as publick Notaries, others as publick Teachers, so having a double office incumbent upon their party: Take these Scribes, Lawyers and Pha∣risees together, they were
notorious Hypo∣crites: They had reduc'd Religion to no∣thing but air, to a meer empty shew, they had a form of Godliness, but they denyed the power of it: They were extremely ambitious and vain-glorious even to ridiculousness. They  laid heavy burdens upon the shoulders of others, but would not touch them themselves with one of their fingers, they did all their works to be seen of men, they made broad their Phylacte∣ries, that they might seem the greater zealots for the Law, and enlarged the fringes upon the corners of their garments for the same purpose; they loved the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief places in the Synagogues, and greetings in the market places,Matth. 23.4-7. and to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, all this contrary to that simplicity and modesty which their Law in several places required of them. Again these, in conjunction, shut up the kingdom of heaven against those that were de∣sirous to enter it. They abused prayer by running it out into an impertinent length, that the world might not suspect men of such fervent devotions could have any thoughts of devouring widows houses. They abused the intent of Proselytisme, that being to bring strangers to the knowledge of God, but they made theirs twofold more the chil∣dren of hell than they were themselves: They allowed perjury, payed Tythes of Mint, Anise and Cummin, but omitted the weightier things of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith: They were outwardly clean, but inwardly con∣scious to themselves of infinite extortion and excess: They appear'd outwardly righteous to the eyes of undiscerning men, but within were full of hypocrisie and all iniquity, as our Sa∣viour informs us in the continuation of that
chapter. The Pharisees particularly were so infamous for these things, that one Joshua an ancient Rabbine, and if his age be right∣ly calculated, antecedent to our Saviour's Incarnation, reckons the foolish severities of the Pharisees as one of those things that brought a general infelicity upon the world, and yet by those hypocritical severities they pretend∣ed to merit Heaven and more, they judged their own wills so absolutely free, their own abilities towards performance of the Divine Law so very great, that They esteemed a reward of mercy or happiness attain'd by God's free grace a matter not worth their ac∣ceptance, but glory purchas'd by merit was really great and honourable: they encourag'd im∣pieties admirably, by entayling felicity, or a portion in the future world, upon every one that was born an Israelite, were his circum∣stances never so discouraging, a principle re-asserted and maintained by their modern Rabbines: Which corrupt opinions, ex∣treme superstitions, and shameful Hypo∣crisies, as they fill'd them with abundance of prejudices against our Saviours Doctrine and Person, which carried nothing but love and meekness, humility and sincerity along with them, all direct contradictions to their opinions and practices, so after our Saviour's time they expos'd 'em to all the contempt and derision imaginable; hence they got those ridiculous nick-names given
'em by the Talmudical writers, as cited out of the  book Sotah by Buxtorf,Buxtorf. in voce Lex Tal∣mud. Where first they are called Sichemites, because as Hamor and Si∣chem consented to be circumcised, so these, not out of any respect to God's honour, but to advance interest and serve their own carnal ends, this was their the second sort of them was the I might call them Creepers from their pretended humi∣lity, whereby they seemed afraid to raise their feet from the ground, as being far from any thing of a lofty humour, by which means they stumbled often and fell down, the inconveni∣ence of which they bore with a great deal of ap∣parent patience, the next was the  a Blinking Pharisee, or one that breaks his face against the walls, a name given them on occasion of their imaginary purity and spiri∣tuality, which was so great, that for fear a maid, or a woman, or any other unclean thing should fall into their sight, they walkt with their eyes so far shut, that they could not chuse their own way, and so often ran their heads against walls and posts: The fourth sort was the  these may be call'd Crook-backs, from an humour some of them had taken up, of stooping so much out of hu∣mility too, as they call'd it, that they seemed almost to walk double, or to be very crooked, and this was, lest by walking upright, they should disturb the Almighty, or hit his feet, which they concluded to be very near the earth, that being his footstool, and he filling all things with his presence: The fifth is
This Pharisee I would call a Supererogatorian, or one who superciliously asks, what you can shew him more that he has to do and hee'l do it, intimating thereby that he has already done every thing God has commanded, and has now time and ability to perform a new task: The sixth kind is the  This tho' it sounds favourably, and signifies the Pharisee of Love, yet the Talmudists tell us plainly, it signifies no more than a meer Mer∣cenary, or one that endeavours to observe the Law, not out of any principle of fear or love of God, but of a fondness of that reward that's promised to those who do so, which reward tho' we may have a due respect to, as the Apostle assures us, yet the love of God must princi∣pally constrain to that filial obedience which God requires at our hands: the last nick∣name the Pharisee carries is, that he is  The Pharisee of fear, or he that keeps the Law, or pretends to do it, meer∣ly out of a wretched slavish fear of punishment. These several names were justly bestowed upon them as so many characters of infamy, from those several observations the world made of them: Their long clothing car∣ried somewhat venerable in it, but Rabbi David upon that of Zephaniah, where the Prophet in God's name threatens to cut off all that wear strange apparel, tells us,Zeph. 1.8. Vid. Dru∣sium de 3. Sect. l. 2. c.
1. That by that expression some understand those men who to make a shew of piety and holiness to  the world, put on garments that are not like the garments of other men, that by those gar∣ments they may be taken notice of for very pious and holy men, but in the mean time their ways are wicked, such were the Pharisees who, in a word, at our Saviours appearance, had perverted the Law of God so as to be a meer stale of their ambition and false interest; they were religious in shew, but the greatest enemies of Religion in reality. If after the Jews we come to take notice of the Gentiles, we shall find they were fal∣len into the same or greater corruptions, The precise Stoicks, so famous for their Morals, were both themselves and their fol∣lowers as infamous for their effeminacy and luxury; those great enquirers into the wis∣dom of God discover'd in the works of Na∣ture, lost themselves and their admirers in a thousand follies, they recommended con∣tinence and sobriety, themselves in the mean time being bauds and panders to their own unnatural Lusts; they declaim'd against pride, yet thought themselves too good to converse with earth; their chief Philosophers ptetended to unite a rational Soul to the Di∣vine Nature, and at the same instant made ignoble Magick and Diabolical contracts the very crown of all their endeavours; the ge∣nerality of the Pagan world, tho' they multiplied their Deities so fast, scorn'd the slavery of a devout fear, and dar'd and hector'd the greatest of their Gods with their
extravagancies: they fell into the foolery of deifying one another, and by such a super∣fetation of Divinities, came to have no fear at all of God before their eyes; what enor∣mous crimes they fell into, S. Paul gives us a just account of, where for their sence∣less Idolatries, he assures us, God gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves, and as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, so God gave them over to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not convenient; hence they were fil∣led with all unrighteousness, fornication,Rom. 1.24.28—32. wick∣edness, covetousness, maliciousness, they were full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malig∣nity, they were whisperers, back-biters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant-breakers, without na∣tural affection, implacable, unmerciful, and these knowing the judgment of God (that they which commit such things are worthy of death) not only did the same themselves, but took plea∣sure in those that did them: Sin was grown among them then, as at present it is with us, one of the most fashionable things in the world, so that even their own companions, the Parasites and Sycophants, of those irre∣ligious ages, could not but now and then Satyrize upon their vices; it was indeed no wonder that in our Saviour's time, and the immediately precedent and subsequent Ages,
they should be so miserably corrupted, the degeneracy began betimes, for Maximus Tyrius tells us a story of Anacharsis the Scythian, (a man of a truly philosophical spi∣rit and of ancient simplicity, and living a∣bout the time of the great Cyrus, who re∣stor'd Israel to their countrey after the Cap∣tivity of Babylon,Maximi Tyrii Dis∣sertat. 15.) that he came into Greece in quest of a wise man, or one whose words and actions were of a piece, Athens
that eye of Greece, and where all the various Sects of Philosophers were in their splendor, could shew him no such man, nor could the rest of Greece satisfie his inquiry, till at last, in an obscure corner of the Countrey, he found one Myson, a man of no name nor reputation in the world, but one that really spoke and acted too as be∣came a wise and good man: And if Greece which seems to be the world's glory for the learning and valour, and the yet greater reputation of it's inhabitants, could afford no better store of men who liv'd virtuously, how meanly must we conclude the rest of the world was stock'd with them! there∣fore Lucian, that impious but witty scoffer at Christianity, could not forbear lashing the Philosophers themselves, who knew so much, and exposing them to the world's contempt, so in his Icaro-Menippus, Menippus tells his friend a story of his being in heaven, where, among other considerables, a Council of the Gods was call'd by Jupiter their supreme, to discourse with them concerning the Philo∣sophers,  and Jupiter tells the rest, that the Philosopers were a race of Men lazie, quar∣relsome, vain-glorious, cholerick, gluttonous, silly, proud, abusive, and in a word ac∣cording to Homer's phrase, , an unprofitable burden to the Earth, some of these call themselves Stoicks, some Academicks, some Epicureans, some Peripa∣teticks, and by several other more ridiculous names these assuming to themselves the vene∣rable character of Virtue, they walk about with a supercilious and disdainful look, a long reverend beard, a starch'd habit, but under all the most detestable manners in the World, yet these wretches, forsooth, despise all the World beside themselves, they talk lewdly and sillily of the Gods, and, getting a company of unex∣perienced youths about 'em, they make a migh∣ty noise of virtue, and always commend sobrie∣ty and modesty among their followers, and rail against wealth and pleasure, but when they get once by themselves, they gorge themselves without measure, they indulge themselves in all manner of lust, and are base enough to rake a kennel for a leaden farthing, and what's worse in them than all the rest, when they themselves do nothing towards the good of man∣kind either privately or publickly, when they are neither fit for the Wars abroad, nor for con∣sultations in private, they are always accu∣sing others, and with bitter expressions and studied abuses,Luciani . 2. p.
208. &c. they reproach and rail upon their neighbours, and he's the greatest man  among them who is most noisy, impudent, and has the foulest tongue: Had St. Paul and Lu∣cian liv'd together, though one were so holy, the other so much an Atheist, a Man would have thought they had agreed together in their accounts of the degeneracy of those, who were accounted the wisest part of the World; to these I may add Philostratus, who giving us an account of a discourse be∣tween Apollonius Thyanaeus and Phraotes an Indian Prince, he introduces the Prince, re∣flecting upon Apollonius and his Compani∣ons thus, I hear, says he, there are many a∣mong you, who make Philosophy their trade to get by, and putting it on, like a Garment which they can as easily throw aside, they bear themselves high upon an habit that belongs not to them, and most certainly as common thieves, who look upon themselves as sure of hanging whensoever they are catcht,Philostrati vita Apol∣lon. l. 1. c. 12. are for a short life and a merry, so these Philosophical rogues among you indulge their lusts and their guts, and are the tenderest and most effeminate Crea∣tures in the World, and this I take to proceed from the defect of your Laws. He that coun∣terfeits the publick Coine dyes for it, and so does he that cheats an Orphan, or any thing of the like nature among you, but, as I am told, there's no Law among you that punishes Quacks in Philosophy, who onely abuse and corrupt it, nor is there any Magistrate appointed to take cognizance of them: Thus far he. By which we learn that as to the Divine Law, where
there is no Law there can be no transgression, so in respect of worldly matters, where there's no Law there's nothing but transgres∣sion, and by the concurrence of all these so very plain testimonies we find, that the ends of true Devotion in that part of the World which was without the pale of the Jewish Church, was not onely perverted about the time of our Lord's appearance on Earth, but it was worn out of memory, and God so re∣presented by Men, that there seem'd to be no better way of approaching his nature, than by an irresistible ingenuity in all man∣ner of bruitish violence and extravagant wickedness. Thus have we at large consider'd the an∣cient Maximes of Religion, and seen wherein the World in general believ'd it to subsist, and we have seen how far both Jews and Gen∣tiles had declined from their own principles; by the whole it will appear, that the fulness of time was come in every respect, that hu∣mane wickedness was grown to that height, and consequently that great God whose eyes are purer than to behold sin, so infinitely pro∣voked, that, had not the blessed Jesus the Son of God interpos'd, as great and uni∣versal a deluge of vengeance must have over∣spread the World, as that of Water hereto∣fore; but withal it will appear as plain, that notwithstanding all these abuses and depra∣vations of Religion, the foundation of it still stood good, the Laws of God were as
really believ'd to be holy, just and reasonable, and obedience to them as necessary among the Jews, and
Virtue and solid Honesty was as much commended, tho' perfectly starv'd, among the Gentiles, as ever before, it was the practice of what they so commended that so miserably fail'd among Men, so that there was indeed no kind of necessity to ex∣tirpate the whole of all former Religions for the setling that of Christ, but onely of a reformation of abuses and clearing the old foundation from all that rubbish, from all those bryers and thorns that had overgrown it, and there was need of reinforcing those duties appertaining to Religious converse whether with God or Men, upon all sorts of persons with new and more forcible argu∣ments than former Ages had offer'd, that Men might re-entertain their first Love, and do their first works, so bringing forth fruits agreeable to repentance: Therefore our Sa∣viour professes of himself with respect to the whole Mosaic Law, that he came not to destroy, but to fulfil it; i.e. to shew its whole design and intention, to perform every part in his own Person,Mat. 3.15. upon which reason he offer'd himself to John's Baptism, though in its own nature but a deduction from, or an appendix to the Law, and when John made a modest refusal, Jesus said to him, Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness. He came to fulfil it farther in suffering upon the Cross, by  which Sacrifice of his, it being the end of the Law, all Jewish Sacrifices were vacated, the substance being once come, the shadow could have no longer place in the World, and consequently all those Ceremonies con∣ducing to their Sacrifices had an end too: So he fulfill'd whatsoever the Mosaic Law had prefigured to the Jewish people. He came to teach Men the very comprehensive nature of the Law, to show his own Dis∣ciples and Followers how much more was required at their hands, than what the strict∣est Zealots among the Jews thought them∣selves obliged to, to convince them that it not onely reach'd the outward Man, and so might be slighted by evasive subtilties, but it was to engage all the inward affections of the Soul, and so must necessarily exclude all collusion and Hypocrisy; this method our Lord follow'd in that admirable Sermon up∣on the Mount, wherein He cancell'd no part of that Law given to the Jews of old, but commented upon it; And so the Apostle St. Paul acted with relation to the Gentiles, and therefore when he was at Athens, though his Spirit was stirr'd up in him, mov'd equally with grief and anger to see that populous City so wholly given to Idolatry: yet He fell not immediately to the reproaching of their Religion, nor to the taking it away both
root and branch, but he took an happy oc∣casion from that Inscription upon one of their Altars, , To the unknown  God, to assure them that he preach'd no o∣ther God to them, but him whom they igno∣rantly worship'd, He being that God who made the World and all things therein,Acts 17.23, 24. and therefore could not be confin'd to Temples made with hands. Thus from the beginning of the World, Religion, as to its Essence, has been immu∣table; what was fixt in Man by nature, so long as Nature is, must be the same too; God planted in man his own fear, and what∣soever tended to the promotion of that, and an earnest desire of self-preservation, with respect to this and to a future life; whatso∣ever byasses men now to a wretched slavish fear onely of Divine displeasure, and makes them therefore rather avoid evil than do good: And whatsoever engages men in un∣lawful ways of securing themselves from any apparent danger, all that arises from those corruptions nature at present is embarrassed with: these things are to be mended, but God is still to be fear'd, and Men shall still get a good name by doing real good unto themselves;
Obedience was the great first end of every Law, and a Law was given our first Parent to put him upon a tryal of original prudence, which could never put him upon any thing but what was excellent; when pru∣dence seem'd drowsie, sin crept upon him, and ruin'd him and his prosperity, but be∣cause Man sinned, God did not therefore change the nature of his commands, but he  explain'd and improv'd them, by adding particulars coincident with them; he supply'd the defects of reason impair'd, and reveal'd those things at which it might have stumbled beyond recovery: Noah and his Sons had not a new Law, but the same again illustra∣ted farther, and more clear'd up by additi∣onal revelation, to supply the greater decays of humane abilities: Nor did God change his mind when he chose the Seed of Abra∣ham from the rest of Mankind, or give Is∣rael any new Laws essential to Religion, for Circumcision and the Paschal Feast were not of the essence of it at all, since Man might have kept all the moral Law without ever participating in either: The rest of the ce∣remonial and political injunctions were neces∣sary to the Jews necessitate praecepti, as they were commanded by a God infinitely pow∣erful and wise, and who could enjoyn them nothing that was unfit or unjust, but the mo∣ral Law which was the Law of nature, and obliged all Mankind, as well as the Nation of the Jews, was necessary, necessitate Medii, as an absolute and indispensible means of salvation, or as containing
such duties, and forbidding such sins, as without an exact care in each of which it was impossible for any man living to be saved: and whereas the circumstantial Laws of the Jews were such as had no intimate connexion with or dependance upon one another, all the parts of the Moral and perpetually obliging Law  are of so
close an alliance, and in their ex∣ecution so inseparable one from another, that as S. James says,James 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all: for the whole sum of the Law being comprehended in those few words, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbour as thy self, If therefore any man bow to an Idol, or worship more Gods than one, or profane the name of the true God, or be guilty of perjury, or refuse to devote one day in seven to the worship and service of God, by any of these sins he proves he does not love the true God so entirely as he ought. And again, He that dishonours or rebels against his pa∣rents natural, spiritual, or civil, or that com∣mits murder with his hand or in his heart, or that submits to the enticements of lust, or that defrauds and purloins from another, or that by falshood endeavours to prejudice the life or estate or reputation of others, or who indulges himself in covetousness, or gives way to the first motions of the heart that encline to envy, Whosoever sins in any one of these particulars, tho' at the sametime he be a rigid observer of all the rest, cannot be said to love his neighbour as himself, since he would not be willing, either that by himself, or by any other, any injury of what kind soever should be done to him: and how much more essential to the body of Religion the Jews  thought these perpetual Laws, than their own Ceremonial Institutions, is plain from their practice, since they, as much as possible, hinder'd all meer Heathens from co-habiting with them, and yet admitted those whom they called Proselytes of the gate, upon their renouncing a plurality of Gods, and submitting to the seven precepts of the sons of Noah, to the priviledge of performing their Devoti∣ons in the exterior Court of the Temple, and kindly suppos'd them too capable of a portion in the world to come. As God made no alteration in the natural Law by what he gave Israel by the hand of Moses, so nei∣ther did he innovate any thing when he sent his only begotten Son into the world for it's Salvation, the Law of Christ was the Law of Moses, which was the Law of Noah, which was the Law of Adam, which was the Law of pure original Nature, which was the Law of God; as Moses was the Law-giver of the Jews, so was the blessed Jesus the Law-giver of the Christians, but if we look on them both as meer Men, their legislative power was not original, but as Stephen tells the Jews,Acts 7.53. Numb. 21.18. the Law was given them by the disposition of Angels; Moses yet is called a
Law-giver in the Song of the Israelites, but it's in the same sence as a Judge on the Bench, who has no power to make any thing a Law of his own contrivance, or by his own Authority: God himself, on whose services myriads of glorious Angels always attend, is a Law-giver,  as a King on his Throne, who has no superiour, and therefore what he there de∣crees, has the force and sanction of a Law, the Lord is our Judge,Isa. 33.22. says the Prophet, the Lord is our Law-giver, the Lord is our King, he will save us: As our Saviour was Man, he too, tho' superiour to Moses, and pecu∣liarly faithful in all the house of God, had no authority to make alterations in that ori∣ginal Moral Law, and as he was one with his Father, and so conscious of every determi∣nation of his, it was impossible he should vary from himself, i. e. from his blessed Father, or should openly in the world act as if it were possible any thing imperfect should come out of the hand of God: Hence we ratio∣nally believe, that if salvation be a thing really attainable, it must be attained by the same means by all persons whether Jews or Gentiles. Of the Patriarchs several have that testimony given of them in Scripture, that they pleas'd God; now there being no variableness nor shadow of turning with God, but he
the same yesterday to day and for ever, whatsoever pleas'd God in those, the same and nothing else can please him now. And whereas our blessed Saviour in the days of his flesh made it his business to please his Almighty Father, and did so by performing every punctilio of the Mo∣saic Law, so we who are to follow his ex∣ample, must perform the same; but where∣as the very circumstantial appendages of a  Law, tho' nothing essential to it but the meer evidences of the Sovereignty of the Lawgiver, are not yet to be cancell'd, but by a power equal to that which gave them their first obliging authority; therefore it was necessary that Jesus Christ, in and by whom the ceremonial sanctions of Moses's Law were vacated, should be God and so have the same original Divine Authority in himself; and his fulfilling and re-confirm∣ing all the substantial parts of that Law, made it yet the more publickly authentick, and taught his followers to have their due respect to him, which was due to both an Al∣mighty Lawgiver, and an infallible Interpre∣ter. And whereas that insupportable bur∣den of Ceremonies is taken off from the necks of Christians, it being laid upon the Jews partly for the hardness of their hearts, and partly for to shadow out to them their ex∣pectations of a Messiah, who being himself come in the flesh has now no need of types and shadows to prefigure him; so the old Natural Law is urged upon them with the greatest strength and reason in the world, and the force and intent of it is more clear∣ly shew'd them; from whence the Apostle S. John, who tells those he writes to, that he gave them no new commandment but the old which they had heard from the beginning, yet in the very next verse subjoins,1 John 2.7, 8. Again a new commandment I write unto you, the sub∣stance of which is, that you love one another,
this was an old commandment, in that Na∣ture injoyn'd it, and it was co-incident with that, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self; it was a new Commandment, in that it was re-inforced and inculcated so very often by our Saviour, in that He gave so many powerful reasons why his followers should practise it; and yet the result of all amounts only to this, that the design of Religion being to restore Nature to its first happiness, and that being rationally concluded to be the best and purest Religion which has the greatest effects in that design, if those who were his Disciples would but take care to evidence their Discipleship by that mutual love and endearing charity, they would, at the same time, convince the world that the Lord whom they follow'd was truly autho∣riz'd by Heaven, that the Doctrine which He preach'd was really agreeable to the Will of God, and that Love being the first intention of pure and uncorrupted Nature, That which raised and encouraged men most powerfully to it must needs be the most suitable to that original purity of Nature. And hence it is that we observe, many are prejudiced against Christianity by those cursed feuds and animosities to be found a∣mong Christians, they having an eye ge∣nerally to the restauration of Nature, but quarrels and contentions being wholly barba∣rous, brutish and unnatural; hence it appears farther too, that whereas the Apostle seems
to distinguish between the Gospel and the Mosaic dispensation, as if the first were the Law of Faith, the last the Law of Works, and that such a Law as by which Salvation could never be obtain'd, The works the Apostle reflects on, are not the duties of the moral Law, but the Ceremonial punctilio's of the Levitical Law, which, as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, agreeably to what I asserted before, assures us, were not able to make any man perfect; but for the Moral Law he's so far from invalidating it, that where ever he dehorts from any vices, such as he calls the works of the flesh,Gal. 5.19, —24. which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, strife, wrath, seditions, heresie, envyings, murders, drunkenness, re∣vellings, and such like; of which he tells us, that they who do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God: Again, wheresoever he exhorts to any virtue, such as Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against which there is no Law; Wheresoever he does thus, He enforces the Moral Law with expressi∣ons as strong, and reasons as weighty as the Holy Ghost could inspire him with; and where the same Apostle assures us that in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision,Gal. 5.6. he shews what works are excluded from any efficacy in our Salvation, for
Circumcision is put for the  whole Ceremonial Law, and where he adds that Faith working by Love is available, he shews the inefficacy of all pretences to Faith without good works, agreeing with S. James, that Faith without works is dead,James 2.26. and with his own severe reflection elsewhere upon those, who profess they knew God while in their works they deny him,Tit. 1.16. being abominable disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.
Since then it was the great end and design of the Gospel to confirm the Moral and eternal Law of God, and so by just degrees to reduce fallen Man again to the rules of perfect rea∣son, to make him sensible of the noble na∣ture and spiritual inclinations of the Heaven∣born Soul, that so he might the more fully apprehend, how much below himself he falls in yielding himself a slave to Sin, and how much he retrenches his own true li∣berty by that unbridled exorbitancy he aims at: the Gospel being intended to set Man's natural misery in a true light, and withal to shew the sole remedy for that misery in the undertakings of a Saviour: It remains an inquiry still whether Man could, in the state he is in at present, arrive at a full and plain satisfaction in these matters? And here we are to call to mind our second Posi∣tion relating to Humane Reason, which teaches us, that by the Fall, humane reason is exceedingly impair'd, and very much inca∣pacitated for those great ends for which it was first bestow'd on Man; and it's plain that  though our Saviour has appear'd, though he has brought us the glad tydings of life and salvation in and by himself, tho' he has taken the kindest care imaginable for the propagation of this Gospel, we are still by birth the same naturally miserable and mis∣understanding Creatures that we were be∣fore; and therefore we are in some sence actually regenerate or born again in Baptism, being in it born members of the Christian Church, and so having a right to all Christi∣an priviledges, and it being a Symbol or sign of our new birth or resurrection from dead works to serve the living God; yet after our Baptism, our intellectuals are still the same poor, weak, and miserably foolish; and hence it comes that Catechetical instructions in the principles of Christian Religion, and frequent Sermons or exhortations to true piety and sincere goodness, or dehortations from Sin, and explications of hard and diffi∣cult expressions or doctrines in Scripture, and vindications of divine truths from the as∣saults of Hereticks, Schismaticks or Infidels, and the refutation of those errors, endea∣vour'd by such to be impress'd on the minds of Men, all these things are absolutely neces∣sary for advancing our knowledge in Divine Matters, for keeping us from the paths of error, and for teaching and shewing us how to live godly, righteously and soberly in this present evil world: And the more improve∣ments we make according to these means of
grace which we enjoy, the more powerful assistances and encouragements we meet with from Heaven in our work, as was be∣fore observ'd in our fourth Position concern∣ing humane reason. Yet after all, we re∣main but on the positive side of those great truths laid down in Scripture, we believe them firmly and stedfastly, because we have an irrefragable and infallible testimony of their truth, the veil that was upon the hearts of men is indeed taken away, the types, sha∣dows and ancient Prophecies, relating to the Messias, are all made good in his ap∣pearance upon earth, the way to life is made clear, and according to right reason, very easie and agreeable to those who endeavour to walk in it; and Man so endeavouring, is reconciled to God by the blood of his dear Son Jesus Christ, and there is a nearer and more close Communion between God and man than heretofore, all these things and the infinite love of God in them, are now so plainly decipher'd, that he who runs may read them. But for the rational part of these things, or what means an Almighty God could make use of to effect things so stupendous, how that dismal distance be∣tween a pure Divinity and corrupt Mortality, should be made up; how God himself should stoop to man, when man notwithstanding all his inordinate ambition, could never rise to God, how that strict communication between God and Man should be maintain'd, &c.  All these things are such mysteries, that its impossible for even Angelical Intellectuals to comprehend them fully, since common rea∣son will give us this maxim, that Nothing but an infinite being can perfectly understand all the operations of an infinite being: There∣fore we have the Communion between God and Man still shadowed out to us in the Symbols of Bread and Wine, consecrated into a clear representation of the body and blood of our Saviour to us in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: Nor can we believe (whatsoever Grotius,In tract. An. semper sit commu∣nicand. per Symbola. a man of more learning than ortho∣doxy, would perswade us to,) that we, while we have the means and opportunities of com∣municating with one another, and holding a close communion with God, by partici∣pating of those Symbols which our Lord himself instituted to that very end and pur∣pose, can possibly communicate as well with∣out them, or that we may make at any time the Bread and Wine a Nehustan, a sign of no account or value at all, because perhaps it may have been abused to ill purposes by a factious or an Idolatrous Crew: but not to insist upon that; Tho' it be with S. Chryso∣stome and many other Antients,
, a dreadful and tremendous Mystery, and will be always so accounted by the most understanding and humble Chri∣stians; there's not an article of our Faith, not one of the principal heads of the Apostles Creed, which we so often repeat, but its  a body of Mysteries. Mysteries, after all the pains of the most learned and pious men, un∣intelligible otherwise than as to their posi∣tive truth by all mankind; and more parti∣cularly those clauses concerning our blessed Saviour are so true, so essential to our eter∣nal salvation, and yet so far above our reach, that while we meditate on them seriously, our Souls have nothing but miracles of po∣wer, wisdom, mercy, and love in view, but being known for such, they all hold their miraculous nature still, and can never be ful∣ly decipher'd either by Men or Angels; and that we should yet be obliged stedfastly to believe these things, though we cannot com∣prehend them, will appear no way unrea∣sonable, if we consider these things, belong∣ing to the 3d. Inquiry, which is, What considerable advantages can accrue to Religion from those Mysteries it's founded up∣on? we consider in pursuit of this Query, That by a due reflection upon the nature of such Mysteries as are really necessary, and con∣sequently of very great weight and importance, men are brought to a due acknowledgment of the deficiency of their own reason, they learn how weak and shallow all the utmost flights of wit and reason are, when they come once to stand in competition with the results of in∣finite wisdom and unlimited understanding: Men of the most presuming abilities find it
very hard to unriddle ancient parables, and to give a clear and evident explication of aenigmatical writings and figurative senten∣ces and expressions; the youthful
Philistines, Men without doubt of very brisk parts in their own esteem, as we may conclude by their ready acceptance of Sampson's propo∣sition, faltred pitifully when they set their wits on work to expound his riddle, and the Pharisaical Allumbradoes, those men of light, who (like the modern Chineses) concluded almost all the World blind except them∣selves, when our Saviour put that Dilemma to them concerning John's Baptism, viz. Whether it were from Heaven or of Men, it confounded them so as all their mighty wis∣dom could never dis-intangle them; if these things were difficult, the fundamental My∣steries of Religion are much more so; Men have attempted several ways to solve the appearances of Nature, and some have made such ingenious researches after them, and have laid down Hypotheses so very rational for the solution of difficulties in them, that they have got themselves the applauding vogue of the World, and their Dictates have been valued by learned Men as the great standards of Philosophic reason: Nay, the acquists of some in these matters, have puft them up with that ridiculous vanity and pride, that they have dared to trample up∣on all Religion, nay upon the Deity it self, imagining themselves able to demonstrate,  how the World and all the parts of it might be constituted, regulated, and continued, without any concurrence of a Divine and unbounded Providence: but when these same mighty pretenders to wit and sense, have come to look into the shallow Mystick rites of ancient Heathens, they have but fool'd and disgraced themselves: but when such fall upon the foundations of Christia∣nity, they prove like that Stone our Saviour speaks of, which whosoever shall fall on shall be broken,Matth. 21.44. but on whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to powder; they onely show themselves egregious fools, and endeavour to ridicule every thing which they find them∣selves unable to understand. Thus Lucian or some of his Contemporaries in his Philo∣patris, a Dialogue of that name, makes it his business to scoff at several things, reveal'd in Scripture, and at several of the Mysteries of Christianity, though neither he nor his followers, not Celsus, nor Porphyry, nor Libanius, nor Julian himself, nor any other of that witty scoffing tribe, were ever able to confute the Writings of the Prophets or the Apostles, or to baffle their Christian An∣tagonists by any serious argument. In the forenam'd Dialogue Critias offering to swear to Triepho, or to give him an oath for his se∣curity from any danger, having named seve∣ral of their Heathen Gods, Triepho derides them all with reason enough, Critias at last breaks out thus, By whom then shall I swear
that I may be believ'd? The other answers, Thou shalt swear by that God who rules above,Philopa∣tris, Oper. Luciani. T. 2. p. 770. the great, the immortal, the Heavenly God, The Son of the Father, the Spirit proceeding from the Father, one of three and three of one,  Reckon of these as of Jupiter, esteem these God; after this the same Buffoon proceeds to scoff at that great Apostle of the Gentiles, St. Paul, calling him that bald high∣nos'd Galilaean, who mounted upon the air into the third Heaven, and there learnt wonderful matters, , He rege∣nerated or renewed us by water, and gently guided us into the foot-steps of the blessed, and redeem'd us out of the regions of the wicked; and again he burlesques the original of all things, where he tells his Companion, that there was light incorruptible, invisible, incom∣prehensible, which put an end to darkness and disorder, , onely with speak∣ing one word, as that slow-tongu'd Man, mean∣ing Moses, has written; and more to the same purpose, and of the same scurrilous stamp; and this is the wit of Atheistical heads, who think it's enough to expose a Doctrine they understand not, or cannot edifie by, as some would express it, meerly to name it and no more; where, as the true Sons of Religi∣on, though they are far enough from pre∣tending to fathom the great objects of faith,
cannot yet but derive ineffable consolations from the positive truth of those Mysteries contain'd in Holy Writ; but this over∣weening of their own extraordinary wit, made many persons of excellent natural abi∣lities, of well exercised reason, and inimi∣table diligence, in the first ages of the Go∣spel, stumble so foully at the Doctrine of a crucified Saviour; for as a just punishment for that foolish pride and self conceit, God destroy'd the wisdom of the wise,1 Cor. 1.19. and brought to nothing the understanding of the prudent, so the Stoic and Epicuraean Philosophers were mightily puzled with those new Gods, as they were pleas'd to call them,Acts 17.18. viz. Jesus and the resurrection, as if because they could not understand what the meaning of a re∣surrection was, therefore the Apostles who preach'd it up must needs either make a God, or a Goddess of it: Thus the same doctrine of the resurrection; and that of Christ's being the Son of God, and several other mystick truths were cast in the teeth of suffering Christians, as if they could be no better than mad men, who would undergo so many hardships for assertions so very unintelligible, as that they could deserve nothing less than derision; and it was often urged as an evidence of a bad cause, that it had so many strange and incomprehensible postulates attending on it.
The same is the plea of the Atheistical, what if I should add of the Heretical wits  of our age, who labour hard to expose whatsoever they meet with beyond the reach of their debauch'd understandings, and would therefore have all sound Religion banish'd out of the Commonwealth, because, for∣sooth, they cannot comprehend How God should become Man, should be born of a pure Virgin, should converse with men, should dye for their sins, rise again for their justification, and ascend up into glory with that humane body he had assumed unto himself, from whence be∣fore the Worlds dissolution he should certainly come to be the Supreme determining Judge of all both Men and actions, upon which Faith the whole Christian Oeconomy is built, and without the certain truth of all which, Chri∣stianity would be the most absurd and unrea∣sonable religion in the World: Thus
He∣reticks, thus Atheists discourse, as if it were indeed impossible there should exist a God of greater wisdom and power than themselves, or however, that he must dispose of all things just agreeably to their Capacities, on pain of being dethroned for a default, when yet eve∣ry day they see men like themselves born in∣to the World, but can give no possible ac∣count of the reason of their acquiring such and such particular shapes or features in the World; they see a man born naked into the World, but cannot tell us why they are not all cover'd with hair, or scaly armour like Beasts, or with scales and fins as Fishes, or with feathers as Birds: they see and know  they have naturally but two feet, but cannot tell why they should not be born without any, as Worms, or Fishes, or why they should not have four, as the greater number of Beasts, or why not greater numbers, as most insects; they see Man, a Creature of a noble and Ma∣jestick frame, endued with a
discursive fa∣culty, ready to descant upon every visible object, yet cannot tell why nature should have given man but two eyes wherewith to survey so vast and unaccountable a variety, when at the same time she has studded the head of a contemptible Fly with several thousands; they find themselves able to call to mind a mighty number of particulars, seen, heard, read, talkt of, but cannot in∣form themselves certainly where the nume∣rous Idaeas of sensible things past should be lodged, when at the same time the mind is crouded with a World of present objects, and roving too after the most uncertain fu∣ture contingencies; and yet, after all these notorious instances of their wretched Igno∣rances, God must lay his whole Divine power and wisdom at their feet, or else he must be no God for them: We may say with a little al∣teration of David's words, Man overvaluing his own wisdom hath no understanding, but is like the beasts that perish; if he could com∣prehend God, he'd despise him, since he can∣not, he'l deny him, an humour uncouth and unnatural even to corrupted reason; but the truly wise man, when he sees himself thus  puzled with every little effect of common nature, is so far from thinking it strange, that the great Sovereign of all things should say or do any thing above his understand∣ing, that he rather would wonder (did he not acknowledge both omnipotence and omni∣science in God) how so excellent a Being should possibly stoop so low, as to make any thing concerning himself intelligible to a corrupted transgressing Creature; the more he looks upward to God the ordainer of all things, the readier He is to break out into that expression of the Psalmist, When I consider the Heavens the work of thy fingers,Psal. 8.3. the Moon and the Stars which thou hast or∣dained, Lord, what is man that thou shouldst consider him, or the Son of Man that thou vi∣sitest him! The more he meditates on God's infinite perfections, the more humbly sen∣sible he grows of his own wants, and easily can see at how sad a loss wretched Man would have been for obtaining that Divine favour which he had forfeited by Sin, had not somewhat Almighty interpos'd: nor can he be but extremely humbled in his own thoughts, when he sees how unsearchable God's wisdom is, and his ways past finding out, since He, out of such strange confusions as Sin had brought into the World, could pro∣duce order, and by the most improbable and unsuspected means, could once more lay o∣pen to Men the way to eternal happiness, that way which Sin had shut up before; the
more a contemplative Man learns to admire his God in this case, the more he learns to undervalue himself, and never to depend upon his own dreams and imaginations. By those Mysteries attending Religion in ge∣neral, men are in the better capacity to make a judgment of Religions of all ages, and to fix themselves upon that alone which is proper to conduct us through a troublesome world to ever∣lasting happiness: The nature of any religi∣ous profession may be distinguish'd by such characteristicks; for since God, as he mani∣fests himself to mankind, is unquestionably a very benign and merciful Being, that Reli∣gion which has the closest correspondence with such manifestations of himself, must certainly be the most pleasing to God, and consequently the best: Mystick Rites and Ceremonies have been various, and tho' the Devil had his design in the invention of se∣veral, yet Men too, who us'd them, had, as before I prov'd, in all of them some parti∣cular respects to futurity, and that happi∣ness expected by means of a Mediator be∣tween God and Man; but as God was never pleas'd by unclean offerings, so much less could he be pleas'd with humane blood of∣fer'd upon Altars devoted to him, (however such Sacrifices might be thought to prefigure best the shedding of
Christ's blood, that blood without which there could be no remission); and therefore we find, that tho' God tryed  Abraham's faith and obedience by that se∣vere command, that he should offer up his only Son a burnt offering to him, and tho' he permitted the good old Patriarch to go on a great way toward putting the command in execution, yet when he was ready to give the fatal stroke, he stop'd his hand, and accepted the readiness to offer it better than he would have accepted the sacrifice it self when actually made; therefore whatsoever mystery savour'd any thing of cruelty, was enough, if there were nothing more, to de∣secrate that perswasion which admitted of such things. Again, whereas those who pretend to any considerable notions of a God will acknowledge him to be infinitely holy and pure, and consequently to love the same holiness and purity in his Creatures. Wheresoever any mystick rites have at any time trespassed upon such purity, we may be assured God has nothing to do with such worship; a brand in this case the Pagan zeal endeavoured to fix upon the Christians, as well knowing how odious such a charge would render them: Thus Caecilius in Minutius Foelix, having be∣fore charged the Christians with murdering and devouring infants, he adds,Minutii Foelicis Oct. p. 90. Edit. Hackian. On a cer∣tain day the Christians, men, women and chil∣dren of every age and sex, meet together at a feast, after much junketing, when their in∣cestuous lust grows hot, a dog tyed on purpose to the candlestick, pulls it down, extinguishes  the light, and then in the dark they promi∣scuously pollute one another with fornications, adulteries, incests, and what not: But Pliny, as much a heathen as himself, vindicates the abused Christians from that horrid calumny in his Epistle to Trajan, where he informs that Emperor, That he had found by certain intelligence, that the Christians on a set day were wont to meet before it was light, and al∣ternately to sing an Hymn to Christ, as if he were God: Séque sacramento, non in scelus aliquod obstringere, sed nè furta, nè latroci∣nia, nè adulteria committerent, nè fidem fal∣lerent, &c. i. e. And they did by solemn oath engage themselves, not to any wickedness, but that they should not steal, nor murder, nor commit adultery, nor perjure themselves, &c. Now how those who entered into such so∣lemn mutual engagements not to commit such sins, should yet be so notoriously guilty of the worst of crimes, and how such very guilty persons, and such horrid abomina∣tions,Plinii E∣pistol. l. 10, Ep. 97. should have escaped Pliny's cogni∣zance, who had made it his particular busi∣ness to enquire into the behaviour of Chri∣stians, its very hard to imagine. But how∣soever falsly these things were charged up∣on Christians, they were true enough among the Heathens, where the Eleusinian rites among the Graecians, those of the
Bona Dea among the Romans, with their Bacchana∣lia, &c. were nothing but so many subtle contrivances to render all manner of lewd∣ness  and villany authentick and valuable, on which account the Apostle exhorts his Ephe∣sians,Ephes. 5.11, 12. to have no fellowship with such unfruit∣ful works of darkness, but rather to reprove them, for that its a shame to speak of those things which are done of them in secret. Far∣ther yet, whereas God has now really by his Son accomplished that great work of the worlds redemption, those mystick Rites and Ceremonies which fore-signified that to be done, are now vacated, and those who would have mysteries of that nature still continued, do as much as in them lies, to drive the world into an aversion from him, who alone is able to save to the uttermost all those who come to God by him: For those rites continu∣ed, will move the world to belive that the Messias is not yet come, that the Faith so long profest in him, as if he were come, is vain, that He who once pretended to that name, only impos'd upon the world, and was no better than a cheat, and that there∣fore the Jewish Religion is and ought to be still in its full force: Now this will appear very absurd and unreasonable to any one who has seriously weighed all those argu∣ments brought to prove that Jesus Christ was the Son of the living God, and there∣fore could be no Impostor, and therefore must be that Messias he declar'd himself to be; which being true, it will follow, that our Saviours coming must of necessity put an end to so much of the
Jewish Law as was  not co-incident with that of Nature, and con∣sequently not perpetually obliging. That ma∣ny of the Jews themselves ever look'd upon their Law as of a mutable nature in it self, is proved sufficiently by Raymundus Martini in his Pugio fidei against the Jews, and that it could never be more properly actually chang'd, than by the Messias, appears in him who proves, from Jewish writers themselves, that the Messias, the King, shall be greater than Moses, nay greater than the ministring Angels, and therefore the fittest for such a work; and, as he shews, their own gloss in the Midrasch Koheleth upon that of Solomon, Eccles. 11.8.Pugionis fidei p. 3. dist. 3. c. 20 tells us, That every Law of all people whatsoever, every Law that a man can learn in this world, is all but vanity in com∣parison of the Law of the Messias: Things of a less perfect and lasting nature must then vanish when that appears which is more per∣fect and eternal: Whatsoever therefore crosses that end for which God sent his Son into the world, and retains mysteries now altogether
insignificant, as being fully ac∣complished, that cannot be pleasing to God, and consequently, the present Religion of the Jews cannot be the true Religion. There are indeed some mysterious truths in which all Religions agree, viz. The existence of a God, his spirituality, invisibility, incomprehensi∣bility, &c. they all agree, That his Provi∣dence governs all things in the world, however trifling and inconsiderable they may appear in  the eyes of the world: that He hears, sees, knows, understands every thing, tho' they know not how, according to the objection of Atheists, to reconcile such things to his want of eyes, ears, soul, or any other parts, which are all inconsistent with a spiritual be∣ing: All agree together in granting the pre∣sent state of Man very wretched and de∣plorable, in looking upon him yet as capable of happiness, provided a sutable mean for its pro∣curement could be found out, and in expecta∣tion of some proper help for that purpose: These things being agreeable to the general sence of mankind, and being the original reasons of mens putting themselves into a religious course, must still be approved by every one; and every one of these, that Religion set∣led in the world by our Saviour and his Apostles, does advance yet more plainly, and confirm more strongly to the world: And whatsoever mysterious truths it farther propounds, they are all so far intelligible by every one, as may serve sufficiently to con∣firm those first principles; whatsoever is farther to be seen in them, is what moves mankind to lay aside, all brutish, malicious, and unmanly humour, as the meditation upon that
extraordinary love of God to mankind, of God the Father in sending his only Son in∣to the world to dy for it, of God the Son in leaving the bosom of his blessed Father, and in our nature and for our sake suffering that bit∣ter and scandalous death upon the Cross; of  God the Holy Ghost in pursuing us continually with his influences and assistances, and so work∣ing in us to will and to do according to God's good pleasure; this meditation naturally runs into that Apostolical conclusion,Joh. 4.11. if God thus loved us, then ought we also to love one another. If we contemplate our own mon∣strous demerits, our aversion to every thing that is good, our inclination to every thing that is evil, and so offensive to God, our ingratitude for mercies receiv'd, our un∣fruitfulness under the means of grace and Salvation presented to us, our natural en∣mity to God and goodness: And if with∣al we seriously consider, that all those fore∣mentioned favours are conferr'd on us in a state of obstinate enmity, the inference is easie as our Lord has laid it down,Matth. 5.44. That we should love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that hate us, and pray for them that despitefully use us and persecute us. If again, we think on that wonderful mer∣cy of God whereby, for the merits of the blessed Jesus, he's pleased to forgive us our sins, those natural bars between us and heaven, the consequence we must of course draw from thence is, that of the Apostle, That we should be kind,Eph.
4.32. tender hearted, for∣giving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven us: Thus we see what excellent influence these very truths, the nature and reasons of which are above the reach of our groveling minds, may have up∣on  us. If we proceed, and reflect upon the purity and holiness of that God with whom we have to do, that he's a Being who can∣not endure sin, who punishes it for its odi∣ous nature even in his dearest children, all those mysteries reveal'd to us in the Gospel are so far, by any fair consequence, from perverting our minds, that they give us all the motives imaginable,1 Pet. 1.15. that as he who has called us is holy, so should we be holy in all manner of conversation. A man may be a good heathen and yet a filthy Sodomite, a through-pac'd Jew and yet be blind, hard-hearted, carnal; but a man cannot be a true Christian but he'l endeavour to avoid all ap∣pearance of evil,Jude 2. and to keep himself un∣spotted from the world: he'l live in a con∣tinual abhorrence of whatsoever may pre∣judice his soul, or pollute his body, and knowing that he is not his own,James . but that he's bought with a price, he'l follow that advice, he'l endeavour to glorifie God in his body and in his spirit, which are gods:1 Cor. 6. and, to go no farther than what I had instanced in before, a man that meditates on that account the Apostles and Evangelists have given us of the appearance of the Son of God in the flesh, and on the ends and designs of such his appearance, he'l never spend his time idly about types and shadows, when he is invited to embrace the
substance, he'l study to conform himself to the Doctrine of the Gospel, to be, so far as belongs to a  meer man, a perfect imitator of all those ex∣cellent virtues so apparent in our Saviour during his converse with the world: he'l carefully avoid all sin, which was incapable of pardon from an offended God but upon the terms of the passion of his dearly beloved Son; and will be throughly satisfied of the danger of such transgression by a rational assurance, That if men sin wilfully after they have receiv'd the knowledge of the truth,Hebr. 10.26, 27. there remains now no more sacrifices for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the ad∣versaries: If then true Religion consist in worshipping God according to those revelations he has made of himself to the world, and we cannot propound any reason to our selves why God should have made any such reve∣lation of himself to us, but only that when we have a rule, we might have an example too, then whatsoever religion that is, whose most obscure and incomprehensible mysteries highly promote that excellent work of fol∣lowing our exemplar or growing up into an assimilation to God himself, by endeavour∣ing to be holy as our heavenly father is holy, and perfect as he is perfect, That Religion must certainly carry us by the surest ways to eternal happiness; but such a Religion is that instituted by our Saviour in the Go∣spel, therefore that's a Religion above all others, for the sake of such mysteries, so profound, but withal so very profitable and
instructive, to be embraced by all wise and considering Men. A due reflection upon those mysteries any Religion is founded upon, with a just appre∣hension of the deficiency of our own reason in tracing them, is a very proper means to create in mens minds a due and exact reverence for it. Thus that very notion that we have of God's infinity, of his dwelling in impene∣trable darkness, or in
inaccessible light, of the unsearchableness of his ways, the incom∣prehensibility of his wisdom, &c. All these things make awful impressions upon mens souls, and make them to fear before God, and to reverence him; and this God him self inten∣ded when by his Prophet he assured the Jews, My thoughts are not your thoughts,Isai. 55.8, 9. neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord, for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts: This prodigious distance between the nature of God and Man was enough to overawe man, on whose side there was so very great a disadvantage: God's prohibition so often repeated to the Jews, that they should not represent him to themselves by any figure or image whatsoever, with the reason as frequently inculcated, that they never had seen any thing which could look like any representation of him, was to prevent that contempt which too much familiarity with superiors naturally pro∣duces:  for representing a God by any thing of a gross or material nature, is apt to create as gross an Idaea of the Divinity it self in the mind of a Man, and those once entertained, produce a sawciness and fami∣liarity, not at all agreeable to that immense distance there is between a divine and a mor∣tal Being. Thus it's observable, that the Gentiles generally were upon several occa∣sions extravagantly free with those Gods they worshipp'd: Hence the Tyrians when Alexander the great besieged them, chain'd the Image of Apollo to that of Hercules, lest the God should leave them, because one of their Citizens had had a melancholick dream, forsooth, that he designed to serve them such a slippery trick in their necessity: So the Athenians clip'd off the wings of the I∣mage of the goddess Victory, lest she should fly away from them: So Dionysius the elder of Sicily, took off a golden mantle from the statue of Jupiter and put him on a woolen blanket, with that scoffing reason, that the blanket was fitter for all weathers, being lighter in Summer, and warmer in Winter; So he took off the golden beard of
Aesculapius with that Witticisme, That it became not him to have so long a beard, when his father Apollo had none: It's true these affronts were proper enough for those Idols to whom they were offer'd, but they were very un∣becoming those who offered them, since they profest to believe that they were really  gods, so that they were not those Images or Statues which were abus'd, but it was the true Divinity it self, which they imagined resident in or about those Images; And of this Inconvenience from material Images e∣ven of material Saints, the Romanists are sometimes sensible, witness that action of a Spanish Peasant, who making his offering to the Image of the blessed Virgin, and imagi∣ning she look'd not so kindly on him for it as he expected, He very briskly told her, she need not be so proud, for He remembred she was but a sorry piece of timber the other day; it was yet the more effectually to prevent such inconveniences, that God appointed a part of the Tabernacle first, and of the Temple at Jerusalem afterwards, under the Sacred name of the Holy of Holies, to be wholly in∣accessible to any but the High Priest, who bore an extraordinary Character among the Jews, nor might He enter into it above once a Year, and that with a great deal of respect and ceremony; This made God to strike the men of Bethshemesh with so terrible a judgment for daring to pry into what God intended to keep secret;1 Sam. .19. and to strike
Ʋz∣zah dead upon the place; for presuming to do what was above his station, and touch the Ark, though it seem'd an action proceeding from a good zeal, or a fear that the Ark, the peculiar Symbol of God's presence among his People, should have fallen to the ground;2 Sam. 6.9. but we may see what a terror that signal  vengeance struck upon David himself and all his Company;v. 10. and it's observ'd of Pom∣pey the Great, that after He had been so bold as to look into the Holy of Holies, upon his taking Jerusalem, that though He saw nothing there, nor offer'd any violence to any thing about the Temple, but expressed a great deal of reverence towards the place and those that attended on it; yet that God's judgments pur∣sued him from that time, that He prosper'd in little or nothing that He undertook, all things from thence verging hastily to his final ruine: So jealous is God of his honour, so terrible to those who will be strugling to know what he would have kept secret from the World. That great reverence, which a due distance be∣tween God (and the things belonging to him) and Man creates, is so well known in the World, that wise Men have thought it con∣venient, that there should be somewhat of a
Mysterious Majesty in those who are God's re∣presentatives on earth, which has taught the great Eastern Monarchs that prudent piece of state, to shew themselves as seldom as possible to the People, by which means the Vulgar not being capable of any diminutive thoughts of those, whose weaknesses they are unacquainted with, almost reverence their Kings as Gods, and conclude no submissions can be too great to them; But what should I talk of Princes, when even those arts every day made use of, have some darker parts, on which reason we see some Men infinitely cu∣rious  in comparison with others, and that every Art has its every days improvements, and to make them the more valued, their first Inventers are very careful, not to pro∣stitute what has cost them a great deal of pains and study, to every one that would be prying into their methods and discoveries; Hence Ocellus Lucanus, an old Astrologer, ad∣jures his Readers, by every thing he thought mysterious in his Art, to keep what he impar∣ted to them among their most religious secrets, and not communicate them to profane or illite∣rate persons, and that they should repay their kind Instructor with that reverence he deser∣ved; Such solemn engagements Orpheus and other ancient Heathens required of those who were initiated in their mystical Theo∣logy: For the religious among the Gentiles, were throughly convinc'd of this, that the more unintelligible the meaning of their re∣ligious rites was, the greater restraint they laid on vulgar and untutour'd Souls, and made them the more resolute in their super∣stitions: Hence one concludes, That those things which are easily understood, are gene∣rally despis'd by the vulgar, so that to make such plain things have any due effect on infe∣riour Souls, they must be attended by some∣what of a prodigious nature.
Tho' the Writers, from whom I alledge these things, were but Heathens, yet they discours'd rationally, and but with too much truth; For every one has seen the proof of  what they assert notoriously made good; It has been charged on our English Church as an unpardonable crime, as a robbing Souls of that food design'd by God himself for their en∣tertainment, that they have omitted Solo∣mon's Song, a great part of Ezekiel's pro∣phecy, and the Book of the Revelation, in the Lessons of their daily service: It's true they have done so; the Jews did more, for not∣withstanding their great diligence in read∣ing Scripture, they thought it fit, not to allow the reading Solomon's Song, or Ecclesi∣astes, or a good part of Ezekiel's or Daniel's Visions, till they were more than thirty years of age, concluding those mysterious Wri∣tings to be far above common understand∣ings, and we do not find Mens wits now a∣days so infinitely out-strip those of their Predecessors, that every illiterate mechanick, or ordinary auditor can understand them; Those who complain of not having those Books read in our Service, should never com∣plain of the obscurity of rational and cohe∣rent discourses, nor pretend to be most edi∣fied by the plainest things: If we must judge of Peoples edifying in attendance upon Di∣vine ordinances, by their lifted Hands and Eyes, by their loud sighs, and seemingly pas∣sionate groans, I have known them frequent in a numerous Congregation, where falshood, blasphemy, and unintelligible non-sence, has taken up the greatest part of the Preacher's discourse; and I have observed the same in
the wild extempore effusions of some eminent Dissenters: This plainly shews, that there are too many who understand not what is meant by plain preaching: they call noise, and earnestness, a furious action, and a tone sometimes melting and whining, sometimes sob∣bing and roaring, by that name, which is all so far from deserving it, that nothing can possibly be more offensive to Almighty God, nor more destructive to the precious and im∣mortal Soul: Plain preaching consists in truth laid down in
proper and significant terms, urged by pertinent and solid argu∣ments, and defended by well connected reason, drawn chiefly from that great Fountain of light and truth, the written Word of God: it teaches men, who attend it with due dili∣gence and humility, a great many of those things they were utterly unacquainted with before, it lays down before them the whole counsel of God which has respect to their eternal Salvation, it explains God's Word where it seems obscure, shews the connexion of Divine truths with one another through∣out that sacred Book, and not only warns men of encroaching Errors, but solidly con∣futes them: The plain Preacher supposes Christians are not always to continue in an Infant state, always to stand in need of in∣culcating the first Elements of Religion: He supposes mens younger years should be throughly season'd with those Principles, that a greater age should have proportion∣able  improvements, for he's infallibly assu∣red, that those who are always learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, are neither better nor worse, than vessels of wrath fitted for destruction: He believes, e∣very Ambassador of Christ has reason to expect, from professors of a mature age, what that Author of the Epistle to the
He∣brews expected from them, That leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, they should go on unto perfection, not laying again the foun∣dation of repentance from dead works,Hebr. 6.1, 2, and of faith towards God, of the Doctrine of Baptism, and of laying on of hands, and of the resur∣rection of the dead, and of eternal Judgment: It seems then the inspired Writer thought the preaching of faith and repentance to be so far from being the sole duty of a Prea∣cher, that he thought it unreasonable and highly reprovable, that the Preacher should have any occasion to inculcate them at all to truly edifying Christians; It was neither credit nor advantage to the Hebrews, that they were dull of hearing,Hebr. 5.11, 12, 13. that they were un∣skilful in the word of righteousness, that where∣as they ought to have been teachers for their time, they had need to be taught again them∣selves: Nor can the same dulness ever be commendable in others; Yet every age has been unhappily furnish'd with such preten∣ders to Religion, who talk much of it, but never grow the better or the wiser for it: Such our Saviour met with, and such his A∣postles,  especially that great Apostle of the Gentiles St. Paul, who were full of their complaints of hard sayings, such as none could bear, and on that reason were always ready to follow false teachers, and false Apostles: The vulgar thought them much more edify∣ing than either the Son of God himself, or those whom he had peculiarly sent and fitted for the promoting of mens salvation; and so they would always have thought, had not they in pity to prevailing Ignorance, and that it might be inexcusable, done so many authentick and undeniable miracles, to prove their own Divine Commission, which once proved, a more serious regard to what they preach'd would be acknowledged necessary, and even dark parables, and profound specu∣lations about the deepest points in Divinity, would appear very comfortable and instru∣ctive; Our Saviour speaking in parables to the Jews, reflected severely upon them, in his reason for so doing, I do so, says He, because they seeing see not,Matth. 13.13, 14, 15. and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand, and in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaias, which saith,
By hearing ye shall hear and shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see and shall not perceive: Well, did this pro∣ceed from the difficulty and obscurity of what was preach'd? No, though he taught them in parables, things not obvious to e∣very one, their unhappiness proceeded from another reason, This Peoples heart is waxed  gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I should heal them: Therefore he tried to open their eyes with miracles, it being then but the dawn of the Gospel, and men were not so easily wrought upon by clear reason, and by earnest perswa∣sion: They were not the repeated tenders of mercy, nor threats of eternal damnation, that could convince them of the necessity of obedience to and belief of that Word which was Divine and Saving, had not Miracles been exhibited, such whose events they could give no account of to themselves or others, in them, therefore they could be content with that want of plainness which they knew not how to satisfie themselves with before. The force and convincing power of Mi∣racles lay indeed wholly in the inexplicabi∣lity of their reason: So long as Jannes and Jambres could work wonders, in appearance, parallel with those of Moses, they believ'd him no Messenger sent from God, but a cun∣ning Jugler like themselves, and how they wrought such surprizing wonders, they knew well enough; but when Moses had once out∣reach'd the utmost of their skill, they who thought themselves before unconquerable in jugling sleights and Magick skill, presently acknowledged that the finger of God was there,
and began to tremble at what they had de∣rided before; so, when he that spoke as never man spoke, could by no other arguments con∣vince the stubborn Jews that he was their long expected Messias, He bids them believe him for his very works sake; nay and indul∣ges them so far as to allow,John 15.24. that if he had not done among them the works which never man did, they had had no sin: And the Pharisees were very sensible what advantages accrued to the Apostle's doctrine by the miracles they did, as appears by that question among them upon St. Peter's healing the impotent Man, What shall we do to these men? for that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them is manifest to all them that dwell at Jerusalem,Acts 4.16. and we cannot deny it. But we find not our Saviour upon every miracle he did, presently giving the
Jews an account how or by what power he did them, but he left them to make their conclusions from what they saw: And the Apostles, upon their Examination before the Jewish Council, onely answer, If we this day be examin'd of the good deed done to the Impotent man, by what means he is made whole, be it known unto you all, and to the whole people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified,Acts 4.9, 10. whom God rais'd from the dead, even by him doth this man stand before you whole; by which account they left them but in a maze of mystery and wonder more inextricable than before; But if the unwonted cures of distempers, the ejection  of Devils, the restauration of dead bodies to life, could over-aw the most obstinate stubbornness, how much more must the my∣sterious subjects of our faith, the appearance of the Son of God in our nature, his suffer∣ing death for our redemption, his resurrecti∣on and ascension up into glory, truths of a more sublime and incomprehensible nature, and confirm'd too by those very astonishing miracles, work men to a profound venera∣tion of that Religion grounded upon them! I'le add, that had it been possible for God so far to have laid aside his own immense glory, that men might have seen it fully and with open face, that they might have plainly read how all those wonders of love and mercy had been wrought, it would have been altogether unfit, since the pride of man would have been apt to trample upon, and despise the known cause of the most unex∣pected productions. It's necessary then that the fundamentals of Christ's Religion should carry with them somewhat of that awful Majesty inherent in its founder, nor is this wisdom of God in a Mystery to be laid open to scoffing Atheists, or Men onely impertinently curious after no∣velties; Pearles are not to be cast before Swine, nor Holy things to Dogs: The Chri∣stians in the primitive Church were very strict in this respect, insomuch that the Gentiles objected it against them, that they kept the very God they worship'd unknown
to the rest of the World; So Caecilius in Minutius Foelix very passionately, What silly and absurd opinions, says he, do these Christi∣ans take up, when they would perswade us that God whom they worship, a something, whom they can neither see themselves, nor show to any body else, does strictly examine the actions, manners, words, nay the very inmost thoughts of Men? And Maximus Madaurensis, in a more submissive style, speaks thus to the great St. Augustine; Show me now at length, O thou wisest of Men, what God it is ye Chri∣stians claim as yours, and whom ye own as pre∣sent with you in your most private recesses, as for us we expose our Gods to publick view, and adore them, and with offerings of Incense en∣deavour to reconcile them to us in the hearing of all the world; The ancient Christians would neither discourse of the Mysteries of their Faith, nor of their Sacramental Sym∣bols before Ethnics, who would then, as the conceited Socinians do now, deride every thing they could not understand: So La∣ctantius, speaking of the Resurrection, a Do∣ctrine which Christians ever own'd as a fun∣damental, and which Heathens thought the most absurd and irrational principle in the World, subjoyns at last, This is that Do∣ctrine of the Prophets which we Christians maintain, this is our wisdom which Idolatrous pretenders to Philosophy contemn as vain and silly, because we make it no subject of our pub∣lick disputations, but God has commanded us,
that we should peaceably and silently lay up his secret in our hearts and consciences, not perti∣naciously wrangling with profane persons, who violently oppose God and his religion, not with a design to sift out the truth, but to expose it to a publick scorn; Nor ought the Mystery to be discover'd by us especially, who denominate our selves from that faith: Nay, even those who were Converts to Christianity were but gradually enter'd into these things; the Ca∣techumeni and Energumeni being shut out of the Church so soon as the Sermon was done, and not permitted to be so much as Specta∣tors of the Sacramental Mysteries.
From what has been hitherto discours'd, we may justly conclude, That since Religion can have no part or interest, ordinarily, in the hearts of Men, unless it be usher'd in by causes Mysterious, supernatural, or in their full extent incomprehensible: Since our bles∣sed Saviour by introducing his Gospel into the World, has not taken away, but strongly confirm'd the necessity of obedience to God's Laws, whether written or natural, which was, as we have before observ'd, the general intent of Religion, and agreeable to those notions the World commonly had of it: Since, for the better carrying on this end, Mysteries are so very advantageous to reli∣gion, as to make Men have reverend appre∣hensions of it, upon account of its incompa∣rable Excellencies in its causes and effects,  and upon account of the weakness and shal∣lowness of their own understandings, since all these particulars are true; it's likewise absolutely necessary, that the Christian, the onely true, Holy, pure Religion, should be built upon such a foundation, as might appear to all Men, upon the strictest inquiry, beyond all doubt or controversie, Mysterious, inexplicable, incomprehensible. Nor could it be an imper∣tinent labour to clear this truth, because it totally ruines all the pretences of the Socini∣ans, that, after the Revelation once made of the great fundamentals of our Faith, there could remain nothing of so obscure a nature, but that we by the pure strength of our own reason might be able to comprehend it, In short, that though it be true, that Scripture, as suf∣ficient for that purpose, is and ought to be the sole rule of Faith, yet reason ought to be the rule of Scripture, Reason, as it now stands, loaded with all the miserable consequences of sin, reason so blind, as without the ex∣traordinary light of holy Scriptures, to be wholly unable to lead a Man to Eternal life; it obviates their assertions, that the true an∣cient Catholick Interpretation of this and other Texts of Scripture, that speak of the eternal Divine nature of the Son of God, or of that glorious Trinity subsisting in the Fa∣ther, Son, and Holy Ghost, is false and un∣reasonable, meerly because it introduces an unintelligible incarnation and unity of the Di∣vine and Humane nature in Christ: a My∣sterious
co-essentiality of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, &c. not∣withstanding all those glorious revelations God has made of himself in Scripture; For if it be certainly true, that Religion in it's general notion, cannot subsist unless built upon a mystick foundation, and that there∣fore Christian Religion in particular can∣not subsist without it, then it will follow, that the continuing Mystick nature of the great Articles of our Faith, can create no prejudice in any person whatsoever against our Religion on their account; since espe∣cially it will remain impossible to draw any genuine consequences from those mysteries, but what will be so far from impeaching, that they will strongly confirm and re-in∣force all those duties relating to God or man, which are laid upon us by the natu∣ral or written Law; and it will follow far∣ther, that the Socinians themselves, by their endeavours to level all the Articles of our Faith, the great saving principles of the Gospel, to impair'd reason, or by endea∣vouring to leave Christiany naked of all My∣steries, do what in them lies, to disannul all the Religion of Christians, to take away all the use and advantage of the Gospel, leaving the world so involv'd in Atheism, or in meer Deism, at this time very little to be preferr'd before the other.
Having done now with the positive asser∣tion, our next work is, with all exactness  and humility, to consider the illustration of this Proposition in the severals laid down by the Apostle, which altogether afford us the whole sum and substance of the Gospel; for all that glad tydings sent from Heaven to Earth for the comfort of mankind, consists in this, That for their sakes, to procure their Salvation, God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preach'd unto the Gentiles, believ'd on in the world, receiv'd up into glory: all which particulars, (tho' the full prosecution of the first, be all our present task) are incomprehensible my∣steries, yet as well worth our enquiring into, as the Apostles writing them, who without doubt would never have laid the weight of piety, or godliness, or true Religion, upon those grounds, had they not been worth our looking into, or their truth worth our vin∣dicating from all the attacks of prejudiced, opinionative, or haeretical men: It's true a late author tells us,Naked Go∣spel, p 34. c. 1. l. 20. That to dispute concern∣ing a Mystery, and at the same time to confess it a mystery, is a contradiction as great as any in the greatest mystery; the expression is worth our remark, for the boldness and ab∣surdity it contains: It's bold not to say impious, to insinuate so broadly, in a dis∣course where Christianity's concern'd, that all great Mysteries are made up of, or at least contain contradictions; what have we then nothing at all Mysterious in Scripture? what's that love between the blessed Jesus
and his Spouse the Church, so admirably character'd in the book of Canticles? can our Author find nothing Mysterious in all those adumbrations of ineffable love? or can he easily give us a Catalogue of the Con∣tradictions there? the real Contradictions I mean, for things that are of no mysterious nature at all on any other account, may seem to contain somewhat contradictory, but seeming contradictions are not real: Can he fathom every thing relating to Daniel's weeks? Men of a great deal of learning, industry and sobriety have taken a great deal of pains to explain the mystery of them, and have scarce yet given the world satis∣faction, were not the Vision mysterious, it would be more easily clear'd, but because it is not, must it therefore be contradictious to it self? or to make a yet closer instance: the nature of a God, can He or any Socini∣an make it comprehensible to humane under∣standings? or else will the very notion of a God imply a contradiction? He must be a very new fangled Son of the Church of Eng∣land who will assert that: but why must it imply a contradiction to dispute or dis∣course about, or to enquire into a confest mystery? That God was manifest in the flesh is true we believe, that every circumstance relating to his Incarnation as laid down in Scripture is true, according to the genuine and common interpretation of such words whereby these circumstances are express'd,
we believe too: That as they are true we may dispute about them, and clear them from all that Sophistry, whereby some subtle men would fain baffle us out of them, is no uncouth or irrational opinion; yet, after all, we take the whole account of this Incar∣nation, as laid down in Scripture, to be a very great mystery: But where lyes the Con∣tradiction, either in believing it a mystery, or in defending it as such? This truth that God was manifest in the flesh, is as before in∣timated, that upon the literal truth of which the whole Salvation of mankind depends, How he should have been so, is to all man∣kind mysterious and incomprehensible, yet may we without any contradiction explain, de∣fend, prove, and draw inferences from it: Hear what a Bishop of our own, a genuine son of our sacred Mother the English Church, says of this manifestation of God in the flesh: How it was effected,Vid. Mon∣tacut. Nor∣vic. in Act. & Mon. Eccles. c. 1. par. 39. p. 27. 1 Pet. 1.12. by what means made possible, heaven and earth cannot under∣stand nor deliver, , It was a mystery from the beginning, the Angels under∣stood it not, , it will be a mystery to eternity: the Angels as yet can go no farther than their  to receive a glimmering of it, as it were by the crany of a window, or by the chink of a door, and how shall we dare to enquire, how it was done?
, this question is indissoluble, that inextricable, Faith alone has power to  resolve them both; this we submissively agree to, and therefore we enquire not how, or in what manner God was made flesh, any farther, than some particulars relating to that Incarnation are plainly laid down in Scripture; far be any such presuming curio∣sity from us; only since the Apostle, in the consequent parts of the Text, has asserted, that God was made flesh, which according to the natural sound and common accepta∣tion of such words in all languages and wri∣ters, is, that he who was made flesh, or ap∣pear'd in the flesh, was God, since the A∣postle has asserted the positive truth, and has made it the first part of the great my∣stery of godliness, and such a part, as all the other particulars do but serve to prove and confirm: We must assert too, that this par∣ticular point or article of Faith, that He who was made flesh for the Salvation of man∣kind, was really God, God properly so call'd, the most high, the eternal God, blessed for ever, not any made or subordinate God, but the maker of all things, in a word, the true God, exclusive of all created Beings whatsoever. We assert that this is an Article of our Faith, so true and so important, that upon a true embracing it in the sence so laid down, the Salvation of all men depends; as much, as upon believing in Christ the Son of God at all, or on being neither impious, nor
blasphe∣mers, nor idolaters: And therefore we assert farther, that how great a mystery soever  this may appear, (and it never ought to appear otherwise) to enquire into and seek for all such Scriptures, as may render it in∣disputable, is neither impertinent to our Lord's design, in being so incarnate, nor is it fruitless to those who make it their bu∣siness to inquire into such proofs, nor is it dangerous to any, who make that enquiry with due humility and care: But on the contrary it's very dangerous, nay fatal, as before, not to enquire into it, or not to be fully satisfied about it. I know we have in this point more enemies than the meer Socinians, some capital asser∣ters of the Arminian tenets, being desirous to give such a latitude to Religion, as may take in all their friends, are very willing to perswade us, that it's not very material, or necessary to believe, that Jesus Christ the Son of God, is God of the same substance or nature with his father. So Episcopius a man of great learning and ingenuity in his fourth book of Theological Institutions, c. 34.Traitè sur la Divin. de J.C.S. 1. c. 1. p. 10. &c. the sum of whose plea amounts to this, That the essence of Christian Religion consists not in meer contemplative knowledge, but in practice, and that it consists much more in obedience, than in abstracted speculations on the Deity, which, tho' it be true enough, has really no place here, for can we call those principles meer or simple speculations, which are so im∣portant, that we our selves are or are not Idolaters, accordingly as they are true or
false? If Christ be of the same substance with his Father, or if, which comes to the same end, Christ be the supreme or sovereign God, he ought to be adored in that quality; and Socinians themselves cannot without im∣piety refuse to acknowledge him as such, and to honour him under that name: but if he be not so, we cannot confound him with the Sovereign God, without Idolatry: The great concern here then is, to avoid impiety, or idolatry; and by consequence, those inquiries must be of a practical nature, which are of so very great and extraordinary an importance. Episcopius makes several vain attempts to shew, That it is not at all essential to Salvation to know if Jesus Christ be God by an eternal generation; or that, be∣ing but a simple creature, or which is the same, a meer man like one of us, he is called God upon account of his ministry: for when he goes about to make us see that these are no fun∣damental inquiries, in shewing us that those, who believe Jesus Christ is a meer Creature, may worship him without being guilty of Idolatry, because they adore him not as he is man, but as he holds the place of God, as his
Ambassador or Substitute: this proof is imperfect and insufficient. For to prove that these questions are impertinent or unnecessary, it's not enough to shew that Socinians, without being Idolaters, may worship him, whom they believe to be no more by nature than a meer Man, which  supposition yet we shall in due time prove, God willing, to be false. But he ought to shew withal, that we without Idolatry may worship Jesus Christ as the supreme God (as we really are taught to do by the Church of England) tho' at the same time he really be not the sovereign God; which seems to be a very hard if not an impossible task, as I question not but hereafter it will more plainly appear. At present I shall only touch upon an argument, urged by Episco∣pius, from a Topick very easily found out; the reason then given by him, why it is not necessary that we should believe Jesus Christ to be perfect, or the true God, is, Quia nu∣spiam in Scripturâ id necessarium creditu esse asseritur, nec per bonam, nedum necessari∣am consequentiam ex eâ elicitur, Because it's a doctrine of which the Scripture no where af∣firms, that it's necessary to be believed, nor can it be drawn from thence by any good, much less by any necessary consequence: And he goes on to shew, that this argument ought to be of very great force among those of the reformation, because they profess there's nothing necessary to be believed, but what's either directly, or in plain terms contained in Scripture, or drawn from thence by very clear consequence; the last indeed, the sixth Article of the Church of England agrees with, but what she thinks of his first assertion, may very well be gathered from the second, wherein she propounds this Do∣ctrine
as necessary to be believed, The Son, which is the word of the Father begotten from everlasting of the Father, the very and eter∣nal God, of one substance with the Father, took man's nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin, of her substance, so that two whole and perfect natures, that is to say, the God∣head and manhood, were joyn'd together in one person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God and very man, &c. With the Church of England agrees, the Helvetic Confession,Vid. Har∣moniam Confessio∣num in notatis. c. 3. that of the French Churches, Artic. 6. the Scotch Confession, Artic. 1. the Synod of Dort, Artic. 8. the Synod of Czenger. in Hungary in their own Argument against the Socinians, and in Artic. 2. the Confession of Augsburg, c. 1. of Strasbourg, c. 2. the Saxon Confession exhibited to the Synod of Trent, c. 1. that of Wittemberg, Art. 2. the Confession of the Prince Pala∣tine, Art. 2. that of Bohemia, Art. 3. and 6. of Basil, Art. 1. and finally the
Orthodox consent of all the Fathers with holy Scripture, Artic. 2. c. 1. and it's observable, that the authors and subscribers of all these Confessi∣ons, imagine, that they ground this par∣ticular Doctrine of the eternal Godhead of our Lord Jesus Christ, upon Scripture; so that they declare they either find it there in express terms, or at least thought they drew it very naturally from thence, and cer∣tainly they were not mistaken; for, let us reflect a little on the Commandments of  the Old Testament, there Israel received this charge, Hear, O Israel,Deut. 6.4. Exod. 20.2, 3. the Lord our God is one Lord; I am the Lord thy God, thou shalt have no other God before my face: Observe what the Prophet adds to these precepts, Remember, says he, to the same Israelites, the former things of old,Isai. 46 9. for I am God, and there is none else, I am God, and there is none like me; the same Prophet introduces Almighty God speaking thus, I am the Lord,Isai. 42.8. that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven Images, and this particularly in such a place, where God is comforting his people with a descri∣ption of the office, power, excellency of the Messiah, and teaching all to rejoyce upon the certainty of his coming: Our Saviour himself when he contested with the most subtle and powerful adversary in the world, alledges this against him,Matth. 4.10. get thee hence Sa∣tan, when he had endeavoured to hire him to worship himself, for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve: This then of the Ʋnity of the supreme being, and the incommunicability of divine worship to any other Being whatsoe∣ver seems very Authentick Doctrine, and to be very well attested; yet after all this (to prevent that damning sin of Idolatry) whereas S. Peter refus'd the
adoration of Cornelius with that reason,Acts 10.26 Stand up for I my self also am a man; And the Angel, who had shewn S. John all those wonderful Pro∣phetick  schemes, refus'd the worship of that Apostle with those words,Rev. 22.9. See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, worship thou God; yet the blessed Jesus, He who being the Son of God, at least in some sence, should have been of all others the most careful, for se∣curing his fathers honour, yet He tells the Jews, that his father had committed all judgment to him,Joh. 5.23. that all men should honour the Son even as they honour the father, i.e. with the same kind of, or with equal honour; now every one will own, that the Father is to be worshipped as the supreme Being, or as the most high God, therefore Christ there as∣sumes to himself the glory, honour or wor∣ship belonging to the most high God: nor could this be strange in him who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to be equal with God:Phil. 2.6. The same Jesus suffer'd himself to be worshipped, without any reluctancy or prohibition of the worshippers: He forbad not the wise men from the East,Matt. 2.11 when they fell down and worshipped him, and made their offerings to him; nor did the blessed Virgin (who doubtless knew what it was to be an Idolater) reprove them for their misapplied adorations: nor did the An∣gel,Matt. 8.2. c.
9.18. who was their guide and director in their journey, inform them of this error: No more did Christ forbid the Leper, who worshipp'd him, nor the Jewish Ruler, who beg'd his goodness for the healing of his  daughter; Nor his Disciples when by his power delivered from the storm; Nor yet all the Disciples when after his resurrection they all came and held him by the feet and worshipp'd him:c. 14.33. c. 28.9. now Scripture in all these places puts no difference between that wor∣ship that is given to Christ, and that which the same persons generally render'd to the supreme God, therefore they knew nothing, but that he really was of the same nature with God: nor could he be so kind, or good, or wise, as he is character'd to us, who could see so many guilty of so damn∣ing a sin as Idolatry, (which they must have been guilty of, if they gave to him, a meer Creature, that sovereign worship which be∣long'd to the Creator,) without any reproof or check for it. Now tho' this danger may seem to infer a great deal of necessity of knowing Christ to be the true God, yet we may press it farther: For S. Paul tells us in plain terms,Rom. 10.13. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, where he is speaking of no other but our Lord Jesus Christ, now this laid together with that other text,Acts 4.12. that there is no salvation in any other, for there is none other name un∣der heaven, given among men whereby we must be saved, joyning these together, as they assert the positive, so they include the negative of equal truth, that
Without calling on the name of the Lord Jesus, Salvation can never be attained: but then it follows, How  shall they call on him in whom they have not be∣liev'd?v. 14. or in whom they have not had faith? but Faith may not be fixt on any, but on him who is the true God: true Faith is only towards God;Heb. 6.1. as the Apostle's phrase tea∣ches us, and the Socinians themselves in the very Text we are now upon, would per∣swade us to believe, that it was onely God the Father who was believed on in the World,Heb. 11.6. because he onely was the proper object of Faith, and we are told that without Faith it is im∣possible to please God; but to imagine, that any Faith can please God which is placed in any Being beside himself, is foolish and ab∣surd; Yet whereas God declared by his Pro∣phet of old, Cursed be the Man that trusteth in Man, and maketh flesh his arm, and in his heart departeth from the Lord:Jer. 17.5. Christ a little before his Passion, bids his Disciples, as they believed in God,John 14.1. so to believe also in Him: But now if without believing in Christ eter∣nal life and happiness cannot be obtain'd, and that be saving Faith which is fix'd on Him, and if we be reasonably commanded to believe in him, and yet true saving Faith cannot be fix'd in any but in God alone, then it will follow, that Christ must be God, the true, the Supreme God, and it will follow too, that it's indispensibly ne∣cessary that all Men should know he is God, that they may know in whom it is that they believe, that he is the proper object of Di∣vine Faith, and able to answer all the ex∣pectations
of Faith: For otherwise, as, a proposition may in it self be true, and yet I may be a lyer, when I swear it is true, be∣cause I know nothing of its being so: So, though Christ may be in himself the true God, yet I am an Idolater, for worshipping him as the true, while I know not that he is indeed the true God: And St. Paul ac∣quits not the Athenians of Idolatry, in con∣secrating an Altar to the unknown God, tho' that God, unknown to them, was the same God whom he preach'd unto them: Nor will that of the Apostle St. John, be easily avoided, where having before told us, We know that the Son of God is come,1 John 5.20. and hath given us an understanding to know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in Jesus Christ; he subjoyns, This is the true God and Eternal Life: These words, if we interpret them as they lie, and they seem to have no figure or Hyperbole, or foreign relation in them, may pass for a very plain Text to prove, that it concerns no less than our Eternal Salvation, to know that Jesus Christ is the true God, and this Interpreta∣tion gives the clearer reason, and stronger Emphasis to his following rule,v. 21. Little Chil∣dren keep your selves from Idols: If then our Lord's design was to procure Man's ever∣lasting Salvation, a right and certain know∣ledge of that on which Eternal Life depends, cannot be impertinent to our Lord's design: And if to worship God according to his de∣clared
Will, be the purpose of every one that embraces Christianity, exclusively of all other Religions, he that thinks it neces∣sary, in his worship, to distinguish between these respects due to a meer Creature, and those Honours belonging to the Creator can∣not miss his purpose, or lose his labour: and He who, by solid proofs, drawn from clear and pertinent places of Scripture, makes his Faith in this particular, rational, cannot ea∣sily incur any extraordinary danger: though, without so doing, he may incur a fatal ha∣zard, and thus we come to a direct discourse on that Particular, where these things will be more fully considered. Having concluded the first words of this Verse, Without Controversie great is the My∣stery of Godliness, to signifie to us the con∣currence of the Christian Faith with the Worlds general vogue in relation to Reli∣gion, and that Mysteries great and obscure are very necessary to the perpetuation of that Faith, and rend'ring it venerable among conceited and presuming disputants, it cannot be unuseful to discourse on the first instance the Apostle makes use of to illustrate the Mystery of Godliness, or of the Christian Faith, viz. God's manifesting himself in the flesh; or appearing and showing himself to humane eyes cloth'd in humane nature; for though God manifests himself a thousand se∣veral ways in his works of Creation and
Providence, where his Truth, Justice, Mercy, Power, Wisdom, &c. are notoriously evi∣dent to diligent observers, yet all these ma∣nifestations of himself are at a distance, and such as though they give us a very fair Idea of divine Goodness as in himself, yet con∣duce little to Humane happiness while Men reflect upon themselves as miserably dege∣nerate from that original excellency they were created in: and as such who have ex∣tremely abus'd all those evidences of God's power and influence upon the World, which have been given for restraining them within due bounds, and making them submissive to a superiour Law: such reflections teach Men to look upon themselves as in a ruinous state, fit subjects for eternal displeasure, and of themselves wholly incapable of satisfying divine justice, or retrieving forfeited happi∣ness, and upon God onely as a severe Judge and powerful revenger, of whom they could onely conclude, that he would vindicate his own honour upon those that injured it, and punish those to extremity who had not duly improved those overtures of himself which he had made in his visible works. What Man in such a case might wish for is easie enough to conjecture, He that's falling down a precipice would bless the Hand that would save him from death, and he that's going immediately to execution, would be over∣joy'd to hear of a pardon; so would almost despairing, wretched, sinful Man do, wish for
some proportionable power to interpose be∣tween himself and vengeance. But such a power onely could be in God, and yet so great a benefit could be procur'd for Man onely by such an adequate satisfaction to God's anger as could be given by a Man; Here Humane conceptions were entirely at a loss, the universal imperfection of their nature they plainly understood, and so the impossibility of meer humane satisfaction; they easily found it was no created being, it was no mere man though strengthened by Divine assistance, nay it was none of those pure and happy Spirits who attend on cele∣stial Ministrations, that could stem that pro∣digious tide of immense wrath, therefore God himself must interpose; but how Infi∣nity should be confin'd, how He who grasp'd the Universe in his hand should stoop from Heaven for the sake of those who had affron∣ted his goodness before, how He should con∣descend to assume Humanity, the necessary Medium of peace, were Mysteries too great for Man to fathom, and Hopes too large for guilty souls to please themselves with; but what was so very obscure to Man was plain and easie to the Almighty; and when the time of his redeem'd was come, when he look'd and there was none to help,Isay. 63.4, 5. and wondred that there was none to uphold, then his own arm brought salvation to the World; It was then in that absolute fulness of time, when
sins and miseries, and anger were at the height, and  all things seem'd inevitably running to eter∣nal destruction, that God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law from those burdens, and that death to which they were enslav'd: to stop the fatal final sen∣tence then ready to be past, God himself was so made manifest in the flesh; In rela∣tion to which great action we shall assert, That Jesus Christ the Messias appearing in our Humane nature, or cloth'd with flesh and blood, was really the Son of God. That the same blessed Jesus was God, equal with his Father, or really and truly God, as well as real Man. That it was necessary, that to effect our Sal∣vation, God, and particularly God the Son should assume our nature to himself. We shall make some deductions from these Con∣siderations. We assert then, That that Man call'd Jesus Christ, and reputed the Messias, or the Saviour of the World, who appear'd in our nature, was really indeed the Son of God: It's he whose Genealogy we have in Scripture descended according to the flesh, from the Royal Line of the House of Judah, the true and legal Heir of David's sacred Family: whose birth into the World, as it was
mean and despicable, so it was very publick and unquestionable: We find his actions set down at large in the Gospels, and Him, according to their history,  a Man of a blameless life and conversation, and of inexpressible condescenscions and good∣ness, we observe him going about and doing good (the proper character of a great Per∣son) in the Country of Judaea; healing Dis∣eases, casting out Devils, forgiving Sins, and that not by a precarious or surreptitious po∣wer, but by a really supreme inherent Au∣thority of his own: We meet with him af∣terwards accus'd by Jews, condemn'd by Ro∣mans, and according to their Law, crucified between two Thieves, on Mount Calvary, bu∣ried by Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, rais'd again in a stupendious manner, con∣versant among several Persons who were his Companions and admirers before, talking, eating and drinking with them forty days together, and afterwards in publick view lifted up above the Clouds, beyond the utmost reach of humane Eyes, this Man call'd Jesus Christ by the Writers of all these things, was really the Son of God.
He that would recommend a new disco∣very to the World, gives a considerable ad∣vantage to its reputation, by the extraor∣dinary worth and merit of the Author; and therefore whereas the Gospel, or the glad tidings of salvation were the newest and most glorious discovery the World was capable of, and though the most welcome to a declining Age, yet with all the most incredible, it was incumbent upon the first divulgers of it, to recommend it upon the  wisdom and power of its founder. The re∣puted wise Men of old, to render them more venerable to the multitude, were wont to derive the first Originals of their great Benefactors from the Gods; But never was any benefit conferr'd on any place or Person by the kindest Patron which could stand in competition with that which the blessed Je∣sus conferr'd on the whole World, there∣fore never could any such publick Bene∣factor be with equal reason deriv'd from Heaven with him: From thence therefore the inspired Writers deduce his Pedigree too, as well as from David, and tell us boldly, that that great Man, whose praises they celebrate in their Writings, was indeed the Son of God; which they assert not in a Me∣taphorical sense, as the Psalmist calls Ru∣lers and Governours,Psal. 82.6. I have said ye are Gods, and ye are all of you Children of the most high: As the Angels are stil'd by God himself, in his question to Job, Whereupon are the foundations of the Earth fastened, or who laid the corner stone thereof? When the Morning stars sang together,Job 38.6, 7. and all the Sons of God shouted for joy? as believers are stil'd by the Evangelist: As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name;John 1.12. 1 Joh.
3.2. And again, Beloved, we are now the Sons of God; But the holy Writers make him the Son of God in a plain literal sense, as Seth is call'd the Son of Adam, being begotten of  him, as Isaac of Abraham, as Solomon of David, or as we generally understand the word in our common expressions of the near∣est Relations, declaring him so the Son of God, begotten of his father before all worlds, in contradistinction to creation: But it would not have been enough to satisfie the world in the truth of that extraordinary original for them to assert it; for tho' men value great discoveries according to the credit of their Authors, yet the weight and greatness of the discoveries make them nice and curious in their disquisitions about them that they may not be impos'd on, for how wretched a disappointment would it have been for a whole world, to be big with the violent ex∣pectation of a Saviour, to be throughly sen∣sible of their own necessity, to have a com∣pany of men boldly publish to them, that the expected Saviour was really come and qualified suitably to those wonderful ex∣pectations they had of him, and yet to find nothing but a sham or an imposture at last, a Bar-cozbi the Son of a ly, instead of a Barcochab, the Star that should have risen in Jacob, as the unhappy Jews were deluded at last. In such a case Men are wont to look for clear and uncontroulable evidences of the au∣thority of the
discoverer, and had not God himself afforded such to the world in rela∣tion to the descent and original of our Sa∣viour, it would scarce have been reconcile∣able  to infinite justice, to have condemn'd the world for not believing on him; Nor would Almighty God have made use of those effectual means to satisfie humane doubts, had he not himself judged it highly rational that those creatures of his for whom he intended so great a good, should receive entire satisfaction in the truth and nature of that good bestow'd. In the evidences of his being the Son of God, lay all the strength and weight of his Doctrine, and the validity and efficacy of that Repentance preach'd by the Apostles in his name; had he, after all those glorious pretences, been one of an inferior rank, there never had been so great an Impostor in the world as Christ, nor such frontless cheats as his Apostles, nor such abused, besotted, bewitched Crea∣tures in Nature as the Christians in all ages have been: Therefore to vindicate both their own Credit and that of their Master, the Evangelists in their writings, first ap∣peal to the common knowledge of those who liv'd at the same time that Christ convers'd on earth, at which time had what they pub∣lished been false, it would certainly have been quickly confuted by the interested Jews and Romans: For the Jews who saw them∣selves expos'd under the characters of the most obstinate and ingrateful infidels in the world, and the Romans who saw themselves traduced as tools in the hands of their own vassals to carry on the most barbarous and un∣reasonable  cruelties; would certainly have vindicated themselves to the utmost against their slanderers, could they have found any flaws in those things they delivered; yet the Jews never went about to deny the
ex∣istence of Jesus the supposed Son of Joseph, nor the reality of those mighty works per∣form'd by him, but rather to shew the pos∣sibility of all those things tho' Jesus were not the Messias, wherein they were easily baffled, and the Gentiles endeavoured to confront his Miracles by the pretended wonders wrought by Simon Magus, and A∣pollonius Thyanaeus, and so to depretiate the Messiah's reputation, but with as little suc∣cess: And indeed it was almost inconceive∣able, that a company of mean men, looked upon generally with an evil eye, should re∣solve to publish a parcel of notorious false∣hoods, which every man upon his own know∣ledge could have confuted, and thereby have exposed themselves to the just fury of a deluded multitude: it was inconceivable that so many in their writings and preach∣ings could at such different times and such distant places agree together, to put a sham upon mankind, and to do it so coherently in it self, and so agreeably to one another, as it was apparent these men did. Now in writing a History of immediate transactions, there can be nothing fairer in the world than for men who are eye and ear witnesses of the things in question to compile the  story, and to publish it in their times who knew the same things whether they were true or false, as certainly as themselves, and an History so written, that passes through such an age without reproof, may justly pass for authentick, nor can any meer humane testimony attain a greater certainty. And where the subject of such a History is Di∣vine, where many things are declared be∣yond the reach of humane capacities, where they are yet laid down so exactly agreeable to those things obvious to humane under∣standings, and where there appears nothing disagreeable to the common expectances of the world, nor to those best and fairest Idea's we have of the Divine Nature, there the History grows it self divine, and proves it self dictated by a Being superiour to all terrene defects: such a History is the History of the Gospel, and such an appeal to humane sence and knowledge, and carryes such de∣monstrations of inspiration with it; where we find God himself declaring by a voice from Heaven, (the nature of which the Jews from their ancient records must necessarily apprehend,) at the Baptism of Jesus by John the Baptist,Luke 3.22. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, which voice, as being de∣sign'd for the Introducing of our Saviour into the world, was audible not only to John the Baptist, but to others, and when it was repeated at the transfiguration,Matth. 17.5. it was audible to all those who accompanied him,
and John the Baptist himself, of whose Com∣mission the Jews seem'd very well satisfied, declares,John 1.33, 34. He that sent me to baptize with wa∣ter, the same said unto me, Ʋpon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost: and I saw and bare record, that this is that Son of God. Now tho' the stubborn Jews seem not to have depended at all upon these declarations, nor to have been by them convinced of the truth of what was asserted in them, yet their ac∣knowledging John the Baptist to have been a Prophet, and their never denying the truth of these accounts as here set down, are in∣deed very considerable proofs of their truth, especially since nothing could repre∣sent them worse, than relating such things as truth, and describing them as incredu∣lous and refractary still. The Evangelical writers as they give us this account concerning voices from Heaven, and the testimony of John the Baptist, so they inform us of Christ himself that he owned and asserted his own original too, so he tells Nicodemus, a person of sence and curiosity, as appears by his discourse with our Saviour, God so loved the world,John
3.16. that he sent his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed on him should not perish but have everlasting life: Which declaration refers to himself, he mentioning that sending of the Son of God, as a thing now accomplished, which title  none assumed, nor was it given to any be∣fore himself. They tell us how justly he rebuk'd the Jews for charging him with blasphemy because he called himself the Son of God;John 10.36. for the nature of those works he did openly in the world's view, was a sufficient proof of his being sent by God, since no∣thing less than a divine power and assistance could possibly effect such things, as the Jews if they had not been resolved upon ruine, could not but know: But God was not wont to send such on his errands, who puff'd up with pride would usurp great and im∣proper titles to themselves, or who would impose on the world by daring falshoods; the Jews were not wholly irrational in thinking he deserved death for calling himself the Son of God, if really he were not:John 19.7. No Poli∣ticks yet could fairly give a toleration to open blasphemy: But the Jews, tho' very angry with him for calling himself by so august a name, railed at him indeed, and accused him and persecuted him, but never went about to disprove him; nay, when he challeng'd them if they could to convince him of sin,John 8.46. to shew any crime whatsoever that he had been guilty of, they answered him only with an
acquitting silence; they were excellent at generals, but the worst in the world at particulars; and yet to be with∣out sin, was so extraordinary a quality as could be compatible only with one de∣scending from Heaven: Ʋnclean Spirits  terribly sensible of his power, frequently howsoever unwillingly confest him to be the Son of God,Matth. 8.29. Mar. 3.11. and they were too much his ene∣mies to acknowledge a thing so very disad∣vantagious to their own designs, had it not been truth. Nathanael a prudent and a pious man, upon discourse with him, easily confest Thou art the Son of God,Joh. 1.49. thou art the King of Israel; The disciples when they saw how with one word Jesus laid that storm which had threatned their destruction, confest,Matt 14.33. of a truth thou art the Son of God: Humane power could not quell the loud and violent storms, but he that made them could easily allay their fury. The Roman Centu∣rion who was his guard at his Crucifixion, when he saw how at his giving up the ghost, the earth quaked,Matth. 27.50—54. the rocks rent, the veil of the Temple was split in twain from top to bottom, and the graves opened, and long bu∣ried bodies arose from their heavy sleep, could not but submit his faith to such prodigious visions, and profess that truly this was the Son of God: Nature was not wont to un∣dergo such dreadful
convulsions, for the death of an inferiour person, but when its great Creator suffer'd, it was time to own its sympathetick pangs; after these things it was no wonder to hear the Apostles de∣clare,Acts 3.13, 36. That the God of their fathers had glo∣rified his Son Jesus Christ, and again, That unto us God having raised up his Son Jesus Christ, sent him to bless us in turning away  every one of us from our iniquities. But af∣ter all, had either Jews or Romans prov'd as well as call'd Christ a deceiver before, it must have been a very unordinary confi∣dence in the Apostles to act over the baffled farce again, and to set up their Master for the Son of God, who had justly suffered be∣fore for blaspheming that Divinity he pre∣tended so near a relation to. But tho' what I have said already may go a good way to∣ward the proof of that, That Jesus was the Son of God, yet for the farther clearing this matter, we may enquire Into the promises and predictions concern∣ing his birth, or appearance in the world as an Intercessor for it. Into the manner and circumstances of his Birth. Into the intent and design of his Doctrine. Into that influence Scripture history in these cases ought to have upon all those who own the being of a God whether they be Christians or not. It's our business to enquire into those promises and predictions current in the world concerning such an Incarnation of the Divi∣nity, or its extraordinary appearance in the world for the restauration of its bliss, before by the encrease of wickedness perverted and ruined: for Promises and Prophecies concern∣ing a person yet unborn, and these
publick  and obvious to an inquisitive world, are wont to signifie such a person wholly extraordi∣nary, especially when the same spirit which imparts the fore-knowledge of him gives his very name to the world; so we find, when the Man of God cryed against the Altar in Bethel,1 Kings 13.2. he prophesied, That a child should be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name, who upon that Altar should offer the Priests of the high places themselves and pollute it with dead mens bones; that Josiah spoken of there so long before his birth, made good the Prophets word to the utmost, and has that admirable character bestowed upon him by the Holy Ghost,2 Kings 23.16, 25. That like to him there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him: So the name of Cyrus was fore∣told long before his birth by the Prophet Isaiah, He's there stil'd God's shepherd, his anointed, the man whose right hand God him∣self had holden, but he was to be a perfect Hero, and such heathen as well as sacred Hi∣storians represent him, and God by Isaiah predicts his glory,Isai 44.28.45.1, 2. even That he should per∣form all his pleasure, saying to Jerusalem thou shalt be built, and to the temple, thy foun∣dations shall be laid, which Cyrus so named by the Prophet was indeed a type of our Je∣sus, our Saviour and deliverer.
How numerous, and how plain soever the Prophecies of him in Scripture were, we shall more particularly consider here∣after, but some principal passages we must on this occasion take notice of: And first of that foundation of humane hopes, the Proto-evangelium Paradisiicum, or that pro∣mise made to our first Parents in their lapsed state, tho' before their expulsion from Pa∣radise, for it was a promise to them, tho' a threat to the Serpent to whom the speech was more immediately directed,Gen. 3.15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed. It shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel: This being by all Christians and antient Jews in∣terpreted of the Messias, was the first glad tydings of hope to those who were just fallen into a ruinous condition, this supported our great Parents spirits, when otherwise no∣thing could present it self to them, but fears, terrors and desperation: after this we find God promising as a peculiar blessing to Abraham—and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,Gen.
22.18. which the Jews too of old understood of the Messias, to be of the stock of Abraham according to the flesh, nor could it otherwise have been made good; for the Jewish nation, tho' they were parta∣kers of particular and infallible oracles, yet were but an obscure nation in respect of the rest of mankind, and tho' they were active in the degeneracy of their Church, to make  Proselytes to their Law, yet the numbers were not great, and if that of our Saviour be truth, That they made their Proselytes two fold more the children of wrath than they were them∣selves,Matt. 23.15. that care of theirs was no very great blessing to the world; Therefore S. Peter in the close of that Sermon he preached on occasion of the lame man's cure,Acts 3.25, 26. applyes this promise to our Jesus, and more distinctly and determinately S. Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians,Gal. 3.16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made, He saith not unto seeds as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed which is Christ. And further we have in the early ages of the world that famous and indisputable prophecy of dying Jacob, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah,Gen. 49.10 nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shilo come, and unto him shall the gathering of the people be, the exact accomplishment of which, as Shilo means the Messias, that is,
the Christ, we shall afterwards take notice of. It were no difficulty to shew how many of those institutions and Ceremonies of the Jews prefigured this same Saviour, but I shall rather confine my self to prophetick words than actions, as tending more directly to my purpose. Famous was that prediction of Balaam,Numb. 24.17, I shall see him but not now, I shall behold him but not nigh, there shall come a star out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Seth. And afterwards, Out of Jacob shall come He that shall have the Dominion, and shall destroy him that remaineth of the City; by which ge∣neral destruction is onely meant that Idola∣try, and those Idolaters which the Doctrine of the Gospel should confound, and this, as Christians have all along applied to Christ, So the Jews prov'd sufficiently they under∣stood it so, by their eager following the Bar∣cochab, whom they thought pointed out by this Text, as I hinted before. Nor did the Jews till afterwards when they came to seek subterfuges for their ob∣duracy, question the meaning of their Law∣giver, when he told them, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet,Deut. 18.15. from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken, this could onely be made good of Christ, since Moises Ben Mai∣mon, the most learned of Jewish Writers of late, has largely prov'd the disparity be∣tween Moses and all other Prophets menti∣on'd in Scripture, and Scripture it self as∣serts, That there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses,Deut. 34.10. whom the Lord knew face to face: Our Saviour onely spoke out Divine Mysteries in the day time, and in the face of the whole world, he needed not, as others, the mediation of Angels, or of Dreams, or of Visions, to make him understand the will of God, but
saw and knew every thing past, present, and to come, clearly and fully in himself: His humane nature lived not onely  in a strict friendship, but in a close and com∣pleat union with the God-head, and therefore felt no Convulsions or ecstasies, no violent emo∣tions of his rational faculties, nor was he confin'd to time, or place, or common rules, and methods, but as the fulness of the God∣head dwelt in him, so he deliver'd Oracles to Mankind at all times, as he himself pleas'd, for God did not give the Spirit to him by mea∣sure.Job 3.34. Thus inspir'd David, publishes that Eternal Decree, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: ask of me and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance,Ps. .7, 8. and the utmost part of the earth for thy pos∣session, which could never be true in respect of David, who never acquir'd so vast an Empire as is there promised, but it was re∣ally acquir'd by our Saviour, who by his holy Gospel subdued the Ʋniverse, and made all Mankind partakers of that redemption wrought for them by himself: And so Saint Paul preaching Christ to the Jews at Anti∣och in Pisidia, tells them, That the promise made to their Fathers, God had fulfilled to them their Children, having rais'd up Jesus again, as it is written in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee;Acts 13.32, 33. and the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, proves his Superiority to Angels by that Argument: For to which of the Angels said God at any time,Hebr. 1.5.
Thou art my Son, &c. And again, to prove the mission and autho∣rity of Christ having said before, That no  man takes the Priestly honour to himself, but he that is call'd of God, as was Aaron, he pleads, So Christ glorified not himself, to be made an High-Priest,Heb. 5.4, 5. but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee; and so we are certain of the due ap∣plication of the Prophecy, which we shall dilate on farther in another place. Such again was that of David in the Per∣son of Jesus, afterwards to appear in the World,Psal. 40.6, 7, 8. Sacrifice and burnt-offering thou didst not desire, mine ears hast thou open'd; inti∣mating by that the inefficacy of all those legal and typical Sacrifices which the Jews and, in imitation of them, others had been us'd to; for if these Sacrifices could have avail'd for the taking away of Sin, they had no longer been types and shadows, but things of a real and substantial excellency; which since they were not,
Burnt-offering and Sin-offering hast thou not requir'd, Then said I, Lo I come, in the Volume of the Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will,Hebr. 10.5-10. O my God, yea thy Law is within my heart: And thus this Prophecy is apply'd by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, onely with that difference, that whereas the Psalm has it, Mine ear hast thou open'd, according to the Hebrew, the Apostle follows the tran∣slation of the Septuagint, and renders it, a Body hast thou prepared for me, the sense a∣mounting still to the same, for as the He∣brews, according to the Law, made a Servant  their own for ever, by opening their ears or boring them,Exod 21 6. so God made his Son Jesus o∣bedient as a Servant, by preparing him a body, which was open'd too and fastened to the cross, as the Servants ear, in boring, to the posts of the door; Nor was that less plain or consi∣derable, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand untill I make thine enemies thy foot-stool. The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent;Psal. 110.1-4. Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck: The first part of this our Saviour, who undoubtedly knew its true meaning, assumes to himself, and con∣founds the Pharisees, by asking them that Question, That whereas it was expected the Messias should be the Son of David, yet Da∣vid calls him Lord,Matth. 22.41-45. How could he be his Lord and his Son too? which was a mystery inex∣plicable to those who had meer carnal and mean notions of the Messias; but a difficulty which when they got over, it would not be so very hard to believe him, humble and de∣spicable as he appear'd, to be the very Messias they look'd for; For if he who was David's Lord, and indeed God blessed for ever, could condescend so low as to be David's Son, it could not be strange that he who was Da∣vid's Son should stoop lower yet, and appear in the form of a servant: The latter part of this prediction relating to
a Priest, is by the Writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews ap∣ply'd to Jesus,Hebr. 7.17-21. as a proof of the legitimacy and eternity of his Priesthood; Of the same  authority is that, 18, . The Stone which the buil¦ders refus'd is become the head of the corner, this is the Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes; which (not to mention the Jewish fable of such a stone, being reall, met with∣all in the building of the second Temple, which had by several been thrown aside as useless, yet afterwards by miracle was found fit for the joyning of the corners of the buil∣ding) our Saviour makes use of to convince the Jews of their folly and obstinacy in re∣fusing to own him in his great Mediatorian office, and to let them see that their con∣tempt of Him could be no prejudice to his sacred dignity and Honour, but that he, who was now thought too inconsiderable to be of any use to the Jews, one of the smallest of the Nations,Matth. 21.42, 43, 44. should afterwards appear great enough to joyn Men of all Countries and Na∣tions together in one Sacred bond, and to crush all his Enemies in dreadful ruines; for so he adds, on repetition of those before quoted words, Therefore I say unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof, and whosoever shall fall on this Stone shall be broken, but on whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to powder: And this ad∣vancement and dilatation of Christ's power St. Peter justly takes notice of, from the same Psalm, in the case of the Cripple newly cu∣red,Acts 4 9,
10, 11, 12. If we be this day examin'd of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what means  he is made whole, Be it known to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God rai∣sed from the dead, even by Him does this Man stand before you whole; This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is be∣come the head of the Corner. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other name under Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved. That of Isaiah is wholly extraordinary, and, as I hinted before, it was a sure sign of some extraordinary Person intended, it gives us the very name proper to our Jesus, as he was the Son of God, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son,Isai. 7.14. and shall call his name Immanuel; where the thing foretold is so much a miracle, that it cannot be believed to have occurr'd more than once in the World, nay, the prodigiousness of the thing has made some, great pretenders to reason en∣deavour to weaken the very authority of Scripture it self, from the impossibility of the thing foretold: And the Jews have endea∣vour'd to affix a large sense upon the Text, as if no more was meant than barely, That a Woman should be with Child, and so the mi∣racle is wholly taken away: But all these little stratagems of unbelievers have fail'd, and the very Name added would convince considerate Men of some great thing de∣sign'd, since a meer Man, or one coming in∣to the World, according to the ordinary
course of nature, could not be truly call'd Immanuel, or God with us: This declaration of the Evangelical Prophet, as He's justly call'd, is soon follow'd by another of the same nature; For unto us a Child is born,Isai. 9 6, 7. unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be call'd, Wonderful, Counseller, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, of the increase of his Government, there shall be no end, upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from hence∣forth even for ever: In all which the Pro∣phet seems to write a perfect History of things past; he speaks with that assurance and confidence, as if he had seen that hope of Israel born into the World, and wholly ecstatick in his contemplation of so infinite a blessing bestow'd on the World, he fixes such Titles upon him, as were compatible with no meer man, nay he makes him God, an Infinite, an everlasting God, the Ʋniversal Monarch of Earth and Heaven, yet leaves him drest in flesh and blood at last, a Child born, a Son given to us, miserable perishing Creatures: But Isaiah's reflections on the promised Saviour are so many, as not to be instanced in, more particularly we may just name that,Isai.
11.1. And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots; And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom  and understanding, the spirit of Counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord, with righteousness shall he judge the poor and reprove with equity, for the meek of the Earth, and he shall smite the Earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked; and more to that purpose, which St. Paul in his discourse to the Antiochians in Pisidia alludes to; And that again,Acts 13.22, 22, 24. The voice of him that crieth in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make streight in the desert an high-way for our God, every Valley shall be exalted, and every Mountain and Hill shall be made low, and the crooked shall be made streight, and the rough places plain,i. 40.3.4, 5. and the glory of the Lord shall be reveal'd, and all flesh shall see it toge∣ther, for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it, which John the Baptist applies to himself and his Master:Joh. 1.23. Such is the whole fifty-third Chapter, a compleat, though compendious Chronicle of our Saviour from his Cradle to his Tomb, happily read by the Aethiopian Eunuch; since from thence the Evangelist Philip took occasion to preach to him Jesus:Acts 8.34, 35. Such that, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord hath anointed me, to preach good tidings to the meek, he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound,Isai. 61.1, 2. Luk. 4.17, 18, 19. to proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, apply'd to himself by our Saviour.
Agreeably to these Predictions the Pro∣phet Jeremy foretels, Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise to David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper,Jerem. 23.5, 6. and shall execute judgment and righ∣teousness in the Earth, in his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the name whereby he shall be call'd, The Lord our righteousness; Which is again re∣peated by him, Jer. 33.15, 16. To the same purpose Ezekiel, I will save my Flock and they shall be no more a prey, and I will set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their Shepherd, and I the Lord will be their God,Ezek 34.22, 23, 24. and my servant David a Prince among them, I the Lord have spoken it; Which is repeated and enlarged, Ezek. 37. 21—ad fin. Daniel yet more plainly, I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the Son of Man came with the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him; And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom,Dan. 7.13, 14. that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve him, his dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away,Rev. 14 14. and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroy'd; Which St. John alludes to; not to mention any thing of Daniel's weeks, Micah gives us that,
Thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little a∣mong the thousands of Judah,Mica. 5.2. yet out of thee shall he come forth to me, that is to be ruler  in Israel,Matt. 2.6. whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, which those Priests Herod afterwards enquired of, could re∣member very well: And lastly, Malachi as plain as any,Mat. 3.1. Behold, I will send my mes∣senger, and he shall prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom ye seek shall suddainly come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in, behold he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts. These are a few of that very great num∣ber of Prophecies which rais'd the ex∣pectation of the Jews for the appearance of a Saviour, whom they expected as a mighty temporal Prince, not considering that the things foretold of him were beyond the at∣chievments of the greatest Potentate in the world: For to be the great messenger of that Covenant which was between God and his people, and at the same time the God whom they sought, and whose their Temple was, who yet were taught to worship only the true God; to be the glory of a private town as of Bethlehem, yet of an eternal ori∣ginal with respect to the time past, and the worlds everlasting head and governour with respect to the time to come; to be a David, a man after God's own heart, who should do all his will, after David's natural death; to be infinitely happy, just, compassionate, Anointed by the sacred Spirit of God, to have the
greatest of those born of a woman his harbinger, and by him acknowledged  for a God, tho' shaded from vulgar eyes by a cloud of humane frailty, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, yet a child, a Son, brought forth in the world and given to us; To be born of a pure and spotless Virgin, so Man, yet the hopes of all the ends of the earth, and of those that remain in the broad Sea, and so God: To be despis'd by the great and wise, yet the great Center of Ʋnity for all the Nations in the World; To be at once Da∣vid's Son and David's Lord, and seated at the right hand of God: To terminate all material typical sacrifices in his own flesh, and unlimited obedience, yet to be own'd by God himself, as his only begotten Son, and heir to the government of all things: To surpass their admir'd Moses, as a Master his Servant in the Prophetick gift, and an intimate familiarity with God; To be the utter ruine of Idolatry, that seed which should be the blessing and therefore the de∣sire of all nations, that seed which should break the head, ruine the policy and Ty∣ranny of that old Serpent the Devil; To be a real and visible Man, yet our Immanuel, God with us, which is the summ of all those Prophecies and Promises; To be all these things is not consistent with a temporal Mo∣narch whose breath is in his nostrils, tho' all the nations in the World ador'd him: The absolute conquest over prevailing wicked∣ness, the
triumph over Death and Hell and  all the obstacles of a blessed Immortality, the redemption of a guilty world from im∣pendent vengeance, by a swift and entire obedience to the Almighty Will, the making up that prodigious Chasme between an in∣finitely pure and holy Deity, and a depraved and provoking world, are thoughts and en∣terprises too vast and glorious to be under∣taken by any child of Man; therefore who∣soever it was, that all those mighty things should be accomplished in, whosoever should be so infinitely beloved by Heaven, and so prodigious a Benefactor to mankind, must be according to those titles fixt upon him, the Son of God, his Son in a true literal sence, and as such he may really be capable of doing more for us, than we our selves can ask or think. The blessed Jesus, as I intimated before, was not only
the expectation of Israel, but the desire of all nations, and therefore pro∣mis'd to all nations in the forecited passages as well as them; and tho' the Jews were not so good natur'd as to be very Commu∣nicative of their divine treasures, yet the Gentiles who had their concerns in so just an hope, had their predictions too, and tho' not so clearly, foresaw the approaching days of their Redeemer; the elder Prophe∣cies, such as that to our first Parents in Paradise, or that to Abraham might get a∣broad into the world, the prophecies them∣selves being originally known to others,  as well as those whom they more imme∣diately concern'd; and that passage of Job, I know that my redeemer liveth,Job 19.25, 26.27. and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and tho' after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall be∣hold and not another, tho' my reins be con∣sumed within me, is a sufficient evidence, that those who lived without the pale of Jacob's family were sensible of what they wanted, and that their hopes were reason∣able that those wants should be supplied; and Balaam's predictions being heard by Moabites, strangers to Israel, were without all question taken great notice of by the heathen nations: Hence arose the fame of the Sibylline Oracles, talked of so much by antient writers, and by what we find spo∣ken of 'em by Tully,De Divi∣nat. l. 2. and transcribed from them by Virgil, sufficient to raise mens ex∣pectations and desires for some very great and happy event; hence grew those common discourses of the Gods descending in humane shapes to converse with and instruct men, Which shewed mens general apprehensions of the love of the Deity to mankind, of the possibility of an Incarnation, and the useful consequences it might have for the reforma∣tion of corrupt nature. Hence that pro∣phetick advice of
Confutius the famous Chi∣nese Philosopher who liv'd 550. years be∣fore our Saviour's birth, t Prince to be  virtuous,Huetii Demonstr. Evang. Prop. 7. c. 32. for says he, The actions of a good Prince ought to be agreeable to the Laws of God and Nature, and he should not doubt, but that when that expected holy One shall come, his virtue shall then be as much honour'd, as it was before while he lived and reign'd. And I cannot but think it reasonable to conclude, that Balaam's prophecy might be known there and better preserved by their learning, so antient among them, than in other places, and that excited by that, the wise Men came from thence to worship our Saviour at his birth, especially since the length of a journey from thence seems most agreeable to Herod's calculation, when to be sure of reaching the new born King, He killed all the children in Bethlehem and its coasts,Matth. 2.1, 2, 9, 10. from two years old and under, ac∣cording to the time that he had diligently en∣quired of the wise men. About our Saviour's time, and before and after, for a while, a rumour was spread abroad every where that One should be born in Judea, who should be the Ʋniversal Monarch, as Suetonius in the life of Augustus, and in that of Vespa∣sian, and Tacitus in the fifth book of his Histories, tells us, which fame Josephus the Jewish Historian laid hold on to flatter with Vespasian, and to get his own liberty by perswading him the prophetick rumour pointed him out for the Roman Empire. Here again, That ever-living Redeemer, that
glorious child, who should reduce the  frame of Nature to so happy a condition after all the disorders it had suffered, who should banish sin and wickedness, That look'd for Holy One, who should give virtue its due reward, that Jewish native who should command the humble world, must of ne∣cessity be concluded somewhat more than Man by the longing Expectants: He must be God to effect such wonders, and yet must be a Man to be a native of Judaea, he must have humane nature to be born with into the world and to converse with men, and to take away the very smallest foot∣steps and tracks of Sin he must at least be partaker of Divinity; thus all the Pro∣phecies both among Jews and Gentiles con∣clude in a necessity that the worlds Re∣deemer from that misery and those dangers it lay under, must at least be the Son of God. The Chara Deûm soboles magnum Jovis in∣crementum, as Virgil expresses it: And thus much may serve for those Prophecies fore-running the Birth of our Saviour, I proceed now to enquire Into the manner and circumstances of his Birth, which notwithstanding its outward or appearing
meanness, was exactly agreeable to the grandeur predicted of him; for his being born in a publick Inn, and in a place of contempt, his being laid in a Manger, and having as some tell us Oxen and Asses for his Companions, were no prejudice to his  dignity, its not the place of birth but the parents of whom Men are born that makes them vile in the worlds eyes: A Beggar may be born in a Palace, nay, wrapt in purple too, and concluded great by incurious fools, and great Princes have been born in forests and deserts, lost to all humane helps and respects sutable to their descents; yet he that's born of Parent beggars is a beggar still, and he that is deduced from the just Possessors of a Throne, a Prince: and such was our blessed Saviour being God of God, light of light, very God of very God, tho' manifest in the flesh; and to shew that he was such, He that had been so often pro∣mised before, when the time of his mani∣festation in the flesh came, had no less than an Angel from Heaven to notifie his very Conception, and his too, who was to pre∣pare his way before him.Luke 1.11-21. An Angel told Zacharias of John the Baptist, when age made him past the hopes of such a blessing, an Angel too foretold the blessed Virgin, That she should conceive in her womb and bring forth a Son and call his name Jesus,v. 30, 31, 32, 33, &c. who should be great, and be call'd the Son of the Highest, to whom the Lord should give the throne of his father David, and who should reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of whose kingdom there should be no end: So proving that Isaiah's prophecy, c. 7. v. 14. was presently to be accomplished; it being a
Virgin to whom the Angel foretold those  great things, who without a miracle could not conceive, and the design of his Birth being that he might be Jesus the Saviour of the world, which none could be, but who was Immanuel, or God with us. After such preparatives, it was no wonder if other prophetick passages came to be made good too; the fulness of time requir'd such an ac∣complishment, as well as the compleating of Sins, which were the occasion of those gra∣cious promises to the sinners, as they mov'd the merciful God to pitty and compassion, which he chose then to shew when danger and misery was in its extremity. Prophe∣cies concerning persons and places have ge∣nerally their fixt times to be performed in, which tho' they are very difficult to be found out by others before hand, who are not possess'd by the same spirit which in∣spir'd the Prophets, are yet very plain and easily intelligible to considering Men, when they come to read and seriously to weigh the Histories of things past; and we who stand at that advantage of time, who have the History of the blessed Jesus faithfully deli∣vered down to us, and the predictions fore∣going his Birth into the world, may so com∣pare them together, as to make them strong∣ly confirm the truth of one another. And thus, whereas we find the repeated promi∣ses to Abraham and Isaac, that in their seed all the nations of the earth should be bles∣sed, which could not be effected by any
temporal Interests or extent of Empire: For tho' wise Governours are a blessing to any nation, yet all nations together are too great a Body to he managed by a single hand, and a Solomon himself can be no great blessing to those that never heard of him: But when he appear'd who was to save the people from their sins,Matt. 1.21. as the Angel in a dream inform'd Joseph,Luke 1.78, 79. When the day-spring from on high visited the world, to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide their feet into the way of peace; When that common Salvation was presented to humane eyes which was pre∣pared before the face of all people,Luke 2.30, 31, 32. to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, as well as the glory of the tribes of Israel, as old holy Si∣meon expresses himself, then that
Ʋniversal Blessing was really bestowed, and Jesus taking flesh of the blessed Virgin, was really that sacred branch who scattered his good∣ness as the Sun his beams, through all the quarters of the Universe. Remission of sins, Redemption from the powers of Death and Hell, Reconciliation of sinners to a terribly incensed God, were all favours of an Ʋni∣versal influence, none could be exempted from their glorious effects but those who coveted their own ruines, and were resolved not to accept of an offered blessing. That celebrated prediction of Jacob, That the Scepter should not depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from between his feet till Shilo  came, was as punctually made good at the time of our Saviour's appearance in the world, who was the Shilo promis'd, or the person to be sent to take the Government upon him; which Prophecy though the Jews have endeavoured to render as obscure as possible, and tho' others by their needless curiosity have made us no fewer than six se∣veral interpretations of it, yet it seems to have no such extraordinary difficulty in it, if that particle which is in our Bibles tran∣slated, and, be but, as usually it is, transla∣ted, or, for so the import of it will be that either, a regal Government should be continu∣ed in the tribe of Judah, or at least a Law-giver, when that Government ceased, should be found among them, i. e. a legal expositor or determiner of the meaning of the Law of Moses, till the Messias should be ready to come. Now he that considers that as Judah had the superiority among his brethren, that he was the Leader of the Israelites to the war against the Canaanites,Judges 1, 1, 2. that his tribe was abundantly the most numerous of all the rest, as may be seen by the several accounts of their encrease, that the tribe of
Judah had much the noblest and the largest share in the promised Land, and that the Royalty was at last regularly setled in the house of David in that tribe, to which family in particular the Messias was confined; He that shall consider these things carefully, and shall observe withal; That upon the  defection of Jeroboam, the tribe of Levi in their zeal to the honour and service of the true God, left the rebelling tribes, for so we are told,2 Chron. 11.13, 14. That the Priests and the Levites that were in all Israel, resorted to Rehoboam the son of Solomon out of all their coasts, for the Levites left their suburbs and possessions and came to Judah and Jerusalem, by which means the tribe of Levi, to the chief family of which the Priesthood belong'd, came to be in some measure incorporated into the greater tribe of Judah, if withal he take no∣tice that, tho' the regal power in the tribe of Judah ended with the Captivity of Baby∣lon, yet the Priesthood continued in the family of Aaron, he may easily see the ful∣filling of Jacob's words; for we may see Aaron the first Patriarch of the Priestly fa∣mily breaking out of his own into the tribe of Judah and marrying Elisheba the daughter of Aminadab and sister of Naashon of the tribe of Judah,Exod. 6.23. which Aminadab and Naa∣shon are particularly reckoned among Da∣vid's predecessors by S. Matthew,Matth. 1.4. by which means the Regal and Sacerdotal line were intermingled as well as the tribes were af∣terwards: nor were such alliances altoge∣ther extraordinary, for we find afterwards Jehoiada the high-priest marrying Jehoshabeath the sister of Ahaziah King of Judah,2 Chron. 22.11. of the house and lineage of David: Now the
Scep∣ter is assign'd immediately to the hands of Judah, the royalty being fully and entirely  in the hand of that tribe without any com∣petition either with the Benjamites or Si∣meonites, part of which tribes stuck fast to Judah's interests after the revolt of the ten tribes: but the Lawgiver is placed be∣tween his feet, not according to the sence some affix to that phrase, as if Jacob spoke modestly of the original birth of such Law∣givers, as if being between the knees were an equivalent to being born from the womb of such a one, as it's true it sometimes means, but it signifies the Lawgiver shall be in his protection, or within his jurisdiction and li∣mits, as a great Officer between the feet of the Sovereign on some solemn occasions, or as the Bishop of Rome is said to have set the Archbishop of Canterbury between his feet at the Council of Lyons with that ex∣pression, Includimus hunc in orbe nostro tan∣quam alterius orbis Papam; and so the Law∣giver was continually within the proper bounds and limits of the tribe of Judah both before and after the Captivity of Babylon: But as the Scepter departed from Judah at that Captivity, so the legal expounder of sacred writings to the Jewish nation was taken away about the time of our Saviour's Incarnation, the family of Aaron being then lighted, and every one admitted to the high-priesthood who could give most money for that office, and the Civil Government tho' under the title of
Herod being a meer vas∣sal to the Roman Empire: When these  things were both come to pass, then Shilo the promis'd Messias came, in whom those particular assurances to David were made good, That out of his loyns the Messias should come: In him the Royal and Priestly line were united, he was legal Heir to both Houses; he was a King and Priest for ever, to whom the gathering of all Nations is, and ought to be;Luke 1.27 32.35. Now that the blessed Virgin was of the House and Lineage of David, as well as Joseph, we learn from Scripture, and if the Tribe of Judah was exalted by the advancement of David to the Imperial Throne, it was much more exalted and more adorable to the rest of the Tribes by the birth of Jesus the Saviour of the World, and the King of all things both in Heaven and in Earth. How Moses his word was made good, of the Prophet to be rais'd up like to himself, I show'd before, that being made truth in the birth of Christ: but it's more compleat ap∣plication belonging to our Saviour's manly age when he made himself publick, and un∣dertook to preach repentance to his obsti∣nate Country-men; But that of a Body hast thou prepar'd for me, came to pass, when the Angel's word was effected, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall overshadow thee, therefore al∣so that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God;Luke 1.25. It was an im∣mediate Divine power that gave a beginning
and increase to that Sacred Body in the Vir∣gin's Womb, nothing could be produced between Man and Woman, as under the an∣cient curse, and miserably corrupted and pol∣luted in their natures, that was fit for those great things at that time design'd for us, for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? therefore a Virgin untouch'd by man was chosen for his habitation, who was to redeem lost mankind, and was overshadowed by the power of the Almighty,Gen. 1.2. which did in∣cubare in Virginem, as the same Spirit is said to move upon the face of the Waters, to cover it as the Bird covers her Eggs to make them prolifick, as the word imports; now a body so prepar'd, and so inhabited, as our Saviour's humanity was, could not be but pure and un∣defiled, since if a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit, neither can a good Tree bring forth evil fruit; the reasons of both their productions being the same. Nor was it unreasonable he should be David's Lord, though his Son according to the flesh, whose birth was intimated by holy Angels, whose Father was Almighty God himself, and whose Kingdom was to endure from everlast∣ing to everlasting, all which circumstances rendred him infinitely more considerable to pure reason than ever David was; nor could the humble manner of his
entrance into the World be any just prejudice to his mighty title: David was mean and inconsiderable too, when God took him from attending on  the Sheep-fold to feed his People Israel, and the Prophet Zachary gives him notwith∣standing his apparent meanness, his due Ho∣nour, Rejoyce greatly O Daughter of Zion, shout O Daughter of Jerusalem,Zach. 9.9. behold thy King cometh unto thee; he is just and having salvation, lowly and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the foal of an Ass: He might then be a King still, how despicable soever he appear'd to humane eyes; and as a King according to the extent and proportion of his Empire, might be Lord of David, and of all the Kings upon Earth. Isaiah had long since foretold he should be born of a Virgin, and so in the event he was, Mary his Mo∣ther was a Virgin, even beyond the confu∣tation of the malicious Jews, it was to such a one the Angel was sent, it was such a one who was according to his assurance to be overshadow'd by the Holy Ghost, it was such a one who was to conceive and bring forth: And the Evangelist openly declares of Jesus, That when as his Mother Mary was espous'd to Joseph,Matt. 1.18. before they came together, she was found with Child of the Holy Ghost, and of Joseph he asserts, That he knew her not until she had brought forth her first born Son,v. 25. and he call'd his name Jesus: And whereas, the Prophet had been ecstasi'd with joy at the knowledge of a Child, a Son of so Divine a nature being given to his People, when that Child was born indeed, the Sacred Host of Angels was rapturous, as the Prophet had
been before, for when one of that heavenly Chorus had told the watchful Shepherds, Be∣hold I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all People,Luke 2 10.11. v. 14. for unto You is born this day in the City of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord: Presently the whole Quire in a joyful transport prais'd God, and said, Glory to God on high, and on Earth peace, and good will towards Men; and his being really born of the House and Lineage of Da∣vid, gave him a claim sufficient to an Inter∣est in that Prophecy, that the Messias should be a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch out of his roots; and whereas a voice in the Wilderness, was to cry before our Saviour's preaching in publick, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, &c. No sooner was John the Bap∣tist born, who was Christ's forerunner both in birth and in that work too, but his inspir'd Father Zachary declares of him, Thou Child shalt be call'd the Prophet of the Highest, for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways,Luke 1.76, 77. to give knowledge of Salva∣tion to his people for the remission of their sins. The Messias was to be the Prince of Peace, according to the Prophets, and he eventually prov'd himself so, when he made his first entrance into the World in the time of the most universal peace the World had known, the swelling Roman Empire was then in a profound calm within it self, after all those Civil broyls which had almost torn out its bowels before, and it was at peace with
all its Neighbours round about, which had not happened of several Centuries be∣fore, in such a juncture what could ra∣tionally have been expected but what was suitably great and wholly extraor∣dinary? That subtle old Serpent began to feel his influence even before his birth, when all those stratagems of his, whereby he was wont to embroil Mankind, were broken: he saw too easily that fatal off-spring of the Woman, which should break his head, ruine his arbitrary Tyranny and Power, and easily dissolve those seemingly irrefragable chains whereby he formerly had miserably enslav'd humane nature: This was that great and glorious King which God himself in spite of all the tumultuary insults and oppositions of terrene powers in conjunction with infer∣nal malice, setled upon his holy Hill of Zion: It was He concerning whom so many graci∣ous promises were made, as upheld the Church of old under those many dangers, difficulties and oppressions it was ordinarily engag'd in: God knew and pitied his Peo∣ples calamities, and had promis'd, that he would find out an adequate remedy for their extreme necessities, this they believ'd, they knew that God who had promis'd was truth it self, and could not disagree with himself, and therefore when their condition was most cloudy, they saw the day of their Redeemer at a distance and were glad, and resolv'd though God kill'd them, they would yet trust
in him; This hope and confidence made them patiently endure the torture, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection, resolving never to quit the hope of Israel, their faith in the Messiah, that they with him, suffering for the faith in him might rise again to the resurrection of Sal∣vation. But as the blessed Jesus was that Star him∣self, which Balaam had foretold should arise in Jacob, so a Star attended his Birth, not onely shining like the Pillar of Fire in the Night; but giving a surer guidance than the cloudy Pillar in the day time, leading the observing Sages from the utmost quarters of the East, to give an Alarm to the Jews, and make them curious too in observing the signs of the times, that they might be sure not to miss at last, when he should come, of Him, whose coming they had expected so long: And indeed the Priests and Rulers, and He∣rod, nay, and all Jerusalem were troubled,Matt. 2.3. and disturb'd at that happy news, which should have been their greatest joy and sa∣tisfaction; The chief Priests and Scribes trembled, to think if that were true, that their imposing upon the People with a spiri∣tual Tyranny and Hypocritical sanctity would be at an end: Herod was justly startled at the name of a King, as Princes are generally very jealous of Competitors in Empire, and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, who had often felt Herod's fierce and bloody temper before,  might justly fear an Inquisition to be made among them for this young Claimer; Herod yet of all the rest had the deepest impressions of fear and passion made upon himself, which, when the Wise men had deluded him, he ven∣ted upon the miserable Bethlehemites. The poor laborious Shepherds receiv'd the News with calmer minds, they had no Govern∣ments, no Interests to lose, but liv'd in harm∣less Peace, and humble content in ignoble Cottages, and if their Flocks did well, they'd ne'er be concern'd in the cares of Kings and Potentates, therefore they flew eagerly to the Presence of their Saviour, and agreed with the Eastern Sages in their Prudence, not esteeming the new-born Infant, according to the meanness of his circumstances, but accord∣ing to the glorious presages and indications of his Birth-right: So happy are the lowliest minds, and so much more capable of Divine impressions, than those distracted with the thoughts of worldly grandeur: So much more suitable they are to him, who tells us, He was meek and lowly in spirit, not puft up with the Hosanna's, nor yet dejected with the Crucifiges of the impetuous and variable mul∣titude; but though
Herod were angry and raged, God would not permit his madness to take place, chearful Angels were ever ready to wait their Master's errands, and they warn'd Joseph of the impendent dan∣ger, so opening the way to the accomplish∣ment of every word of God; for when Joseph fled into Aegypt for security, whose low condition in the World made him both unsuspected to the Jewish frontier guards, and to his Aegyptian entertainers, who little suspected that a mighty King enter'd under their Roofs, under the tutelage of a contemptible Mechanick, or that a little harmless Infant conceal'd a God; when this was done, an Angel too in due time gave Joseph such intelligence, as put an end to his voluntary banishment; and yet things were ordered so, that upon the news of Herod's Son's reign, Joseph turn'd aside to Nazareth, instead of returning to Bethlehem, that so the Son of God might at once be call'd out of Aegypt, and be stiled a Nazarene, that no Prophetical circumstance or Punctilio might be want∣ing to his Birth, which was necessary to convince the World of his being that re∣al Messias, which had been so long pro∣mised to the Fathers; from all which it was no wonder that Christ himself after∣wards referred the Unbelieving Jews to these very Considerations,Joh. 5.39. Search the Scri∣ptures, says He, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and they are they which testifie of me.
Now that He who before his appearance in the flesh had been the Author of a strong and impregnable faith in God's people, and who created such fears and made such  terrible concussions in the souls of wicked and ungodly men, that he who when born, was to do things beyond the utmost reach of any thing but Omnipotence, to do a Creator's work, and restore all the decays of ruined Nature, that he should make his entrance into the world in a miraculous manner, was rationally to be expected, since the causes in supernatural as well as other things must be proportioned to the effects: And cer∣tainly to any thing but a Jew, these prodi∣gious appearances at the birth of our Saviour would have signified as much as golden Scep∣ters and imperial Diadems, and all the gaudy shews of victories and conquests; and especially it should have been so since the Jews themselves, stupid as they were, ex∣pected wonders in and at his birth; but a∣bove all things their behaviour was strange to him in that, if the Messias were to be the King of the Jews themselves, the Jews them∣selves as his Subjects should with the first have submitted to him, by which means, if any, he might have grown formidable to their enemies, and have, as they expected, restored the kingdom again to Israel, whereas indeed,John 1.11. He came to his own, but his own re∣ceived him not: So that if he must have been so
great and victorious, his Conquest must have been made at first upon his native rebels, before he could have spread the ter∣ror of his arms abroad; They who expected only a Man, tho' very great, to appear,  should have look'd for no such effects of his appearance but what might justly have con∣sisted with humanity, armies are not wont to grow like Mushrooms in a night, and those who cannot have the assistance of their Subjects for their own good, can scarce ex∣pect suitable supports from others to carry on or secure the interests of ingrates or re∣bels. If any thing of worldly greatness were indeed to have been expected at the Messiah's advent, it should have been, that in so depraved an age of the world, he should have come attended with miraculous vengeance to destroy the adversaries of di∣vine goodness and their own happiness: That Those his enemies who would not admit that he should reign over them, should have been brought out and slain before his face: But on the contrary, as his design was Mercy, so he came in a way proportioned to it, the lenity and softness of his ingress into a sink∣king and undeserving world was wholly asto∣nishing; Born, as it was foretold, of a pure and spotless Virgin, a descent agreeable to that
prodigious innocence apparent in his life and converse, and according to the very tendencies of nature, more likely to incline to pity and compassionate tenderness of the miseries of others, such a temper being the ornament as well as the expected compani∣on of a Virgin state: He was born a King, that he might with the greater intention study the good of his Subjects, yet born in  a low and contemptible estate, that he might the better instruct the too aspiring sons of Men, that all the most substantial greatness is founded in humility; He was not well∣com'd into the world with the dreadful shouts of conquering armies, but with the softer Hallelujah of joyful Angels, gentle and kind Spirits, whose triumphs were rais'd, not from the dismal groans of an impenitent tortured world, but that glory arising to God's eternal Name, from that peace brought down by him to earth, and that good will which was then undeniably de∣monstrated toward the sinful children of men: His Birth was not first notified to Kings or Emperors or other worldly Grandees, that they might have cast their Crowns at the feet of him who lives for ever and ever, but to innocent and toyling Shepherds, who were watching their flocks by night, Men whose veracity none could reasonably suspect, and who could have no bye perverse design of their own to carry on, no intreagues to manage by imposing cheats and shams upon the credulous, who were the most proper witnesses of his Birth, who himself fed his flock like a shepherd,Isal. 40.11. who gathered the Lambs with his arm and carried them in his bosom, gently leading those that were with young; as it was predicted of him. Nor was the Royal Palace of a Monarch honoured with his nativity, but a mean and scorn'd stable, to shew
That God had chosen the weak things  of the world to confound the things which were mighty, and that the base things of this world, and things which are despised were chosen by God, and things which are not, to bring to nought things which are,1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 2. that no flesh should glory in his presence; and yet that it might not be pretended that He who was rightful Monarch of the world wanted the due ac∣knowledgments of his Sovereignty and divi∣nity too, from his wiser and more conside∣rate vassals, the Eastern wise Men, whom yet we dare not with those Legendary Au∣thors, conclude to have been Kings, made their Presents to him of Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrhe, proper offerings to so extra∣ordinary a person, and sufficiently divulged both his birth and title, tho' that interstice of time between his birth and preaching publickly made all those premonitions for∣gotten. But was he meerly, as he was esteemed, the Son of an inconsiderable tradesman in Israel, of a poor person thrust into the stable of an Inn to give place to his Superiors? was it a slighted infant the companion of beasts it may be at his nativity, and beneath the notices of Men of birth and fortune? was it such a one that could be born by divine ope∣ration of an untouch'd Virgin of the sacred royal Line? was it such a one that was re∣ceiv'd into the world with the homage of blessed Angels, attended with a prodi∣gious Star at his birth, adored by humble
foreigners, blest and admired by Judaean Saints, and holy Men? Could such a one employ the dreams, visions, revelations, and the calmer studies of so many inspir'd Pro∣phets both among the Jews and Gentiles, employ the care of active Angels for his pre∣servation from the malignant fury of envi∣ous powers, and the happy Pens of faithful Evangelists to transmit the series of his glorious actions, as well as the account of his miraculous birth to inquisitive ages? Could such a one be the Prince of Peace, the ever∣lasting God, the infinitely wise Counseller, that blessed seed in whom all the nations of the World should be blest, that rock of Ages on which was fixt the faith of the Prophets and Patriarchs, the Saints and Martyrs of old, so firmly, that neither the force nor subtilty of Men or Devils could prevail against them? No, these were works only fit for a divine Being to undertake, nothing but God could be so waited on by humble and acknowledging nature, nothing but God could so strongly affect the hearts of holy Men; to raise the drooping soul above all the gay prospects of a flattering world, above all the dangers generally attending despised piety, to make Men sit loose to all those
exterior blessings they meet with in this world, and to account all things but as loss and dung in comparison of that Salvation wrought for them by Jesus, to make them scorn the rack and wheel, and smile at flames  and lingring tortures, and all this only upon the credit of a future happy state, for the purchace of Crowns and kingdoms invisible to all eyes but those of faith, and this too when all such sufferings and inconveniences might be avoided by a few short words and some little inconsiderable actions, these at∣chievements are far beyond the most ambi∣tious thoughts of meer mortal Creatures, beyond their most aspiring hopes, tho' in∣fluenced by those united powers, which acted so vigorously in all the several Pro∣phets of foregoing Ages. It's extremely derogatory to God's justice and wisdom to imagine, that Man, who was not able to support himself in his innocent state when once attack'd by a slight temptation, (tho' there were then no defects of any kind in his intellectuals,) should be able now when every faculty in him is weakned and per∣verted by the spreading infection of sin, to work his own redemption: or should God have ordered a greater price to have been paid for satisfaction for sin, when a lower would have effected it, or have sent a par∣taker of the eternal Godhead, to take upon him and suffer in
humane nature for the worlds crimes, when an inferiour person might have compassed the great design as well. Nor had the benefit conferr'd upon us been so valuable, had God only wrought that for us, which, had he not done, we could as easily have wrought for our selves:  But the case was otherwise; fallen Man was now in a state of damnation, perfect innocence and compleat satisfaction, for in∣veterate guilt must retrieve him from Hell, but fallen Man was incapable of any such innocence or satisfaction; Angels who had sin'd, were incapable of pity, who had not sin'd were incapable of merit, their Creation from nothing, and their support in original sin∣lesness, were benefits so great, that all their chearful attendances on coelestial services were too little to requite; he must there∣fore be somewhat greater and more perfect than either Men or Angels, who undertook the mighty work, who was in a capacity of meriting and not under a necessity of mercy, which only the eternal Son of God could be; he alone who was of himself impeccable, could fully satisfie the utmost pretensions of infinite justice: who was a voluntary in his exinanition or humiliation and sufferings, and who needed no sacrifices for his own sins could perfectly atone the wrath of God: and therefore he took Man's cause into his own hand, and came in our nature, bringing Salva∣tion along with him: then Natures Laws justly yielded to him who was the God of Nature, the Heavens then declared the glory of God, and the firmament shewed his handy work, the faith of pious Men was vigorously re-in∣forc'd, by the full and miraculous accom∣plishment of antient Prophecies and Promi∣ses, and Angels themselves own'd it an ho∣nour to be the first Evangelists.
To prove that Jesus Christ was and could be no other than the Son of God, we come to consider the intent and design of that Do∣ctrine introduced by him, and by his Apostles and Ministers preached to the world in his name, where we are to observe, That as the writings of the Old and New Testament are to be the great standard of whatsoever is at this day published to the world as the will of God, so before the writing of the Gospel, the Law of Moses and of the Pro∣phets was the true and certain Test by which all Doctrines were to be tryed, and as the Apostle writes to the Galatians,Gal. 1.8. Tho' we or an Angel from heaven preach any other Go∣spel unto you, than that ye have received, let him be accursed, So had Jesus whom we conclude the Messias, gone about to propa∣gate any other kind of Doctrines than what the Prophets had before, or than what was in every point agreeable to their precepts and rules, instead of being the worlds Sa∣viour, he had proved himself an accursed impostor; and therefore when the Jews thought to take the advantage of him on this very score, he prevents them with that open declaration, Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy but to fulfil,Matth. 5.17, 18, 19. for verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled, whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, i. e. That he shall be of no esteem or value at all in the true Church of God: But whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven;Luk. 10.25, 26, 27, 28. Agreeably to this when the Lawyer stood up and tempted him and said, Master what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? Christ goes not about to give him any new rules of life, but referr'd him to the old, what is written in the Law, says he, how readest thou? And when the Lawyer had answered, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbour as thy self; which was the real summary of the Mosaic Moral Law, as our Saviour himself else∣where informs us, Christ replyes upon him, Thou hast answered well, This do and thou shalt live: Now if life, i. e. life eternal were to be obtained by the practising according to Legal instructions, there was no need of prescribing any new way of obtaining that everlasting happiness; and therefore when Christ gives us that parable of the rich Man and Lazarus, and introduces the tormen∣ted rich Man supplicating that Lazarus might be sent to forewarn his five brethren, lest they also should come into the same ter∣rible place,Luke 16.17. ad fin. Abraham tells him, they have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them; and to shew the fulness of their writings for
reforming of sinners, Abraham upon his far∣ther importunity subjoyns, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be∣lieve tho' one rose from the dead: By which passage our Saviour plainly informs us, that even himself and his own Gospel after his resurrection would never take any place where Moses and the Prophets were de∣spised before, the Law being the Gospels foundation, and preparing the devout soul for it's entertainment; for Christ still took notice of what we ought to consider, That truth is always agreeable to it self, and con∣sequently the God of truth must be so too, and therefore if the writers of the Old Testament were inspired from heaven, which all wise men have hitherto believed, then the writers of the New Testament had no other way to prove their own inspiration but by agreement with the former, lest the holy Spirit, to whose conduct both pre∣tended should seem inconsistent with him∣self, or variable as mens humours could ap∣prehend him. It's not now to be doubted but that our Saviour who knew what was in Man, therefore all along gave just preven∣tives of those Cavils which the malicious Jews could afterwards raise against him, and therefore in his first Sermon upon the Mount he shews himself so far from evacuating what was in its own nature
moral and per∣petually obliging, that he on the contrary clears it from all those putid glosses the Jewish readers or Rabbins had fixt upon it, and whereas they had endeavoured to find as many starting holes from the severity of good Morals, as the Jesuites of later years have done, he gave his hearers the full sense and meaning of the Law, that so, by pretending to liberty from its rigours, they might not run themselves into eternal woes; and in plain terms lets them know, that whereas they were ready simply to ima∣gine the severities of the Scribes and Pha∣risees very extraordinary and meritorious, they were infinitely deceived, and that ex∣cept their righteousness should exceed the righ∣teousness of the Scribes and Pharisees they should in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven.Matth. 5.20. It was doubtless the full end and design of Moses and the Prophets to advance the honour of that God who employed them, to make his Name and his Laws respected, not only among the tribes of
Israel, but a∣mong all those nations to whose knowledge their writings were likely at any time to come: who by the rationality and tenden∣cy of the Laws would certainly judge of the wisdom, goodness, and integrity of the Law-giver; but when those Prophets and others, had done their best, their endeavours were mixt with so many failures and imperfecti∣ons, that sometimes they fell themselves a great way under God's displeasure, as Moses by his infidelity and presumption at the rock.  The man of God that Prophesied against the Altar in Bethel, by yielding to the lying suggestions of the old Prophet: Jonah by his frowardness because of God's superse∣ding his prophetical denunciation by his long suffering and mercy extended to penitent sinners, &c. And besides, in all those ser∣vices those holy Men perform'd they could claim no higher a title than that of unde∣serving servants, for that they had only done what was their plain duty, and in case of failure they were obnoxious to very se∣vere penalties; and Moses tho' he have that honourable character, that he was faithful in all God's house, it was but as a servant still, and for a testimony of those things that were to be spoken after,Heb. 3.5, 6. But Christ as a Son over his own house took a more exact and effectual care in all things to promote the glory of his Father. It's natural for the
Son to be more sollicitous in such cases than a mercenary servant, who does what he does, prompted both by a fear of punishment and an earnest expectation of reward, above both which things a pious Son always lives; and therefore, whereas the rest always call God their Lord and King, &c. the blessed Jesus continually calls him his Father, his heavenly father, and by that relation he so stands in to the Almighty, and by what he has done for us in taking our nature upon him, and the consequences of that assum∣ption, he has procured the same privilege,  (superiour to what was apprehended by those of old) with assurance of being heard to say in our Prayers, Our Father which art in heaven. But to effect all this in relation to his Fathers honour and our good, how many scorns, abuses, persecutions and barbarous cruelties did he undergo from wicked Men! yet as freely as if he had been altogether unconcern'd, so long as Men could but any ways be reduced to an acknowledgment of their errors, and a se∣rious repentance. What he underwent so, made him as Man the more fit to prescribe Laws to others who were likely to suffer extremely from the same foolish world for embracing those truths he delivered them, as we always esteem an Humble man most fit to teach others humility, and a Charitable man charity, and a Patient man patience. For tho' others may declaim as well in com∣mendation of the same virtues and in re∣proof of the same vices, yet the discourses of exemplary persons are justly expected to make the deepest impressions upon their hear∣ers. With this advantage our blessed Lord instructed every one, that would receive his Doctrine, in the ways of happiness; he used all the allurements of irresistible Wisdom and unanswerable Reason, all the motives of Mercy and Goodness, to procure their at∣tendance and obedience, He set them a com∣pleat pattern of obedience to God, and of innocence and
holiness in his converse, and  then gives that as a standing rule, that his Disciples should follow his example, and let their light shine before Men for that very end, that others seeing their good works might glo∣rifie their Father which was in Heaven. But when the blessed Jesus design'd the reformation of a sinful World, the nature of his Doctrine, and the
manner of its propaga∣tion was adapted rightly to so admirable an end: And therefore, whereas the wretched Heathen part of Mankind did infinitely dis∣honour their Creator, whereas they exactly answer'd that account of the Apostle, When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful,Rom. 1.21, 22, &c. but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish hearts were darkned, they changed the glory of the incor∣ruptible God into an Image made like to cor∣ruptible Man, and to Birds, and to four-footed Beasts, and to creeping things, they changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipp'd and serv'd the creature more than the Creator, whence they were filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, malice, envy, &c. Whereas this was their real con∣dition, infinite numbers of them by this means running head-long into everlasting damnation, and yet the ill-natured Jews, to whom the Oracles of God were at that time committed, took no care for their re∣covery, pleasing themselves onely with a fond conceit of their own righteousness, cry∣ing to all the rest of Mankind, Stand by  your selves, come not near us, for we are ho∣lier than you: Since they only talk'd of their being the people of God, and boasted of his Temple, studying more to proselyte Men to an outward Circumcision, and a few empty Ceremonies, than to real inward holiness and integrity; since these very Jews did but abuse their own greater advantages, and trample upon the most excellent and obli∣ging part of the Law, our Saviour rectified their Error by the dilatation of his own Do∣ctrine, and taking exact care to have it spread as far as humane guilt had extended before; so that had but Men been as careful to improve their vertues as their vices, none upon Earth could have been ignorant of God's will, but the knowledge of that must have cover'd the Earth, as the waters cover the Sea: As he took his flesh of the Jews, so he took the earliest care to reduce the lost sheep of the house of Israel, preaching and do∣ing miracles among them in his own Person, beside sending out his Disciples to preach in all their Cities: But the veil of the Temple was quickly rent in twain, and the Holy of Ho∣lies, the highest Heavens laid open to all that sincerely believ'd on him, whether they were Jews or Gentiles. He came not as an Herald to proclaim War, but with the glad tidings of peace, and as an
ambassadour of re∣conciliation; he resolv'd to make Mercy tri∣umphant over Justice, to give light to them that sate in a more than Aegyptian darkness,  and to guide them in the ways of everlasting life; and therefore as himself vouchsafed to talk with the Samaritan Woman, and others of that Nation, to shew that he was not so rigidly uncharitable and unconcern'd for Uni∣versal welfare, as the Jews were, so he gave his Apostles a very large commission, to car∣ry his Doctrine to all Nations, that all Peo∣ple, if careful of their own Eternal Inte∣rests, might come to the knowledge of his truth, and be sav'd. That Doctrine, and those Laws, by which he intended to effect these great things, to reduce a corrupted World to a sense of duty, were so Innocent, so Pure, so Rational and Divine, that nothing less than a common Reformation could have been expected from them; for let a Man examine the Gospel through, let him do it with the most violent prejudices, the severest Eyes, he'l find no foot-steps of
self-interest in our Saviour's ma∣nagement of himself; he sought not the ap∣plauses and honours of the vulgar, as appear'd by those frequent offences he gave them in his plain and open reproofs, and those disagree∣able propositions he commonly made to them; otherwise the vulgar were not so dull, but that He who spoke as never man spake, might in a great measure have influenc'd them, and drawn them to an easie rebellion against their foolish and obstinate Superiours; notwith∣standing all his care to the contrary, the pre∣dominant humour was once to take him by  force and make him a King, which he was so far from indulging,Joh. 6.15. that he quietly with∣drew himself from their disorderly zeal. He expos'd himself indeed to all manner of ha∣zards, but never sought to advance himself any farther, than to a bare vindication of his Innocence: What he aim'd at was the good and safety of others, to snatch them who were falling into everlasting flames, from that dreadful place, to make them wi∣ser, and every way better; what he pro∣pounded to them was the Cross, self-denyal, patience, humility, a constant expectation of afflictions, things not popular among vain men, but such as would stand them in more stead than all the trifling honours and plea∣sures of the World; If then onely to aim at publick good, if to lay down and command such Doctrines, as himself could reap no be∣nefit by, but those to whom he spoke might; if to declare openly against all high and am∣bitious thoughts, and to be the great Exam∣ple of his own Instructions, argue the harm∣less nature of that design a Man carries on, doubtless what our Saviour taught tended to the most Innocent purposes in the World: Had he privately compos'd a Law, and after∣wards without propounding it to publick ex∣amination, endeavour'd to settle it by force of arms, by an eager persecution of those who should have rejected it even to extermi∣nation, howsoever good the Law might have been, the very method of its propagation
would have been an insuperable prejudice against it, and would have made all Men conclude its deficiency as to reason and
ju∣stice; But our Saviour pursued another Me∣thod, He trod in those steps so many had traced very happily before, He endeavour'd to advance onely such notions as were con∣fessedly of Divine original, He propounded them to the Judgment and censure of all, He was ready to answer all Questions, to resolve all doubts, to silence all cavils, and though He carried on his purpose with the utmost Zeal, yet He made use onely of gentle per∣swasions, and of unanswerable arguments, which none who were not direct enemies to reason, could refuse: He pleaded a Divine authority for his undertaking, yet desir'd not that his Plea should be regarded any farther than he confirm'd it by his works, and by the Innocence of his life; his works were truly miraculous, all works of mercy not of terror, obliging not only his friends by them, but his very enemies, witness the cure of Malchus's ear; He call'd for no fire down from Heaven, no Earthquakes, no storms of Sulphur, or Ʋni∣versal Deluges to force Men to submission, but endeavour'd fairly to convince all who had not heard of his Doctrine before, how much it tended to their welfare, not forbid∣ing their objections, or studying little shifts and artifices to evade them. Now if those who have made men better than they were by plain force are justly celebrated by all as Benefactors, how much more do they deserve the name, who do as much good by gentler means? The Peruvians were wont to account their Yncaes the Sons of Heaven, because they made it their continual business to civi∣lize a barbarous World, to do which they pro∣pounded their own Laws first to the inspecti∣on of strangers, and endeavour'd to perswade them of the great benefits they were like to receive by submitting to them, producing examples of the felicity of others by the same obedience; but where they were re∣jected, those Yncae's introduced civility by force of arms, yet stand not condemn'd in record even for those rougher proceedings: and it could not argue an inferiour Original for our Saviour, that he us'd no violence at all; and yet if we compare the successes of his Gospel, inforced by nothing but reason, a charitable Zeal and profitable Miracles, with the progresses either of Moses's Law, which was from Heaven, or that of Maho∣met, which has been spread prodigiously by Wars and Conquests, or that of the
Peruvian Yncae's, which was promoted by the calmest ways that ever any meer humane politicks were; the Gospel has prevail'd infinitely beyond them all, having been truly Catholick, when others have been confin'd to particular Countries, having out-stood all arguments rais'd against it, when the rest have been baffled by almost every undertaker: and ha∣ving out-stood the strength of time, when the  very name of several others are almost lost; and even Mahometism it self (of a much younger standing) though it has thriven be∣yond the rest, has fallen very short of the progress of the Gospel: This Universal prevalence is an irrefragable evidence of the Gospels excellence, and proves the Con∣triver of it not to have been of an Earthly original, since nothing but Heaven could re∣commend and practise what was so indispu∣tably innocent. Again, to aim wholly at the extirpation of vice, of all sin and wickedness, and the pro∣moting and recommending of virtue and good∣ness, carries the highest purity and sanctity along with it. If miscarriages in government, and trespasses upon humane Laws produce ter∣rible convulsions of state, and unexpected re∣volutions in political affairs, (of which at this day we live to see unaccountable instan∣ces) it's easie to infer from thence, that encroachments upon the Laws of God and na∣ture, must have the same influence upon ge∣neral affairs, and create strange disorders in the World, and mightily prejudice all the bonds of humane Society. It naturally excites God's vindictive justice, and makes him scatter vengeance every where; it cre∣ates nothing but mutual distrusts and jealousie of one another among men, so that they grow like Wolves or Devils in their mutual animosities and injuries. As these things are the consequence of wickedness, so they are
certain proofs and indications of the preva∣lence of Sin in any place or Nation; they show a general infection to have spread it self in a very corrupt people; and there∣fore he that endeavours to purge out the malignant humours of men labouring under such pernicious distempers, employs himself in the purest and most desirable work, since he endeavours onely to reconcile guilty na∣ture to an incensed God, and waspish and ill humour'd Men to one another. A full and ri∣gid execution of Laws against impudent vi∣ces may keep some under by its terror, and make them at least seek the darkest corners for the perpetrating of villanies, but it re∣presents not Sin a whit the more in its na∣tive ugliness, nor gives any ordinary satis∣faction, that Sin is exceeding sinful; for it's easie enough to conclude that God and Men may prohibit and punish such or such an action out of their own arbitrariness, to shew their own absolute and
uncontroulable power, upon which account, though Force may restrain them for a while, yet there re∣main in perverted minds some strange Gustos of delight in finding opportunities to do what they are forbidden, and which they conclude may be things good enough not∣withstanding such prohibitions; but when vice is delineated truly by Instructors appoin∣ted for that purpose, who are neither afraid nor asham'd to speak Truth, when they find Sin decried by solemn and weighty arguments,  more than by authority, where on the other hand, they find virtue and goodness described fairly as it deserves, recommended by earn∣est and gentle perswasives, set out with all its circumstantial beauties, discover'd in its happy effects, with relation both to earthly and heavenly influences; when they see bles∣sings shour'd down from Heaven upon them, and their very Enemies at peace with them, when they see how all this onely propounds a pure and unmixed goodness in Devotions towards God, and in Converse among Men; such Observers have nothing to say for them∣selves, in case they chuse the worst part; they cann't pretend so much as to excuse themselves, that they embrace evil not vo∣luntarily but by mistake, and sub specie boni, since vice and virtue ly both unveil'd and naked before them; Or they must acknow∣ledge themselves onely to be resolutely wick∣ed, to be so because they will be so, which puts them easily past all hopes of pity or of Pardon. But since devotion and ordinary converse were so exceedingly deprav'd, and since the wisest among meer Men had made so many attempts for reforming them, and yet had been so miserably mistaken in their measures to that end, as to convince them of the impossibility of such atchievments from their hands, when one person, howsoever despicable and mean in his outward appear∣ances, could reassume the forsaken design, and not onely assume, but apparently accomplish
it, laying down such Rules, as if exactly follow'd, must necessarily restore all things to an absolute perfection; when Men ob∣serve all his instructions to agree closely among themselves, and with the ancient au∣thentick methods of doing well, and all con∣curring still in the same center of Ʋniversal Sanctity, it must be necessarily concluded, That the Ʋndertaker was somewhat more than Man, that nothing less than infinite holiness and wisdom could effect such things, which being yet apparently effected by One who was a true Man, that true Man must withall be acknowledged the Son of God. And whereas the generality of inquisitive Men in their searches after truth and wis∣dom always observed strange deficiencies in humane reason, whereby antient wise men broke into so many several divisions in their inquiries after the Chief good; whereas they found, that none could lay down a fair pro∣ject for pursuit of That, but that presently he was assaulted by whole Armies of ad∣versaries, and all projects found absurd and unprofitable for acquiring that they aim'd at: When the Gospel of our Saviour came to be divulged, tho' it met with adversa∣ries enough, they were all too weak to in∣val date its strength and reason. It was neither the juggling fair-tongu'd Pharisee, nor the absurd and ambitious Saducee, nor the
wrangling Sophister, nor the Sceptical or cunning Philosopher, nor the undermining  Heretick, that were able to ruine the repu∣tation of the Christian Doctrine, but it still grew upon them tho' they were cruelly as∣sisted by earthly powers, and indeed made use of all the roughest means for the ex∣tirpation of the Professors of the Gospel. And what was very considerable, tho' the great promoters of Religion after the Apostles and their immediate Successor's times, nei∣ther had the gift of languages, nor had much of the learned education of those Ages, yet they were able, having truth on their side to baffle all the learning of the great wise men among both Jews and Pagans, which could never have happened, had not what they preached and defended been highly rational. For keen adversaries, who pretended to the greatest acuteness of Wit and Sence, would never have quitted arguments that had been
stronger for the sake of meer cant and im∣pertinent jangling. But indeed the common scope of the inquiries of wise men, being to discover what was really the greatest de∣gree of humane happiness, and the highest and chiefest good, (by which they confest somewhat Lost, and tho' possibly to be re∣trieved, yet not without the greatest diffi∣culties imaginable) there was no propo∣sition made by any for the full discovery and attainment of that Good, but it was eagerly listned to, and the probabilities on all sides being duly weighed, and the effects of the several propositions being carefully  consider'd, Christianity gain'd the victory, whose effects were the most considerable, whose Professors the most innocent, whose promises were the most excellent and pun∣ctual, and whose rules the most general, intelligible and unquestionable. Pagans and Jews if they were not wilfully ignorant, could not but see all those principles of reason which themselves pretended to, extremely advanc'd by this doctrine introduced by Christ; for whereas they were wont to de∣cry pride and haughtiness of spirit, arro∣gance and contempt of others, very earnestly, its true the vice was so notorious that they could not want arguments to disgrace it: yet while ambition and an enterprising hu∣mour were commended, while their ap∣plauded Philosophers were the persons who above all others contemn'd and vilified the vulgar, and since their very gods were re∣presented to them as tainted with the same fault, their ingenious Lectures and fine di∣scourses against it were generally lost. But when Christianity teaches the miserable na∣tural condition of Men, how they are all the heirs of wrath, and just inheritors of eter∣nal damnation, because they broke an
easie Law, and forfeited their original Innocence; when it shews how Angels those purer Spi∣rits fell from that glory they were at first enstated in, by a pride and haughtiness supe∣riour to that of Man, when it shews us, how short and transient our life here is, how  uncertain and flitting all our comforts and enjoyments, how little power we have to help ourselves under any extraordinary ca∣lamity or temptation, and yet that we are born to trouble as the sparks fly upward, when it represents us to our selves as too weak by any strength of our own, to get the ma∣stery of Innate lusts and sensual desires, and God's anger as just hanging over our heads and extremely hard to be aton'd, nay plainly impossible to be satisfied, had not a very powerful Mediator interpos'd on our ac∣counts, all these things are so many morti∣fying considerations to the proud, that who∣soever allows himself but a few serious thoughts on these heads must certainly be very mean and humble in his own eyes, looking upon himself as too inferiour for divine mercy to take notice of, too unwor∣thy to be partaker of any great hopes or extraordinary future felicities; and such Humility is propounded to us as an excellent foundation for extraordinary grace, and as the best way to be exalted by God in his due time. Again,Jam. 4.10. whereas Pagans recommend friendship and fidelity to all persons, and give us a great many extraordinary ex∣amples of the noble effects of those virtues, yet they commend revenge, and applaud that internecine hatred which concludes in nothing but blood, and therefore represent their greatest Heroes, such as Achilles and Aeneas and
Alexander, as desiring only to  live till they might throughly revenge the fair deaths of their friends, and can scarce tell how to condemn their barbarous Tydaeus whom they make when dying of his wounds himself, yet gnawing the bleeding head of his enemy Melampus, (who had hurt him in a fair war,) with an expiring rage: Where∣as we see Joab murdering Abner in cold blood, on pretence of revenging the death of his bro∣ther Asahel, whom Abner had killed purely in his own defence; and find our Saviour reckoning it as a Jewish maxim, Thou shalt love thy neighbour,Matth. 5.43. and hate thine enemy. Yet a good Christian looks upon revenge as so unmanly a humour and so disagreeable to those principles he owns, that he scorns to be thought guilty of it; for what advan∣tage is it to me if one have killed my Bro∣ther or my Father, to kill him for it? will it restore any life to my dear departed re∣lation? will it contribute to the peace and satisfaction of the departed soul? Or, will it not rather shew a devilish temper only delighting in murder, and
committing that very crime my self which I think I can never punish with severity enough in another man? are there not a thousand inconveniences at∣tend such practices, deadly and immortal feuds not terminating between particular men, but legacy'd down to entire families, and concluding at last in mutual utter exci∣sions, or by both of them falling under the impartial strokes of a superior's Law? Re∣venge  is brutish, Dogs and Bears and Wolves and Tygers out-do Man at it; but it's noble and God-like to forgive, and therefore our blessed Saviour teaches all men who expect pardon from heaven for themselves, to be ready to forgive their bre∣thren here, i. e. those who are partakers of the same humane nature with themselves; He commands us, To love our enemies,Matth 5.44, 46. to bless them that curse us, to do good to them that hate us, and to pray for them that despitefully use us and persecute us, for if we love them that love us, what do we more than others? The meanest souls, the greatest aliens to virtue are capable of such things: Publi∣canes, esteemed the meer scandal and refuse of mankind among the Jews, could do them, but those who followed Christ were to act in softer methods. They may design to make the world their slaves, but it must not be effected by rage and a studious revenge on every little supposed affront, that sets men upon their guard, and he that by such courses strives to subject me, must expect the same measure from me if I can get him at advantage: but He that studies to do good to all, is consequently beloved and ad∣mired by all; a forgiving and reconcileable temper obliges all mankind, and every one is a willing servant or slave to him whom he loves. How easily does this compassionate temper slide into a true and universal Charity? and our Saviour plainly shews by the course
of his doctrine, that as it was Man's great ambition in his first sin to become like to God, tho' he miserably mistook the way, so he now accounts it the greatest honour to God, that Man should indeed be what he then aim'd at, that that Image of God which was imprinted upon the Souls of Men in their first Creation should be restored to its pri∣mitive perfection and lustre: but there was no way to bring this about more effectually than by implanting this real and extensive Charity in the hearts of Men, which makes them the true representatives of that God who is love and goodness it self. It changes that state of war corrupt nature's ingaged in, and diffuses a Catholick and agreeable serenity through the world; it abolishes that Wol∣vish humour predominant among Men, and makes every one a God to his fellow. God makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends his rain upon the just and upon the unjust, he allows means for the conversion of sinners to repentance, as well as for conducting the righteous to that glory prepared for them; and Charity teaches us to resemble him in this, where he par∣dons and blesses, that we should do so too, and not neglect, or despise, or implacably persecute those of whom God himself is pleased to take care. Intemperance in meats and drinks was one of those vices which Paganism very ra∣tionally condemned and exposed so far as to
make wise Men asham'd of it: They saw plainly how it impair'd mens reason, how it engaged them in frequent and senceless quarrels, destroyed health and confounded estates; yet they had but very small appre∣hensions of the influence it might have upon mens future conditions, how displeasing it was to Almighty God, how certain an evi∣dence of Mens brutish and carnal inclina∣tions; Our Saviour therefore heightens their reasons against it, by shewing the certainty of judgment after death, the severity of that judgment, the uncertainty of the time of our leaving this world, the immediate conse∣quence of judgment upon death, and that there is no intermedial state of reconcilia∣tion to heaven, and therefore he advises his disciples,Luke 21.34. Let not your hearts be over∣charged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and so that day come upon you unawares, he refers them to the instance of the old world where they lived in mirth and jollity till the flood came suddenly upon them and destroyed them all, and to the instance of the Sodomites who practised the same dissolute Liberti∣nism,Luke 17.27, 29. till it
rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all: Now if there be reason to avoid these vices, to escape some temporal inconveniences, Men should do so much more to shun shame and scandal and eternal torments. Thus did the blessed Jesus in all the instances of sin or goodness use so much stronger arguments for the  first and against the last, than the most stu∣dious meer humane zeal could reach to, that consequently Men were infinitely more obe∣dient to him than they were to other Di∣ctators in virtue: For if Scipio Africanus could truly make it his boast, That among all his souldiers there was not one but at his bidding would throw himself off the highest rock into the sea tho' certain to be drown'd, how much was our Saviour honoured, when so many thousand zealous Christians voluntarily exposed themselves to the most exquisite torments in assertion of that truth He had transmitted to them? When not the angry insurrections of the headstrong multitude, nor the
threatning frowns of raging Tyrants, nor the lingring tortures of racks and wheels could affright them from their obedience; when all the pitiful subterfuges of mean and com∣mon souls were generously scorned, and the Crown of Martyrdom esteem'd much more than the Imperial Diadem? But it was the clear and unanswerable reason of our Saviours commands, of his Laws, that convinced so many: and those who were unwilling to renounce their own reason, were as unwil∣ling to relinquish the precepts of the Gospel; tho' they could not be fond of extreme mi∣sery, yet they would endure any thing ra∣ther than to believe they were no Men; and it was no sign of predominant madness or Hypochondriacal vapours for men to discourse more intelligently than before, to be more  earnest in pursuit of wisdom, to be more humble, more sober, more charitable, more devout, more blameless in their lives and conversations than others. But could a meer Man dive so far into the depths of reason beyond the rest of the World, who wanted all visible and ex∣ternal means for the improvement of his know∣ledge and natural abilities? Christ had not what we call liberal education, the Jews who knew it, objected that against him, How knoweth this Man Letters, having never learn∣ed? But he answers them appositely enough, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me; and adds, He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory,John 7.15, 16, 18. but he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and there is no un∣righteousness in him: Now to advance Rea∣son beyond humane reach, to promote God's glory not as a Servant, but with greater strength of argument and zeal than a meer man could do, proves beyond contradiction, that the Man Christ Jesus could be none o∣ther than the Son of God. I come now to enquire into that influence,
Scripture-history in those cases ought to have upon all those who own the Being of a God, whether they be converted to Christianity or not, which will necessarily take in that au∣thority which the Word of God, as such, ought to have with an Infidel; which enqui∣ry, though it be of a nice and speculative nature, yet it will necessarily convince All  of that value they ought to set upon Scrip∣ture, when they call themselves Believers and Christians, how careful they should be to punish and discourage all slights and con∣tempts thrown upon it, and how ready to lose their lives, or any thing that's dear to 'em, rather than part with those truths con∣tain'd in it. It were easie to prove Scripture equally va∣luable to the greatest strangers to Christianity with any other Humane writings whatsoever; For Heathens never pretended any such ve∣neration for those Writings they had oppor∣tunity to converse with (how great names so∣ever they bore in their titles) as to be afraid to oppose or confute them, and to distinguish among them between truths and falshoods, and proper subjects of Credibility and Incre∣dibility; for tho' the Opinions of some Per∣sons were look'd upon as more rational than those of others, and the Writings of some Historians as more Authentick, yet they were all acknowledged full of mistakes, and naturally liable to such; nay their very Di∣vine Writings, those which they thought written, and which tradition told them were written by divine instinct, were frequently call'd in question; and so their Poets the first Authors of their Divinity were generally re∣puted great Fablers, and they deserv'd it well; and their Sibyls whose Oracles were so much celebrated among them, were by Tully in his 2d. Book de Divinatione, before
the name of Christians, or of Christ himself was heard in the World, cry'd down as a cheat for the most part; and where Acro∣sticks (as some of those so call'd) were inca∣pable of that divine Original they pretended to; Which instance, whether Tully were in the right or no, proves yet certainly the dubiousness of Mens minds among the Hea∣thens, as to the authority of their most sacred and esteem'd Writings, and how small a Crime they held it to impeach any of them. Yet they valued many Authors so much, as to take a great deal of care to preserve their Wri∣tings, and to transmit them very carefully to Posterity. Now to raise Scripture to this proportion of esteem among them, no more needs to be alledg'd, than that the Subjects they treat on, are generally very good, as the Writings of any old Philosophers could pretend to be; that though the Nation principally concern'd in it, was not so famous as many of the rufling or Politick founders of other large Empires were, yet there were such a People really in the World as the Jews, and afterwards as the Christians were; that they had Laws given them, and liv'd under particular forms of Government, and that the Historical account given of Jewish Poli∣ticks and Monarchs, and of the first Founders of Christianity, and their industry, and suc∣cess, were as Rational, and as likely to be true, as the Histories of other Political trans∣actions; and a great deal more likely to be
true in the eldest parts of its History, as that of the World's Beginning, of the Long Lives of those before the Flood, of the Flood it self, and the escape of a very small number from it, of the Reparation of the World by a new increase of Mankind, and other Crea∣tures, of the Original of that call'd the Dead Sea, from the Conflagration of Sodom and Gomorrha, Admah, and Zeboim, by fire from Heaven, of the Ascent of the Jews out of Aegypt, and the Calamities suffer'd by the Aegyptians upon their account, of the Ori∣ginal of the Jewish Government, Sacred and Civil, &c. These accounts of Antiquity, and many more of the same nature, look'd infi∣nitely more probably, than the dreams and forgeries of their eldest Authors, for whose sake they look'd upon all their own stories, relating to the first Ages of the World, as onely obscure and fabulous. These Pleas, as I said before, might serve to bring any into as good an opinion of that Book which we call Scripture, as of any other meer humane writing: But that's not enough; Scripture may, to Infidels themselves, be prov'd to be far superior in the original, nature and use of it, than any thing else the World pretends to; the certainty of which lays open a fair way for the conversion of Infidels to Christi∣anity, and indeed is such a medium, as with∣out it, or unquestionable miracles, which
Mi∣racles too must tend wholly to the confirma∣tion of the authority of Scripture, it's wholly  vain to pretend to their conversion. What I mention'd at first, that the excel∣lency of Scripture might be prov'd, or its au∣thority have a due influence upon such as ac∣knowledge onely the being of a God, was spo∣ken with relation to Atheists, who deny any such Being at all; for tho' we have not met yet with any Nation so barbarous, but it has had some notion of a God, (as where-ever there is any pretence to divination or predi∣ctions of future contingencies, there must be such) yet since some will pretend to Courage enough, utterly to deny the existence of a God, and make it their business to make proselytes to the same non-sense: I confess no Arguments, of that nature I aim at, can have any effects on them; those who deny a God, will scarce acknowledge any parti∣cular Writing to be the Word of God; but to those who do acknowledge a God, these things will be obvious enough, and past dispute. That if there be a God, i. e. One great supreme Being, who presides with an absolute and illimited power over the World, and all transactions in it: This God must necessarily have all those Attributes, due to himself, which are requisite for the exercising such a power, for he that believes not this, has no true notion of a God, without which yet no Man can pretend to any true or solid reli∣gion; for as the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews tells us, He that comes to God  must believe that he is,Heb. 11.6. and that he is a rewar∣der of those that seek him; so the Stoick Phi∣losopher joyns with the Apostle, when he makes the greatest part of true Religion to consist in having , true opinions of the Gods, so as to know that they are, and that they manage all things well and justly, that all ought to obey them and acquiesce in those things which are done by them,Epict. Ench. c. 38. and to act in agreement with them, as being govern'd by an All-wise Mind; now, according to these Models, none can have a true or exact apprehension of a God, but he who represents God to himself as capable of performing all those things for which he thinks it necessary to believe He is: And from hence it was that Epicharmus tells us,Cudw. In∣tel. Syst. p. 263.-4. . Nothing escapes the eye of the Divinity, this you ought to take notice of, He's the Overseer of us all, and there's nothing that he cannot do; which shews he under∣stood the God of all things to be omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent, three of those great attributes Christians give to God, and that it was necessarily to be understood by all others who pretended to the same know∣ledge of a God. Hence God, or he whom Pagans own'd to be the supreme God, known to them by the name of Jupiter, is call'd by them, the great Architect or Maker of the World, the Prince and chief Ruler of the Ʋni∣verse,
the first or chief God, the first Mind, the great God, the greatest of the Gods, the highest, the superior to all Gods: the most transcendent God, the God of gods, the Prin∣ciple of Principles, the first Cause, He that generated the Universe, He that rules over the whole World, the Supreme Governor and Lord of all things, the God without beginning, self-originated, and self-subsisting, He that is far beyond the reach of Humane Minds and understandings, that Eternal Being which can never change and never perish. The beginning, the end, and the middle of all things. He who is one God onely and all Gods in one: now the result of all these titles is, That the Supreme Being which governs the World is infinitely perfect, which if drawn down into Christian words and principles, amounts to this, That God is infinitely pow∣erful, just, true, merciful, glorious, loving and good to all his Creatures, and all these things are so essentially constitutive of the Deity, that without the concurrence of them all, there could be none; for what is perfect, must be so in all instances, for any one exception ruines the whole assertion, and makes that Being, what ever he may pretend to really, imperfect. Amongst these several Attributes which render God adorable to the World, that Love or Goodness of his whereby he regu∣lates and provides for all his Creatures is one, and as he originally
desires, so he promotes  their real happiness, and of this Goodness the Heathens had notions as well as our selves, though not perhaps so clear or con∣victive as those God has blest us with in Scripture; thus Platonists perswade us, that God himself was turn'd into Love when he made the World, that order in which he had set, and that providence by which he go∣vern'd all things, showing the most prodi∣gious effects of Love or goodness. So the Greek Comedian gives us an odd Idea of the World's Original,Aristoph. in Nubibus. That in the beginning Confusion and Night, and Hell and Dark∣ness had an existence, there was then no Earth, nor Air, nor Sky. In the first place black-winged Night laid a prolifick Egg in the inscrutable bosome of profound Dark∣ness, from which in succeeding Hours was produced desirable Love, glittering in the Air with golden Wings, and like the bree∣ding Winds, coupling with prepared Cha∣os, or dark confusion in the infernal regi∣ons,p. 121. expos'd our kind, first of all, to light; nor had the Gods themselves any being, till Love it self had mingled all things. Which Poetical expressions being duly explain'd, or reduced to plain sense, and the Gods in the last passages meaning onely Angels, Moses his history of the Creation, Gen. 1. and St.
John's discourse, John 1. concerning the Creation of all things by Christ, with his assertion oft repeated, That God is Love, are not very different from them; For, tho'  they were of a more obscure and impenetrable kind, yet Paganism in general had very con∣siderable notices of the immense goodness of the Divine nature, and those amongst them who oppos'd Atheism, and asserted Providence, took no small care to set off di∣vine love, or the necessary care God had of his Creatures good, with the greatest Lu∣stre; and the Ancient Christian Doctors, nay, the Apostles themselves, witness Saint Paul at Athens, and St. Peter with Cornelius, and the Ancienter Prophets and Holy Wri∣ters found God's Goodness exerted to his Creatures, an excellent Argument to draw Pagans, as well as others to Repentance and Obedience. Among other apprehensions Pagans had of God, that of his Purity and Holiness was very considerable; they who ascribed Per∣fection to him, and knew what Perfection meant, look'd upon him as necessarily infi∣nitely Pure; for where they tell us of God's being impassible, they prove he cannot be guilty of any thing ill, that being contrary to the original nature of a Spiritual Being, which therefore must be suppos'd to suffer, when it is suppos'd to sin. But as they had these notions of God's immense purity, so they had as quick a sense of the depravation of
Man's Nature, and were ready to la∣ment it with almost as great an Emphasis, as St. Paul himself could lament his own corruption; hence that ingenious Platonist
Maximus Tyrius acknowledges,Dissert. 26. , &c. For the Soul of Man is too weak to extricate it self by force of Reason from all those perplexities it meets with, especially being while in this life involv'd in many dark and gloomy Clouds, and always miserably wearied and distracted with the noise and tumult of occurring mischiefs, for what Man is there so good, who can live without offence or without fault? but Men might live easily enough without fault, did not the general depravation of their natures prevent it, for of what is Good nothing but Good can come. But though this Purity in God and Corruption in Man, must necessarily put God at a great distance from Man, yet as God was Lord and Master at first, both by right of Creation and Preservation, he is so still, (as he that was owner of a Kingdom, does not lose his right in it, because it is vi∣sited with the Plague, and the Infection it may be fatal and almost Universal) so Man owes Obedience and Subjection to God still, as he that was my Slave when
perfect and in health, is not therefore set free of course because he's sickly, or has lost an Arm, or a Leg; Or he that was so when in his wits, does not cease to be so now because he's distracted, and does not understand his Du∣ty: The Relation between God and Man stands good, and is believ'd to do so by Heathens as well as Christians, as a Son owes a Duty to his Father, when his Fa∣ther's  angry, as well as when he's pleas'd; and when himself has really offended him, as well as when he has not; and this rela∣tion is necessarily on man's part to be maintained to the utmost, since by its fai∣lure he loses all hopes of Happiness, and on God's part in vindication of his own Good∣ness. He therefore that rightly understands Humane Pravity of Nature, and yet be∣lieves he owes a duty to the supreme Being, must conclude it necessary, that he should have some Positive Rule or method whereby to manage himself: nor is it enough in this case to fly to the Law of Nature as if that were sufficient: That had been so indeed, had Man continued in that rectitude of fa∣culties which he had in the first beginnings of the world; but Heathens have been very sensible there's no such thing to depend on now: For tho' the Laws of Nature are as Just, as
Reasonable, as Necessary, and as Ob∣ligatory now as ever, yet if men have not Reason enough to understand it, what does the excellency and compleatness of Natures Laws signifie to them? as, tho' I am blind, the Sun shines at noon-day as bright and clear as ever it did, but I see never the more for all that. It was the Apostle's complaint, that the good that he would that he did not,Rom. 7.19, and the evil that he would not that he did, the reason of which was that general Corruption of Mankind, which He, as one of them,   was partaker of; fo He saw another Law in his members, waring against the Law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to the Law of Sin which was in his members; the same is the complaint of Medaea in the Poet when meditating upon a dreadful re∣venge she design'd on her husband Jason —video meliora probóque, Deteriora sequor; Now let the Laws of Nature be never so ad∣mirable, which way can a Man thus di∣stracted within, compose himself so, as to take a fair view of that Law, or be enough himself to practise upon it? The Law of Nature is really obscure and mystical, to be traced through a thousand dark and per∣plexing Labyrinths, which require more than a Man, as now fix'd, to travel through; therefore it cannot be enough to satisfie Man's want, and to give him full and clear direction to do the Will of God, which obedience to his Will is yet His Duty. He again who has a just Idaea of immense Goodness in God, will never be capable of reconciling His refusal to give Man a Law to walk by, to such goodness; For while no Man that acknowledges a God doubts but that he'l punish sinners, none can doubt but to clear his own Justice from all cavils, he'l punish them only as Sinners against some Law, for sin is defin'd to Christians a Transgression of the Law; but that Law must be some such Law as the Transgressor was really capable of knowing: As our Justi∣ciaries
punish the most ignorant Clowns when they break our Laws (tho' perhaps the suf∣fering persons never knew of those Laws) and yet very justly, because there were such Laws really extant, and in such a Language as they understood, and it was their Duty and Interest to be acquainted with, and to enquire after those Laws, the breach of which might any way be penal to them. It's as little doubted, that God will reward those who keep such Laws, and will encou∣rage them, by the easiness of the Laws pro∣pounded, to a ready and exact obedience; These things were so strongly fix'd in the minds of antient Pagans, that it set their Philosophers at work to read Lectures, and to prescribe Laws concerning Virtue and Vice, to all people, declaring previously, That there was an absolute necessity of such Laws for Men who indeed were ingaged in the dark, and some of them could almost have pretended to Divine influences upon them, tho' their Priests and Fortune-tellers did it with more applause: But all this was to bring mens minds to a greater veneration of their Principles; and Empedocles in par∣ticular, thought it no ill Policy to Teach his Philosophy first, and commence a God afterwards, for which end he threw himself alive into the mouth of
Aetna in Sicily, and receiv'd his Apotheôsis in the midst of flames. Yet, after all, Philosophy was ca∣pable of doing very little, and could not,  nor ever was receiv'd by Men as any par∣cel of that Law they wanted to guide them, because they were wholly unable to deter∣mine among them what that one great and chief Good was, the fruition of which they were to aim at: and in submission to which they were to admit of the propounded Law; on account of the weak title of these Pre∣tenders, the Priests, who attended on the publick services of their more celebrated gods, pretended to extraordinary Inspira∣tions; and some of them, especially, such as the Cumaean Sybil, Tiresias, Amphiaraus, the Priests of Jupiter Hammon, the Del∣phian, Dodonian and Trophonian Priests, &c. seemed to be in frequent Raptures and sa∣cred Agonies, as if they had been newly conversing with some Gods, and in these fits they delivered strange obscurities un∣couth and wild, as we find by Homer, A∣pollonius, Virgil, Statius, Sophocles, Seneca, and others: These Priests thus obtaining a great reputation for sanctity, and it being thought they were but as so many Engines conveying the speeches of the Gods down to Men, their Dictates bore a great sway in the Heathen World, and they were much consulted in the inventing and making of Laws; But these again were so disagreeing among themselves and with one another, their
Fancies generally so irrationally extra∣vagant and unintelligible, the self-interest in them, so notoriously apparent to every  body, and their Lives and Manners so ab∣solutely undivine, (which was a very consider∣able prejudice among Heathens themselves) and matters of fact delivered by them to posterity in writing, were commonly so wild, so trifling, or so full of falsities, that all these things quite ruined their claims, and still the Heathen World had new Laws, and new Lawgivers to seek. Hence their Gods themselves, that is, the Devil who usurped the Divine name, and under that name, at several times and in several places procur'd divine Honours to himself, took courage to give answers to enquirers and a kind of Directions for Men to act by; and that he might look the liker a God in∣deed, he'd now and then adventure upon some little Truths, such as had a very consi∣derable Moral import in them, such as , Noli altum sapere, and some few more of a like nature, but these Ora∣cular Rules, proceeding from so great a Patron of real impiety and abominable Ido∣latries, were commonly received accord∣ingly; and tho', as to Sacrifices and all the gaieties of a costly Worship, they were willingly enough ruled by that usurping Impostor, and if any barbarous offering was to be made in
blood of Slaves or Chil∣dren, or the like, Superstition was but too obedient; Yet, in those things that were really Good and worth taking notice of, they were so distrustful as they came to no∣thing  among them. Maximus Tyrius there∣fore, in those cases, prefers Philosophy it self, so far as concerns the Conduct of Men's lives, to all these Oracles, for, as he argues, the Gods pretend to tell us what's sodden in a boiling Caldron in Lydia,Dissert. 19. p. 189. they tell us of a wooden Wall, of ohe danger of cutting through the Corinthian Isthmus, some∣times they talk of a future Earthquake, of a threatning war, and an approaching Plague, but as for those things which are much more worth our knowledge, such as how Wars may be avoided, by what means we may live with∣out any need of Walls and Fortifications, how we may behave our selves so as to have no reason to fear a Plague, not one word, nei∣ther Apollo at Delphos, nor Jupiter at Do∣dona, nor any other Gods, have any thing to say to these things, only Philosophy teaches these things. Yet afterwards, he flyes even from That too as insufficient; For, says he, I require such an Oracle which may teach me without ambiguity to live quietly, answer me then, whither will you send Mankind? which way must they go in the case? where must they end? let the Rule of Life be one, let it be com∣mon to and concern All? Thus He, neither satisfied with Philosophy, nor any way to Happiness, yet known to him, no nor with the additional stories of God's descending down to Earth, in Humane Forms to con∣verse with and to instruct Men in the me∣thod of acquiring Happiness.
Now this Rule, thus sought for among Heathens, we say the Scripture is: They know not that it is so; We prove it, be∣cause the Scripture is the Word of God: There's no ingenuous Pagan but will agree with us, that if it is the Word of God in∣deed, it must of necessity be the thing they look for, and sufficient to effect those great things they desire from it; it's our part then to prove what we call Scripture to be God's Word, and thus far they meet us in the way, They acknowledge the absolute necessity of such a Word, the absolute necessity of Man's obeying him who governs all things, the absolute incapacity Men are in to know of themselves how to perform that duty, its extraordinary consistency with Divine Goodness that there should be such a Word given to Mankind, whereby they may be guided to happiness, and their joy and readiness to receive such a Word, suf∣ficiently proved to be such, when exhibited; all which infer their supposition, that God may, if he please, impart his Will in such a manner to the World: Now what a Hea∣then would require in such a Word which should be the rule of his life, could only be, That it should be One, that it should be of equal concern and respect to All, that it should not be clog'd with Ambiguities, that it should be Practicable, that it should be sufficient for the end it's designed for, and
that it should be suitable to, and worthy of its Author, these are the most comprehen∣sive Qualifications a stranger to Christianity would have in that Word which is ascribed to God, and these it will not be very diffi∣cult to show in that Scripture which we be∣lieve, for If we look into the Moral and Perpetu∣ally obliging part of God's Word as a Rule of Life and Practice, it's but One, and that a very short one too, as laid down in the De∣calogue by
Moses the Jewish, and as Epi∣tomized in the Gospel by Jesus the Christi∣ans Lawgiver, Thou shalt Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and Thou shalt love thy Neighbour as thy self, and upon these two, as our Savi∣our teaches, depend all both the Law and the Prophets; the whole body of the Old Testament and the New is but one large and plain comment upon these few words, shew∣ing their full import in abundance of par∣ticular instances; so as there are no Emer∣gencies of Humane life, but what are redu∣cible to them; There is set down the just Commendation of that one short Rule, the miserable failures of Men in putting this in execution, the true grounds and reasons of their failures, their falling under divine dis∣pleasure on that account, the means found out to atone that divine displeasure, and the extreme difficulty of atoning it, the con∣tinuing  Defects of Humane Obedience, the Mercy of God yet equally continued for the sake of that compleat atonement made, and God's acceptance of an upright heart and sincere endeavours, (according to the do∣ctrine of Pagan wise men themselves) in∣stead of absolute and unattainable perfection in Virtue and Goodness, and Crowning such sincerity and integrity with that happiness due to a total perfection: And all these things are illustrated with such an Historical de∣duction of things, as serves exceedingly to confirm all the particulars, and to convince the World how angry the True God is with those who transgress, and how infinite∣ly pleased He is with those who endeavour to walk by this Rule; and All compar'd to∣gether shew abundantly, that the whole body of Scripture is indeed but one and the same Rule, agreeing with it self in all parti∣culars: and the Matters of fact laid down with that simplicity, impartiality and pro∣bability, and so agreeably to those broken fragments of Antiquity themselves esteemed most highly, and so very pertinent to the drift of the Book it self, i. e. to make Men devout towards Heaven, and sociable among one another (all which things were never pretended to meet in any one Writing whatsoever before) that, till any firm in∣stance can be produced to the contrary, Scripture in this particular must be owned the Word of God.
If its general and equal respect to all Man∣kind be enquired after, the very manner of expression used in Scripture shews it to be really Universal, for when the Rule says, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, and Thou shalt love thy Neighbour, and yet nominates no particular person to whom the sence should be restrain'd, Scripture in that speaks to every individual person who hears or reads it, as Nathan to David, Thou whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free, young or old, learned or unlearned, Christian or Pagan, Thou art the Man. When, in relation to any branch of this short Rule, any doubt is propos'd and the solution given to a par∣ticular Person either in plain terms or in a Parable, that particular solution concerns every man living; so when the Lawyer asked Christ, Who is my neighbour? and Christ had answered him by that Parable of the Man rob'd and wounded between Je∣rusalem and Jericho, and relieved by the good Samaritan, and upon the Lawyers de∣claring for the Samaritan's charity, Christ replyed upon him, Go and do thou likewise, tho' the discourse be to one Man, the im∣port reaches You and Me and every Man who at any time may meet the same Objects of Charity, and be in the same Circumstan∣ces; and when in pursuance of the great Rule any thing is forbidden, and it's said, Thou shalt not do This or That, it means, No Man on any pretence whatsoever shall do it,
and every Judgment against a particular Criminal tells us, that Except we repent we shall all likewise perish; and every Blessing following Goodness, speaks, Thus shall it be done to any Man, whom the King of all things delights to honour; and as happiness eternal is propounded to All, which is unquestion∣ably Man's chiefest good, so the means pro∣pounded for attaining it, are the same to All, All purchase it at the same rate, and ac∣quire it with the same spirit; and in this particular all Humane Writings whatsoever own their defects. Happiness in Scripture being the end pro∣pos'd, and we being taught wherein it con∣sists so, as to have all sorts of Pagans con∣curring in the perswasion, that it consists in the fruition of the Love and presence of the Supreme God, the way to gain it is set down so plain, that none who have common rea∣son can doubt of its meaning; for though a 1000 Queries, and impertinent enough, have been made by Casuists, in what instances we ought to love God, yet never any but Je∣suits, who had heard the Rule of Scripture, Thou shalt love, &c. could doubt whether Scripture taught us to have any love for God or no; Men must resolve to read it backwards, as they say Witches do, who can doubt its meaning; neither can they doubt, but that we ought to love God, so great and pure a Being, in all instances whatsoever. The very
Pagans themselves were sensible  of the little Artifices of that subtle Spirit, which was wont to speak in their Oracles, when they sought to secure themselves from a charge of falshood, by speaking what was dubiously to be interpreted: and though sometimes for things Past or Present they'd speak tolerably, yet in all future matters they'd falter miserably, as Croesus King of Lydia found to his cost, who chose a God to himself among the multitude by his Ve∣racity, having contriv'd it so that several of his Messengers should at one and the same hour enquire of a several Oracle what Croe∣sus was then doing, of all which One onely answering right, that One He devoted him∣self to, and yet that One, when he came to enquire the event of his intended War a∣gainst Cyrus, cheated him with a paltry am∣biguity to his ruine; their subtilties in that kind quickly grew proverbial, to the disho∣nour of the Impostor; but that divine spirit which influenced Holy Writers, needed no such subterfuges for apparent weakness, nor have any yet been able to discover any such thing in Scripture; and though some Pro∣phecies are very dark and obscure at present, yet the event of things has so exactly ex∣plain'd many of the most difficult, that none can doubt but just periods of time will un∣riddle them all, and make the Apocalypse it self as plain as any other part of it.
Scripture runs upon no vain and trifling speculations, such as might disturb and heat  the fancy, but its whole scope and import affects the practices of Men; it advances real knowledge onely, and such Knowledge will show it self in our actions. To Love God and our Neighbours, are things infinitely useful and rational, and on that account were admir'd by Pagans in the primitive persecuted Christians; the duties are so of∣ten, and by such variety of Arguments ur∣ged in Scripture, that as it's almost impos∣sible Men should be ignorant of what's re∣quir'd at their hands, so it's as impossible they should not know how to perform it, that Book lays no task upon us, but what's pleasant, safe, and certain; commands no∣thing, but what it gives us numerous instan∣ces of, as perform'd by others, and there∣fore possible to us; it shows us God's Per∣fection, and requires Ours, as knowing the fairest Copy excites the greatest ingenuity and study to equal it; and whereas we can∣not but be sensible of our own Errours, it shows how God accepts the sincerity of our endeavours, and gives us the instance of One great real Man, who reach'd that consum∣mate perfection in our nature, and that for His sake we are receiv'd; in all these things Heathen wisdom fail'd, either prescribing gay impossibilities for practice, or propoun∣ding happiness as the mark to aim at, but teaching Men to shoot the contrary way, by engaging them in mean pleasures and down∣right sensualities; and where the speculations
were best, they had none to appeal to, who had ever liv'd up to their own principles, their most fam'd Sages being meer prosti∣tutes to notorious immoralities, notwithstand∣ing all the fair shew some late Writers have endeavour'd to make with them; onely Pa∣gans had some few scatter'd extracts out of Scripture, which were in themselves excel∣lent, but being onely fragments injudici∣ously cull'd, and incoherent, and wretchedly misunderstood, were wholly useless. Whereas all Rules and Methods of living before discover'd were lame and imperfect, not sufficient to carry Men through those extraordinary difficulties and objections they might meet with in a course of virtue, (as appear'd by the Famous Brutus, who because he saw it unfortunate, concluded Virtue was nothing but an empty name;) Scri∣pture is compleat and every way sufficient for the design it carries on, and therefore stands at advantage against all other Rules, because Whoever follows others most exactly, can∣not be happy at last, but He that sticks close to our Rule cannot be unhappy; it informs the Mind, it resolves Doubts, it answers Ob∣jections, it encourages Weakness, it dissi∣pates Fears, it reproves Errors, and makes Sufferings easie, of which there are so many thousands of instances, own'd by Infidels themselves, that from hence too it's past dispute that our Rule has this quality of the Word of God.
In fine, there's nothing through the whole tenour of it, either in its Doctrine or Hi∣story, that's beneath the Majesty of an infi∣nite God; if God would speak to Man, he could speak no better, therefore he must speak thus and onely thus. He that finds Princes composing Sacred Hymns infinitely beyond their Orpheus or Callimachus; Mora∣lizing as far beyond their admir'd Antoni∣nus, as he beyond Porters or Scavengers; He that reads Prophets more soaring and divine than their Plato's, or Zeno's, or Py∣thagoras's, and in a strain more soft and charming, as well as more Majestick; and Herdsmen more profound and more truly fatidical, than their Sibyls, or Apollo, and Fishermen more accurate, argumentative, and rational, than their Philosophers of the no∣blest Sects, able to baffle 'em in Disputes, to out-reach them in discovering the causes and natures of ordinary appearances in the World: He that observes Men of various lives and conditions, of different tempers, dif∣ferent times, distant places, different natural abilities, writing a series of Historical pas∣sages, with more clearness, better digested n point of Chronology, more probable in atters of fact, more full, exact, and im∣artial in the Characters of Actions and Per∣ons, more agreeing with one another, and he best Pagan Writers, than all other Hi∣orians whatsoever, nay, than Old and
ublick Records themselves, though pre∣serv'd
and managed with the greatest appa∣rent care and exactness; He that can find nothing low, flagging, and uneven among such variety of Pen-men, nothing trifling, useless, or superfluous, let his perswasion be what it will, let him be Turk, African, or Indian, if he have but his Reason free, he must conclude, if God ever did impart his will to Man, it must be in this Book which we call Scripture; and if He then return to his own principle, of the necessity, in point of justice, that God should give a Rule to Man that might procure his Happiness, it will as necessarily follow, that our Scripture, our Rule must be the Word of God. Which proves its own Immortal Original farther, in that notwithstanding the continued malice and subtilty of Enemies, it could never be de∣stroy'd, it could never be disprov'd, it could never be interpolated, or any thing be added to it, nor be made shorter, or any thing ta∣ken from it; but while other Humane Wri∣tings have been easily abus'd, and additions and alterations made in them, not discover'd or well distinguish'd to this day by the most exact Criticks, nothing could so be fasten'd upon Holy Writ, nor any inferiour Writer or uninspired impose his own upon the World for the Word of God.
Assur'd of these things, We, as Christi∣ans, among other parts of Scripture, em∣brace the History of our Saviour's Incarna∣tion, and these things, being unanswerable  by an Infidel upon his own principles, as a Deist and a Rationalist, he must own the whole History of Scripture to be true; and amongst the rest, this of the Birth of Christ: for as I have no reason to suspect his Vera∣city, who gives me an account of somewhat to his own advantage, who yet has always told me truth, in things that made against himself; So a Pagan, who thinks he has reason to receive all the other parts of Di∣vine History, because he finds them exactly true, has no reason to suspect the Faith of the same Writers in one particular: And besides, the thing has been so oft attempted, but with so little success, that He may justly conclude, That matters of fact impossible to be confuted by any argument, cannot possibly be false: This obliges an Infidel to acknow∣ledge the truth of our History of the Incar∣nation in particular; and Scripture in gene∣ral, own'd to be Divine, is a certain foun∣dation to build the Conversion of Infidels upon. And thus much for the first head, That Jesus Christ the Messias, who appear'd on Earth, in our Nature, was really the Son of God.
We come now to the Second Particular, which is this, That the same Blessed Jesus, who was the Son of God, was God equal with his Father, or really and truly God as well as real Man: He was God, though manifest in the Flesh; To prove the Truth of which  might seem needless, had there not been of old, and were there not of late Years reviv'd a Generation of men, who, under pretence of sacrificing to Reason, have set themselves wholly to explode the Belief of a Trinity; as a means to make good which adventure of theirs, they positively deny the Divinity of the Son of God; they cannot well admit of any Mysteries in Religion which themselves cannot comprehend, the very pretence to which comprehension is enough to make a Mystery no Mystery, for if They who em∣ploy themselves in this work can compre∣hend it, every one may do so too, or at least the generality of the Intelligent World, but what's generally understood cannot be a Mystery, and yet our Apostle in the words preceding the Text, tells us, that That My∣stery of Godliness, of which this Text is a part, is without all controversie a great My∣stery. But that Jesus Christ the Son of God was God equal with the Father, we shall prove by these Considerations. By those accounts of his Appearance, and of his Nature, laid down in the Old Testament. By the Declarations of Himself, and of his Apostles in the New Testament. By his Actions during his converse with the World in our Nature. From the Faith of the Primitive Church. From that common and on every hand ap∣proved practice of adoring and presenting our prayers to Him.
Then We are to consider that account the Scriptures of the Old Testament give of Him, and of his Appearance in the World, where I will not undertake an exact estimate of e∣very thing that has by Ancient Writers been apply'd that way, nor every thing that Mo∣dern Controversie-Writers have insisted up∣on, but upon some particular and more re∣markable passages onely. Among which the First is that of three Angels appearing to A∣braham just before the destruction of Sodom,Gen. 18.2. where I shall not insist on that, that Abraham ran to meet them at their approach, and bow'd himself toward the ground, because I look up∣on that, and the consequent words, as onely expressions of kindness and hospitality, suitable to the custome of that Age and Country, and to that respect, a Person of Abraham's goodness and sagacity would express to Stran∣gers of a promising miene and venerable aspect: But after this,v. 22. we find the Angels going for Sodom, but Abraham standing still before the Lord; Two onely went forward, so Lot in Sodom met with, and entertain'd but Two; the Third continued still with Abraham, with infinite condescension, declaring to him the reason of this extraordinary appearance up∣on Earth; this favour hindred not the de∣sign, but the other Two pass'd on while A∣braham had the liberty to argue the case with him, who is particularly stil'd
the Lord, so the Writer, so Abraham in that converse frequently stiles him, and that not by the  same word originally which Lot made use of to the two Angels appearing to him,c. 19.2. which is onely which the Jews account a name applicable to any, but by that sacred and ineffable name  A name, as they say, onely applicable to the most High God; and here we find Abraham continually speak∣ing, as any who ownes and reveres the Eter∣nal Majesty of God, would supplicate to Him, and making use of that particular ar∣gument in his request, Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?c. 18.25. He then to whom Abraham apply'd himself was the Judge of all the Earth, therefore no created Angel, for such were never honour'd with that Cha∣racter, but it's properly attributed to the Supreme God by the Psalmist,Ps. 94.1, 2. O God to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thy self, lift up thy self, thou Judge of the Earth! and by the Apostle,Heb. 12.23. where he tells the Hebrews, They were come to God the Judge of all, or as your Margin reads it, To a Judge the God of all. If we look yet forward into this story, when Lot was convey'd safe from the destruction which fell upon Sodom,Gen. 19.24 we are told, The Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrha brimstone and fire from the Lord out of Hea∣ven,Epiph. Haer. l. 3. p. 832. where Photinus, from whom some de∣nominate our Socinians, owns, it was the , the Word which rained from the Lord,Sandii Hist. Enud. l. 1. p. 118. but that Word was God, as we learn from the Evangelist, John 1.1. By this we gain the certainty, that our Saviour, the Son
of God had a Being before he was born of the Virgin Mary, that the Title, Power, Acknowledgment, belonging to the true God were given to him, therefore that He was the true God. To this might be added the History of Jacob's wrestling with the Man, when he was left alone; The Man he wrestled with,Malac. 3.1. antiquity generally under∣stood to be the Angel of the Covenant, so Christ is nam'd,Heb. 12.24. and this interpretation is no way disagreeable, since the wrestler from the very contest gives Jacob the name of Is∣rael, which signifies a Prince,Gen. 32.28 or one that powerfully prevails with God. The Person wrestling with Jacob, refuses to tell his name, which created Angels were not wont to do. Gabriel told Zacharias his name, the name of Michael is often mention'd,Luke 1.19. and the Writer of the Apocryphal book of Tobit, supposes it no unusual thing, when he intro∣duces Tobias's companion, calling himself Raphael, one of the seven Angels that stand in the presence of God, i. e. are in a more glorious state than the rest of that Heavenly Host; Again, Jacob expresses his sense of his Antagonist, in the Name he gave to that place, and the reason of it, for, says he, I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved; And lastly, Jacob pray'd to him for a blessing, and would not part without it, which argued his acknowledgment of a Divine power in him; and the Prophet Ho∣sea makes such an interpretation of the
Text scarce disputable, where speaking of Jacob, He had power over the Angel, says he, and prevailed,Hos. 12.4, 5. He wept and made supplica∣tion unto him, (that was to own Him the true God) He found Him in Bethel, and there he spake with us, Even the Lord GOD of HOSTS, the Lord is his Memorial;  An expression so great and so high, as ne∣ver any created Being pretended to. We may then take notice of the 45 Psalm, a Psalm by all the ancient Jews apply'd to the Messias, and rightly, as will appear; that Messias was Jesus Christ, in that both Arians of old, and Socinians of late, as well as the Orthodox agree, his very Name carries it, He is Jesus the Saviour, He is the Christ, the anointed of God the Father. The Psalmist there represents him at first, as a Man, tho' Fairer than the rest of humane race;Ps. 45.2. but he subjoyns,
Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a right Scepter, Thou lovest righteousness and hatest wickedness, therefore God thy God hath anoin∣ted thee with the oyl of gladness above thy fel∣lows, where that God to whom the Apostro∣phe or exclamation refers, is called by the same name with that God, who is said to anoint him, in the original, and the whole Text is authentically apply'd to the Son of God by the Apostle,Hebr. 1.8, 9. even to that Son whom he there shews to be so far above all Ange∣lick Beings, that when his Father brings his  first begotten into the World, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him, which the Apostle quotes from the Psalmist,Psal. 97.7. not lite∣rally, according to the Hebrew, but accord∣ing to the then current translation of the Septuagint, which though varying from our Hebrew a little in words, is the same in sense. That the word by us translated
Gods, signi∣fies, and is apply'd to Created Beings, some∣times, we admit of, as no way prejudicial to truth; but if the Angels are commanded to worship Him, and that Angel whom Saint John would have adored, forbad him, be∣cause He, though an Angel,Rev. 22.9. was but a fellow Servant, a Creature, and order'd him to wor∣ship God, i. e. the Supreme Being, then that must be a Rule to Angels too, and they might not adore or worship a Creature, no more than the Apostle might; therefore the Son of God was no Creature, since they are commanded to worship him; therefore He must be God, for we know of no inter∣medial power between a Creator and a Crea∣ture; We are to worship the Lord our God,Mat. 4.10. and him onely are we to serve, as our Saviour himself alledges, but We are to worship the Son of God, Angels are to do so too, there∣fore the Son of God is God. And since we are gotten into this first Chapter of the E∣pistle to the Hebrews, we may add, in evi∣dence of our assertion, that other quotation, Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foun∣dations of the Earth,Ps. 102.25. and the Heavens are the  work of thy hands,Heb. 1.10, &c. they shall perish, but thou remainest, and they all shall wax old, as doth a garment, and as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail; which Text is so home to the proof of the Divi∣nity of the Son of God; that Schlicktingius twists and winds himself every way to evade its force in his Commentary on the place, and after all does but Magno conatu magnas nugas agere, as the Comedian, he makes a great stir to no purpose, He finds fault with the Author of the Epistle, If He, says he, design'd to perswade us Christ was the most high God, why did he not say so without any farther circumstance? the matter had been then past dispute: But we suppose it is so plain as nothing can be more already, it's as plain as those words he'd prescribe could have made it, to All, but men of perverse wits, who wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction; for if, as He owns, none but the Supreme God could be the Maker of Heaven and Earth, and the Creation of Heaven and Earth be here by the Apostle ascribed to the Son, then the inevitable con∣sequence which the Heretick would have had laid down at first, is, that the Son is the Supreme God, or God equal with the Fa∣ther: And whereas the main foundation of the Arrian and Socinian Heresie is, (as
San∣dius, another of that tribe, owns) that there was a time when the Son was not, if the Son  of God was indeed the Creator of all things, then he was before all things, and conse∣quently before time it self, and so their foundation is apparently false; for he that had a Being before time was, must of ne∣cessity be Eternal. But Schlicktingius would perswade us that, of the whole Text pro∣duced by the Apostle, onely the sence of the last words is to be referr'd to Christ, and that it's quoted onely to prove, that the Dominion of Christ shall not expire, but with the abolition of all things,Schlicktin∣gius in locum. Quod Regni Christi, quod nunc in terris administrat, ter∣minus, cum inimicorum ejus omnium abolitione, quos Coeli & Terrae ruina involvet, sit con∣junctus, are his words, That the end of Christ's Kingdom, which he administers in this World, is joyn'd with the utter aboli∣tion of all his Enemies, who shall be at once involv'd in the ruines of the Universe; As for the first part of the quotation, he makes it altogether impertinent, but that the Apostle took the Text whole as it lay, because he knew the Hebrews, to whom he wrote, were in no danger of interpreting the Creation of the World, as referring to Christ, whom they knew well enough to be no other than , a meer Man, and no more, and adds, that had the Apostle design'd any more by that Text, it had been al∣together beside his purpose: But here I con∣clude, our Adversary mistook the Apostle's meaning wilfully, which is this.
Writing to the Jews, his first design is to convince them of the Messiahship of Christ, whom they knew to be a Man, they had seen evidences enough of that in what he did and suffer'd among them, they had seen him cru∣cified, dead, and buried, so that they could not dream of his having onely a fantastick body, being onely an apparition, as some He∣reticks afterwards asserted, a phantasm, or a Spirit had no flesh and bones as they saw him have; The Hebrews were so certain of this, that they would believe him to be no more than a Man, a man weak and inconside∣rable, a perfect cheat, pretending to the noble character of being their long expect∣ed Messiah, but no way answering that Cha∣racter, having appear'd in no such glory as the Prophets had foretold, and having wrought no deliverance for Israel, accord∣ing to their reasonable expectations. Now, to convince them of their Error, he asserts Christ to have been the Son of God, v. 2. He proves the Messiah was to be so from their own Books, v. 5. He asserts Him to have been the express Image of God's Person, the brightness of his glory, the Ʋpholder of all things by his power, v. 3. That the Messiah was to be so, he proves from his superiority to Angels, v. 6, 7. Nay, he asserts him to be God, and proves the Messiah was to be so, v. 8, 9, 10, &c. In the Epistle afterwards he shews the accomplishment of the Legal Types in him, with the excellency of his office in
every respect, particularly of his Priesthood, the conclusion of all which to them is this, That if the Types of the Law were accom∣plisht in him, (which they could judge of by comparing the Law with his Actions) if He were the Son of God as himself asser∣ted and proved, he then could be no cheat, how meanly soever he appear'd in the world, but was capable of being the Messiah, and having own'd himself to be so (since he was incapable of deceit) He really was that Messiah they expected, and had wrought a Deliverance greater, and more valuable than they dream'd of, not only for them, but for all the World: and to make good this Truth, the applying the Creation of all things to him was not impertinent; God made the Worlds by his Son, v. 2. of this Chapter: Therefore he by whom the worlds were made, had a being himself before they were made, which is what St. John asserts of the Word which was God,John 1.1, 3. All things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made that was made, all which consider'd, it's no wonder the Psalmist prescribed so to the Church, Hearken O Daughter and consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thine own peo∣ple, and thy Father's house, so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty,Psal. 45.10, 11. for he is thy Lord God, and worship thou him; He that was God was really and lawfully to be wor∣shipped.
The next place I shall urge is that of the Prophet Isaiah,Isai. 9.6. Ʋnto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder, and he shall be called Won∣derful, Counseller, the mighty God, the ever∣lasting Father, the Prince of Peace: That this was a Prophecy of the Messiah to come, has never that I know of, been doubted, and it has been as universally apply'd to the blessed Jesus; but that he should be called the mighty God, and yet not be God, would appear very strange! The title of God is, we know very well, apply'd in Scripture to Angels, to Princes, to those to whom the Word of God was sent, but none of these ever wore the name of the mighty God; The mighty God here is emphatical and equiva∣lent to the Almighty, and the only God: and that we should be the less doubtful of his meaning; the same Son, who is called the mighty God, is called the everlasting Father, or the Father of eternity, the Father is as much as the Author or Commander of eter∣nity, which could not without absurdity be applyed to him, who once was not, or had no being himself. The Chaldee paraphrast calls him The Messi∣as living to eternity, the name indeed is very proper to God the Father, nor could it with any probability be applyed to the Son, did not our Saviour himself solve the difficulty effectually when he tells us,Job. 10.30.
I and my Fa∣ther are one; if they be One, the same Epi∣thets  belong to both; and yet that we may the less doubt to whom the whole text be∣longs,Ephes. 2.14 2 Thess. 3.16. Heb. 7.2. this mighty God and everlasting Father is styl'd the Prince of Peace, so the blessed Jesus is said to be our Peace, to be the Lord of Peace, and the just successor of that Priest of the most high God Melchizedech, who was king of Righteousness and king of Peace. Again the Prophet Jeremiah, in that plain∣est Prophecy of his concerning the certain Advent of the Messias, teaches us thus,Jer. 23.5, 6. Be∣hold the days shall come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and this is the name whereby he shall be called the Lord our righteousness, That name there too is applied to him which belongs to none but to the supreme God; It's the name, as Ben Maimon assures us, which signifies the Divine essence purely by its self, without any respect to the Crea∣tures: now that the Divine Essence it self should be attributed to a meer Man is down∣right blasphemy; but here it's attributed to that Branch promised to
David, which all the antient Rabbins, and the eldest Fathers of the Church interpret of the Messiah, that Christ was the Messiah every one who re∣ceives the Gospel must acknowledge, there∣fore Jesus the Messiah was God, and so the Lord our righteousness. If we farther com∣pare this with that of the Prophet Isaiah, Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righte∣ousness and strength, In the Lord shall all the  seed of Israel be justified and shall glory,Isai. 45.24, 25. 1 Cor. 1.30. and that again with that of the Apostle, Christ Jesus is made of God unto us wisdom and righ∣teousness and sanctification and redemption, We shall find somewhat more attributed to Christ than lyes within the power of the holyest meer Man that ever was or could be in the world; Israel is to be saved, Man to be justified by him: now let a Man be never so pure, never so innocent, if he be but a meer Man his Righteousness and Innocence is nor can be no more than may serve his own necessity, it is what God requires at every one of our hands; it's true for ten righ∣teous Men God would have spared Sodom, but that was only temporally, God's judg∣ments might have been deferred for a while, and yet the
Sodomites have been damn'd at last: But the Righteousness of Christ is meritorious and available on our account, he is our righteousness, and consequently by him and upon his account we are justified from the guilt and punishment of sin, our sins being pardoned through his merits and for his sake, and we instead of damnation, being made Inheritors with the Saints in glory: hence it comes to pass, that we, who are forbidden to glory in Man or in any child of man,v. 31. because there is no help in them, are allowed and encouraged to glory in the Lord, and well we may since he may be and is our Righteousness, therefore he whom we are allowed to glory in must be  more than Man, but he is no Angel, there∣fore he must be God. The last place I shall insist on is that of the Prophet Micah,Micah 5.2 But thou Bethlehem E∣phrata tho' thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth to me, that is to be ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from ever∣lasting; That this Text referred to the Messiah we are put beyond doubt by that of the Evangelist, where he tells us that when Herod had demanded of the Jewish chief Priests and Scribes where Christ should he born, they presently answered him it should be in Bethlehem of Judaea,Math. 2.4, 5, 6. and bring this Text to prove their assertion, the appli∣cation then being certain, we may observe how directly this Text contradicts the Ar∣rian and Socinian Position: They say, there was a time when the Son was not, the Pro∣phet says, his goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, or as the Septuagint, . His goings out are from the beginning from the days of eternity, if his goings forth were from eternity, he himself was from eternity too, if from eternity, there was then no time wherein he was not, therefore he was God, for there's nothing to which eternity can be truely attributed but God; or if we should with some learned Men translate the Hebrew word  from the East, our In∣terpretation would not suffer at all, it would
then be, his goings forth have been from the east from the days of old, therefore he was or had a Being before the date of this Pro∣phecy; therefore, he had a Being before he was born of the blessed Virgin, therefore he was eternal, therefore he was God: I might have urged more passages out of the Old Testament, but these may suffice to evi∣dence that That Messias of whom the Pro∣phets spoke, was believed by them to be God as well as Man; their Prophecies indeed were by that means the more obscure and unintelligible to the Jews, who saw Christ frequently, but they saw only his Humane Nature, they understood no more of Him, nor did they then expect their Messias should be God, but only some great Man, which they saw the blessed Jesus as to his outward appearance was not, and therefore they pick'd a quarrel with him as guilty of Bla∣sphemy,Joh. 10.33. because he being a Man made him∣self God. We come to consider His declarations of Himself, and his Apostles declarations con∣cerning Him, in the New Testament, which we shall find of such a nature as may suffi∣ciently prove the Divinity of the Son of God, and here we'l begin, as Enjedine a subtle and industrious Unitarian does, with that of S. Matthew, where having given us an account of the Angels charge to Joseph concerning his espoused wife, then with
child by the power of the Holy Ghost, he tells us, that in all this, that of the Prophet was fulfilled, Behold a Virgin shall be with child,Matth. 1.23. and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his name Immanuel, which is being interpreted, God with us, this the Evangelist quotes from Isai. 7.14. Here Enjedine makes the Evan∣gelist a very impertinent Writer, alledging Old Testaments-texts upon every little hint, tho' never so far from the purpose; which argues very little reverence for an inspired Writer: He tells us The name Immanuel could not signifie that Christ was God, because the Prophet where he names him, says he was sometime to be born, that he should eat butter and honey, that he should sometime be ignorant of the difference between good and bad, &c. therefore he could not be God; but all these things were and were necessarily true of him as he was Man, since he assumed a real and not a fantastick body. We know he was born in the fulness of time, taking flesh of the Virgin Mary, that what was the dyet of other infants in those parts of the world, was his too, that it might be evident to all the world he had assumed a real body like other men, in every thing but sin; We believe his Humane Body grew and increas'd as that of other men, and that rational Soul joyned with his body, by which he was a true Man, had its advances in understand∣ing, tho' at a greater and more early rate than others, all this we believe, and yet
Christ might be God and God with us for all this: For the reality of his Humanity was not any prejudice to the truth of his Divi∣nity, he was perfect Man and no less per∣fect God. Our adversary questions farther whether the name Immanuel be here given to Christ or not, because he finds him no where else called by that name: But neither was there any reason for that, this prophetical name being chiefly designed to signifie his Nature,Enjed. in locum. as Christ was to signifie his Office, and since 'tis certain the name does belong to some body (for it's not put there for no∣thing) either it belongs to Christ, or that Author ought to have named some body to whom it did belong, but he is silent in that matter, therefore we conclude it belongs to the Son of God. He alledges farther, that supposing the name Immanuel be the name of Jesus in the Text, it signifies no more, than that God was in and with him as he was with other of his Prophets: but that's impertinent, since the name doth not import that God was in or with him, but that, upon his Incarna∣tion, God was with us, i. e. God did then assume flesh and appear to and come among us, which could not be unless he were God. He tells us, Moses might as well have been called Emmanuel while he converst with the Israelites, and the Ark of God (espe∣cially since the Israelites expected to be saved by it, and upon its being brought into the field the Philistines cryed out,
God is come  into the Camp) but was Moses conceived of the Holy Ghost? was the Ark of God really a living Saviour? God might have given them what names himself pleas'd, but we no where find that he gave them this, which shews that he designed to appropriate this name wholly to his own Son, when he should send him into the world, that under that very state of exinanition or humiliation we should see him, we should know how great a Being converst with us. What else he objects is absurd even to ridiculousness, viz. That many since that time, have born the name of Immanuel, and yet we never took them for gods, as several Emperours of Constantinople, and many private men, among the rest Immanuel Tremellius, as he instances, a learned Protestant of later years: He might as well have proved, that because se∣veral Jews and others have been called Moses, and yet none of them were Lawgivers to Israel, therefore Moses the Son of Amram was no such Legislator; or that, because there were several Jews who bore the name of Josua or Jesus, who were not the Savi∣ours of the world, that therefore our Jesus was not so; what signifies what name I or another fix upon my Son? Or what's more ordinary than for Men to baptize their chil∣dren by Scripture-names, without ever re∣flecting on or knowing the meaning of those names? But where God gives a name, and where the Spirit of God interprets it, nei∣ther
the Name nor the Interpretation can be insignificant, nor is it so here, but being by the Prophet of old assign'd to, by the Evan∣gelist here applyed to the Son of God, it suf∣ficiently teaches us that He was God eter∣nal, even God with us. In the next place we may consider that Command of our Saviour himself to his A∣postles when he gave them their Commissi∣on for executing their Apostolical Functi∣ons,Matth. 28.19. Go ye and teach all nations baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Where the Son and the Holy Ghost being set equally with the Father, as the objects of our Baptismal Faith, either prove to us their certain equa∣lity, or seem of a very dangerous import, ready to impress upon us false notions of the Deity, and to make us think those really e∣qual, whom we see by Christ himself joyned together, without any particular mark of di∣stinction or inequality, when indeed they are not: But this were to represent the Evan∣gelist under a very ill Character; I shall not insist upon that in this place, that the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are here named as three distinct Beings, and one as much and really a person as the other,Enjed. & Wolzogeni∣us in loc. (which the Socinians de∣ny of the Holy Ghost) but shall only take notice of those evasions they make use of, for here they tell us, That we may as well infer from that of the Apostle concerning the Israelites,1 Cor.
10.2. That they were all Baptized  unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea, that Moses was the most high God, as that Christ was God from this command of Mens being baptized in his name; We know well e∣nough, that to be baptized into Moses is, to be initiated into that Church which is governed by that Law given by God to Mo∣ses: and that to be baptized into Christ is, to be entred into that Church which receives God's Law as delivered by Christ; but where, in any divine precept, do we find God the Father and Moses, and the Holy Ghost linked together, as if there were an equality among them? We are told indeed by Wolzogenius, that that passage after the Israelites having gone through the red Sea, is a parallel,Exod. 14.31. Having seen that great work which God had done upon the Aegyptians, having drowned them, while themselves were safe, we are told, the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, or in the Lord, as your Margin reads it, and in his servant Moses; but that's indeed no parallel, for there's distinction enough made between God and Moses, one is the Lord, the other but the servant: but there is no such di∣stinction in the Text, no servant, no inti∣mation of an inferiority, but only the order of nature followed, and the Father put be∣fore the Son, and both before the Holy Ghost which proceeds from both: Then, whereas Enjedine tells us, That to be bap∣tised into Moses
was not to believe that Moses  was the most high God, and consequently, That to be baptised into the name of the Son of God, is not to believe any such thing of him, he forgets, that to be baptised into the name of the Father, is to declare our be∣lief of His being the most high God, by his own confession: (yet that belief is the very Character by which those Hereticks distin∣guish themselves from us, whom they call Trinitarians) and if that be own'd, our baptising in the name of Christ, must infer our acknowledgment of his Divinity, since the Father and the Son are joyned together in the same expression, and we are baptised alike, and as much into the name and belief of one, as of the other. But they would prove that Christ is not here made equal with his Father, because S. Paul afterwards ranks him but with himself and others, as in his reproof of the Corinthians for saying,1 Cor. 1.12 I am of Paul and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Here indeed they confess there is a real superiority in Christ to any of these mentioned with him: That acknowledgment was inevitable: But farther, tho' the A∣postle condemn the Corinthians for calling themselves by his name, or the name of any of his fellow labourers, yet he approves their calling themselves by the name of Christ: for so he tells them with respect to Creatures and their circumstances,2 Cor. 3.22 23. All are theirs, whe∣ther Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things
to come, all are yours; but then he changes his stile, and ye are Christs, and Christ is Gods, and so he was, the Messiah, the Anoin∣ted sent by God into the world. In conclusion they tell us, that these words were never designed as a formulary of Baptism, which they prove, because there is no account in Scri∣pture, particularly in the History of the Acts, of any baptised by this form, but will they assert there was no form at all, no sig∣nificant words made use of in the admini∣stration of that ordinance? that would be to leave the meaning of the outward Cere∣mony uncertain, and to take away the Sa∣cramental nature of baptism; if there were any words used, either they must allow these, or assign some other, which none that I know of have attempted. It's true, they say, the Eunuch only declared to Philip, before his Baptism,Acts 8.37. that He believed Jesus Christ was the Son of God, and there was no need of more, Philip questioned not his belief of a God, He was a Jewish Proselyte, and if he owned the Son-ship of Christ, he would by consequence believe whatsoever should be revealed to the world by him: But we read not of any words used by
Philip in the act of baptising him; they say this silence proves the words in the Text we are treat∣ing of, were not used: I say no, but Christ's particular institution being very well known, and his disciples using to obey his commands, S. Luke's silence infers that Philip used those  very words so instituted, otherwise the Evan∣gelist would have taken notice of some o∣ther; and thus after all, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being joyn'd toge∣ther in the words of institution in Christian Baptism without any mark of inferiority, these words prove the Son of God to be God equal with his Father. The next place we shall insist upon is that remarkable beginning of S. John's Gospel, In the beginning was the Word,John 1.1, 2, 3. and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, the same was in the beginning with God, all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made; where we have these two great men Erasmus and Grotius agreeing with us, That they are an unan∣swerable argument of the Divinity of the Son of God, who yet are apt enough to betray that article of our Faith, by weakning other considerable evidences of the same truth. As for the person here meant by the , the Word, the Socinians themselves as far as I can find, excepting the Annotator on the Racovian Catechism, acknowledge, that it is the Son of God: to tell all their discour∣ses, for the eluding the force of this Text, would be a work too tedious, only this we may observe, they tell us,
That whereas Moses begins his History of the Creation with a like expression to this of our Evan∣gelist, its rational to believe, that the E∣vangelist here is only going to describe a  second or a better Creation, or rather the renovation of all things by Jesus Christ, which had been ruined by the fall of our first parents; which renovation of things began at the time of our Saviour's Incar∣nation, and therefore the Evangelist means no more by that phrase, In the beginning was the word, but that Jesus Christ the word of God had a being when the Almighty God first set upon this work of re-creation or renovation of all things. And that indeed the design of the Evangelist is only to obviate an ob∣jection, that might be made on the behalf of John the Baptist, who stood fair to have been taken for the Messias, because he first entred upon his office, and preached repentance, and baptised, which were truly Evangeli∣cal works; whereas Christ himself lay hid, and wholly undiscovered to the world: But to my best apprehension, there was very little need of all this care, for tho' some such thoughts might have entred into Men's heads when they were all full of expectation of a Messias, that John, whose holy and severe life, and whose very useful doctrine was ge∣nerally known, might be that Messias, as we see by that message which the Jews sent to him from Jerusalem, Art thou the Christ or Elias, or that Prophet, or who art thou? tho' men might entertain some such thoughts, the Evangelist represents John the Baptist as very careful to prevent any such dangerous mistakes; therefore he not only answers nega∣tively
to their particular enquiries, viz. That he was not Christ, nor Elias, nor that Prophet, but he answered positively too to their Gene∣ral question,v. 19-23. that He was the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths streight, as saith the Prophet Esaias. Now the Baptist being so very much reverenc'd, and so mightily followed as he was, his answer could not but be spread about through all Judaea, and the expectations of Men be the more rais'd, be∣cause the person there prophesied of by
Isaias, was to be the forerunner of the Messias: he therefore being come, the other could not be far behind. Besides, if we interpret the Gospel of the glad tydings of Salvation brought to all mankind, the Evangelists expression will be untrue. For, not to men∣tion the Promise to our first Parents, and those afterwards repeated to the Patriarchs, and frequently declared and enlarged upon by the Prophets, that of the Angel to Za∣charias, the Father of S. John Baptist, and that of the same Angel to the blessed Vir∣gin (and they were einly tydings of great joy, and the real beginnings of that which is peculiarly stiled the Gospel) both these were before the very conception of our Saviour, therefore He as a meer man, was not, or had no being in the beginning of the Gospel; and doubtless the Evangelist here, in the beginning of his History, taking up the very expressions of Moses in the beginning of  Genesis, and using his very words as tran∣slated by the Septuagint, supposed his Rea∣ders would take his words in the same sence as they understand those of Moses, and so, in the beginning in both places, signifies as much as before there was any thing existent: so before any thing, but the eternal God him∣self, had a being, God out of nothing, pro∣duced all things: and so before any thing, God excepted, had a being, the Word was: therefore that Word was God, because God only could exist in the beginning or before the Creation of all things: and thus the Evangelist says something peculiar of Christ, and what might really set him above the Baptist, or blessed Angels, or any other Creatures whatsoever: Otherwise the A∣postle, according to the
Socinian fancy, would have taken pains to prevent an Ob∣jection never brought, at such a time too as never any Man could have rais'd it, for he wrote his Gospel, according to all accounts, about the 90th. year of our Saviour, toward the end of his own very long life, and when the Gospel was spread in all quarters, and Heresies had gotten a great footing in the Church, when that Objection about John Baptist would have appeared nonsensical and ridiculous: Whereas, had he design'd his Master's honour or the advantage of mankind, he would have made haste, and have pen'd his Gospel very early, when such poor ob∣jections might have appeared with some  countenance. But it follows, In the begin∣ning the Word was with God, this seems to prove very plainly, that, if the Word here spoken of be indeed the Son of God, he had a being before he was visible in our Nature, and that above, or in Heaven, or in the pe∣culiar place of the Divine presence; which granted, is enough to destroy all the Soci∣nian Doctrine of Christ's being a meer Crea∣ture, or a Man like one of us, and no more. That Christ really had such a Being antece∣dent to his Incarnation, we have reason to believe on the authority of concurrent Texts of Scripture, for so our Saviour calls him∣self before the cavilling Jews,John 6.51. That Bread which came down from Heaven: But if he came down from heaven, He must first have been there, and that at least some time be∣fore he told them so. The Jews in general, nay his own Disciples, thought this a very hard saying, an expression that was very hard to be understood; and so it was to those who were wholly taken up with carnal thoughts; our Saviour cures their amazement or incredulity with a strange intimation, What and if you should see the Son of man a∣scend up into heaven?v. 61, 62. This question plainly enough asserts, that he had been with God before they converst with him here on earth, and this Socinus himself acknowledges, for he knew not how to disengage himself from the force of this, and that yet more asto∣nishing declaration of our Saviour to
Nico∣demus,  No man hath ascended up to heaven,Joh. 3.13. but He that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven; which ex∣pression, according to the Socinian Ratio∣nal way of exposition, as they call it, is meer riddle or contradiction: but accord∣ing to the Catholick Faith concerning the eternal generation of the Son of God, is easie and intelligible to every man. For if it were God that was manifest in the flesh, and continued the same eternal God still, He might in his divine nature always be with his Father, and yet in his Humane Nature be conversant among Men, at the same time. But tho' Socinus and his followers sometimes own the literal truth of these expressions, they cannot hold true to what they allow, for one while they'd change it's nature, and make it figurative, So Jesus Christ was in heaven by the divine raptures or meditations of his Soul,Explic. loc. S Script. Op. v 1. p. 146. or he was in heaven by that per∣fect knowledge he had of all divine matters; thus Socinus himself: But he quits it at last, and flyes to that wonderful discovery, filium hominis verè & propriè de coelo descendisse & in coelo fuisse, That the Son of Man was truly and properly in heaven, and descended from thence, before he discours'd these things with the Jews. But would you know how? it was as S. Paul, who tho' but a meer Man, was caught up into the third heavens,2
Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. into Pa∣radise, and heard unspeakable words which it s not lawful for a man to utter; so the blessed  Jesus was taken up bodily into heaven, and there was conversant some time with God, and was there as in a School, taught those things he was afterwards to preach, and do in the world: Would you know when? It was, say some, when he was twelve years old, and his parents mist him at their re∣turn from Jerusalem, and after three days found him among the Doctors.Wolzog. in Jo. c. 3. v. 13. Wolzoge∣nius supposes it during the forty days fast in the wilderness, for whereas Socinus thinks it highly fit that as Moses the type was with God upon the Mount, that he might there learn those Laws and Ordinances he was to deliver to the Israelites, so it was very rea∣sonable, Christ the Antitype, should have some such like converse with God, for the same purpose, in a nobler place, therefore this Author, to carry on the parallel the far∣ther, would pitch it on that time to which the Evangelists allot forty days, because Moses was the same space of time in the Mount, and this was the great Invention of Laelius Socinus, which cost him so much study, so many fastings, and earnest prayers to Al∣mighty God: and Schlichtingius pursues the fancy with a great deal of heat and vio∣lence; Crellius joyns with it too, so that this may pass for their general solution of the dif∣ficulty, a difficulty which could never be found till they created it, and with their mighty pretences to
Reason and clear interpretations of difficult places, shut all true Reason and  clear Scripture-light out of doors. It's cer∣tain, that the Evangelists mention nothing of this formal ascent into heaven, and is it likely that they who set down all the cir∣cumstances of his birth, to his very wrap∣ping in swadling clothes, and lying in a manger, they who mention his flight into Aegypt, his wandring from his parents, his several ascents to Jerusalem, his Transfigu∣ration on mount Tabor (a matter much less glorious and important) his talk with Moses and
Elias, (a very unnecessary dis∣course, if he had learn'd all those things from God himself before) is it likely, that those who set down these things so pun∣ctually; nay, S. Luke himself (of whom, when it serves their turns, they say, that He was so inquisitive, as to omit nothing of consequence wherein our Saviour was con∣cern'd) that these should omit so prodigious an Ascent into heaven as this, which would naturally have conciliated so great an au∣thority to his person and his doctrine, and would have been very necessary too if he had been no more than a meer man? Had there really been such an Ascent, it would have been very improper in his younger years, for besides the weakness and insufficiency of that age for the most divine speculations, we are told plainly, after that dispute of his with the Doctors, and his return with, and obe∣dience to his parents,Luke 2.52. that He encreased in wisdom, and in stature, and in favour with  God and Man, which must be false and ridi∣culous, if he had been in Heaven before, and had been fully instructed in all divine mat∣ters by God himself. As for that second time allotted for this Ascent, viz. immedi∣ately after his Baptism, the Evangelists tell us plainly, the design of his being led by the Spirit into the wilderness was, that he might be tempted of the Devil:Luke 4.2. Nay, and as S. Luke asserts, He was tempted by the Devil forty days, this could not have been true, had he been in Heaven any or all those days; and whereas the Evangelist adds, that in those days he did eat nothing, and when they were ended he afterwards hungred; this story must be both false and disgraceful too: for how could he, who had corporeally attained the glorious vision of the Almighty, be so soon affected with the inconveniences of flesh and blood, when we never find Moses, tho' fast∣ing as long several times, complaining of any such hunger? Or can we believe the Devil, so very diligent and violent an enemy to Man's happiness, would have given our Sa∣viour so glorious a respite, which, in all probability too, must have been so prejudi∣cial to himself? When the Socinians can shew us any thing like a proof of their dreams in God's word, we'l consider it, till then we'l entertain it only as a ridicu∣lous, not to say a blasphemous Romance, and adhere to the natural and genuine interpre∣tation of these words, the Word was with
God, viz. that Jesus Christ, or, he who in his humane nature bore that name, was from eternity actually existent in the presence, and in the bosom of his father, that therefore that Prayer of his was rational and intelligible, Now O father glorifie thou me with thy self,Joh. 17.5. with that glory which I had with thee before the world was: This Prayer is intelligible enough, according to the common Doctrine of the Christian Church, that Christ had a being before the beginning of the world: quit that sence and we have nothing but figure upon figure, incoherent, inconsistent, and very profound Heterodoxy and nonsense. And may we not fairly assert that old way of explaining such passages as these, when the Evangelist in the continuance of his dis∣course, says plainly, and the Word was God? That the Word was with God, say they, is as much as if the Apostle had said, tho' he was unknown to the world, he was very well known to God in his privacy, and that's very likely to be true, if God be Omniscient, that he knew his Son: But if it be said, He only knew him, then it's false; for God him∣self had, by his holy Angels before, made him known to the blessed Virgin, to his sup∣posed father Joseph, and to the Shepherds of Bethlehem, and to the Wise Men of the East; nay, he was known to most of them, by the name of the Son of God, by the office of saving his people from their sins, &c. and good old
Simeon, in his Eucharistick song,  gives us a compleat Compendium of the Go∣spel,Luke 2.31, 33. and we are sure, He knew the infant Jesus to be the salvation of God, who was to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of God's people Israel. Here then we find, the adversaries of our Faith wholly mi∣staken: in the consequent gradation of the Evangelists, they are yet engag'd in more difficulties, but what methods do they fix upon to disengage themselves? Accord∣ing to the ordinary acceptation of the words, a man would be ready to conclude that the Evangelist meant as he said, and that if the Word was God, he was so indeed, and there∣fore not simply a Creature or a meer Man; but (what may look very suspitiously) it's observable, that those who are unwil∣ling to own any such thing as a Mystery in the Objects of our Faith, make every word in this beginning of S. John's Gospel My∣sterious; so, by God we must understand Man, or one that really is no more than a Man, only honoured with the name of God, as being his Deputy or Vicegerent, or as the Psalmist speaks to Kings,Psal. 82.6, 7. I have said you are Gods, and all of you are children of the most high, but ye shall dy like Men, and fall like one of the Princes: Well, we allow it; Prin∣ces are so styl'd there in a figurative sence, because of their
deputation from heaven, and the derivation of their authority from thence: And in David we have a King, a Man after God's own heart, but was ever  any thing like this in this text spoken of him? Would not the Author be impudent∣ly ridiculous, who should preface a History of David's life thus, In the beginning of the Israelitish Kingdom was David, for so he really had a being, as soon as ever Saul had any title to that kingdom; and David was with God, i. e. He was known only to him, for God had cut out his Prophet Samuel a way to anoint him King unknown to Saul, to pre∣vent any jealousie in him of any such inten∣ded Heir to his Crown, and Israel in ge∣neral were as ignorant of his Unction to their government; and David was God, because he held the place of God, and in his room and by his appointment managed that people? You see the reason of beginning so would be the same which these Men assign to our Evangelist: but would you not look on such an Historian as an impious blasphe∣mer, or could ever any, without the spirit of Prophecy, imagine, that by such ex∣pressions any thing of this nature could be meant? It's true again, that God promis'd Moses,Exod.
4.16 c. 7.1. he should be instead of God to his bro∣ther Aaron, that he should be a God to Pha∣raoh King of Egypt, and what looks yet greater, that Aaron should be his Prophet; We would conclude that by these expressions God meant no more, than that Moses should interpret the Will of God, or make it known to Aaron, dictating always to him what He should say and do in the name of God:  and that Pharaoh should shew a respect to him as to a Divine Person, and should be no more able to offer him violence or to do any injury to him, how angry so ever he might be, than if he had really been a God: and that, because of his slow speech, Aaron should deliver his mind and errand to Pha∣raoh for him: this Interpretation is natural, and the sequel of the story confirms it; but would ever any Man, that desired to be so∣berly understood, have said of Moses, even when he was upon the Mount, that Moses was with God, and that Moses was God? No Author sacred or prophane can afford us any parallel to this bold and impious asser∣tion, that the Word was God, or that any Person was God, and yet no more than a meer Man. Socinus tells us, that certainly if God had designed that we should believe Jesus Christ was the most high God, he would have told us so in plain terms; Now had not Socinus himself and his Partners endeavour'd to have perswaded the world otherwise, all mankind would have concluded this expressi∣on of the Evangelist such a plain passage as he required; and was the want of a single particle enough so to obscure the whole discourse of the Evangelist, that, without a 1000. fictitious stories added to him, he must become absolutely unintelligible? God in that expression, the Word was with God, and in that again, the same was in the be∣ginning with God, is, by themselves under∣stood
to signifie the most high God, and why should it be otherwise interpreted in the middle sentence? But Schlicktingius here sets upon us with an absurd paraphrase of his own contrivance, the necessary conse∣quence, of the current interpretation of the Evangelist, For, says he, it will amount to this as if the Evangelist had said,Schlicktin. in locum. In the beginning was that one God, and that one God was with that one God, and that one God was that one God, and that same one God was in the beginning with that one God, and that one God made all things by that one God: Absurd and ridiculous enough! but our own learned Dr. Hammond has furnished us with one of a more genuine and sensible complexion, thus, In the begin∣ning of the World, before all time, before any thing was created, the Son of God had a real be∣ing, and that Being with his Father, of whom he was begotten from all eternity, and was him∣self eternal God, and being by his Father, in his eternal purpose, designed to be the Messias, who was among the Jews known by the title of the Word of God, and is here fitly express'd by that name, The Word, This eternal Word of God, I mean, by whom all things were at first created, He brought with him the Doctrine of life, &c. Here we have the meaning of the Catholick Church set down, and a full explication of the Evangelist, without any such nonsence or Tautology as Schlicktingius would amuse us with: But as if the Spirit
of God had resolved to prevent the Socinian Cavils, the Evangelist, to make us more certain who this Word was, adds this to his Character,ver. 3. All things were made by him, and without him was not made any thing that was made; but to evade this they give us a new cast of their subtilty and boldness: For here the word, All things, must lose its sence, and be understood only of some particulars; for they recur to their , their original false principle, which is, that in the beginning is only in the begin∣ning of the Gospel, and so by all things here are meant only such things as have a particu∣lar respect to the promulgation of the Gospel, of all which things he was the Author; but their first principle is yet very far from be∣ing made good, nay had our Evangelist ex∣presly said, In the beginning of the Gospel was the Word, which yet neither was, nor could be his meaning, All things were made by him, could not admit of their restrained sence, the following words forbid it, with∣out him was nothing made that was made: and for fear these words should be liable to any exception, the Apostle interprets their meaning by that, He was in the World, and the World was made by him,v. 10. and the World knew him not: But here (rather than not elude the force of the words) they will in one verse make the word the World, to carry no fewer than three several sences, as it's three times repeated; for first by his
being in the world is meant, his Conversing with all men in general, for there by the World is meant All men, by the World which was made by him is meant, all those who were created a-new in Christ to good works, they are those upon whom his Doctrine had its due effect;Schlicktin. in locum. Renovantur autem & restauran∣tur homines per sermonem cum ad fidem in ipsum adducuntur, &c.
Men are renewed and restored by the word, when they are brought to Faith in him, and draw a new Spirit, even the Spirit of Adoption, thro' him, whereby they mortifie the Flesh and the Works of the Flesh, from sinners and slaves to vice they are made Saints, and from persons condemn'd and lost, they are made certain of eternal life: Such persons then as these constitute the second World, that World which was made by him: but because it would sound very odly, that these new Creatures, Men thus renewed in the Spirit of their minds, should not know Him who had renewed or created them again, therefore they have thought of a third World, that World which did not know him, and that is the World of obstinate and contumacious Men, who would not listen to the Word, tho' speaking never so power∣fully: nor could the Word work at all on them, tho' in it self of so efficacious a na∣ture: those indeed are sometimes called the World, because they are men of earthly and degenerate minds, Men, who give them∣selves  wholly to mind earthly things; but never yet did any inspired Writer call Ho∣ly Men, Men converted from the vanities of this World, from all the Lusts and Follies attending it, never did they call such by the name of Worldly Men: But is not this a very hard shift, to chop and change so often in so very short a sentence? Whereas if we believe, as we ought, that this Habitable World, and all things therein were created at first out of nothing by the Son of God, the sence will be easie enough, that God the Son was in this World, this World the Uni∣versal fabrick of which his own hand had made, and yet the World, so far as capable of sence and knowledge, understood it not, or were not able to distinguish between the Creator and a
meer Creature. That we should believe the Son of God made all things at first, the Scripture seems to take a great deal of care, for so S. Paul teaches us, that God created all things by Jesus Christ, Ephes. 3.9. but much more fully, Coloss. 1.15, 16. Where giving thanks to God the Father, who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, he describes that Son thus, He is the image of the Invisible God, the first-born of every Creature, for by him were all things created, that were in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities or Powers, all things were created by him and for  him, and he is before all things, and by him all things consist, and the Author of the Epistle is acknowledged to apply that of the Psal∣mist to our Saviour,Heb. 1.10. Thou Lord in the begin∣ning hast laid the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy hands: A man would be apt to think these Texts were very plain and positive; yet here too they'l make their impious attempts, for All things in heaven and in earth, must mean only An∣gels and Men; be it so, how come the An∣gels to be renewed by the Word? They will not say the fallen Angels were reduced to a state of Salvation, S. Jude will contradict them there, who tells us,Jude v. 6. The Angels which kept not their first state, but left their own ha∣bitation, God hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness to the judgment of the great day: They cannot say the Good Angels were so restored or renewed, for they were created absolutely happy, and they had not lost that happiness; and our Saviour himself asserts, that He came not to call the Righteous, but sinners to repentance, that the Whole need not a Physician, but those that are Sick: The words then are as they sound to us, they are general, and whereas the A∣postle particularises in Thrones and Domi∣nions, &c. after those general words, all things visible and invisible, it's only to sup∣ply us with an argument à Majori ad Mi∣nus, that if even those superiour happy Be∣ings, who might seem almost to be above
the rank of Creatures, if they yet ow'd their first originals to the hand of the Son of God, how much more may we conclude the visible or grosser parts of the Universe might owe their beginnings to his power? Indeed the design of the Apostle is to set before our eyes in the beginning of his Go∣spel, the wonderful Condescension of the Son of God on behalf of miserable sinners, so to work in us a due fence of what we owe to so infinite a goodness, and a forward readi∣ness to accept Salvation from so all-suffici∣ent a hand, upon the terms propounded, i. e. Faith and Obedience; but what Topic could the Holy Pen-Man better begin his design with, than from that of Christ's being God blessed for ever, or from all eternity, from his existing always in the glorious presence of his Almighty Father, and being infi∣nitely blest in himself, as being One and equal with his Father, (for a compleat and every way perfect Ʋnion or Identity can on∣ly be between equals.) The Evangelist proves this eternal Greatness by that suffici∣ent argument of his being the great and sole Creator of all things. This God, this Creator of all things, appeared upon Earth, where, even those who were the Work of his hands, were grown to that Blindness through the greatness of their Sins, and the corruption of their natures, that tho' the whole Creation long'd for the glorious day of his
appearance, Yet all the Worl'd  seem'd utterly unable to discover him: this glorious and eternal Word yet assumed Hu∣mane Nature, that he might be Visible to the eye of the World, and that he might be able to offer himself a Sacrifice for the Sins of the World, that he might atone his Father's just anger, and reconcile us to him by his own most precious blood: To this end He underwent all the inconveniences ordinarily attending Mankind, and it was a severe be∣ginning of his debasement or humiliation for our sakes, that whereas he honour'd the Nation of the Jews by being born among them, and whereas, out of particular com∣miseration for that poor lost people, he made himself first known among them, and Preach'd, and did Miracles, that they might the better understand him; yet, after all, he came to his own, but his own received him not, i. e. the generality of that Nation re∣jected him, but those who did receive him were empower'd by him to become the Sons of God, they were so influenced, assisted, sup∣ported, and dignified by his Sacred Spirit, that they attained the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they were able to cry Abba Fa∣ther, or to call upon God with that con∣fidence and security, which a dearly loved Son may have in an indulgent and well pleas∣ed Father; He was such, because that Holy Lamb, to whom John the Baptist gave his testimony, did really take away the Sins of the World, and this Lamb whose nature and
goodness was so little understood, appear'd yet (especially after his Resurrection, when their minds were opened) to his Disciples, full of Grace and Truth, they beholding his glory as the glory of the only Begotten Son of God; such lustre would appear in him to the true believers eyes through the thick veil of his flesh, and all the dismal clouds of his unparallel'd sufferings. Now this glory which the Apostles saw in Christ, must be somewhat capable of distinguishing him from others, he might have appear'd as a Son of God at large, in the same sense as all those who live piously are called the Sons of God: but that would not at all have answer'd to what the Evangelist tells us his Glory made him appear, i. e. the only begotten Son of God, begotten of God in such a manner as ne∣ver any meer Creature could be, glorious in such a Manner as no meer Man was ever capable of; but if he could be no Creature, he could be nothing but God, there being no Intermedial Essence between the Creator and the Creature; If then it be the distin∣guishing Character of the Almighty, that he has had a being from eternity, that he is God, that He has made all things, and that there is nothing made but what is made by him: that He has made the World, that
He has created all things visible and invisible, whe∣ther in heaven or in the earth, that He has founded the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of his hands: if all these things are the  Characters of the most high God, Our Sa∣viour justly wears them all. He was in the beginning before all things, He was then with God, He was God, all things were made by him, and nothing without him, He made the World, and all things in it whether visible or invisible, &c. therefore he was the most high God: notwithstanding which exalted nature, he was pleas'd to manifest himself in the flesh, or to become flesh, which could be no diminution of his eternal glory, infi∣nity being absolutely incapable of any such lessening; The Godhead was not converted in∣to flesh, as the Athanasian Creed expresses it, i. e. by taking our Nature, the Son of God did not cease to be God, but he took the man∣hood into God, that which was limited and finite into that which was infinite. Thus have I very largely insisted on this beginning of S. John's Gospel, it being such a dis∣course as asserts the Divine Nature of the Son with the greatest clearness and the most of circumstance of all others, and therefore the whole body of the Socinians level all their skill and strength against it, knowing very well, that a conquest here gain'd would go a great way to make them victorious in every quarter. In the next place, Our Saviour dis∣coursing with the
Jews, who were always seeking occasion to quarrel both his words and actions, when we may assure our selves, that if he had but the discretion of an or∣dinarily  prudent Man, he would have spoken with the greatest caution in the World,Joh. 10.30 He then tells them, without any limitation or allay, I and my father are one.Schlicktin. in locum. Hoc Christi dictum ad essentiam trahere nugari est, says Schlicktingius roundly, It's perfect fooling to infer an essential unity be∣tween the Father and the Son from these words of Christ: Mirum est hunc locum urgeri à qui∣busdam,Enjed. in locum. & ex eo velle eandem Patris & Fi∣lii essentiam colligere, says Enjedine, It's strange that some should urge this place, and conclude from it that the Essence of God the Father, and of God the Son is the same, and he alledges Beza and Calvin, and Bucer, as all declaring that it's no proof in the case; but it's not what Men of great names say, or boldly assert; but the reasons why they say so or so, that we much respect; and there∣fore we cannot overpass this particular Text. The Jews, as we find in the verses before, came about our Saviour, and require he'd tell them plainly whether He were the Christ or not? The Question in it self was reasonable, and might merit a direct an∣swer, and doubtless would have had it, had it been propounded with that ingenuity and sincerity which became those who were prepared to receive the Gospel: But our Saviour, who knew the malice of the Que∣stion, refers them to what he had said be∣fore, and the wonderful Works which he had done among them: They knew what the
Prophets had foretold should be done by the Messias, They saw what He did, and They heard in whose name he pretended to do what he did, it was easie for them to com∣pare his present actions with the antient Prophecies, and to find out whether there was any thing prejudicial to God's glory or Man's happiness, in all those miracles he had done among them: But they not being his Sheep, nor submitting themselves to his conduct, who was the Good Shepherd, they had not Honesty or Prudence enough to ex∣amine and weigh things impartially, and therefore stumbled at noon day: They could not see how the
Innocence of his life, where they could convince him of no Sin; how the purity of his Doctrine, which he uttered so as never Man did before him: how the greatness of his Miracles, which were un∣questionable and extremely kind: did prove beyond contradiction of any, but those who were wilfully mad, that He could be no Im∣postor, no Cheat as they imagin'd: Had they been his Sheep, they'd have listned to him, and have been safe, for all those were so who followed him, He would give them eternal life, and no man could take them out of his hand, for his Father who gave them him was greater than all, Therefore no man could pluck them out of his hand; but He and his Father were One, therefore none could pluck them out of his hand, therefore He too was greater than all. This would seem to  the natural consequence of the Words; and it's certain the Jews thought it was so, for they presently took up stones to stone him, i. e. to give him that death which was the pecu∣liar punishment of the Blasphemer; and such they took him for; for when Christ reproached their baseness,v. 33. and ask'd for which of his good works they stoned him, they readily answer, They stoned him, not for a good work, but for blasphemy, because that He being a Man made himself God: This they thought they concluded very reasonably, because he had said, I and my Father am One. Well, did our Saviour in his reply, tell them they were mistaken, that he meant no such thing by those words, that his meaning on∣ly was, that He and his Father were both of one mind, exactly agreeing in that kind in∣tention of preserving his Sheep from pe∣rishing? did he make any such plea? Not at all; but he sharply reproves their folly in challenging him as a
Blasphemer for those words, and takes up an argument against them from that passage of the Psalmist, I have said ye are gods.v. 34, 35, 36. If he call them gods to whom the word of God came, says our Lord, and the Scripture cannot be broken, say ye of hi whom the father hath sanctified and sent into the World, Thou blasphemest, because I sai I am the Son of God, i. e. If earthly Princes deserve the name of Gods, because they are God's Vicegerents, or if Angels carry that name because they are the Ministers of God  glory, would not that title much more justly belong to the Son of God made flesh, sancti∣fied from the womb of his mother, and sent from heaven to be the Saviour of the world? he must then by the very force of this ar∣gument be greater than either the greatest of Men, or the holiest of Angels; but what middle Being is or can there be between An∣gelick substances and the Deity, that should be above Angels, and yet not God? We'l allow then, that for Two to be One is often used for that unity or agreement of mind, which our adversaries speak of, but we may retort their question, and ask, Is it possible two should be exactly of one mind, and yet not both of one nature? I fear they'l find no instances of that: Friends may be said to be One, Husband and Wife to be One, Two People to be One, but are they not all of a mortal nature, and consequently capable of equal thoughts and apprehensions of things? if therefore God the Father and Jesus Christ be One in their sence, it must be by Identity of Ʋnderstanding, and Will, and Intention, which cannot be but between Persons of equal nature, therefore Christ must be par∣taker of the Divine Nature, and therefore he must be God, and so, what he farther adds in his discourse with the
Jews is easily in∣telligible, and a strong confirmation of what we have laid down, If I do the works of my Father, believe not Me, but believe the Works, that ye may know and believe, that the Father  is in me, and I in him: this passage if inter∣preted of unity of Will, can be no where pa∣rallel'd; and indeed it intimates a yet closer conjunction than that agreement: This Union takes as much of the Subject on one part as on the other, therefore if the father be every where, and more peculiarly in the Son, the Son is every where too, and as peculiarly in the Father, and therefore when Enjedine would make a shew of some parallel expres∣sions of Christ's being in good Men and they in him, he unluckily, among other places, hits on that of S. Paul, where he speaks of Christ's dwelling in the heart by Faith,Eph. 3.17. which indeed explains all the rest; for Christ being a Meer Man, as the Socini∣ans say, cannot any otherwise be united so to men, as to be said to be in them, but by Faith, nor can good Men, pious and holy Persons be in Christ otherwise than by Faith; but sure it was never thought of, that the Son of God, was in his Father or his Father in him by Faith: yet that must be said, be it never so absurd or blasphemous, if their appeal to that of our Saviour stand good, That they all may be one as thou Father art in me,Joh 17, 21, 22, 23. and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that they may be one, even as we are one, I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; here the unity be∣tween Christians, or those who should be∣lieve in Christ, must be that unity of mind, consisting in mutual Love and Charity, that
Unity must be maintain'd by the vigour of their Faith; but cannot that Unity between the Father and the Son be maintain'd, with∣out the same Faith? If the expressions must be explain'd all one way, it will then follow, That God loves those who believe in his Son, as well as he loves his Son, for so it fol∣lows in the forecited place, That they may be made perfect in one,ver. 23. and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast lov'd them as thou hast loved me: but this would quite ruine all their pretences to an extra∣ordinary reverence of the Person of Christ, whom they pretend to prefer, in all privi∣leges, infinitely before the Holiest of other men. Indeed the Prayer of Christ imports only this, He begs of his Father that Chri∣stians might be as closely united with re∣spect to their mortal state, and in proportion to it, as he and his Father were in their im∣mortal Nature; and that believers should enjoy his presence as effectually to their ad∣vantage, by their Faith in him, as he en∣joy'd the infinite glory and happiness of his Father, by his Identity or Coessentiality with him; and this is the greatest happi∣ness they could wish for themselves, or Christ for them. The
Jews then were not mistaken in the meaning of our Saviour, when in saying, He and his Father were one, they thought he made himself God: nor did they mistake him, when they sought to kill him before, because he said, God was his Father,Joh. 3.18.  making himself equal with God. For Christ's permission of any to worship him was a bet∣ter interpretation of his words, than all the glosses of the Socinians put together; and as reason commonly teaches us to understand, that the begetting Father, and the begotten Son, are both of one and the same Nature here, so the same reason taught the Jews to apprehend, that if Christ were the Son of God, he then must be of the same nature with his Father, which they who saw him in the form of a servant only, thought as absurd and impossible, as the Socinians do now: if the Jews committed a mistake in their ap∣prehensions of Christ's words, nothing can possibly excuse either Christ himself, or his Apostles from extreme unkindness, since they would take no pains to rectifie a Mistake in all appearance involuntary, a Care, which might in probability have cured them of their unbelieving humour.
Let us then proceed farther to that Con∣fession of the Apostle S. Thomas, when he called our Saviour his Lord and his God:Joh. 20.28 Where we may take some notice of the oc∣casion of those words, which was this, Our Saviour to satisfie the world of his Resur∣rection; and more particularly to satisfie his own Disciples in that point, had appear'd to them in that body in which he suffer'd for them, and all the World; when the Dis∣ciples were assembled together, their doors shut with a great deal of privacy for fear  of the Jews: there he blessed them, his pre∣sence gave them an extraordinary occasion of joy, the transports of which being over, he blest them again, breathed upon them so effectually, as by that breath they received the Holy Ghost, and with that that Com∣mission and power, which afterwards they were more particularly authorised to exert, for the management of the Church. During this gracious visit of his Master, Thomas one of the twelve was absent, afterwards returning to his company, they joyfully as∣sure him they had seen the Lord; their words carry somewhat extraordinary in them, they tell him not, We have seen our Lord, or thy Lord, they use no limiting particle, but speak positively and generally, We have seen the Lord, so giving him that title by which the Septuagint translate the name  so that it seems here given to Christ, as elsewhere it is to him who by all is acknowledged to be the most high God, emphatically and exclusively of all other Lords whatsoever. But not to insist on this, The report of his brethren to Thomas seem'd ex∣tremely incredible; the Doctrine of the Resurrection, tho' it was a thing which Jews had no reason to stumble at in general, nor had the Disciples in particular, (for they had seen their Master raise Lazarus, and the Son of the Widow of
Naim, and they had doubtless seen those holy bodies, which arose from their graves upon the  dreadful convulsion of nature, when Jesus gave up the Ghost upon the Cross) yet the memory of all these things, and the testi∣mony of his own Companions, whose very looks and discourse, the evidences of un∣wonted joy, carried a great deal of inno∣cency and sincerity in them, could not pre∣vail with him, but he positively declares, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails,ver. 25. and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe; such an unreasonable infidelity, that seemed resolved neither to submit to the testimony of others, nor to his own sight, might justly have been left unsatis∣fied: but our Saviour had a respect to the rest of the World to whom the Gospel should be preached, and the Resurrection be pro∣pounded as necessary to be believ'd, there∣fore he condescended to the Apostles weak∣ness, and after eight days when the Dis∣ciples were again together, and Thomas with them, he appears to them again, and with his usual blessing, applyes himself immedi∣ately to his unbelieving Disciple, He shews himself the great Searcher of the heart and reins, and tells him, without the help of a teacher, how great a folly he had been guilty of, he commands him to do what he had be∣fore desired, he by that means leaves him no opportunity of doubting any longer: He then, who had of all others been the most
distrustful, to make somewhat of a publick  compensation for his former dulness, breaks out into that earnest and emphatical con∣fession, My Lord and my God! the words seem very plain and proper to express a man's acknowledgment of his Divinity to whom they should be applyed. Enjedine yet denyes it, His verbis quidem,Enjedine in locum. non Christum compellat, neque eum Dominum & Deum suum vocat, sed rem inusitatam & admirationem suam summam significat, In these words really, He does not speak to Christ, nor call him his Lord and his God, but only signifies his admiration of so very unusual a matter; yet the Text tells us plainly Thomas answered him and said unto him, that is, to him who bad him reach out his hand to him, in the precedent verse, that is, to Jesus Christ, My Lord and my God! He would have it signifie no more than what a frighted Papist would bless himself with, i. e. the outcry of Jesus Maria, or as we ordinarily say, Good God how strange a thing has hapned lately,
&c. and for this conceit he alleges some such like passages in prophane Authors: a very strange me∣thod and as little approved of by those of his own party. Wolzogenius utterly con∣demns this fancy, and declares of them who first invented it, Nullo modo audiendi sunt,Wolzogen. in locum. they are no way at all to be listned to, and owns this the first place wherein the Disciples after his resurrection owned him to be God: Schlicktingius too declares against it, and  tells us,Schlicktin. in locum. This passage proves, that upon our Saviour's reprimand, Thomas, fully convinc'd of the truth, quitted his former vitious incredulity, and believed, and therefore he calls Christ his God and Lord, as if he should have said, Agnosco te Do∣minum meum & Deum meum esse, I acknow∣ledge thee to be my Lord and my God; but he spoils all at last with this, that Christ after his own resurrection, was only, Deus fa∣ctus, a made God, not the great God, not the eternal, not the most high God, not Maker of all things, by which names yet, and others of the same kind he's frequently call'd in Scripture: Socinus himself in an Epistle to Franciscus Davidis, another Anti∣trinitarian, vindicates our common interpre∣tation of these words, and will not admit of the others arguments, whereby he pre∣tended to prove, that these words are no evidence of Christ's being call'd God: for, besides his alleging that all Copies read it as we have it at present, and that there's no instance in Scripture where such an ex∣pression is only a proof of an extraordinary admiration:Socini Epi∣stola ad Franc. Dav. p.
395. he shews farther, that where∣as our Saviour in the following verse shews his approbation of Thomas's faith, there could be no reason of any such approbation, if Tho∣mas by these words had only signified his won∣derment of what had come to pass with respect to his resurrection; and to say truth, such an extravagant amazement would have argued  some diffidence still remaining in him: but indeed here's no sign in the story of any such wondring at the thing, but only here's a plain confession made of what the Apostle's Faith now was, namely, that the blessed Je∣sus was his Lord and his God, wherein too, he is the mouth of all the rest of the Apostles, and there was reason for this Confession: S. Thomas had heard his Master's disputes with the Jews, the evidences he had given of his being the Messias whom they looked for, or the Christ, he had heard him often call himself the Son of God, declare his equality with his Father, and that absolute and indissoluble unity which was between his father and himself, he had heard him de∣clare what he was to suffer, and that he was to rise again the third day, the suffering he had seen, the Resurrection he was not so fully satisfied in, but when he saw him, and felt his wounds now, which he had known were really given him before, that extra∣ordinary truth which appear'd in all the words and actions of the Son of God, open'd his Eyes to see and his Heart to confess, that this same Jesus, whom he had followed so long, was really his Lord and his God: Thus his Faith with respect to the Messias, was compleat, he had seen enough to prove him to be Man in all that time of converse with him before his passion: he had seen enough now to prove him to be God, not a finite God, or an holy Man Deisied; but
the true,  the eternal God: for tho' Kings or Magi∣strates may be call'd Gods in Scripture, was it ever heard that any called Kings or any other created Being whatsoever My Lord and my God, without being charged with Idolatry? The Israelites when Aaron had made them a golden Calf,Exo. 32.4. cryed presently, These be thy Gods O Israel which brought thee out of the land of Egypt,  these are thy gods, it's expressed there by that equi∣vocal word, which the adversaries of our Faith have so often their recourse to: there∣fore the Israelites might have pleaded for themselves, that they meant not by so say∣ing, that the golden Calf was the most high God, and it's plain they did not, for they presently proclaim a feast to the true God, of whom this Calf was only design'd to be a Symbol or memorial, but such a plea was not accepted, but for the crime the
Israelites were look'd upon and punished as Iolaters. The Prophet Isay, setting out the practice of Idolaters, and the general original of Idol Images, among other things, tells us,Isa 44.17. He that had just made the golden Image, falls down and worships it, and prays unto it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my God: Doubtless the Engraver and Car∣ver, &c. would readily plead for them∣selves, they look'd upon their Images but as Symbols of a real Deity, or places of re∣sidence for more Spiritual Beings, or at most but as subordinate Gods: yet all this  will not excuse them from the charge of Ido∣latry; for God first, declaring of himself, that He is the true God, that He is the living God, and an everlasting king,Jer. 10.10, 11. at whose wrath the earth should tremble, and the nations should not be able to abide his indignation, adds farther, The Gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from under these heavens: that's then the characteristick or the test of a true God, the making of the heavens and of the earth, on which reason begin we our Creed with that, I believe in God the Father Almighty maker of heaven and earth, and whosoever it is who has not made Heaven and earth, in that same sense in which the Prophet here speaks, He's an Idol, and all those are guilty of Idolatry who put any confidence in him.Vid Mar∣tial. l. 5. Epig. 8. Suet. in Domit. c. 13. And such were Caligula and
Domi∣tian, those proud Emperours, who knew not how to sit down with an inferior title to that, Domini Deique nostri, of our Lord and our God: and very Heathens themselves thought this was assuming divine Honours to themselves, and such as were no way be∣coming mortal men: But I know the Soci∣nians allow those who are made Gods by Men to be Idols, but those who are made by Almighty God himself are not so. Ne∣que enim unus ille deus falsos deos facit, homi∣nes hoc faciunt, says Schlicktingius, for he who is the one supreme God, does not make false Gods, they are only Men who do so: hence,  according to them, Kings and Princes are true Gods, because they are constituted by God himself to represent his own person to the world; but to this we answer, never King upon earth, but only such as those be∣fore-named, Caligula or Domitian, preten∣ded to such a name, nor were there ever any but sordid Parasites and flatterers, who offer'd to call them
their Lords and their Gods: A∣lexander the Great himself, tho' foolish and ambitious to be called the Son of Jupiter, yet could not but expose their baseness who complyed with his mad fancy, when he saw the blood trickling from a wound he had received, and ask'd them whether that were like the  which Homer made to fall from his Gods? They allege, on their own behalf, that passage in the Psalmist, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever,Psal. 45.6. which say they is there spoken of Solomon, which we as posi∣tively deny, and are assured they can never prove: God by his Prophets is not wont to tell downright falsehoods, as he must do, if this were to be so applyed; for which way shall we make it out that Solomon's Throne was everlasting, when all the glories of it sunk in his immediate Successor? which way shall the Sceptre of his kingdom be made a right Sceptre, whose immediate Successor, and several after him, have that character in Scripture, that they did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord: What great and terrible things were those which were done  by the sword of peaceable Solomon, who was to be no man of blood, no conqueror o what worship do we ever read was paid by Pharaoh's daughter, or any other of his numerous wives and concubines to Solomon? and the Holy Ghost directly applies these words to Jesus Christ the Son of God, with∣out the least mention of Solomon. Beside this then, they have no Text which looks like any thing of ascribing those names, My Lord and my God, to any created being what∣soever; and when they have said all they can, Christ himself must be an Idol to Tho∣mas, and to all those who own him at any time to be their Lord and their God, if it be not He who has made the Heavens and the Earth according to the Letter: Princes may be Metaphorical Gods, but they are not set up for humane Adorations; Men and Angels are to adore the Son of God, therefore he's no Metaphorical God: and we need beg no pardon for saying, it's not in the power of an Almighty God to create or make a true or an eternal God, or another being Almighty as himself, it's Nonsence to talk of
Monarchs subordinate one to another, or of Monarchs co-ordinate with one another in the same ter∣ritory, and it's plain nonsence to tell us, Christ is a subordinate God to his Father, or that there can be two supreme Gods over all blessed for ever: Therefore when the Apostle calls his master, My God and my Lord, his meaning must be, that the Son of God is  the true God, one God, coessential, co-eternal with his Father. From hence then we proceed to Rom 9.5.Of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for ever, Amen. The character here is very high, the Text plain, and it may justly be concluded those must adventure very boldly who can elude its force. If we look into the occasion of the words, we there find the Apostle ex∣pressing an extraordinary affection to his Countrey-men, being willing to become a curse for his brethren, his kinsmen according to the flesh; whose condition he commise∣rates the more, because of those extraor∣dinary privileges they had before enjoyed; for there is no greater aggravation of misery than to have made a great many fair steps towards happiness, and to have fallen short of it at last. These privileges they had en∣joyed were extraordinary, they were
Is∣raelites, so God's proper or peculiar inhe∣ritance, beyond all other nations whatso∣ever: To them pertained the adoption, or they were adopted to be the Sons of God, and are called so in the Old Testament: to them appertain'd the glory of God's pe∣culiar presence among them, owning them for his people, and delivering them gloriously, with a mighty hand and stretched out arm, from their cruel enemies: To them belonged the Covenants, the two Tables written with the Finger of God himself, the giving of  the Law, that Law Moral, Political and Ce∣remonial, which made their Religious Or∣dinances, their Civil Government, and their Manners far superiour to those of all other Nations; to them belonged the service of God, the only true external form or method of worship; and the Promises, for all the Pro∣phets, among those severe menaces they denounced against Israel for their Sins, yet always brought the Promises of a Messias, a Redeemer to come, to comfort them; their's were the Fathers, all those Men so eminent for their favour with God, such as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, Da∣vid, and all the rest of the Prophets: Of them came Jesus Christ according to the flesh; that particularising of his deduction from them according to the flesh, intimates plainly enough, that according to somewhat else he had another Original, he was not wholly of the Jews: This the Socinians are forced to own, because of that entire story of our Saviour's Conception by the Holy Ghost in the womb of the blessed Virgin. To shew how great this privilege was, the Apostle adds, that this Jesus Christ, who came of the Jews according to the flesh, was God over all blessed for ever, but that they might avoid the force of this Text, they would fain ly to one of their ordinary shelters, a vari∣us reading; but there's no such thing in any of the original Copies; and Versions (if there be any which intimate such a thing)
are little to be regarded. Then they would fain alter the Pointing, which if allow'd, would do them little service; but there is no ground for allowing that.In locum. Enjedine pleads that the word  blessed, used by the Apostle here, is never applyed any where in Scripture to any but only God the Father, for this he alledges, that of the same Apostle concerning the Gentiles, that they worshipped the Creature more than the Crea∣tor,Rom. 1.25. who is over all, blessed for ever: But if it be true, that Jesus Christ, as the eternal Son of God, was the Creator of all things, as it seems to be, his instance turns against himself; and methinks it follows as well, that if the title of God above all blessed for ever belongs only to the supreme God, (for that he means when he speaks of its belong∣ing only to God the Father) then the Son of God, to whom it's given here, should be the supreme God; for it is no less than Sacrilege and Blasphemy to attribute a title so peculiar to the Sovereign, to any one who really and in his own Nature is not the Sovereign God. Others of the Socinian Tribe cannot see, or take no notice of this peculiar usage of the expression, as if it be∣long'd only to God the Father, they acknow∣ledge that Christ, as Made God, is above all Men and Angels, above all Principalities and Powers, nay above all things whatsoever, only,1
Cor. 15.27. He's not above him who put all things under him; This the Apostle asserts, This  we own, but withal we assert, that our Sa∣viour, as Man in that body in which he hum∣bled himself to the Death of the Cross for Man, is thus exalted above all things, and thus as Man he is the head of his Church; as God, we say not that he's superiour to his Father, but that he is equal to him; he is of the same Nature with his Father, and therefore is God over all blessed for ever, as his Father is. Now, that He who is thus God over all blessed for ever, should conde∣scend to take our Nature upon him, was an effect of infinite Love and pity to all man∣kind, that he should condescend to take this humane Nature of any one of the Jewish Nation, was the greatest Honour that could possibly be done to that Nation: We see how Towns and Countreys strive for the Honour of being the birth-places of great Men, and they have been frequently not a little jealous of one another on that account; nay Scripture it self makes such a thing a considerable advantage; in that of the Pro∣phet concerning the Messias, as alledged by the Chief Priests and Scribes to Herod, And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah art not the least among the Princes of Judah,Matt. 2.6. for out of thee shall come a Governour who shall rule my people Israel, the present Hebrew reads it, tho' thou be little among the thou∣sands of Judah: The birth of such a one was enough to make the most inconsiderable place glorious; miserable people then were
they, who had so great an honour confer'd on them, and yet at last deny'd him who conferr'd it on them. S. Paul gives this advice to the
Philippi∣ans,Phil 2.5-1. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, who, being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of Man, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obe∣dient to Death, even to the Death of the Cross, wherefore God also hath mightily exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. We might refer the matter to any who had no acquaintance with Christianity, or with Scripture before, and such a Man, on read∣ing these words, would certainly conclude, that he who carries here the name of Christ Jesus, was described as every way equal with God the Father, whosoever that might be; and that we may understand such a conclusion would be just and rational, we may look into the occasion of the words. The Apostle is perswading the Philippians here to Unity, Love and Peace, and parti∣cularly to a mutual care and sollicitude for the good and happiness of one another,  urging them not altogether to employ them∣selves upon their own private or publick, inward or outward Interests, but to allow some charitable thoughts towards the Sal∣vation of others,Gal. 6.2. to snatch them as fire∣brands out of the fire, agreeably to what he elsewhere advises them to, i. e. that they should bear one anothers burdens; this kind care he urges them to, from the example of him in whom they believed, and whose ser∣vants they profest themselves to be; Who tho' eternally and immutably blest in him∣self, yet, out of that infinite love he had to perishing mankind, was pleased to take hu∣mane nature upon him, that in that humane nature he might suffer, to atone his Father's displeasure against Sin and Sinners, and pro∣cure everlasting Salvation for as many as should believe on him; that to be of this charitable temper would be much to our advantage he proves by this consideration: That God the Father was so highly pleas'd with this action of his Son, that he raised even that humane nature, in which he suf∣fered, to the highest glories, and sanctified that very name, which his Son assumed as Man, and as the Messias, to be above every name, to be admired, reverenced, adored by all created beings whatsoever: which adorations could only be rendered just and reasonable by that intimate and indissluble union between that humane natu  eternal God-head: If God then so exal ¦sus
Christ on account of his compassion and tenderness for us, he likewise will exalt us, if we be kind and tender hearted one towards another, if we endeavour to promote one anothers Salvation by all those means which by Providence are put into our hands. In this argument the Apostle makes use of such expressions, as stumble the enemies of the Divinity of the Son of God very much, and give them a great deal of pains to shift off and to evade; so the form of God, they de∣termine to be nothing but a resemblance or representation of God in his Works; Christ was in the form of God when he did those many wonderful works during his converse upon earth, those Miracles importing some∣what of a divine power; but what is there in this peculiar to our Saviour? Moses might as well have been said to have been in the form of God, since he too did a great ma∣ny prodigious things, and the Skies, the Air, the Waters, the Earth, seemed all as obe∣dient to him as to our Saviour afterwards: Elijah and Elisha might have receiv'd the same Character, and the Apostles much more, since Christ himself had promised them, that they should not only do the same, but greater miracles than he himself did: yet Scripture never talks of these at any such rate as their being in the form of God. If it be objected, that
Moses, the Prophets men∣tion'd, and the Disciples, after our Lord's Resurrection, did indeed many and great  Miracles, but they were not done in their own names, we acknowledge it: but if our ad∣versaries may be believed, our Saviour was in the same circumstances, for his Miracles were only done in the name of God, and so were the Mosaic and Prophetic Miracles done. If they'l own that our Saviour did his Miracles in His own name, they grant what they take so much pains to disprove, for none can do a Miracle in his own name, but he who has an inherent power in himself, commanding all the parts of the Creation, having no need of leave or assistance from any superiour Being; but such a power is and only can be inherent in the most high God, therefore if our Saviour had that power, he was and is the most high God, if he had not, he's in the same rank with other holy and good Men, and any of them might have been instanced in as patterns of as great conde∣scension and love to Souls as himself. They criticise upon the word , the form of God, as if it signified only an outward shadow and appearance, and therefore not the real divine essence; and therefore, where∣as the Apostle makes mention afterwards of the  the form of a Servant, they are under a necessity of denying that that signifies his assuming humane nature, tho' the words following are indeed an explica∣tion of these, being in the form of a servant, and being
found in likeness of men, are but explicatory one of another and so Schlick∣tingius  owns it; but (upon what reason we know not) upon that last phrase of being found in likeness of men, he writes thus, Fi∣gurâ, i. e. non reipsâ sed apparenter & ex∣ternâ specie tantum, in the form or figure of a Man, that is, not a Man indeed, but only to outward appearance, and to com∣mon view; a Commentary to me unintel∣ligible, since they own Christ to have been a real man, and nothing else; the reason of their niceness here is only this, They fear that if they own, the form of a Servant sig∣nifies the humane nature of Christ, then the form of God must signifie the divine nature of the same person, which they cannot en∣dure to hear of: but the Fathers with one current interpret it so, that the is the , the essence of God, so Theo∣doret on the place, Gregory Nyssen, Athana∣sius, Chrysostome, Theophylact, &c. and the is the , the nature of a servant, in the same sence, so Theodoret, Athanasius,Paedagog. l. 3. c. 1. Theophylact, and Clemens Alex∣andrinus, who cannot well be suspected of partiality in the case; and this authority is much better than theirs, who only assert the contrary arbitrarily and without reason. That Christ thought it no robbery to be equal with God, they would have to signifie only this,
That he thought it not so great an advantage to be in the form of God, or like him, as to be obstinate in the reten∣tion of that likeness, but would humbly  quit it to be used and suffer like a servant; and for this Enjedine runs to some phrases in Heliodorus his Aethiopic Romance (where rapina, signifies as much, if he in∣terpret it rightly) but that's too modern an authority to interpret Scripture by, and too slight a work to teach us how to understand the dictates of God's Holy Spirit. After se∣veral Cavils, they yield, that to be like to God, is to be equal to God, but equality must be between distinct beings, for none can be equal to himself; We own it, and say, the Fa∣ther and the Son are distinct persons, but of one nature, as Father and Son must be, if their relation be real; but if God the Father and God the Son be of one and the same Na∣ture, they must have one and the same Essence, because two infinite Essences are a
contradicti∣on; our Saviour being in the form of his Fa∣ther, and equal to his Father, could not look on it as a crime, or think it any Sacrilege or robbery, to own that equality, as he did by his expressions of himself, and by those adorations he permitted to be paid to him∣self. Here then was Love and Condescen∣tion indeed, that He, who was God equal with his father, should assume to himself poor in∣firm servile flesh and blood, and in that humble himself and be obedient to death, even that scandalous and painful death on the Cross, for our sakes: This Passion and this Obedi∣ence was truly meritorious, it intrinsically and in its own real value, merited the re∣demption  of all mankind: it effectually and in its outward operation merited and procured the Salvation of all those that believe in him. As a reward for this Humility and Obedi∣ence, God has highly exalted the Humane Nature of his Son, that's enclosed in, or sub∣stantially united to the Divine Nature, and consequently partakes of all that bliss, that eternal glory and happiness which the Deity it self enjoys; by which means it comes to be lawful for Christians to worship Christ as Man, tho' not as meer Man, as well as, as he is God, a practice which could never be ex∣cused from being the greatest Idolatry in the World, if there were no such union, as will hereafter be proved in course. For that exception to this Text, that Jesus is the name of Man, not of God, and Christ the name of an Office, it signifies the Anointed One, the Messias, and therefore cannot be∣long to the most high God, it's extremely impertinent; they are not our Saviour's names as he is God, but as he is Man; but as none question his bearing the name of the Son of God, so every one knew that he bore the name of Jesus, and that it had been beyond contradiction prov'd that he was the Christ; his Relative name then, of the Son of God, his Humane name of Jesus, his Name of office as Christ, being all equally known, it was certainly free to the Apostle to speak of him by any of those names, and we see that those together with that of our
Saviour, our High-Priest, our King, our Mediator, &c. are all indifferently used by the Apostles in their writings, without any kind of diminution of our Saviour's dignity, or detraction from his eternal divinity. Abundance more Texts might be added, but these are sufficient on this head. We come now to the third Head pro∣pounded, from whence to prove That the blessed Jesus was really God manifest in the flesh,1 Tim. 3.16 comm. 2. God equal and co-essential with his fa∣ther, and that is, from those Actions done by him during his own converse on Earth, or in his name after his Ascension into Heaven; where again we shall not be so curious as to ex∣amine every particular, but only some of the more remarkable. The Socinians them∣selves would have him be in the form of God, only on this account, because all the parts of nature seem'd to obey him as their Lord and Master: the Prophets too had comman∣ded them before; but some things were done by our Saviour of so singular a nature, as the greatest of the Prophets could pre∣tend to nothing of that kind. Thus when Jacob was afraid of Esau, he wrestled with God in Prayer, and God turn'd the heart of Esau towards his brother, and took off those barbarous and revengeful thoughts he had entertained before; so Jacob escaped his fury. Moses when terrified with the anger of the king of
Aegypt, fled for it,  and sav'd himself: and so Elijah himself was forced to flight that he might escape the feminine rage of Jezebel; and the rest of the Prophets, how great and considerable so∣ever, had only flight or sufferings to prepare for. It was otherwise with our Saviour: for when he had enraged the people of Na∣zareth by speaking what was true and necessa∣ry to them, and they resolv'd to put an ef∣fectual end to His preaching, who could flatter them no better, they thrust him out of the City, they lead him, to be sure, with Guard strong and numerous enough, to the brow of the Hill on which their City was built: their design was to cast him down headlong (not to perswade him to cast himself down,Luke 4.29, 30. as the Devil would have had him done, from the Pinacle of the Temple) they resolved to ease him of that trouble, and to do it violently and cruelly themselves: We read of no relenting among them, none who went about to perswade them to give over so bar∣barous and unjust a design, but our Saviour in the open croud, past through the midst of them and went his way: there was no flight before, no calling fire down from heaven now, no other sudden consternation among them, but what appear'd in their countenances when they miss'd him, whom they thought they had held fast enough. We meet not with any interposition of Angels, no blindness laid upon them as a penalty, but He went from amongst them, they no more able to
oppose his Motions, than a Man in a dream would be able to fight a Duel with a waking and terrible adversary; here then Almighty power shew'd it self even in the Man Christ Jesus, he shew'd his enemies how invisible, how every way indiscernible Humane Nature assumed into the Divine, must necessarily be. The Turks, perhaps taking their hint from this passage, tell us, that when our Saviour was led to be crucified, he vanished, in the same surprising manner, out of their hands, and left them only to exercise their rage upon one of his Judges, of whom they say, that he resembled Christ in an extraordinary manner. An humane body acted meerly by a rational soul, must of necessity be perceptible by those who compassed it round, and could they once have been sensible of his motions, it had been easie to have stayed him, but, where a divine Power interpos'd, it was impossible for any to observe, or at least to observe with a capacity to hinder his moving. Vir∣gil tells us, how Venus wrapt her son Aeneas with his companion Achates in a misty robe, but he brings him on the stage of Carthage in the same invisible circumstances, and there∣fore there were no offers to hinder him go∣ing where he would, but when he was once seen, his Mother her self was not able to muffle him up so from humane eyes, as that he should fall into no danger: There∣fore Homer makes both Mars and Venus, the last not visible at the time, to be wounded
by Diomedes, when he was so very eager in pursuit of the Trojans: This then in our Saviour prov'd his rank yet higher than that of Man, his Power greater and more effectu∣al, as working of it self, so upon humane Spirits, that either they could not discern him at all, or had no power to shew their displeasure, tho' never so violent and re∣vengeful before; there needed no Angel here to stop the Lyons mouths, his Will with∣out any outward expression of it was suffi∣ent. And thus he shew'd a Power equally Di∣vine, when meerly by asking the Officers who came with that Traitor Judas to take him, whom they sought? and telling them that He himself was the Person,John 18.5, 6. they went back∣wards and fell to the ground: it must certain∣ly be a strange and terrible power that from the mildest words could produce such ama∣zing effects: Men bred up to
blood and slaugh∣ter are not wont to be affrighted with one anothers looks or words, but God even in the still small voice is to be fear'd. We must necessarily conclude that he who was the Son of God, who was his only Son, that Son to whom he gave so extraordinary a testi∣mony that in him he was well pleased, we must conclude, that this Son would take all oc∣casions to advance the honour of his Father; that He'd not only forbid others doing any thing that might detract from it, but he'd be above all things careful not to do any thing of so impious a complexion himself.  As this was a duty incumbent upon every servant of God, so we find the Prophets al∣ways careful in the case, and therefore pre∣facing all those Miracles they wrought with solemn Prayers, and with the name of that God from whom all their miracle-working power was derived. Moses seems to have fail'd a little only in the point, when he was to bring water out of the rock for the Israe∣lites, but Moses sin'd; nor could the rea∣sonableness of his zeal excuse him from a se∣vere punishment on that account. But, if we run over the general Histories of our Sa∣viour's miracles, we find Him, for ought is upon record, not at all careful upon this matter; He does them frequently, too ma∣ny to be registred, but all in his own name: He
Wills this, and He Commands the other thing to be done, so the Winds, the Waves, the various Distempers afflicting Mankind, the Devils themselves tremble at and obey his Word; the Dead rise at the hearing of his Voice, every thing he speaks is powerful and authentick, yet no Praying before, no making use of his Father's name, no more notice taken of him in the operation, than as if the Father and the Son had stood in no kind of relation to one another. Nay, even in the case of Lazarus, which, if any, must carry the face of an exception; We see our Saviour praising his Father indeed for his readiness to hear him, yet expressing himself so only for their sakes that were by:Joh. 11.43.  but afterwards speaking to him in the Man∣datory stile, and only in his own name bid∣ding him come forth. Now from this car∣riage of our Saviour, we must either con∣clude him to have been One with his Father, and so whatsoever honour came to himself, must also by so doing come to his Father; or else we must conclude him a careless, am∣bitious, sacrilegious Person, one ready to rob God of his Honour, to take all opportuni∣ties of assuming that to himself which be∣long'd to God; for that's plain he did, be∣cause he permitted those on whom he wrought Miracles to offer the same adora∣tions to him which belong'd to the most high God, which never any Man, tho' ne∣ver so holy, had admitted of before. Here then we are reduced to a necessity, either of saying with the blaspheming Jews, that He had a devil, and only by
his power wrought all his miracles; and that Almighty God, ei∣ther for want of power to hinder him, or out of design to have Mankind deluded and abus'd to their own ruine, permitted him to do so many wonderful works: Or else, that the blessed Jesus was really that holy, meek, just, eternal Son of the eternal God, that he assumed no more to himself, than what re∣ally belong'd to him, therefore that he had really power in himself, and originated from himself, to do whatsoever he pleased, there∣fore that he was God, the true, the most high God. That we may be the better assured  that his Power was so innate and inherent, we may observe, that whereas his Apostles, after his ascent, did many miracles, and those of an extraordinary nature; so that Aprons and Handkerchiefs brought from the body of S. Paul, and the very shadow of S. Peter, car∣ried a healing power with them, yet there was nothing in all that equal to what hap∣ned to our Saviour upon the Woman's cure of her bloody Issue, who had but touched the hem of his garment: The Apostles utterly disown'd the working any cures by any power of their own, therein they acted mo∣destly and piously; but on the contrary, our Saviour ascribes the miraculous cure done upon the woman, only to Himself; he takes notice of his garment, and, by it, of him∣self being touch'd, and that at such a time as a croud of people thronged him, and he says, not that his Father's power, or the hand of God, or any thing of that nature, was gone out to cure her. But, says he,Luk. 8.46. somebody hath touch'd Me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out of Me: and it's recorded of him before, that the whole multitude sought to touch him,Luk. 6.19. for there went virtue out of him and healed them all. Now tho' we know well enough that nothing but his
humane nature, and the accidents attending that, were the ob∣jects of common sense, yet we know withal that meer flesh and blood, tho' it be never so pure and innocent has no inherent power, by a distant or a mediate touch to cure any  distempers, or to be sensible of such a cure wrought by any Passion in themselves: The Kings and Queens of England have often cured that disease, from thence, sencelesly named the Kings Evil, by a touch, the ef∣fect is wonderful indeed, but we never heard of those Kings or Queens pretending they were sensible of any virtue passing out from them for the cure of the Patient, nor have any, that have pretended to the sanative faculty, yet dream'd of any such thing as a self-ori∣ginated power in themselves to that purpose: the King, the Prophet, the Physician touches, but God only heals, this inherent Power then in Christ was derived from that Union betwixt his divine and humane Nature, that enabled him in every respect to bear our sins, and to carry our infirmities, so that from him, as from an inexhaustible fountain, all the health both of our bodies and souls is de∣rived; but such a fountain can nothing but God be, therefore He is God.
We said, the Health of Souls is derived from Him as from its fountain or original: a meer Man may be an instrument in God's hand to help forward the salvation of a Soul, his Prudence, Learning, Industry, Charity may, by God's assistance, conduce in a great measure to that excellent end, but Man of himself can do nothing in the case: Our Saviour here makes that just Invitation to Mankind,Matt 1.28. as from himself, Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden and I  will give you rest: it's not come to God, or come to my Father, but come to Me: but it would be intolerable Presumption, not to say Blasphemy, to use such an invitation, if coming to Christ were not an equivalent to coming to God and the Father; He that sees me, sees my Father, says our Lord, for I and my Father are one, he that comes to me comes to my Father, for my Father gives rest to Souls weary and heavy laden with sin, and so do I: My Father does so, not by any adventitious or precarious but by his own inherent and essential Power, and so do I. No Apostle, no Prophet ever used such lan∣guage, only the Son of God and his blessed Father, and the Holy Ghost can say, as of himself, Come to me, I will give you rest: And well may He pretend to give rest to the labouring Soul, who can authoritatively from himself forgive sins, a thing which our Saviour frequently does in the Gospel. The mentioning of that action gives us a strange representation of the stubborn senceless ob∣stinacy of the Jewish nation; our Saviour, when the Man sick of the Palsie was brought to him for cure, says to him,Matt. 9.2. Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, and to Mary Magdalen, when at His feet,Luk 7.48. thy Sins are forgiven thee: We cannot doubt but this was spoken as for the good of the persons to whom they were applyed, so for the
good of those who stood by; for these things were not spoken in a corner. Now the Pharisees  stumbled upon a question proper enough on the occasion,v. 49. who is this that forgiveth sins also? So the Scribes on another occasion, push the question home,Mar. 2.7. Why doth this Man thus speak blasphemy? Who can forgive sins but God only? The question was rational enough, and implyed a weighty Truth, that none has any inherent authority to forgive sins but God only; others may declare or pro∣nounce it by a derivative authority, only God can do it by his own: but the reason of these Questionists left them presently; They saw Christ holding a strict Commu∣nion with their Church as setled by the Mosaic Law, They could not convince him of any sin against that Communion, they heard him, of himself and in his own name, forgive sins, this was a plain publick claim to a Divine Authority, and they understood it so: They saw him with the very same breath work a prodigious cure, a cure not likely to be wrought by the influence of a Malignant Spirit, it was of too benign and advantagious a nature to the Patient, it must then be wrought by a Divine Power, but the Divine Power would not concur with a gross sinner, a notorious blasphemer, therefore Christ of necessity must be no sinner, if no sinner, then an extraordinary Person, for his mira∣culous actions would admit of no middle state, then he could be no Impostor, no Deceiver; therefore, Forgiving sins and asserting his Power by an undeniable miracle,
upon their own Principle, he must be God, the True God emphatically; for who can forgive sins but God, but the True God only? For they respected only the True God when they asked the Question. It's a peculiar Attribute of the Supreme God to know the hearts of Men, he assumes that Power as his own due, in which none can be partakers with him, the heart is de∣ceitful above all things, says he, and despe∣rately wicked, who can know it?Jer. 17.9.10. I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins even to give every man according to his ways, and accor∣ding to the fruit of his doings: The same title our Lord takes to himself,Rev. 2.23. All the Churches shall know that I am he which search∣eth the reins and hearts, and I will give unto every one according to his works: it's true this was in his glorified state: but if Christ were a meer man before his Resurrection, he was no more afterwards, the giving him Honour, and Power, and Glory, could not alter his Nature, or make him any more than a
Metaphorical God, but a bare Metaphor, applyed to a Man, will not make him imme∣diately commence a God, or appropriate the most eminent of the divine Attributes to him. But not to insist on that, this par∣ticular faculty of knowing mens hearts he really had, and sufficiently evidenced, be∣fore his Ascension into Heaven; so in one of the before-mentioned instances, when Christ had said to the Man sick of the Palsie,  Thy sins be forgiven thee,Mat. 8.24. the Scribes mur∣mured or said in their hearts, this Man bla∣sphemes: the Evangelist adds, Jesus know∣ing their thoughts, said, Wherefore think you evil in your hearts?Mat. 12.25 Again, when Christ cast out the Devil out of one that was pos∣sest, and the Pharisees, hearing of it, said he cast out devils by Beelzebub Prince of the devils: We are told, He knew their thoughts, and presently gave them a reproof suitable to their folly. The Disciples, as they were following their Master, fell into a dispute among themselves who should be greatest? Their Master when in the house, ask'd 'em of their dispute, their inward guilt shut their mouths, but he presently lets them know he was,Mar. 9.33, 34, 35, 36. without their information, Master of their mighty secret, and took an imme∣diate occasion to teach them how to employ their time better, than in such dangerous and impertinent disputes. Our Lord was preaching in the Temple to a very captious Auditory, they admire his boldness, but ne∣ver pitch upon his Office, which he had then undertaken; nay, they argue among them∣selves the unlikelihood that he should be the Christ, We know, say they, this Man, whence he is, but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is: Our Saviour, as if he had been privy to all their discourse, in the midst of his doctrine tells them aloud, Ye both know me,John 7.27, 28. and ye know whence I am, &c. When the same blessed Jesus was in Jerusa∣lem
at the Passeover, on the Feast Day ma∣ny believed in his Name when they saw the miracles which he did:John 2.23, 24, 25. but the Evangelist tells us plainly, Jesus did not commit himself to them, because He knew all men, and needed not that any should testifie of Man, for he knew what was in man; If he knew what was in Man, it must be either perfectly or exactly, or it must be imperfectly, if imperfectly, he might easily have been impos'd upon, the Prophets of the antient Jewish Church were often so; so Joshua and all Israel in the case of the Gibeonites: So Samuel in his opinion of the fitness of David's brethren for the kingdom of Israel: So the man of God by the old Prophet who dwelt at Bethel: The Apostles afterwards, tho' influenced fre∣quently by the Spirit of God, were lyable to Error, Philip an Apostolical person, in ad∣mitting Simon of Samaria to Christian Bap∣tism; S. Peter in making a difficulty of preaching the Gospel to one that was Un∣circumcised, in dissembling afterwards for fear of the Jews, &c. S.
Paul in admitting false hearted Demas to the Pastoral Charge; but this we find no instance of in our Savi∣our, none were able to deceive him, nay, not so much as to fasten a temptation on him; He chose indeed twelve Disciples, and one of them a Devil,Joh. 6.70. but he knew him to be such, and declared him such, tho' not by name, long before he betrayed him. So neither the treachery of his pretended friends,  nor of his professed enemies, could take any place upon him. If Christ's knowledge of those things was perfect, it was as much as God's knowledge is: No Being can do more than know the heart of man perfectly, that heart which Man himself is so generally un∣acquainted with. This is a Knowledge no way compatible with humane nature, That since the fall being defective in a thousand particulars, besides the necessity of Ʋbiquity attending a perfect universal knowledge of the thoughts of all, which a Body can never be capable of; If then the knowledge of Christ in reference to the Hearts of men, was equal with God's, if it were impossible for him to be deceived, if it was no Sacri∣lege in him to ascribe to himself this peculiar Attribute of the most high God, He then must be equal with God, therefore he must be the True God. If we reflect upon our Lord's behaviour after his Resurrection before his Ascent into Heaven, if he be no more than a meer man, it's wholly unaccountable. The Holy Ghost is by the
Socinians denyed to be a Per∣son, or to be God; yet it's allowed by them to be the power of God, a virtue flowing out of or from the Supreme Deity, under this No∣tion we may rationally assert, that this Holy Spirit can be commanded no way but by the Supreme God himself, none else can pro∣mise it, none can give it; for if the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets,  much more certainly must the Spirit of God be subject to him, it subsisting wholly in him, and being according to our Adversaries, one of those qualifications necessarily in the Su∣preme God: Granting all this, if our Sa∣viour was a meer man, as they say, he could not possibly command this Sacred Spirit, this Spirit so much superiour to
mankind, tho' considered as no more than a meer Appen∣dage to the Almighty. Yet our Saviour seems to employ this Spirit as he will; that's no wonder, if the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost tho' three persons be all one God: That exact concurrence in their eternal wills taking away all difficulties: Thus when the Lord met with his Disciples, and shew'd them the necessity of things happen∣ing with relation to himself, as they did, then He opened their understandings that they might understand the Scriptures,Luk. 24.45 this opening their understandings, did not consist barely in explaining some particular Texts to them; they were yet but very dull and slow of understanding in themselves, and tho' they had heard a thousand Texts authenti∣cally explain'd, they might have continued very inapprehensive still: Nor is it an usual manner of speech to say, when a man ex∣plains any Author to others, that he opens their understandings; he may open the mean∣ing of such or such Books, or Passages very well, yet those who hear him may not im∣prove in their intellectuals; this opening  their understandings therefore argued some force upon their minds, some extraordinary Energy of the Spirit within them, whereby their natural and inveterate Dulness went off, and they had more of spriteliness and vigour in their Souls than formerly: they seem'd as Slaves with their fetters knockt off, nimble and active, and therefore more capable of apprehending any thing offered to them than formerly. This was the first beginning to fit them for that great work they were in a few days to engage in, it was to make them capable of satisfying them∣selves gradually in the Truth and Reason of those things which they were afterwards to preach to the world abroad, and which they were compleatly fitted for by the fol∣lowing extraordinary effusions of that Holy Spirit upon them; The first operations of it upon them then were gentle and easie, but it was the operation of that Sacred Spirit only, and of that Spirit as ordered by the blessed Jesus, by which their understand∣ings were thus opened. We may agree to this the more easily, if we consider that Pro∣mise Christ makes to his Disciples after this,
Behold I send the promise of my father upon you,Luk 24.49 but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem un∣till you be endued with power from on high: The Father promises it, but I send it. Now this uses not to be a task for a man, to make good the Promises of God, it's out of his power, especially if the Promise be to be  made good in some particular wherein God has a more peculiar interest: Is my Spirit my breath? none then can give it to ano∣ther, tho' my Spirit be not originally my own, but breathed into me by an Almighty Creator: Is the Holy Ghost, the Breath, the Spirit, the Influence of God? none then can dispose of it from him, and the rather because it is originated in him, and must be one with him; it was then a strange pre∣sumption in our Lord, to take upon him the making good Gods Promises to others, since, if he were no more than a Man, He promised what was not in his power, and pretended to make up some defects in his veracity, who was the God of Truth, and Truth it self. But our Saviour went farther yet, for making a visit once to his Disciples after his Resurrection, His Blessing being bestowed, he gives them a Commission of an extraordinary nature, As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you, i. e.Job. 20.21. As my Fa∣ther sent me to reform the World, so I send you to cary on that same work, and as my Father's mission of me gave me a sufficient authority to do those things necessary to so great an end, so my sending you gives you as great and unquestionable authority in proportion to those things which are laid on you; this intimates, that Christ had power to send men to govern and manage his Church, as his Father had, and in the same degree; for if our Saviour was only his
Father's Ambassador to them, and so infe∣riour to him that sent him, this had been an extravagant vanity; it was never heard that an Ambassador from a King or Em∣peror pretended to send another Envoy from himself, with such kind of expressions as these, As my master the King has sent me, so send I you, nor are Princes wont to entrust their Agents with any such Power, and the Credentials of such sub-ambassadors would appear very ridiculous to all those to whom they should be sent: But from this Com∣mission our Lord proceeds, And when he had said this, He breathed on them, and said unto them,ver. 22. Receive ye the Holy Ghost, Spiritus Sanctus est virtus seu efficacia à Deo in homi∣nes manans, iisque communicata quâ eos ab aliis segregat & suis usibus consecrat, say the Socinians in the Racovian Catechism, The Holy Spirit is a virtue or efficacy flowing from God upon men (from the True the Supreme God they mean) and communica∣ted to them, by which he separates such men from others, and consecrat them to his own use. If it be the efficacy or Power of the Supreme God, how comes one, whom they suppose to be a meer Man, to confer it with his breath? It was given afterwards by the laying on of the Apostles hands; they gave it not by any virtue inherent in them, but where they laid on their hands God sent it, and that in different manners and pro∣portions, as he judged fit for the Receivers,
whose fitness the Apostles knew nothing of: Our Saviour bestows it with his breath, It must therefore be his own, therefore he must be the Supreme God; for in this action our Saviour did not mock his Disciples, as Schlick∣tingius confesses,Caetechismē Rac. sect. 6. c. 6. but he did certainly sepa∣rate them, by this action, from the rest of the world, and consecrated them peculiarly to his own service, and this, at the appointed time, they engaged in, according to his orders. In the forementioned Catechism, when they ask what the gift of the Holy Spi∣rit is? the answer is, Est ejusmodi Dei affla∣tus, quo animi nostri vel uberiore rerum divi∣narum notitiâ vel spe vitae eternae certiore, at∣que adeo gaudio ac gustu quodam futurae feli∣citatis aut singulari gloriae divinae, pietatisque ardore, complentur. It is such an influence of God, as by which our minds are fill'd either with a more plentiful knowledge of Divine things, or with a more certain hope of eternal life, and consequently with joy and a taste of future happiness, or a pecu∣liar heat of divine glory and piety; this may look somewhat like cant, but how∣ever it teaches us to ascribe this sacred in∣fluence to the most high God, and to ascribe very great effects to this influence, but these effects the
breathing of the blessed Jesus had, therefore there must either be two Holy Ghosts, one the influence and Power of a meer man, the other the influence or Power of the most high God, or else the Power and  influence of the most high God, in its full force and vigor, must be at the disposal of Christ, and therefore he must be equal with the most high God, since he bestows the same Divine Gift with the same power and efficacy, and therefore he must be the most high God. Thus have we animadverted on our Savi∣viour's own Actions while conversant upon Earth, and have seen how far they contri∣bute to the proof of his Divine Nature. We may read the same in the Actions of his A∣postles after his Ascension. S. Peter makes his Speech before the feast of Pentecost to the Apostles and Brethren about filling that vacancy made in the Apostolical College by the miscarriage of Judas the Traytor. A suf∣ficient evidence this, says Schlichtingius very truly, that He had indeed received the Holy Ghost with effect when his Master breathed, as before, on Him and his Companions: but there was yet a more plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost upon them, to come; their Master had promis'd it, and he took occa∣sion, on the most publick and solemn Occa∣sion to fulfil it, namely, at the feast of Pen∣tecost, when Jerusalem was extremely full of Strangers from all parts. The Apostles were no sooner endued with power from on high, but presently they employ the Heavenly Gift, and preach to purpose to the wondring mul∣titude. S. Peter's discourse is particularly upon record, and in it, after a severe and plain recollection of their great sin in cruci∣fying
the Lord of life and glory, he gives them an account of their present miraculous gifts, which he derives, not from God the Father, but assures them, that Christ being exalted to the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he,Acts 2.33. the same Christ, had himself shed forth that which they then saw and heard, thus the Holy Ghost proceeded equally from the Father and the Son, the first promis'd it, the last gave it: but this was not all, when the wounded multitude came to the Apostles with that weighty question, Men and Brethren what shall we do? Peter said unto them,v. 37, 38. repent and be baptised every one of you in the name of Je∣sus Christ: Was Jesus Christ then God, or was he a meer Man, or, what's the same, a meer Creature? We find no example of a meer man so honoured as that any should be baptised in his name: S. Paul indeed tells the Corinthians that the Fathers, the prede∣cessors of Israel, were all baptised into Moses in the cloud and in the sea,1 Cor. 10.2. meaning the Red Sea and that Cloud which parted them from the Aegyptians at first, and afterwards co∣vered the Tabernacle: This is of the same import with that of being baptised into Christ, and both signifie,Gal. 3.27. being by virtue of a sacred Ordinance admitted into or made members of those Churches, of which Moses in the name of God founded the one, and Christ in his own name founded the other: But we never read of any
Sacramental Institution, by virtue of  which any should be baptised in the name of the Father, and of Moses, and of the Holy Ghost; nor do we find any footsteps of Mens being, circumcised in the name of Moses, nor were the Israelites ever call'd by the name of Moses; Christians yet bear the name of Christ to this day, and justly, since he did and suffered so much for them, and they are baptised in his name:1 Cor. 1.13, it's the Apostles argu∣ment against the dividing Corinthians. And the Apostle, tho' a chosen instrument in the hand of God, for the conversion of the Gentiles, tho' inferiour to none of the A∣postles, and therefore as holy as the holiest of meer men, yet makes it a matter of sa∣tisfaction to himself with respect to the Corinthians, that he had personally baptis'd so very few,v. 14, 15. lest any should have said he had baptis'd in his own name. What the Apostle there writes is worth our more serious con∣sideration: That the Corinthians who be∣lieved, were baptised in the name of Christ, we need not doubt, we see it was one of the first conditions of eternal Salvation propoun∣ded by S. Peter, by
Philip, by Paul in the Jaylors case, therefore not neglected here: Why then should S. Paul be so well pleas'd on this account, that He, in person, had not baptised them? it seems an enquiry thus only and truly to be answer'd: The Co∣rinthians being naturally of a very fickle and dividing humour, were desirous to have some considerable persons to Head, and so to  countenance their several Parties, this hu∣mour made them catch so eagerly at the great names of Apollos and Cephas, as well as of S. Paul himself: this was very unhap∣py: but when only Elders, or Deacons of a common reputation and inferiour rank,Vid. Cle∣ment. Ep. ad Corinth. Coc. t. 1. p. 154. Edit▪ Lab. & Cos. ap∣pear'd in the work of Baptising Converts, their names made none ambitious to be cal∣led after them, nor would it ever enter into any man's head, that such should have bap∣tised Christians in their own Names, as it might have done, had the principal Apostles been the general ministers of that Ordinance: so S. Paul is very fearful here, lest among a Capricious People, his name should seem to stand in competition with that of his Ma∣ster the Lord Jesus Christ: He appears in this case, as tender of Sacrilege or robbing Christ of his, as he was of robbing the most high God of his Honour, when at Lystra he rent his clothes for grief at that levity and madness, whereby the Lystrians were moved to offer Sacrifices to him and Barnabas, as if they had been Gods; but there would not have been so great reason for this extraordi∣nary sollicitude of the Apostle, if Christ him∣self had not been of a Divine Nature, or robbing Him equal to robbing the supreme God of his Honour; and if it had been so great a crime for S. Paul an holy Man, to encroach upon God's Honour, by ascribing any thing of it to
himself, it could be no less a crime in our Saviour, if he were but a meer Man,  a created Being (tho' he were never so ho∣ly) to appropriate any thing of that glory belonging to the supreme God, to himself. Yet, if he were a meer Man, we find him strangely guilty in this point; for as be∣fore his Passion, he requires of his Disciples that they should believe in him, as after his Passion he joyns himself with the Father, and with the Holy Ghost, in the institution of Baptism without any difference at all, so after his Ascension into heaven, he seems to take all care possible, to confirm such an opinion in his Apostles and followers, as ac∣cording to which they must treat him as the Supreme God; for when our Saviour bids his Disciples have Faith in God,Mat. 11.22. doubtless he would not lay that injunction upon them, if Faith, so placed, had not a sanctifying power for such Faith is sufficient to make men Holy and acceptable in the sight of that God with whom they have to do. But when the same Jesus appears to S. Paul in his journey to Damascus, he tells him, He had appear'd to make him a Minister and Witness of what he had seen,Acts 26.16, 17, 18.
Delivering him from the people and from the Gentiles to whom he de∣signed to send him, that he might open their eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and an in∣heritance among them which were sanctified by Faith which was in Him. Here then, besides Christ's assuming to himself a sovereign and  universal power of delivering his servants from all dangers, of Commissioning them for the most weighty Work in the World, of enabling them to open the Eyes of those that heard them, and to turn them from darkness to light, (all which are the effects of a power truely Divine only) He in plain terms asserts, that that Faith which is in him, sanctifies those that have it exclusively of all other Faith whatsoever; for by his words it appears, that forgiveness of sins, and an everlasting inheritance, are only attainable by that Faith: and again the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews reckons Faith in God,Heb. 6.1▪ among the fundamentals of our Religion; these things laid together, will oblige us to conclude, either that there are two kinds of justifying Faith, or such as may render men holy, and acceptable in the sight of God, or else, which is true, that Faith in the most high God and in Jesus Christ is one and the same thing, fixt upon one and the same inseparable Object, and so saving and sanctifying to all them that have it, and S. Paul, in the fore-cited Chapter of the Acts, having shew'd what help Christ promised him, in prosecution of his discourse, de∣clares, he received his help from God, where∣by he was enabled to bear that witness Christ had assured him He would help him in, therefore God and Christ were all One, or the Son of God and his Father were one Supreme God.
That there was this Identity of nature be∣tween the Son of God and his Father, will appear farther, from that account S. Peter gives to the People of the Cure wrought upon the poor Criple at the beautiful gate of the Temple; where reproving them, and tel∣ling them they had killed the Prince of life, a very strange title, by the way, to be given to a meer Man, and such as can be parallel'd in no Author Sacred or Profane, He adds, And his Name,Acts 3.15, 16. through Faith in his Name, has made this Man strong whom ye see and know, yea the Faith which is by him, has given him this perfect soundness, in the presence of you all: here again, the Name of Christ and Faith in his Name, are both set in the high∣est rank, and whatsoever was before pro∣fest to be done in the Name of the True God, was now done in the Name of Christ. Moses and the Prophets appeal'd still in all things to the name of the most high God (and I doubt if Gehazi, when he laid his staff upon the Shunamite's child's face, had commanded it in the name of his Master, to arise, or if his Master afterwards had done as much in his own name, they would both have lost their labours) the case was otherwise here, S. Pe∣ter's word to the Criple was,ver. 6. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk: the Cure was immediately effected: the people wondered: They assert the glory of the Miracle only to the Name of Christ,Acts
4.9, . and they repeat their assertion to the High  Priest, and the rest of the Members of the Jewish Council. Had not the name of Christ been powerful enough to effect the greatest miracles, it had been a foolish presumption in them to have appeal'd to it: the Priests of Baal would not have appear'd more silly in their violent addresses to their paltry Idol, nor the Sons of Sceva in calling over those possest with evil Spirits, the name of Jesus whom Paul preached; Had their invoca∣tion fail'd, it would have exposed all that Religion they pretended to advance, to the common scorn and contempt of all mankind; but that Sacred Name prevail'd, those Mi∣racles which had formerly been perform'd in the name of the most high God, were now perform'd in the name of the Son of God; God did not and could not give his glory to ano∣ther, for he had before declared he would not, therefore that Jesus, the Son of God, in whose name this astonishing Cure was wrought, was really the most high God: It may perhaps be objected, that All power was given to Christ after his Resurrection, by virtue of which, he could give his own name that virtue and authority by which such mighty Miracles as these might be per∣formed: We answer to this, it's true, our Lord did tell his Apostles that all Power was given to him, in heaven and in earth,Mat. 28.18 and He told them so after his Resurrection, but it does not therefore follow that he was not possest of such an universal power before his
body was rais'd from the grave; he adds no word intimating that this power was now invested in him and not sooner, for He might very well forbear to inform his Disciples of it, till he came to his state of exaltation, commencing from his being raised from the dead. But allowing what such Objectors would have, that there was no such Power given him, or that He never had such Power till his Resurrection, They and All know the Philosophical Axiome is of universal truth, Quicquid recipitur recipitur ad mo∣dum recipientis, Whatsoever is received is received according to the capacity of the receiver: and Volkelius tells us in plain terms,De verâ Relig. l. 3. c. 20. p 106. that after his Resurrection the body of Christ was of mortal nature, and no other∣wise partaker of immortality, than by the will of his Father: Now if this be true, tho' God Almighty be able of and from himself to give an
universal Power, as having it in∣herent originally in himself, yet it implyes an absolute contradiction, that he should be able to confer such an infinite Power upon a finite or a mortal Subject; for that would be to setle a double Almightiness in the world, of which one should not be Almighty: or, whereas Omnipotence is such an attribute, as where-ever it resides it must constitute a True and Supreme God, and whereas its such an attribute as cannot stand alone, without a concurrent-infinity in every respect, yet it may rest in a Subject neither God, nor yet Supreme, but in such a one as is still, tho' highly exalted, mortal in its own nature, and capable of destruction or annihilation: For if it depends only on God's Will, that Christ's Body, now exalted to the right hand of his Father, is no more lyable to Death, then, had it pleased God, he might have invested Mo∣ses, or Elias, or Enoch with this same Omni∣potence as well as our Saviour, and our Sa∣viour is no more secure of the continuation of that Omnipotence he is at present possest of, in himself, than the good Angels are of continuing in their present state of bliss, i.e. so long as the supreme God upholds them they are safe; if He withdraw, but for one moment, they are as miserable as their fallen companions. But the very thought of these things are absurd and blasphemous, how∣ever not to be avoided without acknowledg∣ing the eternal Divinity of the Son of God. For the farther evidence of this Truth we must look into the Faith of the Antient Church, and see how this Doctrine, that God was manifest in the flesh, or that, He who was manifest in the flesh was God, the True, the
Supreme, the most High God, is asserted in it. This inquiry we make, not because we think Antiquity infallible, nor because we imagine every opinion, maintained by any Father of the Church, ought to be an authentick prescription to us. Where any of them have in any particular deviated from  the sence of God's holy Word, we value not their opinions a-whit the more for their being antient. But this we must own, that those who lived nearest the times of our Sa∣viour and his Apostles, had the best oppor∣tunities of knowing what they meant, or how those, who personally converst with them understood them; as it's easier for me, who have seen and known my Father, to learn from him what were the thoughts of my Grandfather, or great Grandfather, both which it may be my Father may have seen and converst with, than to find out what particular Opinions were entertained by my Predecessors before the Conquest, and so upwards. Again, where Scripture, and Rea∣son improved from thence, give us a full evi∣dence of any truth, the concurrence and harmony of Antiquity with these evidences, is of great weight, and gives us a fair de∣duction of
divine and necessary Truths thro' all ages, and shews us how, in spite of all the oppositions and artifices made use of by the enemies of Truth, yet God has been pleased to preserve it entire, and to derive it by various chanels down to us, that we, embracing and asserting the same Holy Faith, may be partakers of the same eter∣nal happiness with our predecessors, Pro∣phets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, who have all dyed in the True Faith and fear of God; on this consideration we shall, by God's assistance, give you a short account  of the Primitive Faith in this particular: Here then in due order of time We begin with that Clement, remembred with Honour by S. Paul,Phil. 4.3. as one of those fellow labourers of his, whose names are in the book of life: This Clement was afterwards Bi∣shop of the Church of God in Rome, on which account, and by reason of his great eminence in the Church of God, some of the Factors of that See, have endeavoured to fasten several spurious writings upon him: but the abuse was too gross to impose upon a learned world; However, of his we have one Authentick Epistle, written in the name of the Church of Rome to the Church of Corinth,Conc. Gen. Lab. & Cossart. T. 1. p. 133. B. upon account of a violent Schism broken out in that Church, to the great scan∣dal of the Christian Religion, and to the ob∣struction of the progress of the Gospel: In this Epistle, (tho' nothing were purposely written on the subject we are now treating on) yet there are some not obscure eviden∣ces of what opinion He, and the Church of Rome in whose name he wrote, had in those early days of our blessed Lord: He calls him , a name very great, and such as is no where given to any meer Man: it's designed here to illustrate the
extraordinary dignity of our Saviour, for, by so setting him off, the Apostolical writer enforces his argument upon the Co∣rinthians, to perswade them to Humility, which would be an excellent foundation for  Charity, for, tho' our Lord Jesus Christ were so great, tho' he were the Scepter of the greatness of God, yet he came not, as he might, in an assuming and lofty manner, but with the greatest Humility, and this argu∣ment, S. Hierome in his commentary on the 52 of Isaiah, and the three last verses, ac∣cording to our translation, makes use of to the same purpose, owning Clement for his Author; but now, if the Argument of these great Men was good, it must necessarily fol∣low, that our Saviour had a Being, and a glorious Being too, before he was born of the blessed Virgin, which Birth of his into a ca∣lamitous World, has always been accounted one part of his Humiliation; this Humilia∣tion could not have been thought so consi∣derable had he not been very great and happy before, Christ could not have been so great and glorious, antecedently to his Birth, but He must have been God, and therefore the True the most high God: for there could be, even in a Socinians account, no more but One True God before the Incarnation of our Sa∣viour; You see, my beloved people, says the good Man, what an example is set before you, and if our Lord so humbled himself, viz. if he descended from Heaven to earth for our sakes, how humble should those be who take upon them the yoke of his Gospel? Twice af∣terwards, this same Holy Man concluding his period with Jesus Christ,p. 137. C. adds, To whom be glory and Majesty for ever and ever, Amen.
The same expressions of praise he gives to God the Father several times,p. 156. B. p. 144. B. p. 148. C. p. 160. C.D and what can we conclude, from using such a Doxology indifferently to God the Father, and to Je∣sus Christ his Son, But that He understood them to be of one and the same nature, both Infinitely Glorious, both one proper object of praise and adoration? And the same vene∣rable Author, speaking of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, adds particular∣ly of the last; that from him descended all those Priests and Levites who serve at God's altar, , &c. ,p. 144. A. of him was Jesus Christ, so far as concerned his flesh, of him were the Kings, Princes and Leaders of Judah; where it's observable, that name∣ing our Saviour, He says of him, that, He was of Jacob according to the flesh, by a par∣ticular phrase , according to, or so for as concerned in the flesh; but of the Princes and Levites deduction from that Patriarch, he speaks only in the common way; now this particular way of expressing himself in relation to Christ, must have been very impertinent, had it not been designed to shew the difference there was between the manner of Christ's Descent and Theirs; for never was such a thing said of any meer Man, by any Writer in the world, that He was born of such and such Parents according to the flesh; as it would look ridiculously to say,
David was the Son of Jesse according to  the flesh, the very phrase intimates some dif∣ferent origination, according to some other nature,Rom. 1.3, 4 whatever it be; and the Apostle uses the same expression, in the same distin∣guishing sence. So elsewhere S. Clement calls our Lord ; the same word used by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and by us transla∣ted,Heb. 1.3. the brightness of God's glory, properly enough, or it might be render'd, a beam from the body of his glory, from which ex∣pressions the Antients generally collected, that Christ must be co-eternal with his Father; so S. Chrysostome tells us, the Son is call'd, the brightness of the glory of his Father, as al∣ways existing in the Father, as brightness al∣ways is in Light, for the light cannot be without brightness, nor brightness without light, so the Son cannot be without the Fa∣ther, nor the Father without the Son, for he is begotten of his Essence before all time, and is always with him: to the same purpose, but more largely, speak Theodoret, Gregory Nyssen, Theophylact, &c. and S. Clement to shew his meaning to be the same with that of the Author to the Hebrews, proceeds in a large citation out of that Chapter, from whence we have before evidently prov'd the eternal Divinity of the Son of God: Be∣sides, this unquestionable Epistle of Clement, which we have almost entire, there's a Frag∣ment of another, written by the same ex∣cellent person, to the same Corinthians, not
so generally own'd indeed, but of very great antiquity, being taken notice of by S. Hie∣rome, and before him by Eusebius;Conc. T. 1. p. 181. the very first words of which give us a full proof of the doctrine we now assert. Brethren, says the Writer, We ought to think concerning Jesus Christ as concerning God, as concerning the Judge both of the quick and the dead: If we must think of Christ as of God, we must think and believe that he is God, for so we think always of the Supreme Being: But these passages are sufficient from an Author of so great antiquity. From him we shall proceed to the next Greek Father, Blessed Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, One who had seen Christ himself in the flesh, who is reported by some to have been that Child whom our Saviour took in his arms:Mark 9.36 who conversed frequently with the Apostles, He left several Epistles behind him, to se∣veral Churches, full of excellent advices, and truly savouring of an Apostolical Spirit and temper. In Him we meet with many evidences of his belief, that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was the real, the True God. So in the very first words of his first Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, He begins,Epist. ad Smyrn. E∣dit. Voss.
, I glorifie Jesus Christ who is God, he is with him, , the God, with an article, the want of which the So∣cinians so frequently cavil at in Scripture, that Article is certainly exclusive of all other Gods. The Son he is the only True God, the  Father is the same True God, not two Gods, but two persons and one God, or one Deity: this is a plain passage and needs no descant upon it. In the conclusion of his Letter to Polycarp, then Bishop of the Church of Smyr∣na, (the same who is called the Angel of the Church of Smyrna by S. John in the Revela∣tions, who dyed afterwards a Martyr for the truth) he gives Polycarp this salutation, I pray that Grace may be always with thee in Jesus Christ our God;Ad Polyc. he neither prefixes nor sub∣joyns any thing to the words, that might allay the sence, or make it ambiguous, it is an entire sentence, and as clearly owns, that He thought Jesus Christ was God, and that he wrote to another, who had the same Faith, in that respect, with himself; So that the real Deity of the Son of God, was no strange Doctrine in those days. In the In∣scription of his next Epistle to the Ephesians, He stiles that Church predestinated from the beginning,Ad Ephes. or before all worlds, to everlasting glory, according to the will of the Father, and Jesus Christ our God; where he plainly makes the Father and Jesus Christ one God, to which blessed Jesus he ascribes the same character, of an absolute Deity, with his Father. So again in the beginning of the Epistle it self, he tells the
Ephesians, they bore an honourable reputation, and justly gain∣ed by their Faith and Love, in Jesus Christ our Saviour, being imitators of God, and re∣enflamed, or revived by the blood of God:  An expression, like that of S. Paul to the Elders of the same Church, when he tells them, God had made them overseers of that Church,Act. 20.28 which he had purchased with his own blood; Now we cannot, with any propriety of speech, call any blood the blood of God, unless it be really his, and it cannot be his as he is God, therefore he must have as∣sumed some such nature, as wherein his blood might be shed, which might, and did come to pass, by his taking our nature; but our Nature being substantially united to that which was before eternal and Divine, and so God and Man being but one Christ, when Christ, as Man, shed his most precious blood for our sakes, that blood was, properly and truely, called the blood of God, or God's own blood. But we meet with yet plainer evi∣dence in the same Epistle: so I take those words of his to belong to Christ, Nothing lies hid from the Lord, (that is the common title of our Saviour, in all Apostolical wri∣tings,) but even our most secret things are near to him: Let us then do all things, as if He lived in us, that we may be his Temples, and He may be God in us, which also he is and will appear before our faces, for which reasons we justly love him: I the more readily ap∣ply this, which argues Omniscience, to Christ (and is no more than what Scripture openly ascribes to him, as I have formerly shew'd) because soon after he earnestly asks that Question,
Wherefore then are not we all wise  embracing the knowledge of God, which God is Jesus Christ? and presently after asking the Apostle's question, Where is the wise Man? where is the disputer? where is the glo∣rying of those who were reputed men of Ʋnder∣standing? He subjoyns, For our God, Jesus the Christ, was conceived of Mary according to divine order of the seed or line of David by the Holy Ghost: I durst now appeal to all Mankind, whether they would not conclude, that whosoever should speak of any Being whatsoever at this rate, would not be thought to account the Person he spoke of in such broad terms, Real God? and whe∣ther a good rational Deist would not con∣clude, that if He, so spoken of, were no more than a meer Creature, He who should so speak of him ought not to pass at least for a Borderer upon Idolatry? For it's ratio∣nally expected that, in such weighty mat∣ters, Mens Words should be the proper in∣terpretation of their Thoughts, and not pester'd with dubious or uncertain, or un∣intelligible phrases. In the same Epistle he calls our Lord , God appearing humanely, or, in the same man∣ner as men do, clothed with flesh and blood, and endued with a rational soul; which is but an∣other way of expressing the Text, God was manifest in the flesh. Would you then have his pre-existence as God, before he was con∣ceived in the womb of the blessed Virgin? our Ignatius asserts that too, in his Epistle  to the Magnesians,Ad Mag∣nes. p. 33, 34. viz. That He was with his Father before all time, and in the end, or in the fulness of time, at last he appear'd, and afterwards, There is one God, who manifested himself by his Son Jesus Christ, who is his , his eternal word, agreeably to S. John in the beginning of his Gospel. Again in his Epistle to the Trallians; and twice in the Inscription of his Epistle to the Romans, He gives the title of God to our Saviour, nay of our God; and toward the end of that Epistle He begs of the Romans, that they would not go about to hinder his Martyrdom then at hand, no: Permit me, says he earnestly; to be an imitator of the sufferings of Christ my God, and again,Ad Roma∣nos, p. 60. he calls him My God twice over in the subsequent two or three lines. The Prophets frequently reflect upon it as Idolatry to say to an Image thou art my God: and I am not yet convinced by any Socinian argument, that it is not Idolatry to say the same to any created Being whatsoever: At best, the Apostles themselves and those emi∣nent Apostolical men, if our Lord be no more by nature than a meer man, must needs be condemned of extreme imprudence and uncharitableness; who when they might as well have express'd their minds otherwise, would yet make choice of such words as were nly apt to deceive and impose upon Men, o give them false notions of God and Jesus Christ, and either make them Idolaters at
st; or at least very near borderers upon it;  Words that are figurative, may be easily mis∣understood by very good Men, in ordinary cases, as we see his Companions concluded, S. John should never die, only from our Sa∣viour's words to S. Peter, If I will that He tarry till I come, what is that to thee? How much more dangerous then must such Words be, especially when continually used in mat∣ters of the greatest weight. It were easie to give more of the same nature from Igna∣tius his Epistles, if we'd meddle with those spurious or interpolated, but we need no such precarious assistances. The next of the Fathers of the Greek Church, in order of time, is Justine, com∣monly stiled the Martyr, because he dy'd such, for his obedience to the Faith of Christ: He liv'd about one hundred and forty years after the birth of our Saviour: I shall not go about to prove the Divinity of our Savi∣our, out of the , or the Ex∣position of Faith, printed, as his, among his Works, tho' it would afford us a great deal, because the credit of it is doubtful, and learn∣ed men think they have reason to believe our Justine was not the Author of it. I shall therefore only examine what's of unquesti∣onable authority in him. In his Apology for the Christians, presented to the
Roman Se∣nate,Apolog. 1. p. 44. l. D. among other things, he tells them, The names of Father, and God, and Creator, and Lord, and Master, are not the proper names of God, but names derived from his Works,  and those favours he has extended towards Men: but his Son, who alone is properly called his Son, the Word, who was with him and be∣gotten of him, before all creatures, because in the beginning God created and adorned all things by him, was called Christ, he being anoin∣ted, and God beautifying every thing by him: here then we have, what the Evangelist had taught us before, literally understood and confirmed, That the Word was in the begin∣ning with God, and that by him all things were made: the holy Martyr thought of no figure or ambiguity in the discourse. The same Martyr in his second Apology for the Chri∣stians presented to Antoninus Pius the Ro∣man Emperour, in asserting the Justice and Reason of that Faith in Christ which He and his Christian brethren profest, lays down a clear proof of Christ's being God, and con∣sequently of the reasonableness of their ser∣vice to him, in giving an account of that
burning Bush which Moses saw, and out of which he heard a voice; for at that time when Moses, as he was feeding his Father-in-law's sheep, was ordered to go into Egypt, and to bring out from thence the people of Israel, , Our Christ spoke to him out of the bush under the resemblance of fire, and bids him loose his shooes off his feet, and attend him; and receiving abundance of strength, and courage from that Christ, with whom he discours'd, He went down and (glo∣rious  and terrible with a thousand miracles) led that people from their bondage.Apolog. 2. p. 5. l. B. The Jews themselves confess, says he, that it was that God whose name was unknown or unutter∣able, who then discoursed with Moses, but the Martyr himself says, it was our Christ, there∣fore if the Martyr's opinion were true, Our Christ is the Lord Jehovah, the most high God. The Martyr urges his argument yet farther, with reflections upon the Jewish incredulity: That Angel which spoke to Moses out of the burning bush, said to him, I am that God, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob, the God of thy Fathers, Go down therefore into Egypt and lead forth my people: A Socinian himself will own, that that Name was never due to any but to the most high God, (tho' they fly to figures there too) We urge this, says the Father, only that we may prove, that that Jesus Christ, in whom we believe, is the Son and Messenger of God, who being the Word before, had sometime ap∣pear'd in the resemblance of fire, sometimes in the form of Angels, now at last, by the Will of God, was made Man, for the sake of mankind, and for their sakes suffered whatsoever Jewish cruelty and malice could inflict upon him; who while they own'd it was God the Creator and maker of all things, who spake to Moses in the bush, and yet He, that there spoke, was the Son, the Angel, the Messenger of God indeed, they laid themselves open to that just reproof of our Lord, that they neither knew the Father, nor  the Son. We argue too from hence, that if it were our Christ, who appear'd to Moses in the Bush, as Justine affirms, and Scripture sufficiently evidences, if it were our Christ, what name soever he might be call'd by, he then was pre-existent, or had a real being be∣fore he was conceived in the womb of the blessed Virgin; therefore he could be no meer Man, unless the Socinians can find out the way to satisfie the question of Nicode∣mus by asserting positively, that a Man, a meer Man, may be born when he is old, that he may, literally, enter again into his mothers womb and be born a-new, and can prove it when they have asserted it. He could be no Angel, that's denyed in Scripture, the A∣postle assures us,Heb. 2.16. He took not upon him the na∣ture of Angels, a speech very idle, if he had been an Angel originally: if therefore he neither was a meer Man, nor a created Angel, he was and must be the supreme God. Again, the same Justine in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew,Dial. cum Tryph. Jud. p. 267. l. B. C. when
Trypho urges him with his absurd assertion, That Christ was God before all ages, and yet had condescended to become Man; Justine answers him, The truth would not therefore be lost if he should fail in his proofs, that Christ was the Son of the world's Creator, and that he was God: because, how∣ever, it had been foretold by the Prophets, that he should be so: but if I do not prove that He had a being before, and then condescended to become Man, and took flesh, according to his  Father's design and determination,p. 275. & dcinceps, it's only proper to conclude that I am a weak disputant, not that he, who bore that Character, is not the Christ. When Trypho afterwards bids him prove, that there was or could be an∣other God, besides the maker of the Uni∣verse, the Martyr stumbles not at the pro∣position, but proceeds to prove the thing by that instance of the Lord, before whom Abraham stood, when the two Angels went forwards towards Sodom; and falls again upon the forementioned instance of Christ speaking to Moses in the Bush, by both which he proves that the Son is God, as well as the Father is God, and yet he asserts not two Gods, but one God, because if two or three Beings are partakers of one divine Na∣ture, they must of consequence be one God, the divine Nature being indivisible and in∣capable of degrees or diminution. After a large discourse with the Jew, he tells him, that in the several arguments he had brought, he had sufficiently proved, that Christ was Lord and God, and the Son of God, who had ap∣pear'd both as a Man,p. 357. D. and as an Angel, in the burning Bush, and at the destruction of Sodom: And Trypho all along looks upon him as en∣gag'd in that design of proving Christ to be God, not by a figure, but in reality. He concludes the Scriptures were very express in their evidence, that that Christ, who had suffered so much at the Jews hands, was to be worshipped and was God; had he not prov'd
the last well, that He was God, to have as∣serted the first, that he ought to be worshipped, would have sounded very harshly in the ears of a Jew: But even Trypho himself, who thought it prodigious and incredible that God should be born and should con∣descend to become Man, tho' none of the most tractable persons in the world, was brought to Agrippa's condition by the zea∣lous Martyr, and almost perswaded to be a Christian. About the same time lived S. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyons in France, one who had been a Hearer of blessed Polycarp, who had been himself an Hearer of the Apostles; He had certainly the advantage of knowing what was sound and true Doctrine, with re∣lation to our Saviour, and that from very authentick hands; his writings were origi∣nally Greek, as himself was by Birth, tho' employed to preach the Gospel in the parts of France, but those Originals are almost all lost, and we must necessarily content our selves with their Translation: This excel∣lent Father then tells us first, what the gene∣ral Faith of the Church is, That the Church believes in one God,Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 2. the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth,
&c. and in one Jesus Christ the Son of God, incar∣nate for our Salvation, and in the Holy Ghost, who among other things, has taught us that, according to the good pleasure of the invisible Father, every knee of things  in Heaven, and of things on Earth, and of things under the Earth, should bow to Jesus Christ our Lord, our God, our Savi∣our and our King, and that every tongue should confess to him; and this passage we have in the genuine original, and it seems satisfactory enough as to the Faith of the French Church in those days; and doubtless was look'd upon by him as the Faith gene∣rally embraced by all the true professors of Christianity;C. 3. and indeed so he assures us, in the following chapter of the same book; That the Church spread through the whole world, diligently maintains this Faith, and observes it as exactly, as if they all inhabited in one house, they believe it, as if they had all one heart and one soul, and with a wonder∣ful consent, preach it as it were with one mouth. We then are safe enough, while we believe Jesus Christ to be God, since holy Martyrs, nay the whole Church of God believed the same truth so long since; and making it a part of their publick Creed, declared their judgment, that so to believe was necessary to eternal Salvation. Having afterwards told us what the Apostles have preached, and how they have prov'd
Him true, and that there was no falshood in him; he proceeds in the next chapter thus, Therefore neither our Lord himself, nor the Holy Ghost, nor the A∣postles, would have called any one God, abso∣lutely and definitively, unless he had really been true God, nor would they have called any  one Lord, in his own person,l. 3. c. 6. but only Him who is Lord of all things, God the Father and his Son; and so he proceeds to enumerate seve∣ral Texts, wherein the name of God and Lord, is indifferently given to both the Fa∣ther and the Son: and elsewhere he teaches us,c. 18. That our Lord is called Immanuel by the Prophet, as cited by S. Matthew, or God with us, that we might not think he was Man only, but that we might know he was God too: If then Christ was God as well as Man, his Divine Nature being mentioned in contradistinction to his humane Nature: Irenaeus cannot mean that He who was really a Man, was only me∣taphorically God, but that he was as really and essentially God as He was Man, which is what we believe. With Irenaeus agrees Clemens of Alexan∣dria, who thus teaches the Gentiles, in his Admonition to them;
We are the rational Creatures of God the Word (so he calls our Saviour after the Evangelist S. John,)Admon. ad Gent. p. 5. l. D. by whom we pretend to Antiquity, because God the Word was in the beginning; but because the Word was from above, He was and is the divine original of all things: but since He has now taken upon him the name of Christ, a name suitable to his power, and which was sanctified of old, I call him a new song; (This refers to his former Allegorical discourse, wherein he endeavours to describe every thing, under terms proper to Harmony or Musick) This Word then, this Christ who was at first in God, was both the cause of our ori∣ginal existence, and of our well-being: But now this Word himself, has made him∣self manifest to men, who alone is both God and Man, the cause of all our good; by whom, we, being taught to live well, are sent from hence to eternal life; for ac∣cording to that inspired Apostle of our Lord, the Grace of God hath appear'd to all men, teaching them, that denying all ungodli∣ness and worldly lusts, we should live godly, righteously and soberly in this present world, looking for the glorious coming of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; This is the new song, that manifestation of God the Word, who was in the beginning and before all things, and now shines brightly. out to us; He ap∣pear'd but lately, who was our Saviour be∣fore. He who is, appear'd in him who is, because the Word was with God, and that Word, by which all things were made, makes his appearance as a Master; that Word, which, as a Creator, gave us life in our first formation, appearing now as a Ma∣ster or Teacher, has taught us to live well, that hereafter, as God, he may bestow upon us eternal life: Thus far that very learned Father; and his whole discourse does so plainly teach us the Pre-existence of our Saviour, before his Conception in the Womb of the blessed Virgin, and conse∣quently his Divine Nature, in his eternal
being with the Father, that the most igno∣rant person in the World, may plainly un∣derstand what the Faith of this Writer was. Thus afterwards speaking of John Baptist, the forerunner of our Saviour, he tells them, John taught men to be prepared for the pre∣sence , of God the Christ. After∣wards, speaking of that care our Saviour took to have the Gospel preached, he adds, The Lord did not effect so great work in so short a time without a sacred care; He was despised in appearance, but adored in∣deed; being a Purifyer, a Saviour, and extremely kind: The Divine Word be∣ing really most manifest God, and put into an equal rank with the Lord of all things, for as much as he was his Son, and the Word was in God,Ibid. p. 68. l. D. he was neither disbe∣lieved when he was first preached, nor was he unknown or unacknowledged, when as∣suming the presence of a Man, and being made flesh, he managed the saving design of his assumed Humanity. Again speaking to those who are blind with sin and folly, un∣der the person of Tiresias, that blind The∣bane Wizzard, and inviting such to believe in Christ, he speaks thus,
If thou wilt, thou too shalt be initiated into these My∣steries, and join in the Choir of blessed An∣gels about the unbegotten, the never to be destroyed, the only true God: God the Word, assisting in the same Hymn with us, He is eternal, the only Jesus or Saviour,  the great High-priest of God, who is the Father,p. 70. L D. he intercedes for Men, and he per∣swades them to goodness. I shall instance but in one passage more in his , where having cited that of the Psalmist, Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord, or who shall stand in his holy place, &c. at large, He thus descants upon it: The Prophet, says He, in my opinion, here briefly describes the true Gnostick, or the man of true knowledge to us, and by the bye, David shews us, that our Saviour is God, for he calls him, the face of the God of Jacob, who brought us glad tidings, and taught us of, or concerning the Spirit, therefore the Apostle calls the Son, the Character of the glory of God, Him who taught the truth concerning God, and who represented to us that God and the Father was one only and Almighty, whom none could know but the Son,Stromat. l. 7. p. 733. C. and He to whom the Son shall reveal him: That God is but one appears by those who seek the face of the God of Jacob, whom our God and our Saviour characterises, as the only God and father of Good. Here then we have the Father true and real God, the Son true and real God, and yet but one God, and this is that Faith which we preach. To Clemens, I shall only add his Scholar
Origen for the Greek Church, a man of extra∣ordinary eminence in his time, who in his third Book against Celsus, that great adver∣sary  of the Christian Religion, reflecting upon the vanity of Heathen Gods and their incapacity to help those that depend on them, he tells Celsus, that upon this very reason, because there is no help in false gods, it's a sure Rule among Christians, that no man should trust in any being as God, except only in Jesus Christ; and a little after, whereas Celsus objects against us so often, that we believe Jesus, consisting of a mortal body, to be God, and imagine our selves very pious in so thinking, he answers, Let those who accuse us know, that He whom we know and believe to be God of old, and to be the Son of God, he is of himself the Word, the Wisdom and the Truth; and that even that mortal body and reasonable Soul which he assumed by its Communica∣tion, and Unity and Mixture with the Word, or with his divine nature, arose to so great a height, as to be God, i.e. his hu∣mane and his divine nature make by a substan∣tial or essential union, one God; and that I give no false interpretation to his words here, will appear by what I shall allege after∣wards. It's all along the humour of Celsus, then when he speaks in the Person of a Jew, and when he speaks in his own Name and Person, to reproach the Christians with the irrationality of their Religion on that particu∣lar account, that they owned Christ as God:Contra Celsum, l. 1. p. 30▪ so he objects, that Christ was educated in the dark, was hired a servant in Aegypt, that he there
tryed their magick powers, and returning from thence, in confidence of his jugling tricks set up for a God. Origen vindicates him from the ma∣licious imputation of being a Magician, but never pretends to deny that he was God, or that he assumed that title; nay he's so far from that, that he takes a great deal of pains to prove that He was God, particularly from those passages of the 45 Psalm cited by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews in his first chapter, which I have clear'd before; and he adds, that we must here consider the Prophet speaking to that God, whose throne is everlasting,l. 1. p. 43. and that he asserts that God was anointed by God, who was His God, with the oyl of gladness above his fellows, which is the real sence of the words, and which, he tells us, he had formerly silenc'd an obstinate Jew with. In his second book, Celsus introduces a Jew speaking against Christ, and saying, they could not own him for God, who did not make good his word, who endeavoured poorly to avoid Death, and was at last betrayed by one of his own fol∣lowers, &c. Origen answers,
Christians did neither believe the body of Christ nor his soul to be God, but the , the Word, the Son of the God of all things, was God; that Christians justly condemn the Jews, who acknowledge not him to be God, whom their own Prophets so often give testimony to, as a powerful Being and as God, which he is by the witness of the great God and Fa∣ther of all things himself: That when God  in the beginning of the world said, Let us make Man in our Image, the , the Word, perform'd all that his Father com∣manded, for if according to that of the Psal∣mist, He said and they were made,l. 2. p. 6. he com∣manded and all things were created, if at God's command, all the Creatures were framed, who, according to the meaning of the prophetical Spirit, was able to put in execution such his Father's command, but He who was the living Word and Truth it self? The Word then in the beginning of all things was with God, and the Word was God, and without him nothing was made that was made: It's the Doctrine of S. John and of O∣rigen too: So far then we may know how the beginning of S. John's Gospel was under∣stood in his days, and what they thought might conveniently be proved from thence. When the Jew afterwards is brought in ob∣jecting, that Men who are partakers of the same Table, would not lye in wait for one ano∣ther, much less would any one have treacherous designs upon God.p. 74. Origen might easily have an∣swered that cavil by denying that He was God, and then by giving instances of Men false and treacherous to those who have ea∣ten with them at the same Table: but He owns his Godhead, and only performs the latter. Celsus afterwards brings in his Jew objecting against the Divinity of Christ thus,
Who ever heard of God coming down from hea∣ven to earth on purpose to perswade Men, as  they say Christ did, and failing in his design, especially when he was long expected and hoped for? a denyal of his Divinity had put a full stop to this objection too; but Origen, on the contrary, retorts upon them, That the Jews themselves were instance enough of the possibility of such a thing, since God had appear'd so remarkably to them, in bring∣ing them up out of the land of Aegypt, and in giving them a Law from Sina, and yet they nor their Fathers could by that means be perswaded to obedience, or pre∣vented from running presently into Idola∣try.p. 106. After all this, Celsus, in his own person, makes use of this argument to prove that Christ could not be God; God, says He, is good, and pure, and happy, and in himself infi∣nitely excellent, and lovely, if He should descend to be among Men, He must necessarily undergo a change, a change from good to bad, from pure to impure, from happiness to misery, and from the most excellent to the most sinful state, this God would never undergo: To this the Father answers,
That it's true, God is in himsel Immutable, nor did he suffer any change o this account: But that which descended down to Men was in the form of God; but, out of his Love to mankind, he debased him∣self so far, as that he might be born among them, but He suffer'd no change from ba to good, for that He was without Sin, he ne∣ver committed any; He was not chang'd from pure or clean, to foul or filthy, for H  did not so much as know Sin; nor did he fall from happiness to misery; He humbled him∣self indeed, but was not a whit the less hap∣py, even when he stoop'd the lowest for the good of mankind: nor did he fall from the best to the most sinful state, because what he did, proceeded from Love and Charity to us: by being among whom, He, that was the great Physician of Souls, could be no more altered for the worse, than a Physician for the body is, by conversing with those that are sick and full of diseases. But, says he, if Celsus think, that because the immor∣tal God the Word, assumed a mortal body, and an humane Soul, that therefore He suf∣fered an alteration or a change; Let him know, that the Word, essentially continuing the Word still, suffers by none of those things which happen either to the body or the Soul: but that He condescends to be∣come flesh, and to speak in a Body,l. 4. p. 169, 170. for the sake of those who are not able to behold the eradiations and brightness of his Divinity, so long, till He, who receives him, being in a short time rais'd to a greater understand∣ing by the Word, may be able to contem∣plate his original nature. And finally in his sixth book against the same Celsus, he speaks hus excellently,
If then Celsus enquire how we think to know God, and to be saved with him, We will answer him, That He, who is the word of God, being in them who seek him, or who wait for his appearance, is  sufficient to make known and to reveal the Father, who was not to be seen before His appearance; for who else can save the Soul of Man, and guide us in every thing to God, but only God the Word? who being in the beginning with God, for the sake of those who are confin'd to flesh became flesh, that he might be comprehended by those who were not able to see him as He was the Word, and as He was with God, and as He was God;l. 6. p. 322. and appearing in flesh, and speak∣ing in the body, He calls those, who are in the flesh, to himself, that first he might make them like to the Word, which was made flesh, and afterwards might raise them to see himself indeed, and what He was be∣fore He was made flesh. The passages are enow and plain enough to shew us what Origen thought true Doctrine concerning the Son of God our Saviour. Up∣on the whole, what a silly and impertinent ad∣versary was Celsus throughout a large dis∣course, written only to expose Christianity to contempt and hatred, to make a continual noise about the impossibility of our Saviour's being God? and what a shallow and ignorant advocate was Origen for Christianity, to write so many books, principally to prove the Faith of Christians rational in this point, when in the mean time, if we may believe our Socinian Adversaries, the Christians, in those early ages, believed no such thing, nor ever dream'd of Christ's being any more
than a meer Man? Men who intend to do any service to the cause they undertake, or to procure themselves any reputation by their writings, use to consider what and who it is they write for or against; but it's meer childs play, for a Man to set himself up a thing of clouts, that he may throw stones at it to knock it down, while another takes as much pains to keep it standing. Certainly
Celsus knew better what he oppos'd, and was sufficiently convinced, that the Christi∣ans did really believe Christ was God. We saw before that the Author of the Dialogue, called Philopatris, among Lucian's, understood the Christians so; and Pliny (who liv'd before either of our Disputants, who had by his office of Proconsul great opportunities of knowing what tenets the Christians main∣tain'd, who had often examined them with tortures, and punish'd them with Death it self, for their supposed obstinacy in their errors.) He, too, understood the Christians in the same manner, and therefore in that account he gives the Emperor Trajane of them, among other things, he takes notice of their Coetus antelucani, their meetings be∣fore day-break (which they were forc'd to, for the better securing themselves from the Pagan furies) in which meetings among the rest of their religious rites, they did Car∣men Christo ut Deo canere, They presented their Prayers or sung Hymns to Christ as God: but this Heathens themselves would  have accounted a bold mocking heaven, had not they believed he was God indeed whom they so worshipped as God; from which Ger∣rhard Vossius, in his Commentary on that Epistle of Pliny, as also Rittershusius, con∣clude,Vià. ad Calcem E∣pistolarum Pliniana∣rum Edit. Hackianae That tho' the Heathen world looked upon our Lord as a Sophister only, and a cheat, yet the Christians always acknowledged him to be God: Vossius tells us the very name of Hymns intimates that they belonged to God, for so he says, a hymn is , a Psalm to God, and never used otherwise, except once or twice in poeti∣cal writings, and refers us to Eusebius, who from a nameless Author,Historiae Eccles. l. 5. c. 27. but about the Age wherein Irenaeus liv'd, takes notice of ma∣ny Psalms and Hymns composed from the beginning, by Faithful Brethren, who in those compositions declared Christ the Word of God to be God: Thus the Writings of Hea∣thens themselves, and of such who have been the greatest enemies of Christianity, have been, by Divine Providence, preserved to give unanswerable evidence to those truths, which some false pretenders to Chri∣stianity, have endeavoured to explode, and to satisfie us of our consent with those an∣tient Saints and Martyrs in the most weigh∣ty particulars of our Holy Religion. We have now done with the Greek, we come next to the Latin Fathers; And here we must in the first place take notice of
Ter∣tullian,  a Man of vast abilities, and most acute in his reasonings, and whom Schlich∣tingius esteems almost the Parent of our Doctrine concerning the Trinity; he's the eldest Writer we have in the Latin Lan∣guage, and very plain in the case before us. Tertullian then in his book de Patientiâ,Tertul. de Pat. Edit. Par. 1545. p. 3. for an example of Patience, recommends to us our dear Redeemer, Nasci se Deus in utero patitur matris, &c.
God suffers himself to be born in the womb of his Mother, and waits for his birth: Being born, He endures gradually to grow up, being grown up, He's not ambitious to be taken notice of, but even debases himself, and is baptised by his own servant, and repels the Tempters assaults only with his Word: So He, who had resolved to clothe himself with flesh, had yet nothing of Humane impatience about him. Here we see he calls our Saviour God positively, and makes a great use of that notion of his be∣ing so. Thus again in his book de Carne Christi, written against Marcion, who was so far from denying Christ to be God, that he fell into a contrary error, and would be∣lieve he was nothing else but God; that the Flesh he assumed was a meer Phantasme, a Body in appearance, but nothing at all in re∣ality; and so all the actions he did, all the sufferings he underwent, were only seeming actions, and seeming sufferings, and no more; and a principal reason he pitched upon for  his opinion, was this, He thought the Birth or nativity of God was an impossibility, but why should Marcion pitch upon this fancy, if he had not known, that all the professors of Christianity took Christ to be God? Or why should any trouble themselves to recon∣cile God's being clothed with flesh, to a possibility, when the best method to have confuted Marcion, (as before we observ'd in the case of Origen) would have been to have prov'd, that our Saviour was so far from having only the outward appearance of a Man, that he was really a meer Man, and nothing else? But says Tertullian to this, Sed Deo nihil est impossibile, nisi quod non vult,De Carne Christi, p. 8. &c.
But nothing is impossible to God, but what's disagreeable to his Will: Let us consider then if it were his Will to be born, for, if he would, he certainly could be so; In short, if God would not have been born, neither would he have ap∣peared as a Man on any account; for who would not have thought him born into the World, had they seen him in the form of a Man? Therefore if he would not be a Man, he would not seem so; for it signified nothing to those that saw him, whether He really was a Man or not, since, by see∣ing him, they concluded he was so. But whereas Marcion objected, He denyed God could be converted into Man so as to be born, and to be incorporated with flesh, because He that is Eternal must also necessarily be Ʋn∣changeable,  Tertullian makes this a pecu∣liarity of the Divine nature, which sets it higher than any thing created, that where∣as created Beings, upon a change, lose their former nature, God does not so, but is God still, tho' he be clothed with flesh; and ar∣gues, that if Angels of old could assume real bodies, and yet be Angels or Spirits still, much more must it be believed that God could do the same: Thus still he pro∣secutes his Argument, and all his care was to prove, not that Christ was God, for that was granted on all hands, but that he was Man, which some denyed upon that very ground, because he was God without contro∣versie. Again in his book of Prescriptions against Hereticks,De Prae∣scrip. p. 36. He lays down somewhat like the form of a Creed, and agreeable to our own: Where first he says,
They be∣lieved one God, the World's Creator, who produced all things out of nothing by his Word; that Word, his Son was cal∣led by the name of God, variously seen by the Patriarchs, always heard in the Pro∣phets, at last brought, by the power and Spirit of God the Father, into the womb of the Virgin Mary; He took flesh of Her, and was born of Her, and so became the Man Jesus Christ, &c. Here we have our Saviour's Existence, antecedently to his birth of the blessed Virgin, not only asser∣ted, but declared as the general Doctrine and Tradition of the Catholick Church; and  that less than two hundred years after our Saviour's Passion; and made use of as a Prescription against an Heretick: Now Marcion, if he had not been well assured, that Tertullian asserted no more than what was the current Doctrine of the Catholick Church, might easily have baffled all Ter∣tullian's pretence to Prescription, by shew∣ing him that all the Christians of the for∣mer Age were utterly ignorant of his pre∣tended Articles of Faith; but we never hear of any such Reply made: Tho' we have no reason to doubt, but that the He∣reticks of those ages were as earnest to maintain their Errors, as those are who tread in their footsteps in this. After this, in the same book Tertullian reflects upon other capital Hereticks: So he tells us that Cerinthus maintained,fol. 41. that Christ was only of the seed of Joseph, a meer Man, without any Divine Nature: He tells us again, that Theodotus of Byzantium bla∣sphemed Christ, for He too brought in a Doctrine, quâ Christum Hominem tantum∣modo diceret, Deum autem illum negaret. Wherein he taught that Christ was a meer Man, and that he was not God; that He was indeed born of a Virgin, thro' the Holy Ghost,fol. 42. otherwise He was only a Man, no better than others, but as his Goodness gave him a greater authority than others. If
Tertullian then took Theodotus to be an Heretick, on account of this Doctrine, it  can scarce be doubted, but he'd have taken Socinus and his Partners for the same, had they liv'd in those days; and I find our Socinians doing so much right to this Theo∣dotus, as fairly to reckon him among the Patrons of their opinions. If we go farther with Tertullian, we find him assaulting the same Heretick Marcion again, and arguing God's extraordinary goodness, from that great Humiliation of himself to take humane nature upon him: He concludes his argu∣ment at last with this, Totum deni{que} Dei mei penes vos dedecus,Adversus Mar. l. 2. f. 68. sacramentum est Humanae salutis, &c. All that, which, in your opinion, is so disgraceful to the God I believe in, is the Seal of our Salvation; God converst with Man, that Man might learn to do those things that are divine: God acted suitably with Man, that Man might endea∣vour to act agreeably to God: God was found in a mean state, that Man might be exalted to the utmost; He that despises such a God, can hardly be thought to be∣lieve in God crucified. In another book against the same Marcion, he argues, from the antient apparitions of Angels, that Christ tho' God, had a true and real body,
We will not yield to thee, says he, that An∣gels had only a fantastick body, but those bodies they assumed had a true, solid, hu∣mane substance; this elsewhere he makes good; it follows, If it were not hard for Christ, to exert the true sence and action  of a Man in imaginary flesh, it was much easier to make true and substantial flesh, (as he was the Author and maker of it,) to be the subject of true common sence and acti∣on: Thy God was fain to appear in an imaginary body,l. 3. fol. 72. because he was not able to produce a real one; But my God, who without pursuing the common course of nature, could make real flesh of Earth, could have invested Angels with real bo∣dies of any kind whatsoever: For with a word He made the world of nothing, and shaped it into so many various bodies as we see: Then he tells us, Angels had flesh truly humane, and connate with the time they appear'd in, because Christ only him∣self was to be flesh of flesh, that by his Birth, he might purifie ours; that by his Death, he might free us from the slavery of Death; he rising again in that flesh, in which he was born, only that he might die: Therefore He appear'd in a true body, ac∣companied with Angels, to Abraham; but not a body that was born, because it was not that body which was to die. In conse∣quence of this discourse, which proves our Saviour's Pre-existence to his Birth,fol. 73. he urges his Adversary with that name of Immanuel, or God with us; from whence, proving the
reality of his divine, he regularly infers the equal reality of his humane nature. If we pro∣ceed, we find the same Father publishing his Faith, in the beginning of his book against  Praxeas: He was an Heretick, so far yet from believing Christ to be a Creature, or a meer Man, that he asserted it was God the Father who was born of the Virgin, and crucified and Dead, and that He was Jesus Christ: In op∣position to him the Father declares, As we are instructed by the Holy Ghost,Adv. Prax. fol. 144. which leads us into all truth, We believe one God; and that the Word is the Son of that one God; who was begotten of him; by whom all things were made, and without whom nothing was made; that he was sent, by the Father, into the Virgin, and born of Her, Man and God, the Son of Man and the Son of God; and called Jesus Christ: This was then his Faith, and with him Christ had a being before he was born into the World, and was, what we assert, the Creator of all things: Thus afterwards he tells us, in the same book, the Father is God,fol. 147. the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and di∣lates upon, and vindicates that truth: He tells us that the Father is God Almighty and most high,fol. 149. and that the Son justly claims the same titles, and that the Father and the Son are one God; and indeed,c. 21.22. fol. 219, 220. the farther proof of this, is the general design of that book. He confirms the same Doctrine in his Apo∣logy for Christianity against the
Gentiles. Besides these books, he wrote one particu∣larly concerning the Trinity, where, among other things, quoting the words of the Pro∣phet Hosea, I will not save them by my bow,  nor by horses,Hos. 1.7. nor by horsemen, but I will save them by the Lord their God: He infers from thence, If God promises them Salvation in their God, or by him, and yet saves them only by Christ, why should any Man be afraid to call Christ God, since he is cal∣led so by his Father in Scripture? Nay, if the Father saves none but by God, no man can be sav'd by God the Father, who does not confess Christ to be God; in and by whom God promises to give salvation; whosoever acknowledges him to be God, shall obtain Salvation in Christ,De Trinit. fol. 236. who is God; whosoever acknowledges him not to be God, shall not be sav'd by him: With a great deal more to the same purpose. In conclusion, he takes notice of some, who, in those days, argued at the Socinian rate, That if Christ were God, and Christ suffered Death, then the Deity suffered death, to which he answers appositely enough, That if Christ had been only God, and had dyed, their con∣clusion had been true, but Christ, being man as well as God, his Humanity suffer'd in∣deed, but his Divine Nature was unprejudi∣ced, untouch'd. Thus have we largely and impartially examined this Father about this Doctrine of Christ's being God, and his as∣sertions are so plain, and direct, and the He∣resies he impeach'd in his writings, of such a nature, that they both concur exactly in the confirmation of the same; that our Saviour was truly and really God, equal with his Father, and the most high God.
We have another glorious luminary of the same Church S. Cyprian, that holy Martyr of Jesus Christ, and the laborious Bishop of Carthage; who as he was a great admirer of the writings of Tertullian, so concurred with him in the same Doctrine, of the Divinity of Jesus Christ: S. Cyprian then, in his book of the vanity of Idols, having setled that fundamental truth, That there is only one God, presently shews, that our Saviour is God too: this he would not have done, had he judged the inference good, that to believe Jesus Christ was God, was, to make two Gods: He would not so soon contradict himself, nor go about to set up a new Idol, when he was en∣deavouring to exterminate the old. Thus then He tells us,
That whereas the Jews, a stub∣born and rebellious people had long abus'd the Goodness of God, God was resolved to call to himself, from among the Gentiles, a People that should shew forth better effects of his mercy, than they did; the Manager of this Goodness,Cyprian. de Idolor. vanit. Edit. Ox. p. 15. Grace and Method was He, who is the Word, and Son of God; who had been foretold by all the Prophets, the en∣lightner and teacher of all Mankind: This Son, is the Power, the Fulness, the Wis∣dom, the Glory of God: He enter'd into the Virgin, assumed flesh, by the co-opera∣tion of the Holy Ghost: God united with Man: He is our God, He is Christ, who put on the nature of those Men, whom He leads to his Father; Christ would be what Man  is, that Man might be what Christ is. In his second book of Testimonies against the Jews,p. 34, 35. he spends one whole chapter, in heaping up such Scripture texts, as, before Socinian Commentaries were thought on, were judg'd sufficient proofs, that Christ was God: In particular, he insists on those passages of the 45 Psalm, which are applied to our Saviour so directly by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews.1 Joh. 5.7. That famous place, There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one, has been much controverted, it seems to be a very plain text for the Trinity, and consubstantiality, or equality or sameness of nature, in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: but Criticks observe that this verse is want∣ing in several Copies of considerable Anti∣quity: and Dr. Burnet, in his account of the Library in Swisserland,See his Lett. takes notice of its being wanting in several Manuscripts, he had purposely examined: yet, after all, our S. Cy∣prian, much more antient than the eldest Ma∣nuscript he or any other Critical Writer have yet given us an account of, in his book of Church-unity, quotes it, as we read it i our Bibles. Socinus takes it for granted, th passage was inserted into the Bible by som zealous Trinitarian, who made use of an fraud to advance their own Error. S. Hi¦rome, who had found it wanting in som Copies in his time, which was about 400 years after Christ, imputes the want of it
more rationally to Arrian transcribers, who finding themselves pinch'd with so plain a text, when they could not answer it, resolved to take it quite away: This he signifies in a short Epistle to Eustochium, printed formerly fre∣quently in the Latin Bibles, of late omit∣ted, as is observed by the learned Dr. Fell, late Bishop of Oxford, in his notes on S. Cy∣prian. S. Cyprian by quoting the verse as we have it, confirms S. Jerome's opinion, and renders that of Socinus ridiculous, for he quoted it before the Arrian Heresie was founded, and that twice in his Works: there∣fore could he have no such design as Socinus insinuates: Yet S. Cyprian's opinion is, that whosoever does not believe this Unity of the Father, and the Son,De Ʋnit. Ec. p. 10. as laid down in that Text, does not believe the Law of God, nor hold the Faith and Truth of the Father and the Son to his Salvation. The ame S. Cyprian, recommending Patience to Christians, and that in a time when the aging Persecution made it extremely ne∣essary, he advances it by the example of Christ, for says He, Jesus Christ, Deus & Dominus noster, Our God and our Lord, as taught us this virtue, not only in his Words,De bono Patientiae, p. 213. ut in his Actions; which he clears, as Tertullian before him, by his Descent from Heaven to earth, assuming our nature, and iffering in it. Again, in his account of he Council of Carthage, held about those
ho had been baptised by Hereticks, among  the suffrages of the Bishops there present. Fortunatus, Bishop of Thuchabore, declares, Jesus Christus Dominus & Deus noster,p. 233. c. 17 Dei Patris & Creatoris filius, Jesus Christ our Lord and God, the Son of God the Father and Creator, has founded his Church, not upon Heresies,c. 29.235. but upon a Rock. The same title is given him by Euchratius Bishop of Then; the same by Venantius Bishop of Tinisa, a Confessor: had not this been agreeable to the common sentiments of the Church in those days; it would certainly have been the oc∣casion of some contests, and others would have observed and reflected on the incauti∣ousness of their Collegues; but we meet with no differences on this occasion, there∣fore, we rightly conclude, they spoke agree∣ably to the Catholick Doctrine. S. Cyprian himself is mighty frequent in such passages, so in his Epistle to Rogatianus, he calls out Lord Jesus Christ, our King, and Judge, and our God:Ep. 3. p. 6. Ep. 11. p. 23. and what higher characters could be given him? In his Epistle to his Pres∣byters and Deacons, he encourages them to assiduity in Prayer, by the consideration of having Jesus Christ our Lord and God, our Advocate and Mediator,Plebi Thi∣baeri p 123, 125. p. 146, 148. so again, in his fifty first Epistle to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, in his fifty eighth Epistle twice, in h s sixty second to Januarius and others; Christ is our Judge, our Lord and our God; so in his sixty third, in his Epistle to Ju∣baianus, concerning the invalidity of the
Baptism of Hereticks: He argues against that Baptism thus, If any one, says he, can be truly baptis'd by Hereticks, he may then by that Baptism obtain remission of sins; if He obtain remission of his sins, he is sanctified, and is made the temple of God: I ask then of what God? if of the Creator, he cannot be his temple, because he believed not in him; if you say of Christ, neither can he be his temple,Epist. 73. p. 203. who denyes Christ to be God; if you say he's the temple of the Holy Ghost, seeing the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are all One, how can the Holy Spirit be pleas'd with him who is an enemy to both the Father and the Son? Here the force of the Martyrs argu∣ment lyes only in the Identity of nature, in he Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and the poyson of Heresie consists effectu∣ally in denying the Lord Jesus Christ to be God, but he would not have argued thus, had not the Divinity of Christ been the gene∣ral and well known Doctrine of the Church.p. 212. He uses the same argument again in his 74. Epistle to Pompey, to name no more Now,
n conclusion, who can imagine that a holy Martyr, so great an enemy to Idolatry, so careful to refute the vulgar Error, of a lurality of Gods, should yet so very fre∣quently use such suspicious expressions, as must needs make the World believe, he wned Christ for God, and consequently, multiplied those Gods himself, which he  expos'd others so much for, if the whole objection were not to be removed by that assertion, that the Father was God, and the Son God, yet they were not two, but one God? an Identity of their nature, ne∣cessarily inferring the Ʋnity of the God-head. The same Africa affords us yet another Writer of great antiquity and learning. Arnobius, in his several books against the Pagan Religion, in his first book, reflecting upon several of their Gods, he takes no∣tice how much they were grieved, that Christ should be worshipped by Christians, and received for, and esteemed as a God. And whereas Pagans derided Christians,Arnobius adver. gen∣tes. l. 1. p. 21. Edit. Lei∣densis. for accounting him a God, whom they owned to have been born a Man, he re∣torts upon them, that They were guilty of that crime; but, says He, supposing all you object in that respect were true, would not Christ, on account meerly of those bene∣fits he confers upon us, deserve to be call'd and to be thought a God? He argues from their own principles, who thought every considerable Invention of any Man was enough to procure his being Deified, as Bacchus for finding out the use of Wine, Ceres for Bread, Minerva for Oyl, &c. But in the mean time Arnobius openly e∣nough acknowledges, that Christians did receive Christ as God: He speaks yet more plainly soon after,
Christ for his  benefits ought to be called God: Nay, He really is God, without any scruple or ambiguity; and would you have us deny him Worship, or disown his Government? But will some angry Pagan cry out, is Christ a God? We answer, he is God, and a God of infinite Power too, and (which will more exasperate an infidel) he was sent from the supreme King to us, upon the greatest errand in the World: Perhaps the Pagan, being more enraged at this, will demand a Proof of what we say; there needs certainly no greater proof of Christ's Divinity, than an exact examination of his actions. If it be ob∣jected, that He was a Magician, and per∣formed his mighty works only by unlawful arts, Let them who object this shew us any of their Magicians, who ever did any thing like what was done by Christ: or if they have done any thing of a pro∣digious nature, it has still been by in∣voking some other Being: but Christ, without any Helps, without any Magick Rites or Observations, did all he did by the power of his own Name; and what was proper and agreeable to, and worthy of a True God, nothing he did was hurt∣ful or mischievous, but helpful, saving, and the kind effects of divine Bounty: And was he Mortal? was he only one of us, at whose ordinary commands Weak∣nesses, Sicknesses, Fevers and all bodily
Pains were gone at once? Was he one of us,l. 1. p. 27. &c. whose very Look the Devils could not endure? Was he a meer Man, whose slightest touch could cure the bloody Issue, whose hand could make Hydropick hu∣mours vanish, who could make the Lame run, the Wither'd Hand recover its moti∣on, the Blind to see, nay those, who were born without eyes, to see the light? Was He a meer Man at whose word the angry Seas laid down their rage, the rugged Storms and Tempests sunk, while He, with a dry foot walkt upon the swelling billows, and trod upon the Oceans back, the waves themselves standing amazed at the prodigious action, and humble nature submitting to her Founder? And so he proceeds in a florid and pathetick stile by an induction of particulars, and a relating of circumstances, to prove that Christ must be True God, and that all the Idols of the Heathen were none. Again, a little after, he tells the Pagans;
Christ was the high God, the God from the beginning, a God sent from unknown kingdoms, God sent by the Prince of all things, to be the uni∣versal Saviour; whom neither the Sun nor Stars, if they have any sence, nor the Governours, nor Princes of this World, nor those mighty Gods, who (assuming that terrible name) affright poor mortal creatures, were able to find out, or so much as to guess what He was, or whence He  came; at whose very look, then when he was clothed with flesh,p. 32. the universal fa∣brick trembled, and fell into a sudden dis∣order. Again, Arnobius brings in the Pa∣gans objecting, If Christ was God, why was He seen in the form of a Man? Why was He put to Death as Men are? to this he answers, Was there any other way whereby that in∣visible power, which had no Corporeal Substance, could suit it self to the World, or be visibly present in the assemblies of mortal Men, than by assuming a covering of solid matter, which might be a proper ob∣ject whereon Men might fix their eyes? What mortal Creature could have seen or discover'd him, if he had come down to earth in his own original Nature, or such as he is in his Divinity? Therefore he took upon him the
form of a Man, that he might be seen, and look'd upon, that he might speak, and teach, and perform all those things for which he was sent into the World: And, whereas He dyed as a Man,p. 37. it's true, his Humane Body was fastned up∣on the Cross, but his Divine Nature was incapable of suffering; his Body only suf∣fer'd, and that for the Salvation of those very Wretches, by whose cruelty he suffer'd. The same Author, reflecting upon the cu∣riosity of the Heathens (because they would not believe what they did not understand) asks them a great many questions about the Originals, or natural causes of several things  in the World, which puzled them in those, and confound us their posterity in these days; He wonders then that they should de∣ride Christians, because they cannot explain all the Mysteries of their Religion, and own their inabilities in the case, when They were so much to seek in those ordinary cases? Our concerns are mysteries indeed, Et ideo Chri∣stus licet nobis invitis Deus, Deus inquam Chri∣stus, hoc enim saepe dicendum est: ut infidelium dissiliat, & dirumpatur auditus, &c. There∣fore Christ who is God, in spite of all your opposition, that Christ I say, who is God (for that must be repeated often to scourge the ears of Infidels) speaking, by God's com∣mand, in the form of a Man,Adv. gent. l. 2. p. 85. knowing the blindness of humane understandings, and the weakness of our apprehensions, forbad us to be curious or inquisitive into matters so far removed, only ordering us to direct our thoughts and souls to him, who is the original of all these things: What advice Arnobius gives his Pagans, in pursuance of this discourse, would be very proper for our Socinians, among whom a modest opinion of their own Natural strength, and an humble supposition of God's superior Wisdom, would cure that Incredulity they are at present guilty of: Arnobius soon after lays down this Truth,
That none can save Souls but an Almighty God, nor is there any who can give them long life or perpetuity but only He, who is himself immortal, and  perpetual and uncircumscribed by any boundaries of time: Yet this work of sa∣ving souls he ascribes to the Son of God,Adv. Gen. l. 2. p. 87. therefore according to his sentiments, the Son of God is that immortal, all powerful and unbounded God: To all these evidences, I shall only add one of Lactantius, the Scholar of the forecited Arnobius, who endeavouring to reconcile the worship which the Christians paid to the Fa∣ther and the Son, to those adorations which they acknowledg'd only to belong to one God, writes thus,Instit. l. 4. c. 29. p. 445. Ed. Hack.
Where we say the Father is God, and the Son is God, we do not say they are different Gods, nor do we separate them one from another, for neither can the Father be divided from the Son, nor the Son from the Father; for the Father in a rela∣tive sence, cannot be named without the Son, nor the Son be begotten without the Father: Since then the Father makes the Son relatively, and the Son the Father, they have both one Mind, one Spirit, one sub∣stance, only the Father is as an exuberant Spring, the Son as a stream flowing from it: the Father is as the Sun in the firmament, the Son as the rays beaming from that Sun; who, because he is dear and faithful to his Father, can no more be separated from him, than the stream from the Spring, or beams from the body of the Sun; for the water of the fountain is in the stream, and the light of the Sun in those rays which issue from it:  And this is plain and pertinent enough. And thus have I gone thro' the Writings of those first Fathers, who are of the greatest Name and Reputation, for their learning and piety in the Churches of God: I have ex∣amin'd on this account, only such Men as lived before the Arrian controversie was on foot, so that they cannot be suspected of partiality in the case, and either we must believe these Men knew very well what was the General Belief of Christians in those earliest ages, or they did not; if they did not understand what the Catholick Faith really was, we are all strangely in the dark, and the Socinians are no more capable of giving an account of the Faith of the primo-primitive Church in contradiction to what we now assert, than we are in agreeance to it; nay, there lye all the presumptions in the World against them in the point; for all the Writers, extant afterwards, with an almost Ʋniversal consent, are di∣rectly against them: So that unless the true Christian Faith were entirely lost a∣bout the time of the great Nicene Council, the Socinians must of necessity acknowledge, that the Christian Church generally be∣liev'd, that Christ was true and real God. Nor can they secure themselves, even a∣mong the several Heretical Clans of those ages; for though they own Artemon and Paulus Samosatenus and Photinus, and Ar∣rius, and
Aëtius, &c. for great and very  Orthodox Men, and the sole Pillars of truth in those times, yet neither did Artemon agree with Paulus, nor Paulus with Photi∣nus, nor Photinus with Arrius, or he with Aëtius: and the same Writers call our So∣cinians sometimes by the name of Samosa∣tenians, sometimes of Photinians, some∣times of Arrians and Semi-Arrians, yet really they agree exactly with none of them, as might easily be prov'd by com∣paring their opinions together. Now if Artemon, and Paulus, and Photinus, and the rest, were such very great Men in all respects, and such careful preservers of the true Apostolical Faith, in those things wherein they agree with the Socinian sen∣timents, why should not we believe they used as exact a care, and were as certainly in the right, in those particulars wherein they differ'd from them? for doubtless such
Good Men would not admit of any Errors in any points of weighty and im∣portant concern. Those Men certainly must presume very much upon their own infal∣libility, who, tho' they are at odds among themselves, will admit of none to be in the right but such who, and where they agree with them in the most singular and para∣doxical opinions. But if, on the other side, we admit that these Fathers, I have quoted on this occasion, had real opportunities of knowing the General Sentiments of the Christian Church in their days, and that  they really did know them, the result of that acknowledgment will be this, either they were honest and faithful deliverers of the same Catholick Faith down to us, or they were not; if they were not honest and faithful in delivering down the true Faith in their Writings, then holy and zealous Martyrs, and devout Confessors, must have proved themselves a pack of impudent cheats and notorious villans, in that they have left us such accounts of that Faith, whereby Salvation must be attain'd, as can only serve to cheat and abuse their Readers, and lead them into unreasonable and damnable Errors: They only laid so many snares in their un∣happy Writings, for the ruining mens Souls, and their wicked designs have had but too too fatal effects upon the World. Now all this is very hard to believe of Men, who converst with the inspired Apostles, some of whom had that glorious power of work∣ing Miracles confer'd upon them, some laid down their Lives, with the greatest joys, and triumphs for the sake of their blessed Master, and the rest were ready to have done so, whensoever Providence should have summoned them to that fiery tryal. It's hard to believe that such Men could be
be∣trayers or corrupters of the Faith in its most Essential Articles. If these Fathers were honest and faithful in their Writings, and set down there only what were their real thoughts, as became honest and good Men,  if they defended Christianity against its subtle and powerful enemies with a just In∣dustry and Integrity, then, in what I have alledged from them, we have a faithful and honest account of what the Antient Church believed concerning the Nature of the Son of God, and we have reason to satisfie our selves, and to give praise to God, who has still afforded us so much light, as that we can agree with the Eldest and most Aposto∣lical Churches in that saving truth, That the Son of God, who in fulness of time took upon him our flesh, is really God equal with his Father. If any should enquire Why I only make use of those Fathers who lived before the Nicene Council? The reason is, because they are less to be suspected by those we have to do with, as having no interest in those Controversies, which were afterwards managed by particular Persons, with a great deal of heat and eagerness. Besides, the Socinians are sometimes apt to boast, that the most antient Fathers are on their side, whereas they'l freely own the Princi∣pal Writers afterwards are against them; not but that several did undertake the Pa∣tronage of the Arrians and their accompli∣ces, after the Council of Nice, but their Writings are gone, and they ly there at the mercy of their Adversaries. Not only the Socinians themselves are apt sometimes to Appeal to the Ante-Nicene Fathers, but
several Great Men, such as Erasmus, Gro∣tius, Petavius, and others, are apt to yield this to them: therefore it was proper in the first place, to give a true account of the first Writers, whose Doctrines others afterwards did but repeat and illustrate. Our Church principally recommends to us the Doctrine that's nearest to the fountain head, that a∣greeing best with the fountain it self, from which it is derived, that is the Word of God. Now the Socinians sometimes would fain put in for an Interest with these An∣tient Writers,Vid. Epist. intermu∣tuas Ruari & Zwicke∣ri in Ruari Epist cen∣turiá pri∣mâ. and Zwicker particularly in his Irenicum Irenicor. (tho' he was very far himself from agreeing with his brethren in all particulars) Yet upon better considera∣tion, they are loth to depend upon that au∣thority of the Fathers, knowing too well, that they must be cast by their verdict: Therefore their great Patriarch Socinus him∣self in his answer to Vujekus the Polonian Jesuit, who had written a book on purpose to prove the Divinity of Christ, where Vujekus presses him with the Authority of the Fa∣thers, answers thus, That the perpetual and universal consent of the whole World, is of the less weight against Divine Testi∣monies, tho' obscure, when those things which are the subjects of that consent, evi∣dently oppose reason and common sence. But here we may say, That truth can ne∣ver be so entirely lost, that the whole World should always desert it; but where Scripture-expressions
are obscure, the perpetual con∣sent of the whole World about their sence would be incomparably the best interpreta∣tion of those obscurities; and it's very hard to believe, that the whole World should per∣petually agree, in what's against reason and common sence. A great number have em∣braced the Roman Doctrine of Transubstan∣tiation, but we know, that neither All, nor the greatest part of the World embraced it, nor was it held perpetually by any; and tho' we may allow Socinus to have been a man of great Reason, yet we may allow those who held the contrary Opinion to His, to have been as Rational as himself, and perhaps, on a strict scrutiny, it may appear, contradictious to reason and common sence, to assert that our blessed Saviour was no more than a meer Man. But in short, Socinus ne∣ver troubles himself to deny those Authori∣ties the Jesuite had ramassed from the Fa∣thers, nor to answer them, but makes use of one Herculean Argument against them all, for first he tells us,
It can't be said, the whole doctrine or the greatest part of the doctrine of the antient Church was op∣posite to the Socinians, or agreeable to the Doctrine of their Adversaries; for there were many, whose Writings are now wholly lost, whose opinions therefore we cannot judge of; and many there were, who never wrote any thing at all; and they might be of a contrary mind to those  whose Writings we still have, and they were infinitely more numerous: That the Arrian Heresie was once spread far and wide, favoured by Princes, confirmed by Councils, and almost generally entertained, tho' afterwards by degrees it vanish'd, therefore, says He, our Adversaries need not boast of that universal and perpetual consent of the Church; whether it were real or verbal; for which was the true Church, and where it was, was for several ages disputable. Itaque haec, Authoritatum & testimoniorum ex Patribus & Conciliis, congeries, nullas vires habet, praesertim vero adversum nos, qui ab istis Patribus & Conci∣liis, quae extant, nos dissentire non dissitemur:Socinus contra Vu∣jekum ad classem ar∣gum. 7 c. 9. p. 618. Therefore this heap of Authorities from Fathers and Councils is of no force, espe∣cially against us, who freely own our dis∣sent from those Fathers and Councils which are yet extant: Nor can it ever be prov'd by the Writings of any of our Party, that they did either assert or believe, that those who wrote before the Nicene Council, whose works are extant, were of our mind, tho' they were as little of the mind of our Adversaries as of ours. This now is plain dealing, and more ingenuous by far than wresting a few sentences, contrary to the Writers minds, only to amuse the ignorant with an empty shew of Antiquity. But more plainly yet, Socinus soon after confesses, that the extant Fathers differed from his Party,
in that they assert, That Christ, or the Son of God, had a Being of the substance of his Fa∣ther before the worlds creation: that he had often appear'd to the Fathers under the Old Testament; nay, that that one God his Father, had made the World it self and all other things by him, and that by him He had made known to Men, whatsoever he desired should be known by them: Thus we have Socinus his own confirmation of what we had before pro∣duced as the sense of the Ante-Nicene Fa∣thers. After this, he touches slightly upon some pieces written by those first Fathers which are of suspected credit, but we have nothing to do with them, having quoted nothing from any of them, but what among Learned Men at present is of undoubted re∣putation. As for the Fathers who writ after the Council of Nice he fairly owns, that the
Socinian's business is to oppose those Errors, which they gave credit to by their Autho∣rity in the Church of God. The Fathers then are on our side, whether those of the eldest, or those of an inferior date; nor can we desire a greater advantage to our cause, since we can neither find out any means by which these Hereticks should know God's Will and Meaning in his Word, better than these Antient and Heroick Assertors of the Christian Religion: We have no ac∣count of any new Visions or Revelations, any of them have had: Nor have we heard of any Miracles perform'd by them in con∣firmation  of their Heterodoxies; therefore when we believe that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, our Saviour, is God equal with his Father; we follow that truth, which, to our apprehension, is very plain in Scripture, which holy Saints and Martyrs have from the very beginning of Christianity embrac'd, and which really is That Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, as God willing will yet more plainly appear hereafter. I observe here by the way what Socinus touches upon, and what others of his Dis∣ciples allege farther, that tho' the Fathers do thus make Jesus Christ to be God, yet they always put a great difference between Him and his Father, and insist particularly on his own Words in the case, where He tells the Jews, That his Father is greater than He, that, his Father orders, commands, directs and enables Him to do every thing, &c. It's true they do sometimes speak sus∣pitiously in this matter; but what solves the Objection from such Texts of Scri∣pture, solves those Objections which may be drawn from such expressions in those an∣tient Writers, viz. That, where they urge such things, their meaning is only to assert that difference there is between Christ's Di∣vine and his Humane Nature; as He is Man we doubt not but he is inferior to his Father, that he received power from Him, and acted here upon earth in subordinacy to hi as
He was God, he was equal with his Father, always united with him, having the same Will, Power, Knowledge and Wisdom which his Father had; by which means, whereas meer flesh and blood would have had a strange reluctance against such sufferings as were necessarily prepar'd for him, his Divinity, in concurrence with that of his Father, supported and enabled meer Humanity to effect and make good the work he had un∣dertaken. Thus we find the same Scri∣ptures asserting of Christ,Acts 2.32. that his Father raised him from the dead, and that he rose from the dead of himself, he asserting to him∣self only that power of laying down his life,Joh. 10.18. and of taking it up again, and both true: as He was God as well as Man, none could have taken his life from him without his own consent, as He was
Man as well as God, none could have brought that flesh and blood to life again, which was now a car∣case by the reparation of the rational Soul, without the concurrence of Almighty God; but as such He and his Father were one: They both Will'd and both Acted (as they both were able) to effect the same thing. But besides this (which answers those before∣named seeming difficulties) it's enough to say, that whereas the first Fathers of the Christian Church were irreconcileable ene∣mies to Idolatry, or to worshipping a Mul∣tiplicity of Gods, which is the same thing; whereas in all their Writings they took care  to vindicate the Honour of the one true God, in opposition to all false Gods; when they assert Jesus Christ to be God, they mean not that He is a false God; for they prove themselves to be the only true Worshippers, and they make it their boast that they wor∣ship Jesus Christ; therefore they look'd up∣on him as true and real God, and worship'd him only as such. If then these Fathers did think Christ to be a God of an inferior or subordinate Nature, or to be a Created God, as the Socinians would have him be, they directly contradicted their own Prin∣ciples, and brought in again that multipli∣city, or at least plurality of Gods, they had before exploded. As for the notion of a made or created God, or a God,
à parte post, as Socinus calls him, it's a dream so senceless and full of contradiction, that it's only to be wondered at, that Men pretend∣ing to any sharpness of Reason should ever stumble upon so absurd a conceit: For Scripture no where makes a distinction be∣tween God self-originated, and God made by another, and both true: but it lays us down a plain difference between the true God the Creator and the Creature, or any thing that is created by that true God, and therefore tho' there be in Nature such things as Spiritual and Corporeal Beings, yet the allowance of that difference makes or introduces no inter∣mediate Beings between the Creator and the Creature, every thing that is not God, is  made by God; every thing that's made by God is not God; and so it must follow, that, if the Son be made by God, he is not God, but a Creature; if the Son be in all particulars equal with God, he is not made by God, but is God himself. Again, The notion of a true and real God is infinity in every respect, Heathens, Jews, Mahumetans, Christians, all agree in that: if this be a true notion of a real God, it must be such a notion, as must sufficiently distinguish him from all other Beings, infinite Attributes being wholly and only proper to and inseparable from Him: If then these infinite attributes do agree to our Lord and Saviour, He is and must there∣fore be the true God, in contradistinction to all created Beings; if they do not agree to him, then He cannot be the true God, there∣fore he must be a false God, therefore he must be an Idol, therefore he must be no God at all, and this is the true and inevitable conse∣quence of the Socinian notion of a made or a Created God: For that the Supreme God should make another supreme as himself, and yet at the same time continue supreme him∣self, is nonsense and a contradiction; that the Supreme God should make another God, who yet is no God, because the attributes be∣longing to a real God are not applicable to Him, is a contradiction too; therefore the Socinians and their Adherents, must either declare in plain and express words, that our Saviour is no God at all, either à parte ante,
with respect to the time past, or before his Incarnation, or à parte post, with respect to the time to come, or after his Incarnation, but only a meer glorified Man: or they must agree with us, that He is God eternal equal with his Father, as true and as real God, as ever he was true and real Man: and this is what those antient Fathers did certainly agree with, and in all those passages I have quoted from them, they must believe so, or be absolutely inconsistent with themselves; and all those, who were their successors soon after in the Government of the Church of Christ, must have strangely mistaken them and their opinions, which yet is not so like∣ly, as it is, that modern Writers should mis∣understand them. Now how their imme∣diate Successors, nay and their Contempo∣raries understood them, will appear the bet∣ter, by a short view of the dealing of pub∣lick Councils, and such as were approv'd by them, with respect to the Samosatenian and Arrian Heresies; in which it's observable, That Gregory Bishop of Neo-Caesarea, commonly called Thaumaturgus, among o∣ther things gives us a Confession of Faith, said by Gregory Nyssen to have been dicta∣ted to him in a Vision; leaving that circum∣stance in suspence, the sum of his Confession amounts to this,Concil. T. 2. p. 841.
There is one God, the Father of the living Word, of essential Wis∣dom and Power, and of an eternal Cha∣racter, the perfect begetter of him that  was perfect, the Father of the only begot∣ten Son: There is one Lord God of God, God alone, of him who alone is God, the Character and Image of the Deity, the Word working in us comprehending the contexture of all things, and the power which made the universal Creation; the true Son of the true Father, invisible of him who was invisible, incorruptible of him who was incorruptible, immortal of him who was immortal, and eternal of him that was eternal: This confession of his Faith was express enough to our purpose, and but necessary, for that time when Sa∣mosatenianisme was springing forth, and making way for more Heretical Innovators in the Faith. About the same time was a Council called at Antioch, where Paulus of Samosata was then Bishop, whose Doctrine was, in that, agreeable with our Socinians; that He held, That Christ was a meer Man,Concil. T. 1. p. 844. that He had no Being before his Conception in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and that He acquired the name of the Son of God by his good works and extraordinary righteousness: In that Council then met at Antioch, these Doctrines of Paulus were condemned and Anathematized; this was about the year of our Lord, 264. very early: and by the con∣currence of a number of Bishops in the con∣demnation of that Doctrine; and that when there were no Roman Emperors, nor other great secular Men to countenance them, is a
sufficient proof, that Socinian Doctrine, as now it is, Samosatenian Heresie as then it was, was not then approved of in the Church. In their Synodical Epistle to Paulus, thus they declare, No man hath known the Father but the Son, and He to whom the Son has revealed him,Ibid. but we confess and preach, That this Son is begotten, the only begotten Son, the Image of the invi∣sible God, the first-born of every Creature, the Wisdom, and Word, and Power of God, existing before all ages, not in his Fathers foreknowledge, but real God in his own Essence, the Son of God, so decla∣red both in the Old and in the New Testa∣ment, whosoever then fights against this truth, and declares the Son of God not to have been God before the foundations of the World, and who says, that to believe and confess, or to preach that the Son of God is God, is to introduce two Gods, we look upon such a Man to be without the pale of the Church, and all Catholick Churches consent with us in this opinion: Then they proceed to prove what they assert, by several Texts of Scripture, the greatest part of which we have considered before. About the same time Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, answered Ten Questions pro∣pounded to him by Paulus,Ibid. p. 857 wherein he main∣tained the same Doctrine of the
Eternity and Consubstantiality of the Son of God. Cer∣tainly these would not have not only de∣clared  their own opinions freely, but ap∣peal'd to Universal Judgment, if they had thought it possible that they could have been confuted; but Paulus offers at no such thing that we can hear of. Paulus condemn'd by the first Council of Antioch, renounced his Heretical opinions, but soon return'd to his vomit again, and undertook their vindica∣tion, this Apostasie of his made a very great number of Bishops meet at Antioch a second time, they look'd on the Controversie as of so great importance, that even in the reign of Aurelian a cruel persecuting Emperour, they thought it necessary to meet to crush so dangerous and fundamental an Error. In that Council Paulus and his Doctrine are unanimously condemned again: there Mal∣chion a Presbyter, disputing with Paulus, tells him, That Jesus Christ, of God the Word, and an humane body which was of the seed of David, was made one, no longer subsisting in a Divided, but in an Ʋnited state: In their Synodical Epistle, not entirely extant, they complain of Paulus, as denying Christ to have descended down from Heaven,Concil. T. 1. p. 899. Baluzii Nova col∣loctio Con∣cil. p. 19, 20, 21, 22. and for affirming him to be wholly from earth: In some other fragments of the same Epistle, omitted by Eusebius, the Synod speaks thus, Neither God who was clothed in an hu∣mane body, was in that body free from humane passions, neither was his humane body empty of Divine Power, that Power which was in that body, and by virtue of
which, that Humane body wrought those wonderful works. Here then we have a body of Pious and Learned Men, represen∣ting a great part of the Eastern Church, con∣curring in the condemnation of those opini∣ons, which the Scholars of Socinus have late∣ly reviv'd; To these we may add, for the Western Church, the suffrage of Foelix, the first of that name, Bishop of Rome, in a small fragment of an Epistle written by him about those controversies, as the matter evinces, to the Clergy of Alexandria: the fragment is extant in the Apologetick of S. Cyril of A∣lexandria against the Eastern Bishops in the first General Council at Ephesus, and it's to this effect. As for the Incarnation of the Word, and our Faith in that point,
We believe in our Lord Jesus Christ,Concil. T. 1. p. 912. who was born of the Virgin Mary, that He is the eternal Son of God and the Word, and not a Man as∣sumed by God, that there might be ano∣ther beside himself; for the Son of God did not take humanity upon him for that end, but being perfect God, he also became per∣fect Man, being Incarnate of the Virgin. When the Arrian Controversie was on foot, Alexander Bishop of Alexandria condemned it in a Synod of almost an hundred Bishops, who all concluded the Doctrine of Arius a perfect Innovation, not at all consistent with the Faith of the Universal Church; what Arius asserted we have in Alexander's circu∣lar Epistle, viz. That God was not always a  Father, but that there was a time wherein he was not the Father; that the Word of God was not always, but had its original as other Crea∣tures out of nothing: for He that is God framed or made him who had no Being, out of what had no Being: Therefore there was a time when he was not, &c. Of these Hetero∣dox assertions of Arius, Alexander in that Epistle gives us a confutation, and that strong and pithy, and such, as being drawn from plain texts of Scripture, could never have been oppos'd, had not there lived in elder ages, some, who were able to study out as perverse glosses for positive texts, as the So∣cinians do now a-days. But that's not all; what Alexander insists upon is the disagree∣ment of these positions with the Churches antient Faith; so he first stiles the Arian Heresie, a fore-runner of Anti-Christ; and properly enough: After this He says, they were Apostates, such as had fallen off from the Faith of the Church, and delivered such Do∣ctrines as were no way consonant to Scriptures.
Whoever heard such things before, says He, or who is there, who hearing them now,Socratis Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6. Edit. Val. would not be amazed, and stop his ears, that they might not be defiled with hearing such abominable stuff? That there had been many Heresies before, but this the worst of all the rest, and making the near∣est approaches to Anti-Christianism: Thus Alexander in his circular Epistle: But Alex∣ander must have been equally silly and impu∣dent,  to have written in this manner to all the Bishops of the Church, when his business was to satisfie them of the reasons of his pro∣ceedings against Arius and his Accomplices, and when he was to countermine the strata∣gems and interests of Eusebius of Nicomedia, a subtle and powerful adversary, If the Do∣ctrine of the Son's co-eternity and co-essentia∣lity with his Father, had not been the receiv'd and well known Doctrine of the Church; for the whole design of his elaborate Epistle had been blasted, had but his Brethren the Bi∣shops or any part of them, retorted upon him, that Arius taught no new Doctrine, but what had been held even from our Saviour's time, and generally taught in all Christian Congre∣gations: but we find nothing of this kind offer'd at, and Alexander himself going off the stage of the world at last, with the re∣putation of a very wise and a very good Man. Eusebius of Nicomedia then makes a consi∣derable party for his Client Arius, and sup∣ports and encourages him to resolution in his Opinions; this made the Controversie grow hot, and obliged Constantine the Great, who desired by all means to preserve the Peace of the Church, to call that famous General Council at the City of Nice in Bithynia, to determine at once the Arian and the Paschal Controversie; the Emperor himself in his Letter to Alexander and Arius, by Hosius of
Corduba, seems to be very indifferent in the Controversie: his indifference was enough to  give life and vigour to the Eusebian or A∣rian party, yet all would not do, for, not∣withstanding the Emperors indifferency, and Eusebius his industry and activity, upon fairly debating the matter, of 318. Fathers which made up that Assembly, there were only Five who refused to subcribe the condemna∣tion of Arius; Eusebius of Caesarea, the Church Historian, seem'd to hesitate a little at first, but, after mature deliberation, sub∣scribed, and gave an account of his Subscri∣ption, and the reasons of it, to his own Diocese of Caesarea, wherein he gives them a Copy of that Creed himself had drawn up, wherein he declared,
He believed in God the Father Almighty, Creator of all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ the Word of God, God of God, light of light, life of life, the only begotten Son, the first-born of every Creature, be∣gotten of God the Father before all ages, by whom all things were made, who for our Salvation was made flesh, and convers'd among Men: Thus Eusebius,Socratis l. 1. c. 8. this he de∣clares to have been always his Faith, and therefore he could safely subscribe to that Form propos'd in the Council it self, and so he did, and he declares, that He willingly subscribed those Anathema's propounded a∣gainst Arius, because they particularly forbad the use of such words with which Scripture was unacquainted, of which several, which he there instances in, were in the Arian Formulary, or  Confession. The Nicene Council it self, in their Synodical Epistle, declares the opinions and expressions of Arius so uncouth and bla∣sphemous,c. 9. that the Council could scarce have patience to hear them, that He had yet unhap∣pily seduced two Bishops with his impious He∣resie, whom they therefore had excommunica∣ted, with Arius himself. The Emperor Con∣stantine in his Epistle to the Church of Alex∣andria, on the conclusion of the Council, tells them,Ibidem. that Arius and his Companions had blasphemously contradicted Scriptures, and our Holy Faith, that when three hundred and eigh∣teen Bishops, had setled the Faith according to God's Word, only Arius, seduced by the Devil, refused to submit to it; he advises them to embrace that Faith which God himself had delivered; that all should return to their dear Brethren, from whom that instrument of the Devil, had separated, them: And thus the whole Controversie came at last to rest in the determinations of entire Councils. These particular persons Alexander, Eusebius and Constantine, had called the Arrian opinion Apostasy, a seduction from the true Faith, a subserviency to the Devil, disagreeable to God's Word, &c. the Councils gave their positive Determinations, and Confessions of Faith, suit∣ably oppos'd to those encroachments men in those days made upon the true Catholick Faith. Thus the second Council at Antioch, before mentioned, gives us this Confession of Faith, with respect to our Saviour,
We  confess our Lord Jesus Christ, begotten of his Father, according to the Spirit, before the Worlds; born in the last days of the Virgin, according to the flesh, one Person of the Heavenly Divinity and of humane flesh united; whole God, even with his body, but not God according to his body, whole Man, even with his Divinity, but not according to his Divinity, wholly adorable, even with his body, but not adorable according to his body, entirely adoring God himself, even with his Divinity, but not adoring him ac∣cording to his Divinity; wholly uncreated, even with his body, but not uncreated ac∣cording to the body, wholly created even with his Divinity, but not created accord∣ing to his Divinity; wholly consubstantial with God even with his body, but not con∣substantial with God in his body, and whol∣ly consubstantial with Man, even with his Divinity, but not consubstantial with Men in his Divinity, &c. Where it's observable, those Fathers use the word , Con∣substantial, 50. years and more before the Nicene Council; and Eusebius of Caesarea, in his before-cited Epistle to his Diocese, owns, it was an expression used by some, ,Forhesii Inst. Theol; Hist. l. 1. c. 4. by some antient Bishops and Writers, a thing either not observed or strangely forgotten by some modern Authors. This Confession of the Antiochian Council, was confirm'd in the Sy∣nodical Epistle of the Council of
Constanti∣nople  afterwards, and so made theirs. The Council of Nice, gives us this Creed, We believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of all things visible and invisible; and in one Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, be∣gotten of his Father, and the only begotten, i. e. of the substance of his Father, God of God, light of light, very God of very God, begotten not made, being of one substance with the Father, by whom all things were made, both that are in heaven, and those that are on the earth; who for us Men and for our Salvation came down from Heaven, and was made flesh, and became Man. After the Council of Constantinople, the second Ge∣neral Council reduced that of Nice to that Form which we now make use of in the Com∣munion Service. A Confession of Faith so full and so plain, that so long as that's re∣tain'd and faithfully believed, the Socinian Heresie can never get any considerable ad∣vantage against us: (the consideration of which has occasioned some late struglings of an heretical party, to get that Creed, as well that called the Athanasian expunged out of our Liturgy) To this agrees Their Council-book, sent to the Bishop of Rome and other Italian Bishops, assembled together at Rome: and to the same agreed, before them, Atha∣nasius, that great standard of the true Faith against the Arians, in his
, or exposition of the Faith, extant among his other works; and to the same we may joyn  that excellent Confession of Faith appointed to be used on particular days, in our Liturgy, under the name of the Athanasian Creed, sound and orthodox, but not of so great An∣tiquity. And thus have we shewn at large what the Doctrine of the Primitive Church was, with respect to our Saviour's divinity, long before the Bishops of Rome pretended to the mighty name of the Universal Bishop, or could carry on any ambitious design by alter∣ing the Faith every where receiv'd in the Church: this Primitive Faith is what the Church of England, and with her all the Bo∣dy of the reformed Churches hold, as I shew'd before, and which even the Church of Rome it self dares not attack, nor shall the gates of Hell ever prevail against it, Amen. And thus have we done with our fourth evidence of the real Divinity of the Son of God, viz. the Faith of the Primitive Church. We pro∣ceed to the Fifth, and last, which we propounded to that purpose, and we shall now prove, that Jesus Christ is true and perfect God, from that common, and every way approved pra∣ctice of adoring and presenting our Prayers to him: This adoring and praying to Christ, is a duty so properly incumbent on all persons who hope for Salvation through his name, that the Socinians themselves in the
Racovian Catechism, in answer to that question, Quid sentis de iis Hominibus qui Christum nec invo∣candum  nec adorandum censent?Catech. Racov. l. 6. c. 1. p 92. What think you of those men who conclude that Christ is neither to be called upon nor worshipped? they thus reply, Since those are certainly Christians who acknowledge Jesus to be the Christ, or that heavenly King of an Holy people, and therefore worship him in a Divine manner, and scruple not to call upon his name, (on which account we formerly de∣scribed Christians as such who call upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ) it's easie to understand, that those who will not do so, are not yet Christians, tho' they may other∣wise profess the name of Christ, and pre∣tend to adhere to his Doctrine. In this we have the Great Prophets of that Party, de∣claring how essential praying to Christ is to Christianity, and this their witness is true; but, in the mean time, we cannot but svere∣ly reflect upon their Impudence, who will first make us believe that our blessed Saviour is no more than a meer Man, and then would perswade us either that we ought or may call upon him in our Prayers, or Worship him: but that we may have the fairer view of their folly and madness in this particular, we shall lay down this Argument, All that Divine Worship is Idolatry which is paid to any Being but him who is the true God. None of that Divine Worship is Idolatry which is paid to Jesus Christ. Therefore Jesus Christ is the true God.
Where by Divine Worship we mean, that Worship, either inward or outward, which by the Laws of God or nature, is ascribed and appropriated to the supreme Being: The true God then is, that supreme or sovereign Being: and by Idolatry I mean, such an application of that true Divine Worship belonging to the su∣preme Being, to any Creatute, or created Be∣ing, as is forbidden by the first or second Com∣mandment in the Decalogue, from whence alone, the true notion of Idolatry, or re∣gular and properly applyed Divine Worship, can be taken. I assert then, That all that Divine worship which is paid to any Being besides the true God, is plain Ido∣latry: the excellency of nature in any of those things which may be the Objects of our ado∣rations, make no difference or abatement of guilt in the case: He's as much an Idolater who worships a wise Man, or a great publick Benefactor, or a Man Deified, as he who worships a stock or a stone; and he breaks the holy Commandment as notoriously who pays those adorations to a good Angel which belong to Almighty God, as he that pays them to the Devil; for the noblest Created Being in the Universe is no more able to an∣swer the true ends of all Divine Worship, than the most contemptible Creature we can cast our eyes on: and God expresses as great a jealousie of his own honour, when it's taken from him to be given to the purest of his Crea∣tures,
as when it's misapplyed in a grosser manner. When God commands Israel, what the Law of Nature must necessarily have prescribed before, Not to have any other Gods before his face, he made no Reservation of any right of appointing another God to himself, but excluded all other Deities, were they made, or subordinate, or co-ordinate, or under what character soever they might be made the objects of our Worship. And when He re∣quir'd they should not make to themselves any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing ei∣ther in heaven above, or in earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth, that they should not bow down to them, nor worship them, he ex∣cluded every Creature from a capacity of re∣ceiving divine Honours; whatsoever was capable of being represented by any figure or image, if it was worshipped, was an Idol, the Creature represented was so, as well as the representation; and invisibility, as well as any other attribute, is ascribed to the true God, as a peculiarity whereby we might know him to be the only proper object of our Worship; by both these precepts, our Saviour is perfectly shut out from being the subject of Divine Honours, as he is suppos'd by the So∣cinians to be a God in subordinacy to his Fa∣ther; and as he is a Creature, and capable, as other Creatures be, of being represented by a material Image, which is wholly incon∣sistent with a true Divinity. For tho' the So∣cinians allow our Saviour to be the
Son of God  in a peculiar manner, by reason of his being begotten in the Womb of the Virgin by the Holy Ghost, or as they call it, by the influ∣ence of Almighty God, this does not at all put him out of the rank of the Creatures; nor does that Glory, and Honour, and Immor∣tality, which they suppose his Father to have adorned him with, after his resurrection, make him a God who was before a Man; for all these things are reserved too, in a just pro∣portion, for all such as die in the true Faith of Christ, by which they too, in their turns, must necessarily be Gods; tho' because their proportion of honour is suppos'd inferiour to that of Christ, they must be Gods of an inferiour rank and quality: but this Collation of dignity effects nothing at all, and the So∣cinian distinction between a God made by the supreme God, and a God made by Men, comes to nothing at all: The Poets Divinity in that point is better, and more rational than theirs, Qui fingit sacros auro vel marmore vultus, Non facit ille Deos, Qui rogat ille fa∣cit,
He who represents a Divine face in gold or marble makes it not a God, but he who prays to it makes it such: So, if God render the body of our Lord never so illustri∣ous, that makes him not a God, but the pre∣senting of Humane supplications to him makes him one, so that Christ, by that means, comes to be a God made so by Man, as well as any other Idol whatsoever is; therefore, according to the Socinians own principle, Christ being a meer Man, if he be prayed to must be an Idol. There can be no true God, but He who is the Creator of all things, nor does it lye within the reach of omnipo∣tence it self, to make a Creature a Creator, therefore either Christ must be the Creator of all things, or else he cannot be true God, He remains a meer Creature still, and all those adorations presented to him by the Christian World, are notorious and damnable Idolatry. The common notion of Idolatry confirms this, so S. Cyprian tells us, accor∣ding to the notion he had of it; Idololatria committitur cum Divinus honor alteri datur, Idolatry is then committed, when that Ho∣nour which belongs to God is given to an∣other. Gregory Nazianzen gives us this definition of it, , Idolatry is a transposition of divine worship from the maker to the thing made, from God the Creator of all things to the Creature? Therefore so long as our Saviour is really but a Creature, which he must be if he be not the eternal God, so long, all that Wor∣ship paid to him, according to this antient notion, is Idolatry. Now let a
Socinian, if he please, impeach those of the Roman Communion as Idolaters, we'l agree with him, and we really believe them to be so: but there's no Argument which can pro∣perly be made use of against that Church, to convince them of Idolatry, by reason  of their praying to Angels or departed Saints, (from which practice they have been suf∣ficiently and undeniably proved to be Ido∣laters) but the same will hold good against these: The strength of all Arguments a∣gainst Rome lying in that, That they trans∣fer the Honour, only due to the Creator, to a Creature; which is as true of all those who pay divine Worship to our Saviour, if he be no more than a Creature. The Gods who have not Created all things, who have not Created Heaven and Earth, shall perish from the earth, and from under the Heaven, as we alledged from the Prophet before, but, according to the Socinians, our Lord did not make the Heaven and the Earth; Therefore, tho' they say he is True God, (at the same time they say, He is not The true God) He must be one of those Gods which must so perish: A conclusion which our Adversaries either must deny, or fairly renounce all their pretences, which indeed are but weak at best, to Christianity. Di∣vine Honours cannot be lawfully offered, or Prayers lawfully presented to any crea∣ted Being, but upon supposition of some defect in the Creator; for a positive Com∣mand from him to that purpose, could it be suppos'd, would not be enough: for a Divine Command open and plain, cannot make, that which in its own nature is Evil, to be good: things morally good or evil are
eternally so, and that from that  consideration, that their moral goodness or illness flows from their agreement with, or contradiction to the Divine Nature: Now what was once contradictory to the divine Nature, God himself cannot make agree∣able to it, because He cannot change his own Nature, which yet must be, if that which being abstractedly considered, was a sin against him, should now, under the same abstracted consideration,1 Tim. 3.16 be no longer so: therefore we are sure God himself cannot command any thing that is morally evil; but diverting that orship, which belongs to the Creator of all things, from him, to his own Creature, let that Crea∣ture be what it will, is morally evil, it's Idolatry; therefore God cannot command it; therefore he cannot give or have given Christians any positive or open Command to Worship our Saviour, if he be a meer Creature, because that's translating that Worship due only to the true God to the Crea∣ture. To suppose any defect in the Crea∣tor is blasphemous; if there can be yet any just reason or apparent necessity, of Mens addressing themselves to any Being, which is but their fellow Creature, for the attain∣ment of that, for which they were wont to apply themselves only to the supreme Being or Creator before, it must be asserted: but where there is all Perfection concluded to reside in that Sovereign Being, to whom it's granted on all hands, that Divine Wor∣ship
is due, there's no kind of necessity that we should apply our selves to any Inter∣medial Power, or go round about when we may have a direct access to the throne of grace. While we own Christ to be the True God, as his Father is, of the same eternal Nature, whatsoever obliges us in our necessities to call upon the True God, obliges to call upon him: If He be a meer Man, whatsoever obliges us to Worship the Lord our God, and to serve him only, ex∣cludes Christ from being any such Object of our adorations; and we cannot reason∣ably believe, but that, after our Saviour had baffled the Tempter by that assertion, when He came to see our Saviour permit himself, nay, and encourage and command himself to be Worshipped, He would have reflected upon our Saviour as false to his own Principles, and therefore none of God's Son, or the worlds Saviour; and the re∣flection must have been good, unless the Devil had been satisfied, beyond dispute, that He whom he had tempted under the veil of a body assumed, was really and truly God; As
such, the Devil found him, in his humble state, able to confound, able to command him, and that in his own name upon all occasions: Devils trembled at the sight of him, as of their original and all-powerful Creator, at whose hands they had received a glorious and blissful Being, but had foolishly and ingratefully  fallen from it: So the guilty Soul trembles now at the distant apprehensions of it's terrible Judge, and according to Evangelical assertions, at his dreadful approach will cry eagerly to the hills to fall upon it, and to the rocks to cover it, if possible, from the dismal effects of infinite and insupportable Fury. The Apostle tells us, That the ear∣nest expectation of the Creature waiteth for the manifestation of the Sons of God,Rom. 8.19, 20, 21, 22. That the Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly but by reason of him who hath sub∣jected the same in hope, because the Crea∣ture it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of Corruption, into the glorious li∣berty of the children of God. And that we know that the whole Creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now: By the Creature here we understand all crea∣tures whatsoever, or all created Beings, of a purer or of a grosser Nature; and the Creature is agreeably interpreted in the last cited verse, by the whole Creation; and this interpretation is so general, that it seems incontestable: Hence we infer, that, if our Saviour was a meer Creature, he was under the same necessities and in∣conveniences as all other parts of the Creation were: He must have
earnestly expected the manifestation of the Sons of God, as they themselves, being a part of the Creation, do, i. e. to see the time wherein the Servants of God in spite of  all sinister Opinions and Prejudices against them, shall be gloriously proved to all the World, to be what they are, the real Sons of God, and infinitely dear to Him: Farther, Christ as a Creature, must have been subject to vanity as well as the rest, lyable to corruption, assertable into liberty, something that could groan and be in pain till the time of manifestation; all these things Christ if he were a meer Creature must have been, and must be liable to at this present, and be always in an obnoxi∣ous state, till the great day of Judgment and the revelation of the righteous Judge, that is, of Himself: Therefore he cannot now excuse any Man from the Sin of I∣dolatry, who shall worship him as God, any more than others can, nor indeed can he be yet capable of that divine Glory and Honour, which the Socinians would have us believe were conferred upon him after his Resurrection. This consequence from these words, the Socinians are so very sensible of, that they endeavour by all means to prevent it, and to do so, they fly to one of their conceited interpretati∣ons, and the Creature here must be the new Creature; tho' the new Creature be no where in Scripture besides, called either the Creature absolutely, or the whole Crea∣tion: Schlichtingius in particular is very elaborate and prolix in proving, that the Creature, can mean nothing else, but what  is elsewhere known by that Epithet of New; but here their admired friend Grotius for∣sakes them, and in effect declares that In∣terpretation of theirs meer Nonsence. The Sons of God mentioned in the cited Text are unquestionably new Creatures, they must be one before they can be the other: Why then the Creature should signifie the same is unaccountable,Vid. Deut. 32.1. especially seeing the A∣postle in those Verses puts a plain distin∣ction between them, so that Grotius de∣termines rightly,Jer. 47.6. The words are a Prosopo∣poeia, wherein by a Figure, no way unusual in Scripture, the Ʋniverse and all the parts in it are brought in, as some single Rational Being, expecting, waiting, groaning, subject to vanity, &c. Nor is the subjection to va∣nity, nor the expectation of liberty, so un∣couth an application to the Universe, for besides that, Solomon tells us, that all things under the Sun are only vanity; we cannot wonder at the thing it self: Man's first sin was prejudicial to the whole frame of Nature, all things suffered by it, the Earth fell under a curse, the living Creatures em∣broyled in a state of War one with one another: Sin and Death having gotten footing in the World, all things in their proportion felt the dismal effects of it; the Creatures according to Prophetical Pre∣dictions, were to be partakers of very con∣siderable advantages by the dominion of the Messias, an Universal Peace was to over∣spread
the World, The Wolf to lye down with the Lamb, and the Ox with the Lyon, Children to play securely with the most noxi∣ous Creatures, and Men to beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pru∣ning-hooks, &c. And we make no doubt but that when the final determining Judgment shall be past, and a notorious distinction made between God's Servants and his Enemies: The New Heavens and the new Earth, (whatever Creatures we may imagine to be sharers in it) will be the unchangeable habitations of Peace and Righteousness; and even the most insensible parts of the Cre∣ation will receive advantages by those bles∣sings the eternal Government of the Son of God must introduce; At least we may be sure there will be an end put to all those Calamities, and that extreme Servility, the whole Creation lyes under at present by reason of Sin: Now to this servile or vain state, the Creature is subject, not willingly, nor indeed by it's own fault, but as Subjects suffer, whether they will or not, by the mis∣carriages of their Princes, so the several parts of the visible Creation, by the folly of Man their Prince and Head. It was from that time the Devil acquired his title of being the Prince of the power of the Air; a Title and Power troublesom to every thing there: but if that Crime commit∣ted by Man, subjected the whole Creation to vanity, that merciful Promise of a Sa∣viour  given to fallen Man, could not but be of excellent advantage to his visible fe∣low Creatures, since the performance of that Promise would be so great an abatement to the Devil's Tyranny, and the absolute Government of the Messias would put a full end to it at last: So that the Criticisme of Schlichtingius is childish, when to a rea∣sonable and usual Prosopopoeia he objects, the insensibility of several parts of the Cre∣ation, and to the general Interpretation of the Words, a wild assertion, that signifies, not the Creature absolutely, but this Creature, i. e. the New Creature, of which he had spoken before, tho' indeed others can find no such thing; whereas really the Article signifies, that the word is put absolutely, and not otherwise; and if, according to Schlicktingius his own sug∣gestion, our Saviour's command to his Dis∣ciples that they should go preach the Gospel to every Creature,Mar. 16.15 be to be understood of every Creature that was rational, and so capable of receiving benefit by it, then by the same Rule here, by the Creature named absolutely, we are to understand every Creature which is lyable to Vanity and Ser∣vitude, i. e. every part of the visible Crea∣tion. To what we have said that of Ter∣tullian agrees very well as cited by Grotius,
Death shall then have an end, when the Devil its manager shall be gone into that fire which God has prepared for him and  his Angels,Grotius is loc. he being first cast into the bottom of the Abyss, when the manife∣station of the Sons of God shall redeem the Creature every where subjected to vanity by Sin, then the Creature, being restored to its Innocency and Integrity, the tame beasts shall play with the wild, and chil∣dren with Serpents, God laying his Ene∣mies, the works of Sin, under the feet of his Son. As for the hardness of the Pro∣sopopoeia: Origen follows it exactly with re∣lation to the Sun and Moon, generally ac∣counted irrational Creatures, , Of them we confess that they look for the revelation or manifestation of the Sons of God. Nor can we look upon it as an improper argument for the Apostle to com∣fort suffering Christians by, That all their fellow Creatures are at present in a state of servitude or vanity, therefore they have no reason to expect an exemption; That all their fellow Creatures yet wait in hope of the discriminating season, when those who fear God shall be fully distinguished from those who fear him not; This they hope for, in spite of all that servitude they groan under; therefore those who fear God, who are his Sons, his Children, have no reason to despond, tho' they suffer all the extre∣mities imaginable from Hell, and the worlds malice here, since they are sure of a compleat and dearly purchas'd Liberty hereafter to
be bestow'd upon them. I have gone the farther in clearing this Text from Socinian sophistry, because from hence a clear and undeniable argument may be drawn against applying Divine Worship to any Creature: for, if all Created Beings are really sub∣ject to vanity, and wait themselves for liber∣ty with a mighty expectation; whatsoever addresses are made to them, as they must necessarily be vain and fruitless, so they must fall under the charge of gross Idola∣try; and if our Saviour be no more than a meer Creature, then, as before I alledged, He being subject to the same vanity, all Worship or adorations offered up to him, must fall under the same denomination and cen∣sure. In a word, nothing can be the proper object of Divine Worship, but what is Omni∣potent, Omniscient, and Omnipresent, these attributes are only applicable to the Su∣preme God, therefore Divine Worship ought only to be presented to Him: if these things concur in our Saviour, He's the True, the Supreme God, and so all Honour and Glory belongs to him; if they con∣cur not in him, He's but a Creature, no more, therefore all divine Worship offered to him, under what plausible pretences soever, is vain, fruitless and Idolatrous. But this Question about Worshipping our Saviour or
Presenting our Prayers to him, has created no small Fraction among the Anti-Trinitarians themselves. You heard  before the declaration of their Catechism, which ought to contain the Fundamentals of their Perswasion, That they are not Chri∣stians who give not divine Worship to Christ, nor call upon him: This may seem to im∣ply a necessity of Praying to him, if we would receive any benefit by him; That we may be the more confirmed in this O∣pinion, that they think this Worship of∣fered to Christ necessary, may appear the better if we observe their answers to two Questions. To that,Cat. Raco. S. 6. c. 1▪ p. 88. In what manner ought we to trust in Christ? They answer, In the same manner as we ought to trust in God, namely, that We should believe him able to do all things, and that if we seek his favour, he will do us good, and perform all his Pro∣mises to us: To that, In what does that di∣vine Honour due to Christ consist? They answer, In worshipping and calling upon him, for it's our duty always to worship Christ, and we may
direct our Prayers to him in all necessities as oft as we will, and we have several reasons exciting us to do so. Now, according to these things, if Adoration or Divine Worship be due to Christ, then there lyes a necessity upon us to pay that Adoration so due. But they seem to fall off from that resolution in the last words, where they say, We may pray to him, as if praying to Christ were , some very indifferent thing: this last expression is in compliance with their great Leader So∣cinus,  who in managing this very Contro∣versie (one indeed of their own starting) with Franciscus Davidis, rests principally in that assertion, That it's really lawful to pray to Christ, (which his adversary, upon their common principles, more rationally denies) but is very loth to assert the necessity of any such invocation; therefore when George Blandrata, Physician to the then Prince of Transylvania, and the great Patron of the Anti-Trinitarians, and of Socinus himself, out of a politick fear, that a denyal of the necessity of praying to Christ (a practice continual among all Christians to that time) might justly render the Party odious to all the believing World; when, out of such a fear,Soci re∣spon. ad Blandrat. operune T p. 716. he urged Socinus to assert and prove such Praying necessary, yet Socinus was very cold in the matter, sed constanter asserimus, says he, posse nos, & quidem jure, quocunque loco & tempore, ad ipsum Chri∣stum verba precationum nostrarum dirigere, &c.
We constantly affirm, that we may, by good right, direct the words of our Prayers to Christ himself, and beg his help and assistance in all those things which may any ways belong to his Church, or to any particular person, as a Member of his Church; We may do it. So far he'l freely adventure, and so to leave the mat∣ter indifferent, Blandrata thought suffici∣ent to quiet Franciscus Davidis, but not enough to secure the Publick Reputation of  the Party: However Socinus in the same place declares, That there's no command gi∣ven in Scripture for our praying to Christ, and their Catechism asserts, there's no plain command in the whole Old Testament for our praying to God the Father, tho' the positi∣on be notoriously false: only this we'l joyn with them in, That we have no com∣mand to pray to Christ as he is a meer Crea∣ture, but we are forbidden it in the first and second Commandments; But we are bound to pray to him, as He and his Father are One, not by agreement of Will, or by the Son's entire submission to the Father, but by agreement or Identity of Nature: Other∣wise the Will of all deceas'd Saints, the Will of all holy Angels, is wholly submis∣sive to, and the same with the Will of God, therefore they might as lawfully be prayed to as our Saviour, if a meer sameness of Will, and not of Nature, were enough to found Divine Worship, as offered to any other Being but the Supreme God, upon. But when Socinus comes to speak of the necessity f Praying to Christ, he runs off from the matter in hand, to that of acknowledging hat Kingdom, and Power, and Government given to him by his Father, which acknow∣edgment, as he concludes, infers a necessi∣y of Praying to Him: But this is an Ar∣gument far fetch'd, and very impertinent;
oth the foundation and superstructure is alse. Christ in his Humane Nature is the  head of the Church; in his Humane Na∣ture he has the Government of it in his hands, in his Humane Nature all power in Heaven and in Earth is his own, but none of these things are his meerly as he is Man, or as he is a Creature, but that Humane or Created Nature of Christ, is made capable of those things of which in its own Nature it was absolutely incapable, by its entire Union with, and subsistenee in the Godhead. Without owning this, our Prayers to Christ, as those offer'd by the Church of Rome to Saints or Angels, are meer mock devoti∣on. For if Christ, before his Ascension in∣to Heaven, had no Existence but in a Bo∣dy, in meer flesh and blood, then after his Ascension he likewise had no existence but in the same Body; if he existed in the same Body, he could be partaker of no other qualifications but such as are incident to a Body; for if his natural Body could be partaker of such qualifications as a natural body was not capable of, it could be no lon∣ger the same body he was rais'd with, but an∣other, and that no natural body: If he still existed in Heaven in that same body he rose and ascended with, and it was not changed to or for another, no attributes wholly or essentially Divine, could be truely or properly ascribed to him: therefore Christ could not be Almighty, which In∣finite Power or Almightiness yet is abso∣lutely necessary in him who has all Power
given to him, both in heaven and earth, and who is able to do every thing, that can tend to their good, or to God's glory for them that ask him. Christ in his Natural Body cannot know all things, without which Uni∣versal Knowledge yet it's impossible he should suit all grants to the necessities of Petitioners, or be assistant to those who lie under a natural incapacity to address themselves to him otherwise, than in their thoughts and inward wishes. Christ in his Natural Body cannot be Omnipresent, he cannot be in more places than one, for na∣tural bodies are and must be circumscribed by Time and Place, otherwise they lose their natures, and become God, for only God can exist without those circumscripti∣ons of Time and Place: which Omnipre∣sence yet is indispensably necessary to every one, who can receive Petitions offered to him in several quarters of the World at once. If now the Socinians will deny these things to be inconsistent with a Natural Body, if they'l assert that a Created body may be Almighty, that it may know all things, that it may be every where present, they must introduce a new and yet unheard of Philosophick and Theologick Scheme, and to little purpose. If they'l say,
these things are needless to our Saviour's natural body, for that he may read all the wants of Petitioners, in all parts of the World, at one view in the Essential glory of his Fa∣ther,  that's the Roman plea, and every whit as rational, on behalf of their Saint and Angel-worship: They can see all the wants of their humble supplicants, in the glasse of the Trinity, as they tell us: They say too, that God reveals to Saints and An∣gels, to whom Papists make their Prayers, all those things their Devotoes pray to them for; If the Socinians joyn with them, and say, God so reveals every thing to Christ: We answer them both, that this is to set God upon a needless work, and indeed to make the Supreme Being, in effect, inferior to his Servants and to his Son: for those are the greatest Persons to whom the last Ap∣peal is made, those inferiour, who are im∣ployed in carrying or presenting Petitions to another; if then the Supreme God make it his business to present the Supplications of Petitioners to his own Son, he takes upon him that inferiour Office. If he pre∣sent them to his Son, that his Son may grant and perform them, it argues a natural Im∣potency in himself to answer such Petitio∣ners, and consequently a superiority in the Son, whereby he's able to grant and to do for his servants what God the Father could not. If the Socinians will have us believe, in respect of Omnipotence, that Christ only represents our wants to his Father, and that it's his Fathers Power alone which answers and acts for us, it will follow then, that God has not given him all Power in  Heaven, and in Earth, whosoever has that Power, can do all things in and of himself; if Christ cannot do all things in and of him∣self, he has not that Power; if He want that Power, for what reason should we pray to him, and not rather immediately to Almighty God? especially since this Man Christ Jesus died for us, that, in his own blood, he might open to us a new and a living way whereby we might have access with boldness to the throne of Grace. If we may go directly thither, what should we trouble our selves with applications to a subordi∣nate Power? as for the Mediatory Office of our Saviour, so far as He's concern'd in it, according to Socinian Principles, he'l mediate continually for Us, and all Believers in general terms, whether we make any supplications to Him or not. The result of all then is this, ether Christ is not Almighty, nor All-knowing, nor Present every where, and consequently cannot be the proper Object of our Adora∣tions and Prayers, and therefore all such Adorations offered to Him must be scanda∣lous and Idolatrous, or else, our Lord must be present every where, Know and be able to Do all and every thing, and so their Ca∣techism teaches us in the chapter before quoted, for it says, All Power is given him, as before, that his Power and Efficacy is great enough to subject all things to himself by it,Mat. 28.18 Phil. 3.21. Joh. 6.40, 54. that by it he's able to free us from
death, and to give us life and immortality,1 Cor▪ 4.14. than which Power there can be none grea∣ter. Again, Christ is by his Father con∣stituted our Saviour, our Priest, our King, and our Head, on purpose that he might manage the affair of our Salvation, and help us at our need; and lastly, it's plain, say they, he can understand our Prayers, because He knows all things; He searches the Hearts and reins; He sees through the hid∣den things of darkness,Joh. 16.30. Rev. 11.23. 1 Cor 4.5. Joh. 14.13. In resuta∣tione the∣sium, Fra. Davidis, p. 715. and he has told us that whatsoever we shall ask in his name, he will do it for us: whence it necessarily fol∣lows, that he must know what it is we pray for; thus far the Catechism, to which So∣cinus agrees: As for Omnipresence he de∣nies the necessity of that, since he may be present every where, tho' not in his Per∣son, yet in his Power; this they say, but if they say true that He can do all things without exception, that, He knows all things without exception, we are sure he must, as God, be Present in all places without ex∣ception, for Power and Knowledge are different Attributes, they cannot be one without another, yet Power knows not every thing, nor does Knowledge act every thing especially in a Man; tho' in God all Attributes act all things, because they are all one God: If then all these Attributes belong to Christ, he must be God, not Made, nor Created, but Eternal; for who∣soever had not infinite Power, Wisdom,
Presence from eternity, cannot have them confer'd upon him in time, such a One be∣ing a subject incapable, and infinity not to be determined by time or place, which both must be of a finite nature: these things granted, free all worship offered to Christ from being Idolatrous, a charge which, on the other hand, if these things be denyed, is absolutely inevitable. He that shall seriously consider the many Incumbrances of Life, and the greatness of that Duty towards God, which is incum∣bent upon every Christian, will easily find, that it's a full emyloyment for the life of any Man, to give Almighty God those in∣ward and outward Adorations which be∣long to him: It's with relation to these extreme and continual exigencies Humane Nature's lyable to, that the Apostle re∣quires of us, that we should pray continu∣ally, or without any ceasing or intermission;1 Thss. 5▪17. not that we are obliged continually to be in the very action of Prayer; there are some particulars in the Calling of most Men, which require for some time the whole Intention of the mind, yet that earnest Intention of theirs, is no more a Sin than all lawful in∣dustry can be accounted so; but the mean∣ing of that expression is, that We should al∣ways keep our souls in such a frame and tem∣per, as to be able on every emergency to apply our selves to our Maker with that Calmness, Humility and Sincerity which he requires in
those who come to him as Petitioners. Now this temper of Soul being required in us, and the real business of our proper Callings requiring so much of diligence and atten∣tion, our time would certainly be very ill employed, if we should propose to our selves various Objects of Divine worship, when through the frailty of our Natures, we are necessarily defective in our Adora∣tions paid to One: If we suppose our Sa∣viour to be God of one and the same substance with his Father, we meet with no difficul∣ties in this point; but if he be no more than a meer Creature, whensoever we present our supplications to him, we deservedly incur the Prophets reproach,Jer. 2.13. forsaking the foun∣tain of living Water, and hewing out to our selves broken Cisterns that can hold none: for let us put a meer Creature into the grea∣test circumstances imaginable, either he is Omnipotent or he is not; if he is Omni∣potent, I know no advantage the
Supreme God can have over him, the Creature must be able to do all things, the Creator can be no more: If he be not Omnipotent, then I may often Pray to him in vain, and if I may do so at any time, what security can I have that I shall not do so always? espe∣cially since there's no Rule given me in Scri∣pture, whereby I may certainly know what I may Pray for to a Creature, or what I may not pray for to him: Nay Scripture is so far from giving any such Rule as  might seem to leave the matter in suspence, that it directly forbids all adorations to any Creature as a Creature: but a Creature being no more, cannot be considered un∣der any higher notion than of a Creature, therefore he cannot be adored at all. And besides, If there were no such Prohibition to be heard of in Scripture, yet the Wor∣ship of a Creature, how excellent soever, would be very silly and irrational, since we are sure that God can hear us, and effectu∣ally answer us in any thing we pray to Him for, but we are not sure, that any Crea∣ture can do any such thing for us. Again, God having given several Prohibitions in his Word against all Creature-Worship, and for ought we can find, having left no in∣timation there, that ever He himself would find out such a Creature for whose sake he'd give us a full and free dispensation against all such Prohibitions: We have a great deal of reason to suspect, that what∣soever Worship we may exhibite toward any Creature, may so far provoke the Jea∣lousie of the Creator, as to render, by that very means, all those Services we may offer to him useless and unacceptable; and so while we play the fools with the Dog in the Fable, grasping at the shadow of ex∣traordinary assistances from more than One, We may lose the substance of Mercy from One, who is able to bestow it in deed in a case of extremity. It's not unusual in
the Prophets to find Israel, as a just judg∣ment for their former Idolatries (when they found themselves press'd by any ex∣traordinary calamity, and therefore sought to the God of their Fathers for deliverance) to be remanded to their false Gods, and or∣dered to try what great kindnesses those sha∣rers in their Devotions could do for them; so God by Moses,Deut. 32.37, 38. Where are their Gods! the rock in whom they trusted? which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drink the Wine of their drink-offerings? let them rise up and help you and be your protectors; So the Prophet,Jer. 11.11, 12. Behold I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape, and tho' they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them, then shall the Cities of Ju∣dah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, go and cry unto the Gods unto whom they offer Incense, but they shall not save them at all in the time of their trouble. Nor can this dealing be look'd upon as unreasonable in God, since it's usual even among Men, when they are slighted by those who owe them respect, for the sake of those to whom none is owe∣ing, to send them in their necessities to those Idols of their fancies, for whom the Supplicants had deserted them before. If then we at any time pay our Adorations, or present our Prayers to any Created Be∣ing, when we have all the encouragement of Command and Example, to pay that Worship to the Creator of all things: if
such Created Beings have no inherent ori∣ginal power to assist us, and so we are not assisted, if, (by way of correction to our former Error) we fly in our Prayers to the most High God, we can justly expect no kinder answer from Him, than such a remission to that Creature or Created Be∣ing, to whom we had foolishly engaged our selves before. Now if we examine the thoughts of Pagan Idolaters, we find by their Writings, that they pretended all along to make their One Supreme God, their Jupiter, the object of their Wor∣ship; they terminated nothing upon their inferiour Deities, but made use of them, as they say, as a kind of mediators between them and their Jupiter: The Papists plead the same with respect to those Devotions they teach people to present to Saints and Angels, in their Communion; We know well enough the fallacy of their pretences, and the insincerity of those paltry shifts they make use of, to avoid the imputati∣on of Idolatry to them. But our Socinians teach us so openly, that it's lawful for us to pray to our Saviour, tho' a meer Crea∣ture, nay, and to terminate our Adorations upon him, as their ultimate Object, that we have not so much as the Pagan or Ro∣man subterfuges for our practice. They tell us,Cat. Rac. sect. 6. c. 1. p. 89.
That we may direct our Prayers to Christ in all our necessities, first, be∣cause He both can and will help us, and  He understands our Prayers: Then be∣cause we have several exhortations from our Lord himself, and from his Apostles to that purpose; and lastly, because we have several instances of holy Men who have so done. If these reasons are good, we need not then have that God in our minds at all, whom they call the Supreme God, when we Pray in our most urgent Necessities; for our Saviour can answer our Prayers as effectually to all intents and purposes, as the Supreme God can: but in the mean time, if this Saviour of ours be no more than a meer Creature and if the very reason why the Worshipping more Gods than one is forbidden, be, because all other Beings, except that One God, be no more than meer Creatures, (for so worshipping the Creature, , beside the Creator, is reflected on by the Apostle) then we,Rom. 1.25. in following Socinian opinions, are guilty of most damnable Ido∣latry; Idolatry more inexcusable, while we pray to Christ, than either Papists or Pagans have ever been guilty of before us: for we terminate our Adorations upon a meer Creature confess'd, which They declare they do not, and which Scripture every where declaims against as Idolatry: By this means too, we incur the guilt of Horrid Sacriledge, for we rob God of all that wor∣ship we pay to any inferiour Being; the reason of all Divine Worship is, that sence
we have of our necessary dependence up∣on superiour Providence; that considerati∣on renders all those Commands which we have to Worship God Reasonable and Ob∣ligatory, and it's a consideration which reaches holy Angels as well as Men. If God then, the most High God, command us to call upon him in the time of trouble, as he does, and to encourage us, promi∣ses He will diliver us, and we shall glorifie Him,Psal. 50.15 and we, notwithstanding all this, appeal to a meer Creature in those circumstances of Necessity: If we call one God, and pray to and worship him as God, when we our selves own that he was Created originally; and when God justly asks the Question, Is there a God besides me? Yea there is no God, I know not any; and has declared again, that He will not give his glory to another:Isa. 44.8. Isa. 48.11. If we with these cir∣cumstances call upon such a One, we rob God of that Honour, which belongs to God himself, and to none else; and dis∣pose of what's his due according to our own fancies, and we do all this so, as our Fault becomes our Punishment,Deus enim est zelotes, qui nullâ ratione pa∣titur ut populus ip∣sius cultum ipsi debi∣lum ad alios deferat, si{que} spirituale adulterium committat▪ Quis vero alius est cultus vere divinus qualisque nulli mortalium defertur vel deferri potest, quam aliquem tanquam coelestem, eamque sanctam mentem, ab omni mortali concretione separatam & inconspicuam eo respectu & colere & invocare, quo se à te coli & invocari & velit & intelligere possit, tibique in iis quae petis, opitulari. Nonne qui ali∣quem tanquam talem & hoc respectu colit cum reipsâ, ut ut forte verbis id neget, Deum esse statuit. Plura hujusmodi sed plane  profert, Schlichtingius in notis ad Grotium de Antichristo in 2. cap. 2 Epist. ad Thess. p. 50. we rob God of his Honour, and confer it upon a meer Creature, and we rob our selves of God's assistance, and quit it to those who are wiser and more rational in their Adorations.
What we spoke somewhat of before, relating to our Saviour, we may yet far∣ther confirm from an enlargement on this consideration: That if it be necessary, that an ultimate Object of true Divine Wor∣ship should be infinite in Power, Know∣ledge, Presence, and every other respect, it then being impossible, that any thing which was not, on these accounts, an Ob∣ject properly capable of Divine Worship from eternity, should be made a proper Object of Divine Worship in time; all such Divine Worship paid to any Creature, on pretence of now having those qualifications, which before it had not, must be Idolatry. Now, the Impossibility of any Creature whatso∣ever attaining to that infinity now, which before, meerly by being a Creature, it could not have, must needs be very ob∣vious to every considering Man: God can∣not translate himself into a Creature, be∣cause He cannot be comprehended in a Creature, but the great general Distincti∣ion between Almighty God and the Crea∣ture
is this, that God is infinite in every re∣spect, but the Creature is not; allowing now that any Creature could be made the pro∣per subject of this Ʋniversal infinity, the distinction between God and the Creature is at an end, the nature of the Creature is quite changed, and tho' it were created at first, and from thence had its name of a Creature, it now was no longer created originally, but had its being of it self, be∣fore any thing in nature was created; and if this be not a contradiction notorious and absurd enough, we cannot easily find what is. But admitting one absurdity, a thousand will naturally follow from it: so if the same Being may be infinite in Ex∣tension, Wisdom, Power, &c. and yet be finite or limited in respect of Time, as every one must be, tho' Infinite now, if it had no Being from eternity, we have then a limited infinity, or a Being that's bounded, and yet has no bounds; a contradiction too, which Omnipotence it self cannot verifie: Again, from hence will follow, that the supreme or sovereign Being can create an∣other, who shall be God, truely and proper∣ly so called, and Almighty, and yet no Al∣mighty God; who shall be All-wise, and God, and yet not an All-wise God; who shall be every where present and God, and yet not an Omnipresent God: which things look somewhat more Ridiculous and Con∣tradictory, than any thing objected by
Atheistical scoffers to that commonly cal∣led the Athanasian Creed. Whatsoever is done by Almighty God so, as to be ob∣vious to us, must certainly savour of that perfect Wisdom essential to the Deity, and must as certainly tend to his own Ho∣nour: but to put all his own power into the hands of a meer Creature, if it were possible, (considering the nature of every Creature, that Man, the head of all visible, fell into misery, tho' created Innocent; that Angels the immediate Ministers of God's power, and who had before them the continual vision of Immense Glory, fell from the bliss of Heaven into the gloomy prisons of eternal darkness:) to put his own infinite power into such hands, would be so far from augmenting his own Glories, that it would render Divine Wis∣dom it self obnoxious to rational Censures: and so far prejudice the notion of eternal Wisdom, that God would seem to have forgotten the main end and import of all his own actions: and to act with the same fondness and dotage, as careless mankind are generally guilty of. The Roman plea for Saint-Worship then, (they looking up∣on those Saints as Creatures of an inferior nature, and only beneficial to us, as they are beloved by God) is omparatively to∣lerable, when they say, they minate their worship not upon the Saints, but upon their God, this may seem o tend some
to  God's Honour, as the respects shewn to the Attendants of a great Prince, are interpreted generally as an Honour done to the Prince himself: But to Worship, with true Divine Worship, a Created Be∣ing,Vindicati∣on of Ʋni∣tarians a∣gainst Sherlock, p. 12. and under the notion of an Ʋbiqui∣tary Spirit, as a late Arrian Scribler calls him, or True God, as the Socinians ad∣venture to call him, and at the same time to own he is but a Creature, while we yet make him the Ʋltimate Object of our Adorations, is as far from bringing any Honour to God, as it is, to make a Prince's servant the last receiver of our Pe∣titions, to ascribe to him the whole Sove∣reign Power, to serve him as such with all Humility and respect, and to expect all those favours from him, as in his own Power, which his Master once had the sole power of conferring. It look'd great enough in the Roman Emperours to have their Caesars, nay their partners in Empire, under the name of
Augusti: but, even then, there was an absolute Supremacy remaining in the Emperour himself, and had his re∣served Honours been communicated to his Partners, that Communication must have detracted from the Supreme, the first visible fountain of the Partners Honour and Po∣wer: Yet such are all of a Nature, the Emperour himself as much and as frail a Man as his Substitutes; the danger of diminishing Honour so much the less: but  where the distance is so immensely great as between the Creature and the Creator, there can be no reason to allow such a participation in Divine Honour to the Crea∣ture: Nor can any thing bring more dis∣honour to the name of the Sovereign Cre∣ator, than to permit a meer Creature to sit down with him on his eternal Throne, and to receive the Worlds Adorations e∣qually with himself. Besides all this, to talk of an Ʋbiquitary Spirit, that yet is not God; of a Being existing, as such a Spirit before the Creation of the world, yet afterwards being confined to the prison of a weak and mortal Body; and as a re∣ward for what's done in the Mortal body towards the reconcilement of a justly angry God to his Creatures, received with that mortal body into Glory and Honour, but so, that the Ʋbiquitary Spirit for all futu∣rity must be confined to that body, how∣ever glorified, and so lose its Ʋbiquitary nature (unless the Body after glorificati∣on can pretend to be a Spirit, and so no longer a Body, because Ʋbiquitary too) to talk of these things, as some Arrians do, is nothing but contradiction and non∣sence all over: For, that the true Supreme God is Ʋbiquitary, or every where present, is allowed by all those who have any thing but heavy and carnal notions of the Di∣vinity; but if the Supreme God uncreated, be every where present, and a created Spi∣rit
be every where present too, then that created Spirit, and that God must be essen∣tially One, as being commensurate or equal∣ly proportioned one with another; but for a Created being to be one and the same thing with its Creator, is what Socinians themselves will not allow, therefore no Creature, as failing of Ʋbiquity, can be the proper object of true Divine Worship, therefore Christ, as being a meer Creature and so incapable of Ʋbiquity, cannot, by us, who call our selves Christians, be a∣dored as God, without inexcusable Idola∣try. Besides, if our Saviour be God, only as Princes and Rulers are Gods, because they are sanctified by him, to act as his Deputies in the World, then He can pre∣tend, by such sanctification, to no more Ʋbiquity, than those Kings and Rulers can; Now we all know well enough, that our Kings and Princes are so far from Ʋbi∣quity, that they are forc'd to see with other Mens Eyes, to hear with other Mens Ears, and consequently, are not to be Worshipped, nor trusted in as Gods by us; and those who trespass in this kind, are indisputably Idolaters: therefore all those that Worship our Lord, only as such a made or sanctified God, must be Idolaters. But,
We, who call our selves by that Ho∣nourable name of Christians, being very  careful to avoid the guilt or the very opi∣nion of Idolatry, and yet being withal con∣stant Worshippers of our Saviour, as being that rock of ages, on whom, whosoever fixes his Faith and Hope, cannot be de∣ceived; We assert, That none of that Di∣vine Worship offered to our Saviour is Ido∣latry: We know, that Nature and Reve∣lation teach us clearly enough, that there is, and can be only One True Supreme God, the Maker and Creator of all things, that God in whom we live and move and have our Beings, and from whom alone every good and perfect gift descends: We know, by the same rules, that We are to Worship this Lord our God, and to serve Him only: We know, it's the common practice of all Professors of Christianity, and allowed by our Adversaries, to worship our Saviour, to adore, and pray to him as God: We think our selves, and the Socinians acknowledge, that we may do thus, without being guilty of Idolatry; therefore our Saviour must be the Supreme God, the maker of all things, &c. therefore He and his Father must be One God; and so neither the first, nor se∣cond Commandment at all trespassed upon in those Adorations. We find the wor∣ship of Images, or any false Gods con∣demn'd as Idolatry frequently in God's Word: We find Holy Men refusing to  worshipped there, and Angels them∣ forbidding any signs of Adoration to
be offered to them, because they would not trespass upon a Law so notorious both in Scripture and in Nature, and this we have spoken off before. A Socinian will own, that our Saviour knew his Father's Will as well as either Holy Men or Angels, that He was as careful to Honour his Father in performing his Will, as either of them, that He who came to die for the sins of Men, in what sense soever, would never tempt them to commit Sin: Yet we find him allowing that Worship offered to him∣self, express'd by outward
humility and prostration, which yet was that very reve∣rence, which good Men and good Angels had refused as unlawful before: Either this Worship was Idolatrous, or it was not; if it was, our Saviour was no better than the Jews thought of him, viz. A Cheat and an Impostor, one who sought their ruine, not their happiness, therefore, to be sure, far enough from being that Messias whose title he pretended to: If it was not Ido∣latry, then the worshipping of our Savi∣our was not worshipping more Gods than one, tho' he were worshipped under the notion of God; therefore he must be the Supreme God, all Divine Worship paid to any other Being, being largely proved to be Idolatry before: But we have no rea∣son to believe, that Men of extraordinary Goodness and Wisdom would ever have given us examples of Idolatry, or that God  would any way have allowed, much less have commanded it. That It's fitting to be done, the Racovian Catechism proves from that,Joh. 5.22, 23. The Father hath given all judgment, or government to the Son, that all should Ho∣nour the Son, as they Honour the Father; and again, from that of the Apostle,Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. There∣fore God hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in Heaven, and thirds on earth, and things that are under the earth, and that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father: And tho' they are at a doubt whether there be any direct command to worship Him in Scripture, yet when we read that of the Apostle,Heb 1.6. Ps. 97.7. When He brings his first-born into the World, He says, let all the Angels of God worship him, or as our more immediate translation from the present
Hebrew Text reads it, Worship him all ye Gods: and when according to the acknowledgment of Socinus himself, in his dispute with Franciscus Davidis, that passage,Joel 2.32. Rom. 10.13. p. 721. Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved, is applied justly to our Saviour by the Apostle; these two passages together, appear to be a command strong, and forcible enough, to oblige every one believing in Christ, to call upon his name, or to pray to him: These are Commands enjoyning us to worship our Saviour, even  in his Humane Nature; but if our Lord and his Father are one God; then all those commands which enjoyn the worshipping of one God, are so many commands equally obliging us to worship Jesus Christ: but, supposing a Positive Precept wanting in the case before us, tho' we are not to look upon every private Action of a good Man as an obliging Precedent to us, yet, where we have a Cloud of Witnesses con∣curring in the case, we may reasonably conclude, that they would not have wor∣shipped our Saviour so continually, meer∣ly to lead us into Error; nor would An∣gels have agreed with them in the pra∣ctice; nor would our Saviour himself have passed them by without a reproof. Yet frequently as we find Adorations paid to our Saviour when upon Earth; We never find any dissatisfaction in his words and actions:Joh. 11.33. He groan'd for the stubbornness and obduracy of Jewish Hearts, for their prodigious resolutions not to own him, tho' drawing them all with the sacred cords of love and miraculous goodness; he wept,v.
35. to observe their inflexible, and, to themselves, fatal temper: He wept over Jerusalem,Luk 19.41. on the dismal prospect of those calamities, that wrath to the uttermost, which was then hastning upon them:Luk. 12.14. He reproved the Man who would needs have made him a temporary Judge, or, a Divider of Inheritances among them:Luk. 22.2 He reproved his Disciples for their  contentions about their future grandeur; and seems to check the Man, who only called him good Master,Mar. 10.17▪ as if the ascri∣bing Goodness to one, whom he took to be a meer Man, was too near an encroach∣ment upon the sacred character of the Su∣preme God: And can we imagine he would be so tender in every such little particular, and yet so very careless in those important affairs, wherein the eternal interests of his followers would be concerned, as long as the World endured? This is very hard to believe; yet that the Concern is so great, the late Scribling Arrian owns, when, to the charge of Blasphemy imputed to his Party for denying the eternal Godhead of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, he retorts that question upon us,Vindica∣tion of Ʋnitari∣ans, p. 3. If you err, do not you both blaspheme and commit Idolatry, in worshipping the Son and the Holy Ghost, as co-equal with the Father? We must be guilty of both if they are not, but for the Son, we hope enough has been, or shall be said to prove we are free from danger on that side. To clear our own practice yet farther, We'l trace those footsteps our Adversaries themselves have trodden before us, and make use of those instan∣ces they have laid together on this occa∣on: So the Apostles pray to their Master, Lord, increase our Faith!Luk. 17.5. a Petition of a strange nature to one that was no more than their fellow Creature, and so far from
any encouraging exaltation in the world, that whereas the foxes had holes, and the birds of the air had nests, He the Son of Man had not so much as where to lay his head: How could he give them Faith, who could not, as it seemed, give him∣self security from worldly persecution? but our Lord gives them no check for mislay∣ing their Petition, nor does he bid them seek to his Father, tho' it were an in∣ward grace, a strengthning of the Soul, which they requir'd of him. Again, when the Disciples were with him on ship-board, and during his quiet sleep, just sinking by the violence of an angry tempest, they in a fright wake their Master and cry out to him, Lord save us, we perish!Mat. 8.25. If our Savi∣our was a meer Man, the Disciples acted with much less sence than Jonah's Mari∣ners, who every one, in the storm, called upon their Gods for help, and summoned sleeping Jonas, not to save them, by His Power, but to joyn with them in calling upon his God: For was it ever heard be∣fore, that when a Ship was just sinking, or running upon a rock, the ship's Crew ran to some poor ignorant Passenger to beg their security from him? The Mariners, tho' convinced that he was an extraordi∣nary Person, made no such application to Saint
Paul in a parallel danger; it's God alone who can command the Seas and Winds, his permissive Word makes them ruffle the  Universe, and put Nature into a Conster∣nation; the same Word lays them still as in their first Originals, ere uncorrupted Nature knew any thing terrible or dan∣gerous: In the case before us, our Savi∣our answered them not, as that King of Israel did the Woman, If the Lord help thee not, what can I do? But, He arose and rebuked the Winds, and the Sea, and there was a great calm: Nature, in its greatest hurry, own'd his Divine Autho∣rity, only his Disciples stumbled upon the Question,ver. 27. What manner of Man is this, that even the Winds and the Sea obey him? They talked like Men beside themselves with Fear, they called upon him for Help, as if they had believed him to be God, they reflected upon that Deliverance he had given them, as if he had been no more than Man; but he takes no notice of any error they were in, in their first Devotions, but, by his Mercy, encouraged them to do the same again upon a like occasion. What the Disciples did here in a storm at Sea, that Saint Stephen, the first Martyr for Chri∣stianity, did in a more violent storm of Per∣secution on Land, for when he came to his last Agonies, when, it was the proper sea∣son for a good Man to exert the utmost vigor of his Faith and Charity, then, for himself, and with respect to his own Soul, he prays,Acts▪ 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: The frequent expiring Ejaculation of Holy  Saints and Martyrs after him. Compare now this with that assertion of the wise Man concerning Death;Eccles. 12 7. Then shall the Dust return to Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God who gave it; and the con∣sequence will be, either that our Lord Je∣sus Christ was the great Author or Crea∣tor and Giver of the Rational Soul, or else, that this Holy Martyr, then when fil∣led in an extraordinary manner with the Holy Ghost, in his extreme hours, when commonly Mens apprehensions of futurity are most Clear and Rational, talk'd in a very Impertinent and sinful manner, to devote his Soul to him, who could have no right to it, if he were a meer Creature, and to forget his God: Franciscus Davidis would have us believe here, that Stephen did not call upon Jesus Christ, but upon God the Father, and that we should translate the expression, O thou Lord of Jesus receive my Spirit! but this
Socinus has strongly confuted; tho', upon their common Prin∣ciple, of our Saviour's being a meer Crea∣ture, Franciscus undertakes the much more rational part; However, here his subter∣fuge is nothing worth. It was Jesus the Son of God, He who bore that proper name of Jesus from his Circumcision, for whose sake Stephen was now persecuted to Death by the malicious Jews; it was the same Jesus whom he saw at the right hand of God, when the Heavens opened to give  him such a view of future Glory prepared for Martyrs, as might support and en∣courage him under his sufferings; it was to him therefore that Stephen applyed him∣self, and sitted himself for a glorious and happy Exit, by that admirable Resigna∣tion. But neither did Saint
Stephen stop there, but as the utmost effort of a dying Martyr's Charity, He adds this to his for∣mer ejaculation,ver. 60. Lord, lay not this sin to their charge; He certainly designed ex∣emplary Charity in this, and to imitate his dying Saviour, who prayed his Father to forgive his Murderers, for they knew not what they did: But the Martyr's ene∣mies would have had little reason to have admir'd his Charity, had he presented his Prayers for them to one, who had no power to forgive them; and the Jews would be as ready now to make the Objection, as heretofore, Who can forgive sins but God only? And if God, to whom venge∣ance belongeth, in whose sight the Death of his Saints is precious, would certainly avenge the blood of his Saints and Mar∣tyrs upon their Persecutors, to what pur∣pose was it to pray to him to forgive them, who not being the most high God himself, could have no Power to forgive those who had sin'd against the most high God, so as to give them any security; but above all, He could never have hoped for any acceptance at the hand of God in any  Petition whatsoever, had he now, in his last extremity, been guilty of Idolatry. Saint Paul had been made partaker of ex∣traordinary Revelations, had been snatch'd up into the third heavens, where he had seen and heard things not lawful for a Man to utter,2 Cor. 1.7, 8, 9. indeed things unspeakable, lest He should have been exalted above measure thro' the abundance of those Revelations, there was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the mes∣senger of Satan to buffet him: This was a very severe humiliation, and Saint Paul was sensible of it, and at first, as appears by the Text, very uneasie under it. Saint Paul knew well enough, that the best re∣medy for all calamities was Prayer, that Prayers presented to the true God with a sincere heart, could not return unfruitful; but Saint Paul presently applyes himself to Christ,
For this cause I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me, says he, and He said unto me, my Grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness; By the Lord here, the Socinians themselves understand our Lord Jesus, and therefore alledge this Text as a proof of Pious Mens praying to Christ: Now had Saint Paul prayed to Christ for Assistance and Relief in such a case, where only the Supreme God could really help him, if that Christ were a meer Creature, then such a Prayer must be Idolatrous, and such Service be called Idolatry, where∣in  the Creature was rather worshipped than the Creator; and Christ a Creature must, as Lucifer of old, have endeavoured to set himself up for a rival God, and prose∣cute a separate Interest of his own, and manage and assist his servants, in a way of opposition to the most high God, and so he must have Graces of his own, and Strength of his own, to employ for the use of his own Devotoes, for so Saint Paul tells us, that Christ referred him, not to the Grace of God, or to the strength of God, for security from the violence of Sa∣tan, but tells him, My Grace and my Strength are sufficient for thee, therefore there could be no need of applying himself to any o∣ther: Now if Saint Paul were in this case guilty of Idolatry, all those who follow the pattern of Saint Paul must incur the same guilt, but he was not guilty, therefore nei∣ther were his Imitators guilty of it. The Socinians in proof of the lawfulness of Praying to Christ, allege farther Saint Paul's joyning him with God the Father, in his own Prayer with respect to the Thessa∣lonians, to whom he's there writing, Thess. 3.11. Now God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto You: where he takes for granted, that the Father and the Son are both Co-partners in the same directing power, and therefore he equally Petitions them both for guidance in his design of visiting the Thessalonians. What
the Apostle himself did, in a Letter sent to Believers for their instruction in matters concerning their Salvation, we need not doubt but they'd be very apt to follow him in, so that either this Praying to Christ was lawful and reasonable in it self, or else the Apostle must be concluded to have it in his mind only to abuse those he wrote to, and to draw them, by his ex∣traordinary influence upon them, into Sin; for a sin it must be to make any meer Crea∣ture the Ʋltimate Object of our Prayers and Devotions: That the Apostle in this pas∣sage does so is indisputable, if at least it's own'd, that He makes God the Father such an Object, for he joyns them together, puts no mark of Inferiority or Subordinacy upon Jesus Christ, but what he begs of the Father, the same He begs of the Son in one continued expression. And the Apostle frequently does the same thing in those Sa∣lutations he sends to the several Churches, where He wishes them Grace, Mercy, and Peace, equally from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ: Grace, Mercy, and Peace are all divine and spiritual Gifts, as in possession of the Father, so in possession of the Son; else it would be very imperti∣nent to Petition them equally for it, and of very ill consequence, for it would ea∣sily bring such a notion into Mens heads, as that some created Being might have a power of giving Gifts of a Spiritual na∣ture,  as well as the Supreme God; and that it might be lawful, in our most serious Devotions, to joyn him who alone is God, with one who is no more than a Creature, to set them in a rank as equal as words would allow, and to conclude a Prayer to the great Creator of all things insufficient to procure any good from him, unless it were backt and strengthned by the joyned formality of an Address to a dependent Creature. But we need not so much insist on this particular; since the same Socinians as a vindication of Prayers addrest to our Saviour, take notice of that piece of Re∣ligious Worship, as being made the very Characteristick or distinguishing note of Christians: So
Ananias answers the Com∣mand of Going to visit and baptize the new∣ly converted Saul,Acts 9.14.21. He hath authority from the chief Priests to bind all that call on thy Name: And when Saul first began to preach Christ at Damascus, all Men ask'd, with amazement; if it was not He who had lately destroyed all that called upon the name of Christ, that is, all who believed in him; So that it seems from hence, that to be∣lieve in Christ and to call upon him were used as reciprocal terms, every one who believed in Christ would call upon him, or Pray to him, every one who pray'd to him must believe on him, for as the Apostle elsewhere argues, How shall they call on him, or pray to him, in whom they have not  believ'd? So again, St. Paul inscribes his first Epistle to the Corinthians,1 Cor. 1.. to those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in every place call up∣on the name of Jesus Christ, i. e. to all Christians, for whose general use and in∣struction he wrote that Epistle, as well as for the Corinthians: And the same Chri∣stians are described as such,2 Tim. 2.22. who call upon the name of the Lord with a pure Heart: These are the evidences drawn by the So∣cinians themselves out of Scripture, to prove the practice of Christians in the very in∣fancy of the Church, and they are suffi∣cient for that purpose. Now that Those who accompanied with our Lord himself during his converse upon Earth, or that those Apostles who were guided by the ex∣traordinary influences of the Holy Ghost; or that those first Christians who took the oke of Christ upon them, when the Go∣spel was certainly preached to them in its original simplicity, that all these should be guilty of abominable Idolatries, and that when the Apostles themselves were origi∣nally Jews, who had an irreconcileable a∣ersion to any thing that look'd in the least ike Idolatry; and that our Saviour him∣elf should have so little regard for his Dis∣iples, as to let them commit a gross sin, f a damning nature, without any check or
eproof; that that Holy Spirit which was romised to believers on purpose that He  might guide them into all truth, that both these should so very early, not only per∣mit, but encourage and perswade men to commit Idolatry, and all this at a time when they pretended to promote the Sal∣vation of Souls, and when it was notori∣ously known to all Mankind that Idolatry was a Sin, irrational in it self, and de∣testable in the sight of God; that the one part should commit, and the other promote Idolatry under such circumstances, is ab∣solutely incredible. They had the Pagan World at that time to reform, The A∣postles were all willing to spend and be spent, to carry on that glorious and merciful work, at the utmost hazard of their lives; the great and crying sin of the Gentile world was their Idolatry, that of which St. Paul particularly took notice with grief and an∣ger among the Athenians; but it had been a strange method of reforming an Idola∣trous World, by advancing the same pra∣ctice, without any other correction, but only a variation of the Object, as if Pray∣ing to a Man had not been as great an Error, as Praying to a Genius, or the Sun, or some other bright Star, or an Ox, or any other Creature. Such things would have rendred the Gospel foolishness with a witness, among the Gentiles: and none would have wondered that Christ should have culled out poor
ignorant Fishermen, and other illiterate persons to be the first  Preachers, since such a senceless Method of procedure, was only fit for such dull and unthinking Creatures to prosecute. But for our comfort, the first Christians are free from any such folly; and all the se∣veral sorts of Hereticks, through all ages, have freed them from any such Imputati∣on: They did nothing but what was a∣greeable to the Will of God, They took care not to provoke him, whom they knew to be a consuming fire, to jealousie, by setting up a meer Creature in competition with him. The Christians in that time, shew'd their extreme hatred of Idolatry, in that all the allurements and terrors in the world, could not possibly draw them to it in other instances: If they would but have thrown a little Incense into the Fire burning on an Idols Altar; If they would but have made the smallest conde∣scension to some admired Heathen Deity, they might have been blest both with Im∣punity and Rewards: And sure it could be imputed to nothing but a ridiculously perverse humour, to refuse all kinds of sub∣mission to Creature-Gods, meerly because they were Creatures, and yet, at the same time themselves to Worship or Pray to a Creature of their own setting up. We find not but that the Jews were more tractable, and so more
reasonable in the point, when they had once gotten the gusto of Idolatry in the Golden Calf, and had the fetters  of religious Elders and Governors knock'd off their heels, they stood out at nothing, but were ready to worship any little Idol, any of their neighbours recommended to them. And other Idolatrous Nations, the Romans, in particular, thought it but rea∣sonable, that when they had set up some Gods for themselves according to their own humours, they should compile all the Divinities they could, and secure them∣selves, if not by the quality, at least by the multiplicity of their Gods. But when the Jews were once truly purged from their I∣dolatrous humours by severe and terrible Judgments, they would never more at their utmost peril, admit of the least um∣brage of it: And the converted Gentiles would have dyed a thousand deaths, ra∣ther than have brought such a scandal up∣on Christianity, as to have retained or ad∣vanced any thing that might have laid them open to the reproaches of the Jews, or have seduced or perverted their Brethren. We no where find the Apostles or any A∣postolick men, ever vindicating that Wor∣ship they offered to our Lord with that pre∣tence, that they went to him only as  Mediator of Intercession, as the
Roman di∣stinction is, or that they might not press too rudely upon God, without addressing in the first place to some Favourite servant. We never find them arguing, that they on∣ly Pray to Christ, that He might pray for  them, tho' he always does so, as being the sole Mediator between God and Man; nor do they ever defend their Practice by that Allegation, that they do not terminate their adorations upon Christ, but upon his Father, the contrary would easily have been prov'd against them from their own Writings: Yet, after all, they were not Idolaters, they did not give that Honour to a meer Creature which belonged only to the Crea∣tor, therefore that Christ, to whom they made their addresses, was not a meer Crea∣ture: Yet, as he was Man, He could be no more than a meer Creature, therefore He was more than Man, therefore He was God, the true and Almighty God the great Creator of all things; and thus have we made good our Argument, that Jesus Christ was true God, equal with his Father, from that, otherwise indefensible, practice of Worshipping him, or Praying determi∣nately to him, as the Giver of all good Gifts equally with his Father. If he be own'd to be the One true God, we can have no scruples, no fears of offending, upon us in Praying to him, and expressing all the Signs of external religious adorations towards him. If he be not own'd to be the One true God, then there's no argument which either a Socinian or any Other can bring, to prove the lawfulness of Praying to him as God, but it will equally serve either Papists in their praying to Images, Saints or Angels,
or Pagans in Praying to their confest Idols: and therefore the Socinians themselves fair∣ly confess, with respect to those Texts before-cited, where Christians are known by that character of calling on the name of Christ. That those Words do so com∣prehend all that divine Worship which is exhibited to Christ by his faithful people, that they describe it by that one, the most considerable part of it, namely, beg∣ing assistance from him in our Prayers, Cum necesse sit eum, cujus nomen invoces, pro Deo competente sensu colere, Since it's necessary to Worship him as God in some fit sence, whose name you call upon in Prayer: but there is no other fit sence in which we can call upon him as God, but that which makes him the true, the eter∣nal God: Therefore if he may be called upon as God without Idolatry, He must be that true, that eternal God. We have at last, by God's assistance, gone through these several heads of Dis∣course from which we propounded at first to prove, That Jesus Christ the Son of God was God equal with his Father, or the true, the eternal God: We have prov'd this from those several accounts of his Appea∣rance, and his Nature laid down in the Old Testament, namely, that it was He who appeared to and convers'd with Abra∣ham before the fatal destruction of Sodom, and that He there bore the name
Jehovah,  the name of God incommunicable to any other: That it was He whose Throne the Psalmist declared to be for ever and ever: That it was He who laid the Foundations of the Earth, and that the Heavens were the work of his hands, after whose de∣cay and perishing, He yet should continue beyond the reach of time: That Christ our Lord should be that Child, that Son, given us in time, on whose shoulders the Government should be laid; that He should be the wonderful Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, and the Prince of Peace: That He should be the Righteous Branch springing up to David, whose name should be the Lord our Righ∣teousness: And finally, that He, the bles∣sed Jesus, should be that Ruler of Israel, who should be born in Bethlehem Ephrata, whose goings forth have been of old, from everlasting. We have proved the same assertion from those several Declarations our Saviour has made concerning himself, and his Disciples afterwards concerning him in the New Testament, as namely, that of Saint Matthew, of the Angel's pre∣diction to Joseph, to which the Evangelist applies the Prophecy, that our Saviour Incarnate should be called Immanuel, or God with us: That of our Lord joyning himself in equal rank with his Father in the Institution of Baptism, ordering it to
be performed in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: We have proved that our Saviour was that Word which was in the beginning, which was with God, which was God, by whom all things were made visible and invisible, in Heaven and upon Earth, that accord∣ing to our Saviour himself, He and his Father were One; that it was He whom Saint
Thomas, upon a sufficient Conviction, declared to be his Lord and his God; that, according to Saint Paul, He is God over all blessed for ever; and that, according to the same Apostle, He being in the Form of God thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, yet took upon himself the Form of a Servant for our sakes: These proofs I explain'd, enlarged upon, and vin∣dicated them from their Sophistry, who would have them look'd upon as proofs in∣sufficient of the Divinity of the Son of God. We prov'd the same thing then by those Actions done by himself, and in his own Name, during his converse upon Earth, and done by his Apostles in His Name after his Ascension into Heaven: For instance, from his passing, insensibly, through the multitude, who led him to the brow of an Hill, designing to cast him headlong down from thence: From his making the Souldiers, who came with Judas to seize him, to fall down with barely answering  them what they desired, and in the kind∣est and most satisfactory manner: From his commanding Lazarous in his own Name to come forth of his Grave, after four days burying: From his Apprehension of vir∣tue going out of him to heal the Woman with the bloody Issue, tho' only touching the Hem of his Garment: From his calling those that were weary and heavy laden with their sins, to come to him, and pro∣mising them rest for their Souls, upon so doing: From his Forgiving sins in an au∣thoritative manner, his searching the Heart, trying the Reins, and, according to Saint Peter, Knowing all things: From his Pro∣mising and sending the Holy Ghost, and giving it first of all with his Breath, open∣ing the Understanding of the Disciples, and sending them abroad with a Commis∣sion equivalent to that which himself had received from his Father; and in conclu∣sion, from his Disciples Baptising, Preach∣ing, and doing Miracles, wholly in his Name, and by Faith in him. From this Head we proceeded to prove our Doctrine that Christ was God equal with his Fa∣ther, from the Faith of the Primitive Church, where we confin'd our selves in our Disquisition principally to those Fa∣thers who wrote before the starting of the Arrian Controversie. So, for the
Greek Church, we gave you an account of what Clemens the Roman Bishop in his Epistles to the Corinthians, of what Saint Ignatius Bishop of Antioch in his several Epistles, of what Justine Martyr in his two Apolo∣gies, and in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, and Irenaeus in his books against He∣resies, and Clemens Alexandrinus in his Ad∣monition to the Gentiles, and in his Stro∣mata, and what Origen in his books against Celsus furnishes us with, in evidence of our Saviour's Divine Nature. Then for the Latin Church, we gave you the sence of what Tertullian, St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, Arnobius, and Lactantius have written; from whence we descended to Creeds framed, by Gregory Thaumaturgus, by Felix the first of that name, Bishop of Rome; by the First and Second Councils at Antioch, summoned on the account of Paulus Samosatenus, and the Circular Epistle of the Latter, from the circular Letters of Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, and so from the Epistle and Creed of the Nicene and Constantinopolitane general Councils, with the remarkable suffrages of Constan∣tine the Great, the first Christian Empe∣ror, and Eusebius of Caesarea, one much suspected of Arrianism himself, but a fa∣mous Writer of Church-History. Having done with this, we prov'd last of all that no true Divine Worship was due to any meer Creature, or could be paid to any such
without Idolatry: That true Divine Wor∣ship yet was paid to our blessed Lord by his Apostles, and first Followers, without Idolatry; therefore that our Saviour in consequence could be no meer Creature: Thus far we had proceeded, and concluded all our works of that nature at an end, and our selves at liberty to prosecute our in∣tended discourse farther. But Ill Men, taking advantage of that Liberty now indulged them, a Liberty always fruitful of Errors and Innovations, give us yet more Work, and a necessary care to prevent that Poyson they scatter, from spreading too far amongst those who profess Christianity in these Nations. And here we have two mighty Pretenders to Piety and Reason; One of which undertakes the Patronage of long exploded Arrianism, the Other of the more refined Socinia∣nism, and both with old Arguments, and it may be, some new Finenesses attack the Divinity of our Saviour. It's no small happiness that such Men take up such dif∣ferent Opinions to maintain, for by that means One is somewhat of an Antidote a∣gainst the Other, and by these differen∣ces between themselves in so weighty a matter, Wise and Considerate Christians will learn to believe neither of them. As for what our Socinian pleads, considering
what we asserted in the beginning of our Discourse, viz. That Jesus Christ our Sa∣viour is the Son of God, which We, with all sound Christians understood in a natu∣ral sence; and that that very Notice inferr'd a co-essentiality of the Son with the Father, as it does among Men, where the Son is of the same Nature with the Father which begets him, we thought we had reason; but the Socinians have found us out a way of Filiation or Sonship, of being the be∣gotten, nay, the Only begotten Son of God, without any such Essential Relation: thus the Racovian Catechism, speaking con∣cerning the Original of Christ's being cal∣led, or being the Son of God, tells us He is so; First, Because He was conceived of the Holy Ghost; and being born of a Virgin without the concurrence of a man, he had no other Father but God: and this, Wissowatius in his note upon that pas∣sage tells us, ought to be observed, as the first reason mentioned in Scripture, why Christ is the Son of God, in opposition to those who found that relation upon his eternal Generation of his Father. Secondly, Christ, says the Catechism, is the Son of God, because, as He himself teaches us, He was sanctified by the Father, i. e. He was separated from the rest of mankind in a singular manner, and besides the per∣fect holiness of his Life, furnished with
Divine Wisdom and Power,Cat. Raco. sect. 4. c. 1. p. 24. He was em∣ployed by the Father to execute the Of∣fice of an Ambassadour with a supreme Au∣thority among Men: Thirdly, Christ was the Son of God because He was rais'd from the Dead by God, and so begotten of him again, by this means becoming like God in Immortality: and Fourthly, Christ is the Son of God, because He is invested by God with supreme Authority and Com∣mand over all things. Our Country man Lushington, a great Patron of Socinianism, in his Commentary on the Epistle to the He∣brews,On the He∣brews, c. 1. p. 23. reckons up the grounds of Christ's being the Son of God to the same number. He's the Son of God says He, First, by his Conception, Secondly, by his Function, Thirdly, by his Institution, being by God appointed the Heir of all things, Fourthly, by his Resurrection; thus He: but our New Undertaker, to render these things the more plausible, has given us a new set or Division of the reasons why Christ is called the Son of God?
The title of the Son of God, says he, is in Scripture founded up∣on these Five things, Two that are taken from his two-fold birth, the one out of the Womb of the Virgin, by the Opera∣tion of the Holy Ghost; the other out of the Womb of the Earth, by his Resur∣rection, which makes him undoubtedly the Natural Son of God, his only begotten  Son,Thoughts on Sher∣lock's vin∣dication of the Trinity, p. 4, 5. his own, or his proper Son. Three other which are drawn from his Offices, the First, Because he is that Prophet, whom his Father has sanctified and sent into the World with an extraordinary Commission, Secondly, Because he is the great High-Priest immediately called to that Office by God himself; the Third, Because He is the King, whom God has exalted to a Su∣preme Power both in Heaven and in Earth. Now these Reasons thus multiplied, tho' we should allow them all True, yet they come not up to the matter in hand. It's true, Christ really is the Son of God, by reason of his Conception by the Power of the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Vir∣gin: but supposing, with the Socinians, that the Holy Ghost is not a Person, but only the influence of Almighty God, there is not enough in that Birth, so miraculous as it is, to give our Saviour the title of the Son of God distinctly and exclusively of all others. Dr.
Heylin, tho' far enough from denying the eternal Deity of Christ, yet seems very willing to rest in this Reason, that He is called the only begotten Son of God, purely upon it, or because He's the beloved Son, in whom He is well pleased, or his loved Son, or the Son of his Love: and approves of Maldonat's opinion, that the beloved Son, and the only begotten Son, are terms Reciprocal; but the mistake is ap∣parent:  for tho' Isaac be called the only be∣gotten Son of Abraham, it does not argue that He was the sole engrosser of his love, the contrary is apparent from Abraham's carriage in the case of Ishmael, when he took the necessity of turning Him and his Mother out of doors so grievously,Gen. 21.11. and when, upon God's promising him a Son by Sarah, who should be heir of his blessings, the tender Father yet beg'd, that Ishmael might also live in his sight,Gen. 17.18. i. e. be parta∣ker of God's Favours and extraordinary Blessings too. Besides, that Isaac is called Abraham's only begotten Son, in contradi∣stinction to Ishmael, Isaac was the only be∣gotten Son with respect to God's Promise, and as being the only Son of the free Wo∣man, and properly enough; yet we see, by course of Nature, Abraham had more Sons than Isaac, therefore Isaac was not Abraham's only begotten Son in a sence so eminent, as our Lord is called the Only be∣gotten of the Father:Heylin on the Creed, p. 168. the Father having no other Son begotten by himself but Christ. But tho' sometimes Men do love an Only Child at an extraordinary rate, yet it's not lways, nor necessarily so; for Love, be∣ng sometimes guided by Reason, and Obe∣ience being the only rational ground of aternal Affection, several Children may e as obedient as
One, and therefore several may as rationally be loved as One in an ex∣raordinary manner. But farther, Neither
is our Saviour's Conception by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin, so very great a Miracle, as to set our Saviour, on that account, so far above every Creature; for as Doctor Pearson well observes,Pearson on the Creed, p. 107. Adam the first Man was made immediately by the hand of God, no humane faculty concurring at all, and Adam is therefore called the Son of God by the Evangelist; now there cannot be a Power so much greater requir'd, to give a Man a being in the Womb of a Virgin, than to frame him at first out of a Piece of Earth, as to make so great a distance necessary, as is between the First and the Second Adam: for Jesus Christ, our Second Adam, must be the Son of God in so peculiar a manner, as must make him infinitely Superiour to any other Crea∣ture, he being design'd to exercise such a Power as no other Creature could possibly be capable of. We allow then our Lord's Birth and Conception to have been one ground of his being the Son of God, but not the first, it's no where called so in Scripture, nor is it sufficient to fix him in that supereminent station wherein our Faith is fix'd upon him. The second rea∣son of his Filiation is yet much more De∣ficient, viz. his Resurrection or raising from the Womb of the Earth, for we find none called the Son of God in Scri∣pture on that Reason; that our Saviour was rais'd from the dead we know, if we
look upon him as rais'd from the Dead by his own Power, as indeed He,Joh. 2.19. John 10.17, 18. and He only was, as himself asserts, that affords us a great difference between Him and all other Persons; but utterly destroys the Socini∣an ground of his being called the Son of God. But for such troublesom passages as these, I find a remarkable saying of Smal∣cius, which shews us the whole mystery of their avoiding the force of plain Scri∣pture, and it's this, speaking of Christ's being called God, he proceeds,
When we find it declared in Scripture, not only once or twice, but very often, and very plainly, that God was made Man, con∣sidering that this is a Proposition absurd, wholly contrary to right Reason, and full of Blasphemy against God, we be∣lieve it must be a great deal better to find out some mode of speaking, according to which one may say this concerning God, than to interpret things simply and ac∣cording to the Letter: that is to say, the Socinians have resolved, not to regulate their Opinions by the Scripture, but to re∣duce the Scripture to their Opinions: this however is plain dealing, and a sufficient warning to read their Discourses with the greater Caution, and Intention of mind. But, if the Socinians make use of this Art by their own Confessions in matters of the clearest nature, and so often repeated, we cannot doubt, but they'l rather pitch on  some unknown Figure to elude those Texts which imply our Saviour's raising himself from the Dead, than own his Ʋnity with his Father in the same Essence or Nature, whereby both the assertion that Christ rais'd himself, and that He was rais'd by his Fa∣ther from the dead, are so easily recon∣cil'd: But allowing them their own fan∣cy, if our Saviour was not rais'd from the Dead by any Power of his Own, but only by that of his Father, and yet, was called the Son of God on account of his Resurrection, then all those who shall rise from the Dead before that great day, must be called the Sons of God in the same sence as our Saviour is, and consequently our Sa∣vour cannot, on account of such Resur∣rection, be so the Son of God, as to be his only begotten Son, exclusively of all o∣thers, tho' that title be so exclusive in it's own nature. As for the three Reasons of his being called the Son of God derived from his Offices; it's true in the first place that God has sanctifyed our Saviour and sent him into the World, but so he
sanctified Jeremy, and so he sanctified John the Bap∣tist, and the last in particular he sent into the World with an extraordinary Com∣mission, i. e. to Preach the glad tidings of Salvation, and to prepare the way of the Lord against his publick appearance, which Employs were both wholly extraordinary: but as for that descent of the Holy Ghost  upon him, whereby, say they, he was anointed to his Office, without measure, there was no particularity eminently di∣stinguishing Him in that from his own A∣postles, upon whom the Spirit descended in a visible manner, at the feast of Pente∣cost, and fitted them so for the same Of∣fice of Preaching, and every way promo∣ting the Salvation of Mankind. Indeed we no where find the Apostles called the Sons of God; on account of their being baptised with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, but we see our Saviour is declared the Son of God, in whom he is well pleased, on that occasion; but he was own'd by the same title at his Transfiguration too, when there was no effusion of the Holy Ghost: there∣fore, there was some peculiarly eminent reason for giving our Lord this Title, which could not be applied on any account to any other Person. If we reflect on the second ground of Christ's being called the Son of God, which is, because He is our Great High-Priest, and so constituted by God himself; our Author's proof of it is very strange, viz. from that passage of the Psalmist, Thou art my Son,Heb. 5.5. this day have I begotten thee, quoted by the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, for tho' those Words are there repeated, as well as in the first Chapter of that Epistle, yet it's not in a different Sence, or to a new pur∣pose; but the Apostle there, speaking of  our Saviour's Priesthood, and the great∣ness and excellency of that Office undertaken by him, tells us, no Man takes this Honour to himself, but He that is called of God, as was Aaron: Now the Apostle shews that our Saviour had such a Call as well as Aaron, for his Father who said to him, Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee, shewed his Propriety in his Son, and his Love to him by those words, so that it could not be strange that his Father should lay so great an Honour upon him: But then his title to the Priesthood it self, is founded on that, Thou art a Priest for ever,ver. 6. after the order of Melchisedec, so then, the Son-ship of Christ is antecedent to his Priestly Office, and He was made a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchi∣sedec, because He was the Son of God, and not called the Son of God because He was our High-Priest. As for the last rea∣son why our Saviour is called the Son of God, viz. Because he is exalted to the Su∣preme Power over all things, and so is our King,Hab. 1.5. (which he proves again from the same words as quoted in the same Epistle to the Hebrews) There yet again the same truth occurs, that Christ was the Son of God be∣fore He entred upon his Kingly Office, for by Him God made the worlds, and our Sa∣viour never had a being, but that at the same time he was the Son of God; but if God by Him made the Worlds,ver. 2. as the Apostle  says, and he could not be our King before the Worlds were made, We who are a part of these Worlds, being those Crea∣tures over whom he was to be King; then he was the Son of God before he was our King, and therefore could not be his Son on that account. Besides, if we should al∣low all these things, the whole grant would be useless, for Christ is called, as before we observed, the only begotten Son of God in an eminent and distinguishing man∣ner above all others; but if upon account of his Offices Prophetical, Priestly, or Re∣gal, Christ be called the Son of God, then all those who exercise the same Functions in the world may upon the same reason lay claim to the same title: for of some of them we know the Psalmist says, They are Gods, and they are all the children of the most high; but if they can all justly lay claim to the same Title, then there's no∣thing peculiar to our Saviour included in that being the Son, the only begotten Son of God; which yet the very Title it self imports. All these Reasons then not being suffi∣cient to give our Saviour the Title of the only begotten Son of God in a manner so
super-eminent to all other Creatures and their Originals, particularly to Angels who are of a Spiritual Nature, and are called the Sons of God: There must remain some  other ground for our Saviour's being so called, and that is his eternal generation of the Father, which puts him into such a Re∣lation to his Father, as no other creature can possibly pretend to. We have prov'd that the whole of his Five Precedent Reasons do not fill up the Idea, or make good the full meaning of those terms, wherein Christ is called the only Begotten Son of God, his Beloved Son, or his own Son: for if I am Born of my Mother, but not Begot∣ten, in his own Image, by my reputed Fa∣ther, tho' my reputed Father were able after Death to raise me to Life again, tho' he were able to confer upon me all the Authority in the Universe, yet all this will be so far from giving Me justly the Title of my Father's only-begotten Son, tho' perhaps he never had any other, that by all these Reasons together I should be a putative Son, but really no more related to my supposed Father, than our Saviour was to Joseph the Husband of the blessed Virgin, when before her Espousals he was begotten in her by the Power of the Holy Ghost. Nay, should we admit of the very unphilosophical Hypothesis of Ruarus,Quid in eo absurdi si spiritum Dei venas in virginis uterum descendentes emulsisse, atque ex san∣guine coagulato Embryonem formasse dicam, non aliter atque id fit spiritu in masculo semine latente? Ruarus ad Mersennum Epi∣stola Centur. 1. Num. 56. p. 262. the most modest of the
Socinian tribe, all would  be too little to make good this glorious Idea of the only begotten Son of God. But his eternal Generation answers all, and makes our Saviour as properly the Only Be∣gotten Son of his Heavenly Father, as I or any other Lawful Son is the only begotten of his Father, when he has no more; and the Union yet between the eternal Father and the eternal Son, is of a closer and more levelling kind, than any thing inferiour nature can afford. Our New Author indeed chal∣lenges us,Cum Scriptoribus de genera∣tione animaelium haec comparen∣tur. Nos Dei virtutem in Vir∣ginis uterum aliquam substanti∣am creatam vel immisisse aut ibi creasse affirmamus ex quā, juncto eo quod ex ipsius Virginis sub∣stantiâ accessit, verus homo ge∣neratus fuit. Aliàs enim homo ille Dei filius à conceptione & na∣tivitate propriè non fuisset. Sic Smalcius, de vero & naturali Dei filio, c.
3. Ruarus ab ipso, uterque à veritate quantum distat. if we believe this eternal Generation, to prove it expresly con∣tain'd in Scripture, and then to prove this Eter∣nal Generation the true Basis or Foundation of his glorious Title of the Only Begotten Son of God: As if clear Con∣sequences from plain Pre∣mises, were not a de∣monstrative proof of any thing, to Men who pretend to Reason, and a capacity of dis∣coursing Rationally, which is indeed no∣thing but drawing Consequences plain or obscure from agreeable Premises: Or, for an instance, as if when I find God call'd a Spirit, and I know a Spirit is Invisible, I might not conclude God, tho' a Spirit, to be invisible, unless I found Invisibility  it self,
distinctly and separated from the No∣tion of a Spirit, attributed to him some∣where in Scripture. Now if all these Proofs I have laid down before, have proved, that our Saviour had a Being before he was Conceived in the Womb of the Vir∣gin, which we think to be proved beyond contradiction, and if our Adversaries will but allow that Dictate of Common sence, that, He who really is my Son, is my Son as soon as he has a Being, or if He be not my Son then, He never can be my Son o∣therwise than by Adoption; and so Christ can never be the only begotten Son of his Father, because all those who Believe in and Obey God are his Sons by Adoption too, if they'l but allow this, then Christ must have been the Son of his Father, before such time as he was Conceived in the Virgins Womb, because he had a Being before that Conception: If Christ had a Being before his Conception, it must have been as a Spirit, but Spirits do not generate one another, therefore he must have had a Being from the beginning of the World. If then we fall in with the Arrians and say, God created his Son the Word first out of nothing, and then crea∣ted all other things by Him, we contra∣dict Scripture, which positively assures us, that in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and all that in them is, and there∣fore rested the seventh day, but God could  not rest the Seventh Day, nor do all he had to do in Six Days if he wrought more than Six Days; but He must have worked before the beginning of the Six Days, if he made the Word before he made any thing else, and we have the Six Days Work summ'd up authentically by Moses, but no account there of the Creation of the Word before the Creation of Matter: If he were not Created before Matter, then he could not Create all things as the
Arrians pretend: If therefore He had a Being, it must have been from all eter∣nity, but he was not Created from eter∣nity, for whatsoever is Created must have a Beginning; but he was begotten of his Father as the Scriptures assure us, if there∣fore he were Begotten and not Made, and Begotten before the beginnings of the World, He could be Begotten of nothing but of the Substance of his Father, there being no other Substance for him to be ori∣ginated from, and therefore must be eter∣nal, because the Substance of his Father is and cannot be otherwise than eternal. This being true, it would be meer folly not to fix his Sonship more peculiarly in this eter∣nal Generation: for He that is Begotten by a Father, must be his Son, and he that is Begotten from eternity, must be a Son from eternity, Therefore Christ who was Begotten of his Father from eternity must be  the Son of his Father from eternity, which was the thing to be demonstrated. If yet a Socinian will stumble at the Ʋ∣nion of the Humane with the Divine Na∣ture, as if it were an impossibility, or a∣gainst reason, let Him resolve us fairly, how the Ʋnion is made between a ratio∣nal and immortal Soul, of a Spiritual, and an heavy and unactive Body of an Earthly Nature: We are all convinced they are so joyned together, but those subtle Springs, whereby an Immaterial Soul actuates a Ma∣terial Body, are hitherto indiscernible by the sharpest Eye of impair'd Reason: why then should we conclude it impossible for the Divine and Humane Nature to be uni∣ted together, unless it be
united in a way more intelligible than our Souls and Bodies? For tho' our Souls are of a Spiritual Na∣ture, they are infinitely inferiour to the Na∣ture of Almighty God, and being that Constitutive part of Humane Nature, by which Man is a Rational Creature, it might seem an easie task for us to find out, how that Soul we reason by, should be united to that Body we reason in: But since we are so far to seek in this matter, may we not reasonably conclude, God has hid∣den this from our Eyes, to moderate and humble our unruly Fancies, to keep us from prying into things that are too high for us, and to convince us, that many things where∣in  we are more immediately concerned, not being a whit the less True tho' we un∣derstand them not, we ought to believe that some things may be True with respect to God, of which yet we are able to give our selves no considerable account? And so we may satisfie our selves, that our Savi∣our spoke plain truth, when he said, I and my Father are One, meaning thereby an Essential Ʋnity between his Father and Him; because, tho' he were, at the time of his speaking so, a true Man invested with real flesh and blood, yet He was God before he was Man, the Word of God before he was made flesh and dwelt among us; and was God when He was Man, his Divine Na∣ture not being prejudiced by his assuming Flesh and Blood; by that Divine Nature he was One essentially with his Father, and his Humane assumed Nature being in his Di∣vine Nature, as a finite is contained in an in∣finite, there could be but One Person at last  Christ God-Man, our Saviour and Redeemer. I take the more notice of this particular, which I had in∣sisted on before, because our new Assertor of Socinianism would perswade us, that if we duely examin'd these Words of our Saviour on this occasion spoken to the Jews, (when they charged him with Blasphemy, because in his former expressions He had made himself God, tho' indeed he were but
a Man) we should quit all arguments drawn from thence; the words are these, Jesus answered them,John 10.34, 35, 36. Is it not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods, if he called them Gods unto whom the Word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken, say ye of him whom the Father hath sanctified and sent in∣to the World, Thou blasphemest, because I said I am the Son of God? This says our Ad∣versary,Thoughts on Sh. p. 2. agreeably to those he follows, proves, That our Saviour calls himself God, or the Son of God, upon the same grounds on which others are called Gods, in Scri∣pture, to wit, because the Father has san∣ctified him, i. e. Christ is God, or the Son of God, in the same sence that Magistrates, Good or Bad, are called so, which cer∣tainly is a very great Honour to our Saviour. But, if we examine these Words with that Care we ought, we shall find, that our Sa∣viour by alleging that God had sanctified him, and sent him into the world, does two things: First he distinguishes himself from those called Gods, by that Sanctification and Mission which He had, and They had not; for he affirms no such thing of them, un∣less our Author will infer it from that, of the Word of God coming to them; but all those to whom the Word of God comes, are not sanctified presently by that; nor are all those
sanctified to whom God imparts any thing of his Power for the management of the  World, some sufficiently proving the con∣trary; Nor will it be easie to prove San∣ctification and Anointing to be one and the same thing, upon that reason. Nay, if we admit of Heinsius's Criticism,Heinsius in Aristarcho sac. in lo∣cum. the case will be yet worse, for he would have those words, to whom the Word of the Lord came, be translated, Against whom the Prophetick Burden, or the threatning Word of God was denounced: and indeed the Original will bear it well enough; now we may fairly conclude, that Divine Menaces against sin∣ners do not sanctifie them: so that the com∣parison between our Saviour and those Gods mentioned in the text, does not lye in their being both sanctified. But secondly, our Saviour teaches us, that He was First San∣ctified and then Sent into the World; now He could not be sanctified before he had a being, but he was sanctified before he was sent into the World, He was sent into the world as soon as he was Conceived in the Womb of his Mother, (so Every one is sent into the World as soon as he has a Being in the World, but he has a Being in the World as soon as he's Conceiv'd) there∣fore our Saviour was Sanctified before his Conception, and therefore he had a Being before his Conception in the Womb of the Virgin; this is what the Socinians deny, but the answer to this evidence is not so easie. After this, tho' our new Writer
would have our Saviour to argue as indeed he does, from the Less to the Greater, that, if They were Gods, much more He: yet he has not observ'd, that our Saviour gives himself the Title only of the Son of God, but to be the Son of God, is less than to be God absolute or without restriction, but our Saviour should have given himself yet some Superiour Name, if he intended to prove himself Superiour indeed to those whom the Psalmist calls Gods in the cited place; and so indeed he did, as the Jews understood him, they knew well enough that those Gods were only call'd so by a Figure, and had our Saviour plainly told them, that he meant only Figuratively, when, by calling God his Father, he made himself the Son of God, and by saying,
He and his Father were One, He made not him∣self God, their anger against him would have very much abated, since, in that sence very Ill Men might have pretended to the Title: but they understood, that our Saviour made himself really equal with that One Supreme God whom they worship∣ped: and according to their thoughts, his Sanctification and Mission into the World by God, if He were his Father, set him infinitely above those Figurative Gods, to whom the Father might have communicated some Authority or Power, but had neither Sanctified them, nor sent them with any  extraordinary pretences into the World, and our Saviour was so far from going about to elude their anger, by a shifting or am∣biguous answer, as Smalcius a Socinian says he did, when he told the Jews, before A∣braham was I am; that he exasperates them the more, by alledging the works he did as an evidence that the Father was in Him and He in Him;Joh. 10.3 upon which they go about to seize him but in vain. From the whole we conclude directly contrary to what our Socinian Writer asserts: that since our Lord declared nothing, concerning Himself and his own nature, to the Jews, but what was necessary for them to know, and yet did declare to them such things as made it evident to them, that he ascribed a Na∣ture truely and literally divine to Himself; Therefore it was necessary the Jews, and with them all the rest of Mankind, should know, that Christ was really and truly God, not Metaphorically as Magistrates, nor by participation of God's Holiness, as Good Men are made Partakers of the divine Na∣ture; but essentially and eternally as his Fa∣ther. And thus have we in some measure made good our second Proposition that the blessed Jesus, appearing in our Nature, was God equal with his Father, or really and truely God as well as real Man. We pro∣ceed to shew
How it came to be necessary, that to effect our Salvation, God, and particular∣ly God the Son, should assume our nature to himself? That God the Son did really take our Nature upon him, we have largely proved: That God, especially in such ex∣traordinary cases, does nothing but what's necessary, we may conclude: for tho' God be a Free and uncontrouled Agent, yet in∣finite Wisdom can act nothing that's un∣necessary, or indifferent, whether it be done or no: Our business therefore will be to enquire into the Ends and Designs of our Saviour's appearing in the flesh, from whence we shall be the better able to ap∣prehend the necessity of such his appea∣rance.Sermon of the Nat. p. 247. Our Church in her Homily upon the Nativity of our Saviour teaches us, That the end of our Saviour's coming in the flesh was, to save and deliver his people, to fulfil the Law for us, to bear witness unto the truth, to teach and preach the Word of his Father, to give light unto the World, to call sinners to re∣pentance, to refresh them that labour and be heavy laden, to cast out the Prince of this World, to reconcile us in the body of his flesh, to dissolve the works of the Devil, and last of all to become a propi¦tiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World▪
What's contain'd in these, and what other Ends may be assigned for our Saviour's In∣carnation, I shall lay down, and prosecute, by God's assistance, under these Heads; Our Saviour was incarnate, or the Son of God was made Flesh, That He might destroy the works of the Devil, or put an end to his Tyranny over us. That The World might be convinc'd, that the Law given by Moses to the nation of the Jews was so much God's Law, that it could not be disannull'd or anti∣quated in any particular, but by an au∣thority not inferiour to that of God him∣self who framed it. That God's Law, as given to the Jews, might be, exactly and according to the Letter, fulfilled in our Nature; and so that He who fulfilled it, might be an ex∣ample of Holiness and Obedience to us.
God was manifest in the flesh, or, which amounts to the same, our Saviour was In∣carnate,1 Joh. 3 8. That He might destroy the Works of the Devil, and put an end to his Ty∣ranny over us: This is the very doctrine of the Apostle, For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that He might de∣stroy  the works of the Devil, that is, that He might get the Mastery of Sin and Death, so that neither of them might prevail up∣on us to our eternal Destruction. The Devil had got a strange Ascendant over Men since the Fall, so that he seemed to preside in every humane action, this Pre∣valency of his, almost banished all Na∣tural Religion out of the World, or per∣verted it to so ill Intents and Purposes that it lost it's name in gross Superstition and ridiculous Idolatry. The Devil made use of all the various Dispensations of Pro∣vidence for the promoting of his own wicked Designs, so that the bare Permission of him to prevail was thought a sufficient argu∣ment, by which to assert his own Inde∣pendent Supremacy over the World, and consequently to engross to himself all that Divine Worship, which Originally belong∣ed to the Almighty: Nor could it be strange, that He who seemed to manage all the affairs of the Universe without controul, should be generally feared and sacrificed to, if it were for no other rea∣sons, but that he might do no
outward mischief. Having thus insinuated himself into the Throne of God, tho' he might now and then for his own credit, propound some honest Moral Principles to the World, yet He took far greater advantages to instil all manner of Impieties into his  Adorers; it was his malicious and despe∣rate aim, to revenge himself on that ter∣rible Justice which had condemned him to eternal burnings; and this revenge, as he commenc'd with tempting Men to sin at first, so he carried it on, by moving de∣luded Wretches to do all such things as seemed the most directly to contradict the Will of Heaven; hence arose that horrid complication of sins, of which the Pagan world were guilty, summ'd up by the Apostle. It was Man's unhappiness,Rom
1.28, &c. that notwithstanding the visible fatal ef∣fects of the first sin, they would yet be∣lieve it possible there might some unknown sweets lye hid in the perpetration of wick∣edness; Sin always made a gaudy shew, like a common Whore in gay trappings, who carries so much of Witchcraft in her lascivious looks, that, tho' many rot a∣way piece-meal in her poysonous embraces, yet other wicked and adventurous fools are always adding to the tale of her nasty Trophies: This gay outside of sin could prevail, not only upon the inferior World, but upon the Sons of God themselves, those separated from the rest of Adam's race by nobler principles and a diviner knowledge, tho' the product of that unhappy softness, was nothing but Brutes and Monsters, the Plagues of Nature, and the insolent Ene∣mies of Heaven. Sin prevailed afterwards,  when God had chosen to himself a parti∣cular Nation, and made them the proper Lot of his inheritance, and where God could discover but 7000. of those who had not bowed the knee to Baal, who had not defiled themselves by a miserable prosti∣tution of their Souls to Hell, the Devil had a spreading and destructive Interest among the thousands of Israel, every day added more to his strength and his ready apprehension of his mighty Conque∣rours approach, edged his Industry and raised his Rage to more than a double heat, because his time was short: It grieved that enemy of Souls to think of the impen∣dent abridgment of his Insolence: He had been so us'd to easie Conquests, that He knew not how to veil to the blessed Je∣sus, nor could he speak less to him than as if he had still been the Governour of the Universe, and could really, by vir∣tue of some inherent authority of his own, have bestowed all the kingdoms of the world and the glories of them upon whomsoever he pleased; If we would make more particu∣lar remarks of the Devil's influence on the World, about our Saviour's Incarna∣tion, we shall find it notorious in the ex∣ertion of a double Tyranny.
He exercised at that time a prodigious and unaccountable Tyranny over the Bodies  of Men; He could not be content with en∣slaving Man's nobler part, but as God him∣self, so the great enemy of God, would have the whole Man entirely to himself: not that it could be any way advantageous to himself and his own destructive purposes, for where he had got the Conquest over the Soul before, he knew well enough the bo∣dy must follow; but he cared not what impertinent mischiefs he ingaged himself in, provided he might but the more directly cross his Maker and his Punisher: Hence he came to take Possession of so many bo∣dies, and to vent his malice in so many tormenting Distempers, and especially he invaded those of the Jewish nation, as if knowing, by force of antient Prophecies, the World's Saviour was to be born among them, He'd take possession entirely of all he could, as if it were by violence to keep out the Lawful Heir from that Inheritance which belong'd to him. It has seem'd strange to Many, that whereas a Corporeal suffering by the ingress of the Devil into a Man is so very rare now a-days, and was not so very frequent among the Gentiles even in our Saviour's time; yet so many should be
possest among the Jews, as we find upon record in the Evangelists: This has made divers believe, that all violent or convulsive distempers were generally taken to be the effects of the influence of some  malignant Spirits; not as if there had really been any Devil within them, but, at most, as if he had been permitted then, as he was in Job's case, to inflict bodily diseases upon some by external causes, and not otherwise; We know well enough that the Devil, in some sence, may be called the author of all those Distempers Men's Bodies at this time labour under, for it was Sin that introduced Death and all the Preliminaries to it, and the Devil introduced Sin: But to resolve all these Posessions by the Devil, recorded by the Evangelists, into nothing but some more violent or unusual diseases than ordinary, can no way be allowed; For we find it not said of those that were Lepers, that were Lame, or Blind, or that had bloody Is∣sues, or that had Feavers, &c. That they were possest, yet those distempers were of very malignant Natures frequently, and insuperable by all the Art of the Physici∣an, as the Gospel-History informs us: But among other instances of those possest with Devils, we find Two coming out of the tombes, exceeding fierce and dangerous, so that no Man might pass that way, and it was the voice of a Devil, not of a mi∣serable Man, who would have been glad of a release from Slavery, that cryed out, What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God?. 8. art thou come hither to torment
us before our time? The notion of Christ's being the Son of God, had then gotten very small footing among Men, but the Devil had experienced his divine original, by that extreme baffle He had receiv'd in that Temptation he assaulted him with in the Wilderness: Nor had a Poor Distem∣pered Man, who knew Jesus Christ was the Son of God, any reason to fear his being tormented by Him, who express'd nothing but Goodness and readiness to help the miserable in all the motions of his life; but Devils knew what they had to fear, because they knew what they had deserved; and tho' they expected not their final heaviest Doom so soon, they knew not what terrible Sentence so Powerful and justly incensed a Judge might immediately pass upon them: It could not again, have been a Disease that could with an audible voice have desired leave to enter into the herd of Swine, nor was it a Disease,ver. 31. pre∣dominating only in two Persons, which, upon its removal, could have had such pre∣cipitate effects upon a whole herd of Swine, as to have driven them headlong into the Sea, there to have perished in the Waters:ver. 32. and it evidenced the true temper of a Devil, to be ready to do mischief in all degrees, and to leave no Creature, that might be any way useful to Man, unassaulted by his active malice.
Again, another time there's one brought to our Saviour possest with a dumb Devil,Mat. 9.32. there seem to have been no ordinary natu∣ral causes of this distemper, for, as soon as
the Devil was cast out, the dumb spake, and the people wondered, and said, It was never so seen in Israel. And that the Per∣son was really possest with a Devil, the very Pharisees themselves, who were apt enough to detract from every action of our Saviour, confess plain enough, when up∣on this truly miraculous effect of his Di∣vine Power, they object, that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of the De∣vils:Mat 9.34. the first was their Confession, that He did really cast out Devils, the second was but their malicious and senceless sup∣position, that he cast them out through Beel∣zebub the Prince of the Devils; an Objection, upon another like occasion, sufficiently ex∣posed by our Saviour to the shame of the Objectors. Here it's worth our observa∣tion, that where those brought to our Sa∣viour were really possest with Devils, our Saviour cast them out with a Word only, a short and peremptory Command; where Persons were brought to him affected with the same kind of Distempers, without any such Possession, He generally used some kind of Means, tho' the reasons of them were unintelligible to the Spectators then, and to our selves at this day: Thus for  the Man that was born blind, He spate on the ground and made clay with the spittle,Joh. 9.6, 7. and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with clay, and said unto him, Go wash in the Pool of Siloam, and he went his way and wash'd, and then he came away seeing; Another blind man, that begg'd his pity at Bethsaida, was cured in a manner some∣what resembling that;Mark 8.23, 24, 25. He took the blind Man and spate on his eyes, and put his hands upon him, and askt him if he saw ought, and when he own'd but an imperfect sight, he put his hands upon his Eyes again, and then he look'd up, and saw every Man clearly: And where he was desired to lay his hands upon one that was Deaf and Dumb, where it arose, not from a pos∣sessing Devil, but from natural impediments, He put his fingers into his Ears, and he spat,Mar. 7.32, 33, 34, 35. and touch'd his tongue, and looking up to Heaven he sigh'd and said unto him Eph∣phatha, Be opened, and the consequence was, straitway his Ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spake plain; Now this account of the cure of several particular bodily distempers, puts a plain and very remarkable difference be∣tween these griefs caused immediately by the Devil, and those commonly incident to Mankind. Besides, we often, if not al∣ways, find the Person possest by an evil Spirit, under some
distraction of mind, so  the Two possest with Devils mentioned be∣fore,Mark 5.15. the Man who was called Legion, be∣cause of that multitude of Devils which had entred him, (who therefore when he was dispossest, is said to have been in his right mind:) which tho' it may arise from bodily distempers, and doubtless often does so, yet it's generally observed, that where the Devil has taken Possession of Mens or Wo∣mens bodies by Divine Permission either so as to speak oracularly by them for the delusion of mankind, or to act otherwise maliciously to their destruction, there are and have been frequent, if not continual alienations of mind, and desperate ravings and distractions; and it's no wonder that such an inmate should create nothing but ruines and disorders. Farther, we find the precise number of seven Devils cast out of Mary Magdalene, we could scarcely say rationally that they were seven diseases, or, as some dream, that they were the seven deadly sins: Nor would the casting out of those Devils be so oft repeated, if there had been no more in the case than what was the
ordinary effect of our Lord's goodness to persons in distress, so that, up∣on the whole, we may certainly conclude, it was, at the time of our Saviour's come∣ing into the World, an ordinary thing, comparatively to what it was at other sea∣sons, for the Devil to enter into and possess,  and disorder the bodies of Men; If we ask the reason why, it may seem to have been permitted, For the utmost trial of the possest persons Patience and Faith, and to excite in them the more earnest longings for the coming of the Messias: Thus God permitted the De∣vil to assault holy Job with extreme ma∣lice and violence, not that he intended to leave Job wholly in his hand, no; he knew the natural frailties incident to cor∣rupted nature, and would not permit the enemy to press upon him beyond what he would enable him to bear, therefore, tho' the Devil improv'd that liberty given him to the utmost for the tormenting of his body, and for the taking from him all those worldly comforts he had enjoyed before, yet he could not but complain of that hedge which God by his Providence had set about him; he could not but be sensible of that restraint laid upon him by a superiour hand; at last, after all the expressions of Diabolical malice against him,
Job comes out from the furnace of his Affliction more Pure, more Illustrious and Happy, and every way infinitely more considerable than he was before: Affliction taught him more particularly to depend upon the life of his Redeemer, he saw his mighty Saviour at a distance, but with so clear and strong  a Faith, as preserved him in all his bitter sufferings from sinking in Despair, while he saw the expiring rage of his cruel Ad∣versary, ready to be swallowed up in Victo∣ry, and himself among others, like to be partaker of his Redeemer's eternal Tri∣umphs; he rose from the Dunghil he sate on in his misery, more experienced in the uncertain and unsatisfactory nature of all sublunary things, in the weakness of his own Temper, and the malice of his Ene∣my, so that he was admirably fitted on all hands, to be a Teacher to the rest of the World, both by his pious Lectures, and his more instructive example: What was the Case of Job so long before, was the Case of those more numerous Wretches, whom Satan was permitted to possess about the time of our Saviour's Incarnation; tho' they were miserable enough, in being the unhappy receptacles of Infernal Spirits, yet there was a
providential guard about them still, which check'd the malicious designs of Hell, and made those poor creatures, tho' so terrible to others, yet not to sink by themselves into Despair: those strange ef∣fects of an unusual vigor, apparent in the Persons Possest, shewed the World plain∣ly, how strong the cursed Inmate was, how little Natural strength was able to op∣pose him, and how Dreadful the Prince of Darkness must have been to all, had not  strong and weighty chains been laid upon him. Yet we cannot imagine those Per∣sons, thus possest, were depriv'd so wholly of their Understandings, that they had no lucid intervals at all, the Man, and the Ra∣tional heaven-born Soul acted sometimes, and the poor Wretches were sensible of their own deplorable condition; this made them
long for a Deliverer, and, when they saw him, not to punish themselves with or∣dinary Jewish Prejudices against him, but in spite of Hell it self and all the reluctance of in-dwelling Devils, to fly to his feet, and to seek a remedy for their calamities at his hands; they liv'd in Hope amidst all their former Torments, and now they shewed it, their eyes were not so thick, but that they could see the Son of God through a veil of flesh, and of an humble and inferior State; nay, those very Devils with∣in them were instrumental against their de∣sign, to confirm their Faith and Hope, by that unwillingness they'd certainly express to quit any Seat, where they had engrossed a Power, and to appear before an all-know∣ing and inexorable Judge; and, by those Confessions which they made, who, in that point, as to our Saviour's being the Son of God, when they confest it, were more to be credited than all the Jewish Doctors and prejudiced Hypocrites put together. We may yet be sure it was none of the Devil's  motion, that made the miserable Demo∣niac, when he saw Jesus afar off, run and fall down and worship him:Mark 5.6. they were Devils who drove the unhappy Wretch to take up his habitation among the tombs, they were Devils that drove him about the mountains day and night, where he was con∣tinually crying and cutting himself with stones, whatsoever could be mischievous to him that they urged him to, but it was Reason divinely influenced, and a deep sence of that slavery he then lay under, that brought him to his Masters feet, where only help and salvation could be found. Certain mi∣sery generally opens the Eye of Reason, and brings it to an exact weighing of all things, and an impartial examination of their natures: If it befall an Impenitent guilty Soul, it gives him an
irrefragable convicti∣on of the eternity of those woes he's en∣gaged in, this makes him desperate; If it be the lot of One, who, tho' very guilty, yet endeavours to expiate his crimes by a sincere Repentance, it makes him find un∣answerable reasons why he should still hope in the Mercy of God, and that with some considerable assurance of being a partaker in it. Those very Demoniacks in the Go∣spel, were awakened to a sence of them∣selves by that heavy judgment they were laid under, their lucid Intervals taught them to humble themselves under God's afflicting  hand, it made them long to see the strong Man armed cast out by one that was stronger than he, and their Liberty asserted by one mighty to save; and therefore they saw, what stubborn fools would take no notice of, and flew to that Saviour with an eager haste, whom the rest of their more unhappily possest Country men contemn'd and persecuted. Now this, being one reason of God's permis∣sion that the Prince of Darkness should Ty∣rannize upon humane bodies; it's no wonder He should be more Active than ordinary, when his Power was drawing towards an end, and it's as little to be wondred at that he should lose his aim, and that his violence should make all long the more earnestly, that He who was their much expected Saviour should come quickly. Nor is it any wonder that tho' God permitted the Devil to afflict their bodies, yet he himself should support their spirits from sinking under that calamity, since his own Son's appearance was now at hand, and Hells utmost fury would easily submit to his Almighty power. God permitted this insolence of the Devil, more particularly about the time of our Lord's Incarnation, that as the malice and po∣wer of the Devil was by that means the more ap∣parent, so the glory of his Son, and the evidence of his yet greater power, might be the more illu∣strious: So that, tho' Men were under a pre∣sent affliction, and that far from being un∣merited,
since they had sin'd to deserve more than temporal punishment, should God have been extreme to mark what was done amiss, (as appears by Mary Magdalen's case, to whom our Saviour observes, much was forgi∣ven) yet they were much advantaged by that temporary affliction, and that freedom they ob∣tain'd taught them the more industriously to celebrate God's glory, and to admire that goodness shew'd by him to the children of Men. For, when they saw
what they had suf∣fer'd, and how extreme a danger they had in∣cur'd before by yielding to Sin, Men, with their Cure recovering their Reason, would be afraid to sin any more, lest a worse thing might come to them: Hence we find the Man possest with a Legion of Devils, when they were cast out, desiring to be with his Deliverer, which tho' it were refused him, yet Christ bad him go home to his Friends,Mark 5.18, 19.20. and to tell them how great things the Lord had done for him, and had had compassion upon him: which accordingly he did, and published in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him: and by this means, all those, who were not wilfully blind, might easily discover that the Lord whom they expected was come. Our Saviour, by these par∣ticular actions, got a mighty advantage a∣gainst Pharisaick Prejudices, and evidenc'd his own glory and their shame at the same in∣stant. As all ages had shew'd some on whom the Devil had exercised a more particular Power, so among the Jews there had been  several instances of the same nature, and as they had a certain knowledge of the miser∣able state of those who were so troubled, so pious Men, among the Jews, had had parti∣cular recourse to Almighty God, that God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, interceding by their Prayers for Mercy and relief for those so visited; they, who were brought up in the methods of True Religion, applyed not themselves to Charms or Magick Arts to get a victory over him who was the Inventor and Promoter of such Arts, as the Gentile world did; but they applied themselves to their own God, whose Mercy and Power they were well acquainted with, and of whom they knew all the Powers of darkness stood in awe; and it please God often to hear the Prayers of such pious Persons on behalf of those Demo∣niacs, and to cast those Fiends out of them; this dealing of that God who had planted true Religion, among them by Moses, gave a continual evidence to the Divinity of that Religion; those ejections of Devils being effected not by the loose devotions of an impi∣ous Rabble, but by the humble and incessant applications of such who lived in punctual obe∣dience to the Law, and justified its holy nature by their lives and conversations; these our Sa∣viour takes notice of when the Pharisees re∣proach'd him with casting out Devils by Beel∣zebub the Prince of Devils, when in return to their scandalous Objection, he asks them,Matth.
2.27. If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom then  do your Children cast them out? And from thence carries on an argument to convince them of the falseness of their objection. Now if it were true, that pious Men among the Jews did by devout Prayers to God cast out Devils, and by so doing confirm their Religion, (be∣cause it was certain God would not hear the Prayers of those, who should have separated from a Religion of his own Institution) if this were so, then since Christ liv'd himself in a compleat Obedience to the same divine Law, in an Obedience so absolute, that he could challenge all his quick-sighted Adversaries to convince him of sin; and while he liv'd in such Obedience, did the same things with those whom they supposed Holy and Good Men, then it must necessarily follow, that Christ acted as religiously as They, cast out Devils by the same means, and acted by the same divine Power as those holy men among themselves did. Had he indeed gone about to seduce them from the Service of the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, they might justly have exclaim'd against him: but he referr'd all the glory of what he did to the same God, and appeal'd to him as his Fa∣ther; therefore they could not, upon any just reason, condemn him as acting by any un∣lawful ways, while they admired their own Children for those very things, for which they pretended to condemn
Him. From this he proceeds to a farther Argument in his own vindication: The Devil indeed is strong  and powerful, and where he gets possession is very Hardly removed; If he pretends on foo∣lish Exorcisms, to quit his hold, it's but to delude the Ignorant and Credulous, and to return at his own pleasure; if he be not for that illusion, He cannot be stronger than him∣self, therefore He cannot cast out Himself; but the Devil is really and frequently cast out, and that so, as not to be able to return to his former Mansion when he pleases, there∣fore he must be cast out by one really stronger than himself; but there is no Being more Powerful than the Prince of Darkness,1 Tim 3.16. except only that God who created him, therefore it must be by the strength of that great God that He was cast out. Now that our Savi∣our frequently cast out Devils, nay that the very Disciples who followed him, and who acted only by a Power delegated from him, cast out Devils, was plain to the Eyes of all Men, therefore both the Master and the Dis∣ciples cast out Devils by a Power truely Di∣vine: for, as our Saviour urges them, How can one enter into a strong man's house,Matth. 12.29.
and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man, which He that does must be stronger than He, and then He will spoil his goods: Thus were those cap∣tious Adversaries of their own happiness baffled, and thus was the Glory of our bles∣sed Saviour encreas'd; for by this means, being in the outward Communion of the Jew∣ish Church, and asserting the Honour of the same God whom they worshipp'd, it must  appear plain beyond Contradiction, that He really came from God, that he was the Anoin∣ted of God, That Messias upon whose come∣ing both They and their Fathers had for ma∣ny ages built their hopes. The frequen∣cy then of the Devils exercising his Tyran∣ny at that time upon mens bodies, gave our Saviour the more frequent opportunities of exerting his own Divinity, and so the Devil himself, that great Enemy of his appearance, was the great Evidence of the truth of that appearance, and that by those very means, by which he hoped principally to obstruct those benefits flowing from his Appearance; so numerous Rebels starting up in several quarters of the Kingdom, give a well-arm'd Prince the greater opportunities of become∣ing more Absolute than before, by those very methods whereby they hoped to have shaken off his Yoke, and to have set up a Govern∣ment according to their own fancies. To this Consideration might perhaps be added, that this great prevalency of the Infernal Powers about the time of our Saviour's appearance, was one certain evidence of that fulness of time in which the Messias was to be revealed, since it was a great evidence of the general Deluge of Wickedness, which then had overflowed the World, so that it was full time for the Son of God to interpose with his Power, lest God's anger should have consign'd a general∣ly infected World to his Revenge, who waited for it, and began to domineer in it as his own: but
We find the Devil not at all satisfied with those disorders he created in the Bodies of Men, but that he was much more Tyrannical over their Souls, their better, their immortal Part; there it was the Image of their great Creator was impress'd, there he loved to Tyrannize, and as far as possible to deface that glorious original Image, and He prevail'd but too effectually. The Devil had seduced a great part of the World entirely from the Service of the Creator to himself the worst of Creatures; He had set up his own Altars in every place, and made an unthinking Ge∣neration prostrate themselves to him for good and assistance, when the World con∣tain'd no other Enemie to their good but him∣self; it may seem strange that the World should have been seiz'd with so gross a Stu∣pidity, as to be lyable to the fatal Mistake, but when ignorance prevails, it's no wonder that a Spirit of such active subtlety should extend his Conquests very far, where the Soul is once made like a fair Table without any impression, it's easie for the first that at∣tempts it to draw the Pourtraict of the Devil upon it; now the Engines by which the Devil held the Soul in slavery were these False Interests: Interest is what goes a great way in managing the affairs of this World; where it's conceiv'd to lie, it of∣ten excites in vigorous and apprehensive Souls
a strange industry and eagerness to carry on whatsoever seems subservient to it; nay, he's justly looked upon as his own Enemy, who does not observe his own Interests, and prosecute them to extremity; this the De∣vil knowing very well, set
false Interests before the Eyes of much the greater part of Mankind, some few sagacious Souls were sensible of his Subtleties, and stood upon their guard, kept their Eyes so open that his Lethaean bough was unable to close them, but the rest were lulled by the fatal musick of bewitching Syrens into such Dreams, as nothing but eternal ruines could awake them from; thus the Devil perswaded Men, That Liberty was their interest, not that sacred liberty from sin and guilt, which Divine Re∣ligion offers to the Soul, but a wild extra∣vagance, the product of wretched inconsi∣deracy, which carries men out into all ex∣cess of wickedness, a Liberty which has no bounds but what time and mortality sets before it, and yet, which is so far from being a true Liberty, that it's the most mi∣serable, and to the Soul, when it has lei∣sure but to think a little, the most into∣lerable slavery in the World. But how∣ever Liberty is the word, and it carries charms along with it, and too too few re∣flect upon it so far as to distinguish between what's Real and Fictitious. It is the Inter∣est of Mankind to seek for Pleasure, i. e. to seek to live always with Him, in whose  presence is fulness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore: but here Hell plays again with Ambiguities, and gives not Men leisure to distinguish or judge of Pleasures, false or true, transient or per∣petual: But Pleasure and Liberty are such Interests, as no Wise Man can cease to prosecute, therefore Men must take a world of pains to glut themselves with sensual Pleasures, where Sorrows and Torments have their shares, and they must have Li∣berty to be damn'd in spite of all the whine∣ing Lectures of men pretending to true Re∣ligion, and to teach Men saving Wisdom; there are some petty Moral Virtues which Hell it self would recommend, lest a ge∣neral hurry into Vice should give so hor∣rid a Prospect of things as should startle the most
insensate Brute, and make him desire at least to live in Peace with the World, for his own security; but it is Interest still for any Man to do wrong to his Neighbours, when he finds himself strong enough to ju∣stifie his pretensions by Force: And whe∣ther he succeeds or no, the Devil gains his ends, which is the destruction of Mankind, which he always promotes so far as he may safely do it, without rendring his Advices suspicious to his own Vassals; so that, according to the Divinity of Hell, it is Man's Interest to be extremely Am∣bitious, extremely Debauch'd, extremely  Wicked; in all these things corrupt Na∣ture loves to go on without check or re∣straint. But if it be not safe for the same Person to take his swing in every respect, any One of them is enough to damn him eternally, and he may indulge himself in what he pleases. But whereas the Soul sometimes reflects upon futurity, there are Elysian fields provided for the Fancy to exercise it self upon, where it may be Re∣wards are promised to some Popular Vir∣tues, but neither the Sensualist, nor the irregularly Ambitious, nor the Pitiful Ef∣feminate Souls shall be excluded from them. It was always the suggestion of Hell, that the Messengers of Heaven had no o∣ther design but to yoke men under unrea∣sonable severities, to debar them of all the delights of life, to engage them in mo∣rose and sullen courses, and all with a pro∣spect only of a
Chimaerical happiness, such as had no being but in the talk of those who invented it; now these things must needs sound very harshly to Flesh and Blood, and arm Men against that Religion which should pretend to invade such rights and priviledges: This argument Hell made use of principally against the Jewish Religion of old, and endeavoured on all occasions to expose it to the rest of Mankind. When the worth and import of Jewish Ceremo∣nies was almost at an end, then to the  Jews the suggestion was, That their Holy Religion, that Law given to them in so extraordinary a manner by the hand of God himself, was like to be trodden under foot, that God's Temple, the Glory of their Nation, was like to be destroy'd, and it must certainly be their Interests, who had just hopes of Salvation by their Law, to defend it against all encroach∣ments and alterations whatsoever. A∣gainst Christianity it was easie to per∣swade the Gentiles, That all those Gods whom they had so long adored, and by whose kind influences they had so long been happy, were now like to be set at nought, that they would be tempted to a perswasion which the Wise and Inqui∣sitive Heads, the subtle Philosophers of those Ages, who yet were the Wisest Men, and the greatest Examples, would never admit of, that therefore, if they embraced it, they must certainly incur the odium of all the World, and prepare themselves to suffer whatsoever the joint furies of the Universe could inflict upon them, and it was certainly their Interest to write after the Copy of the Philosophick Tribe, to assert the Honour of their anti∣ent Deities, and to live in a good corre∣spondence with all mankind: These sug∣gestions were fair and plausible, and golden Interest every way glittering in mens faces; these introduced
Violent and unreasonable Prejudices against all those means which should be made use of by Heaven, to assert Men into a true and substantial liberty from that Hellish slavery they had been inured to: Now if the case be never so plain that Men are really in a place of torment, and that they feel it severely, if their Looks and Cryes and Complaints make others take notice of and pity their Condition, and yet One that goes to perswade them of the un∣easiness of their lives, and offers to disen∣gage them from those pains they feel, and proves, beyond contradiction, that his Power is sufficient to effect what he pre∣tends to, cannot be heard, nor his Offers attended to or accepted, it must necessarily be concluded, that such Persons lie under some very unaccountable Prejudice against the Person of the Offerer, or that Autho∣rity invested in him. Such was the con∣dition of the world in general at our Lord's appearance in our Nature, they were all Prisoners to their greatest enemy, to him who desired to be the
eternal tormenter both of their Bodies and their Souls, that Liberty he pretended to indulge them with was nothing, but extreme Slavery, the most base and unworthy of a ratio∣nal Creature that possibly could be con∣trived, like that wherein the Poet tells  us Circe kept the Companions of Ʋlysses, where they, were turned to Wolves and Dogs and Swine, the very tortures of which beastly state made some more fiery Souls conclude it was better by their own hands to disengage themselves from those weighty fetters they mourn'd in, than endure so base a confinement. To these our Saviour appeared, that Sun of Righ∣teousness came to them with healing in his wings; Compassion to their wretched con∣dition drew him from the bosome of his Father and made him manifest himself in the flesh. The end of his descent was, That whosoever believed in him should not perish but have everlasting life: That all might believe in him, He fully and clearly sta∣ted their own miserable condition before their eyes, he shewed them the Strength and Malice of their Tyrant, their own inability to get free from those Chains he had laid upon them, his own ready∣ness to be their Deliverer, if they'd but depend upon him for it, and he gave all Men every day new Proofs, that he was able to make good what he offer'd, the Devil, who was their Persecutor, flying before him as a Wolf would before a generous Lyon, or a Child before a Gy∣ant. Yet after all this our Saviour came even to his own, as the Evangelist assures us, and his own received him not,Joh.
1.11. He came  among them at that precise time which their Prophets had assigned to his advent. He came when their Religion was almost vanished into Air, and the Law of Mo∣ses of no more Authority among a com∣pany of nice Scribes and Pharisees, than the whole Book of God was afterwards a∣mong the Schoolmen. They look'd every day for his coming, and could not avoid being sensible of their present wants: But for all this, the Devil had fill'd them with such ridiculous Jealousies of their Law, and with such Prodigious Prejudices against the Person of Him, they so long waited for; that necessity it self could make but very few of them own or believe in him. It's true, he appeared but in the form of a ser∣vant, in a very mean and despicable state, and the Jews, being enslaved to a Foreign Power, expected some mighty Monarch who should have broke the Roman fetters, and have made
Jerusalem sensibly superi∣our to all the Cities upon Earth: Prejudice in the mean time shut their eyes so strong∣ly, that they could not see, that He who was able to heal all manner of Distempers, to quell the Ragings of a stormy Sea, to drive whole Legions of Infernal Spirits be∣fore him with a Word, notwithstanding the meanness of his outward garb, might be able, if he saw it good, to effect all these mighty conquests they expected at his ap∣pearance;  as if his saving Power had depen∣ded only on the Greatness of his Retinue, the Gayety of his Habit, or the Grandeur of his Court. The Gentiles had their Preju∣dices too; they thought a Contemptible Man far too weak td baffle all those numerous Deities whose directions they had so long managed themselves by; they concluded that one Crucified by the prosecution of his own Country Men, one whose Disciples freely own'd his ignominious Death, and seem'd proud of their Master's Cross, whose Apostles pretended to no elaborate Elo∣quence, to no niceties of Argument, to no depth of Learning, and yet would always be Preaching in their Master's name, they concluded it impossible that such a One should be the World's Saviour, that such Messengers should really be the authentick Ambassadors of Heaven, tho' they too did numerous mi∣racles in the name of Him they preach'd, and without Learning baffled all the wit and arguments of their nimble Sophisters: As if it were the outward appearance, and not the inherent power and authority of a per∣son, that must effect the mighty work; or as if
compleat Liberty could not be worth a Man's acceptance, unless it were given by a royal hand; It must certainly be a strange ascendant which Hell had over mankind, which could infatuate them so far, and per∣swade such vast numbers to build their own  eternal ruine upon such pitiful Objections. The Devil infected Mens Souls about the time of our Lord's Incarnation; with a Pro∣digious and unaccountable Laziness, such as made them absolutely unready to contri∣bute to their own happiness. They saw themselves abus'd by those Gods they wor∣shipp'd, their Credulity impos'd on, and their good Intentions perverted, this they publickly declared. They found themselves cheated with an empty shew of knowledge, and caress'd by others, like themselves, for their Philosophick atchievements, when in∣deed they were not able so much as to agree about the Supreme Good, but fell into more than 300. different opinions about it, tho' they accounted the atchievement of that good the great end of all Humane Actions. This they could not but laugh at them∣selves; They saw that notwithstanding their continual Declamations against unso∣ciable Vices or notorious Immoralities, their very Instructors themselves scarce deserved the names of Men, by reason of their dis∣solute and irregular lives; They found them∣selves irrecoverably addicted to all those very things which themselves branded as irratio∣nal and odious; This they lamented, and they seemed earnestly to wish for a remedy of all these evils; but they were like the Clown in the ditch, they'd cry to Heaven
for help, but never went about to rescue themselves by Care and Industry from those Calamities they were involved in. The Devil could well enough bear with all the Remon∣strances of those who were sensible of the World's deplorable state, so long as Sloth had seized their Vitals, and would permit them to go no further than empty Lamentations. Nothing can render Men more ridiculous or contemptible, than this Temper, to their cruel Adversary: the very Heathens could represent their ancient Hero's as Men of daring Spirits, never giving themselves to ignoble Ease, but travelling continually through the World, to seek Adventures wor∣thy of their Strength and Courage; yet they could easily forget their own Examples, and languish in a miserable slavery to Sin, neither combate with their own Vices, nor with the Temptations of the Devil; they could not so much as find the way to Him who was able to assist them, who could re∣new their languid Souls with a sprightly Vi∣gour, and make them, by the influences of his sacred Spirit, triumphant over all their in-born Corruptions; the Blind were desirous to be led to him, the Lame to be carried to him, only those who were under inward and more mortal Distempers shew'd no forward∣ness to be cured by an Almighty hand. When the Wise-man describes the Sluggard's Vine∣yard, and shows us the Fences thereof broken down, the Surface of it covered with Thorns  and nettles, and the Sluggard himself so far from regarding it that he stretches himself upon his Bed and crys,
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, he characterizes the general dispositi∣on of Men under the Influences of Hell, o∣ver-grown with all manner of Impieties, un∣guarded against all manner of Temptations, and yet dull and stupified under all their Mi∣series. When we reflect upon this general Captivity of rational Creatures to Vice and Folly, when we reflect upon that spiritless Weakness they groan'd under, when we see them lazy in their own nearest concerns, pre∣judiced against all the ways of their own De∣liverance, pursuing Bubbles with a ridiculous Earnestness, and imagining it their greatest Interest to undo themselves; we cannot well persuade our selves, that any ordinary means could help the miserable, or relieve the oppres∣sed, or let the Prisoners go free. The chains and violences of Hell are not easily broken, and the attempts of Weaklings in the Case would but encrease the sorrow of the Suffer∣ers; but when the blessed Jesus reveal'd him∣self, in the fulness of time; when he began, by mighty works, to exert his power; when he commissioned his Disciples to go through the Cities of Israel, and to preach Repentance, and to work Miracles of all sorts; when those Disciples, returning again to give an account of their Ministry, told their Master, that even Evil Spirits themselves were subject unto  them through his name, our Saviour observes,Luke 10.18. that he saw Satan, like lightning, fall from Heaven; he had put an end to that height of power the Devil had pleas'd himself in be∣fore. He had seem'd to himself to be like the most High, invested in an absolute Domi∣nion o'er the World; but he was now fallen from his Height, and should no more be a∣ble to deceive the Nations with that success he had formerly had; for the Gospel then preach'd, set before Men, in plain terms, the true and only good they were to aim at; it laid out the means tending directly to that good; it shew'd Men their frequent Failures indeed, but an infallible Atonement for them in the Death of their Saviour; and shew'd the Holy Spirit ready to assist all their pious Endeavours after Happiness, by which the Works of the Devil were effectually de∣stroyed.
Another Reason of our Saviour's coming into the World, was, That the World might be convinced that the Law given by Moses to the Jewish Nation, was really the Law of God, and that it could not therefore be repeal'd by any Power or Authority whatsoever, but his who was God. The last part of this Reason is a ne∣cessary consequence upon the first; for in all Countries the sanction and repealing of Laws require one and the same Authority at least; nay, where it's possible, the annulling of a Law requires much the greater Power; thus  among the
Romans, the Edictum Praetoris, or the Praetor's Edict, had the force of a Law, and Obedience was absolutely required to it, only it might be rescinded by a Rescript of the Emperour, whose Power was indisputa∣ble both over the Praetor and his Law; but the Praetor could not repeal an Imperial Re∣script, nor his own Edict, after an Imperial Confirmation: thus God can vacate all Hu∣mane Laws, when and where he pleases, be∣cause he's superiour to all Laws but those flowing from his own Nature; but it's a damning Sin for Man to go about to vacate God's Laws, because Man, in his highest state has no other Authority but what he de∣rives from God, who cannot be supposed to give any Man an Authority contradictory to his own, or that should interfere with it; but among Men, as in the Roman Empire it required an Imperial Power to repeal an Impe∣rial Sanction; so among our selves, an Act of Parliament can be repealed only by an Act of Parliament, the King in Parliament being in all respects whatsoever, the supreme Power of the Nation. Thus we see the Parallelism between both the making and disannulling both Divine and Humane Laws; so that it appears altogether rational, that the Mosaic Law, if originated from God, should be re∣pealed by God. As for the Law of Moses, that it was given by God, and only by him, he that reads the Scripture, and owns that to be the Word of God, must of necessity be∣lieve,  and the Jews to this day are so strong∣ly possess'd with that Assurance, that all the World knows the vacating that by One, who appear'd but a mean Man, is one great prejudice the Jews make use of at this day a∣gainst Christianity; they are certain God gave their Law and every part of it, they are as certain that the same God only could change or take it away, they conclude, as our Socinians do, That Jesus was a meer Man and no God, therefore they look upon him as very wicked for pretending to put an end to that Law. Now, if we wanted the Scri∣pture to confirm us in that Knowledge, a bare Reflection upon the behaviour of the Jewish Nation at all times is enough to satis∣fie us, that God was the Author of their Law. For if we look upon them as esteem'd by their Neighbours, they were never lookt up∣on as the veriest Fools and Ignorants in the Universe, that Ptolomey, who procur'd the Translation of the Old Testament into Greek, thought the Books of their Law worth procuring at a vast expence, so he and several adjacent Nations at all times were ready to enter into
terms of Confedera∣cy with them, &c. But were they never so wise or knowing in any thing, they never found any reason to shake off the Yoke of the Law of Moses; they own'd it upon all occasions, and, as at first, when they fell under any ex∣tream Affliction, they had immediately re∣course to the Law and to the Testimony; from  whence they re-confirm'd their Apprehensi∣ons of the true God, the God of their fathers, and apply'd themselves to Him; so afterwards, they employ'd themselves earnestly in vindi∣cating that Law from any Aspersions which their Enemies might lay upon it, and in en∣deavouring to procure Proselytes to that Law, from among the neighbouring Nations. But now we must have a very mean opinion of the Jews, if we can imagine a whole Na∣tion should submit themselves to a body of Laws, for a course of several ages; that they should believe it their indispensible du∣ty to obey all the particular Injunctions of a Law that was extreamly nice and difficult to be observ'd; such a Law as, in its Ceremo∣nial part, was very troublesome and heavy, yet necessary enough, considering the Tem∣per of the People it was given to, and the great end and aim of it; that they should own the obliging force of this Law, notwith∣standing those many Rebellions against it which they were guilty of, and which there stood upon record against them, to their perpetual Reproach and Shame; that they should be infinitely nice in preserving the Copies of their Law pure and uncorrupt, tho' it contained so many Prophecies and Threat∣nings against them, and the accounts of so many Terrible Judgments executed against them for their Stubbornness, Disobedience and Incorrigibility, and that, after all, they should expose their lives to Tortures and to
Death it self for the sake of these very Laws, rather than by any force be drawn to re∣nounce or to trespass upon an ordinary Cere∣mony of them; we must have a very mean opi∣nion of the Jews, if we can believe they would do and suffer all these things for the sake of such a Law, whose Original they really were unacquainted with, or they could be persuaded to assert its coming in an extraordinary man∣ner from the hand of God himself, when there were so many in all parts of the World, who because they would not admit of it, were engaged by their proper Interests, and for their own credit, to ruine its reputation, if they were not able to prove beyond con∣tradiction, that their Law had its Original from God himself. Now since so little has appear'd against the Divine Original of the Jewish Law, in any age, and that little has been so very easily baffled, we can the less wonder that the scatter'd Posterity of the Jews to this day should be so hardly persuaded to quit that Law. Since they have unanswerable Reasons to believe that as it did proceed imme∣diately from God, so it could be
abrogated by none but the same God, therefore those who go about to persuade the World, that Jesus Christ the Messiah was not God, but a meer Man, and so confirm their old Prejudices taken up a∣gainst our Saviour during his converse upon earth; such lay a desperate stumbling-Block in the way of the Conversion of those mise∣rable People; for our great Interest is against  them to prove that Jesus Christ was God, for, that being granted, they'll easily yield, that He was the Messias, and that he lawfully might abrogate the Law of Moses, in part or in the whole, as He himself thought good. When we speak thus of the Abrogation of the Mosaic Law, it's to be observ'd, that part of what's comprised in the Books of Moses, is the Law of Nature, so not His by any peculiar Title, and therefore, though in his Books, not repealable, some part of his Laws were Political, which, since the Fall of the Jewish State and their penal Dispersi∣on, are impracticable, and consequently an∣tiquated of themselves; those Laws therefore which we at this time more particularly re∣spect, are those called
Ceremonial Laws, ap∣propriated wholly to the Jewish Nation in distinction from all others, and made Au∣thentic by the Authoritative Sanction of God himself; this was that Law, which as it had a particular respect unto the Coming of the Messias, being full of Types and Sha∣dows, representing what He was to do and suffer, so it could rationally be no more than Temporal, and expire of course at such time as the Messias the Anti-type should appear in the World: and since the Messias, when come, would be able to effect all those things for Men, which those Types and Shadows did but point at, the Jews themselves could not but be glad to have that Burthen re∣moved  which neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear, when that promised Messias was really come; therefore we see that all that Fondness the Jews at present express towards their Ceremonial Law, arises only from their mis-perswasion, that the Messias really is not yet come. But if the Ceremonial Law were really given to the Jews by God himself, and yet was to be abrogated at last, there must certainly appear some reasons for that Abrogation, beside the meer Authority of the Repealer, sufficient to justifie the Repeal it self; and such are, The general Import, just mentioned, they were Types and Shadows only, they could be no more in their own Natures, nor was it necessary they should be more; they were Figures for the time then present,Heb. 9.9, 10. wherein were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, and wherein was much sollitude about meats and drinks and divers washings, and carnal ordinances were then imposed upon the Jews until the time of re∣formation, says the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews; that those Sacrifices offer'd under the Law were but Vanity in their own Nature, the Jews have been sensible them∣selves; so in their Midrasch Koheleth, or Gloss on Ecclesiastes, on that passage,Eccles 2.1. I said in my heart, go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure, and behold this also is vanity, they comment thus, Enjoy pleasure or good, i. e. the good of the Law, and behold even that is Vanity; sure the
Scripture ought to have said, behold that is pleasure or good; what then is the Preacher's meaning to say, behold that also is Vanity? Rabbi Hezekiah said, All that Law which thou learnest in this age is but Vani∣ty,Ragmundi Martini Pugio fidei pars 3. di∣stinct. 3. c. 11. §. 12. in competition with the Law of the Ages to come; by the Law of the Ages to come, they mean the Law of the Messias, for so they ex∣plain it in their Comment on chap. 11. v. 8. where they positively say, All that Law which a Man learns in this age, or at the present, is Va∣nity, in comparison with, or in presence of the Law of the Messias; and they had reason for their Opinion: for tho' the Ceremonial appendages of the Law had re∣spect principally to the service of God, yet they were all external, such as could not pos∣sibly affect the Soul, yet the Jews themselves conclude the Soul the principal part con∣cerned in their worship of God, in the Mi∣drash Tehillim on that of the Psalmist,Ps. 51.17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart O God thou wilt not despise. Now, if we reflect on the nature of their Sacrifices offer'd to God by Fire, they were expiatory; the blood of those Sacrifices was shed and sprinkled for the atoneing Heaven for the Sins of the Offerers; but as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews asserts, The Law can never with those Sacrifices,Heb. 10.1.4.
Numb. 19. of∣fered year by year continually, make the com∣mers to them perfect: and that it is not possible that the blood of Bulls or of Goats should take  away sin. The Water of Separation prepared with the Ashes of a Red Heifer was to puri∣fie the Ʋnclean, but it could only purifie them outwardly, no inward Pollution could be removed by a sprinkling with it; therefore David in a state of extraordinary inward guilt, begs of God, Create in me a clean heart, O God,Psal. 51.10. and renew a right spirit within me; and else∣where he declares, I will wash my hands in inno∣cency, and so will I compass thine Altar:Psal. 26.6. there∣fore we find, that during the whole force of the Ceremonial Law, the outward Purifications might, on an extraordinary Occasion, as that of Hezekiah's Passover, be dispensed with, but the inward Purification of the Heart was a duty absolutely indispensible; whence it was, that when several of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and Issachar, and Zabulun, had not cleansed themselves, Hezekiah put up that petition for them to God,2 Chron. 30.18, 19, 20. The good Lord pardon every one that prepareth his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary, and the Lord hearkened to Hezeki∣ah, and healed the people: which additional Passage intimates, that God inflicted some punishment on the People for participating of the Passover when legally unprepared, so to teach them a Lesson of punctual Obedience; but he healed them upon account of their in∣ward and spiritual Preparation, to satisfie them, that he esteemed inward Holiness be∣yond all the
ceremonial Purifications of the  Sanctuary. In the Law there were a great many Washings appointed, and upon seve∣ral occasions; the Scribes and Pharisees, by virtue of some Traditions of their own, added more,Mark 7.3, 4. they would not eat except they washed their hands, and when they came from their markets they wash'd; and there were many other things which they had received to hold, as the washing of Cups, and Pots, and of brazen Vessels, and of Tables. Now all these things might contribute to outward Purity, and ar∣gued a great care of Cleanliness; nor were the Jews to have been condemned for these practices, if they had not laid too great a weight upon them, and for the sake of such Purifications, banish'd all thoughts of true in∣ward Purity out of their minds, and this our Saviour reproves them for, not condemning their outward Neatness, but their making void the Law of God by their Traditions; and he carries the reproof yet further,Matth. 23.25. Wo unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, for you make clean the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess, &c. But the Purity of the Soul was what God principally regarded, and those out∣ward Washings originally ordain'd in the Law, were so many Types design'd to put Men in mind of that clean Hand and that pure Heart which every one was to endeavour af∣ter. If we look into Circumcision it self, that great initiating Ceremony in the Jewish Church, it was really a preventive of natural
Ʋncleanness, yet though it were made by God the Seal of that Covenant between him∣self and the Seed of Abraham, the Jews had a right notion of what that Ceremony was to put them in mind of, given them by Mo∣ses himself,Deut. 10.16. so he bids them to circumcise the fore-skin of their hearts, and to be no more stiff-necked; Stubbornness and Disobedience were the Ʋncleanness of the Heart, therefore what care the Jews took to prevent that of Nature, it was reasonable they should take to remove that accruing from Sin; Moses there¦fore promises it as a great Blessing from Hea∣ven on them in case of their sincere Repentance when under God's afflicting hand,Deut. 30.6. the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart and with all thy soul, that thou mayst live; where the stubborn Heart is once mollified, the Love of God is easily settled in it. Now that this Circumcision could effect nothing, ex opere operato, or that it could contribute nothing to the Obedience of the Soul, we see demonstrated by the case of the Jews at pre∣sent, who are careful enough in performing the outward Rite of Circumcision, and yet obdurate and unmalleable by all the Ten∣dries of the Gospel, therefore the Apostle has furnisht us with an easie Distinction be∣tween a Jew by Nature, or one descended li∣neally from Abraham, and a Jew by Grace, or one ally'd to
Abraham spiritually, as he was the Father of the Faithful: for, says He,  He is not a Jew that is one outwardly,Rom. 2.28, 29. neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Cir∣cumcision is that of the Heart in the spirit, whose praise is not of men but of God: We see then that these Ceremonies, to instance in no more, have only a Typical Nature, and can have no more, because though they may serve to represent to our Memories the solid Duties of sincere Religion, yet it's im∣possible they should operate on the inward Man, or, in themselves, make any one that is punctual in them acceptable in the sight of God: Nor was there any need they should be more than Memorials or Representations of more important Good; for those Cere∣monial Ʋsages were from their first begin∣ning, whether among Adam's universal Race, or the People of Israel, intended on∣ly as comfortable supports to mens Spirits, other∣wise ready to droop under the various pressing calamities of a mortal Life: God had given Adam the promise of the blessed Seed, whose heel was to be bruised by the Serpent, which bruise signified Death, unless we can imagine
Adam so weak as to draw any comfort from a literal Interpretation of the words; but that sense could really afford none more than a promise, that I should break the Head of some Snake, and that should bite or wound my Heel, could be a matter of consolation to all Man∣kind; but Adam's case was this, He saw how his Folly and Disobedience had made  way to Sin and Death to tyrannize over all his own Posterity, that the Sin committed was irrevocable, the wages of Sin conse∣quently inevitable, these thoughts were e∣nough to deject the most daring Spirits, and Adam, without the interposition of im∣mense Goodness, must have sunk irrecovera∣bly beneath the dreadful weight of his own Misery. What could prevent his despair, could only be this, an Assurance that the Pow∣ers of Sin and Death should not totally prevail, but there should, by some sufficient means, be a stop effectually put to their Tyranny. This As∣surance God design'd to give him in that memorable Promise, which though spoken to the Serpent, was only a terrible Threat∣ning to him, but a precious Promise to Adam, I will put enmity between thee and the Woman,Gen. 3.15. and between thy seed and her seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel: The bare settling an Enmity between Him, who had tempted Adam by the Serpent, and the Seed of the Woman, could have signified little to Adam's satisfaction; he had suffered too deeply in the first engagement with Him, and therefore could not wish his Posterity engaged in a
perpetual Warfare with so subtle an Adversary, therefore the following words, the seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's head, contain'd the Comfort long'd for: To bruise the Head is to wound a vital part; to crush it, is to put an end to all the strength and vigour of the Animal so crush'd,  nothing can be more fatal to a real Serpent, than a Wound inflicted there, it may live some time afterwards, and when the Head is crush'd, may threaten with the Tail, but those Threatnings are languid and easily to be avoided. If therefore the Seed of the Woman could crush the Serpent's Head, he must get the Mastery and intire Conquest over all the Wiles and Stratagems, over all the Strength and Violence of the Devil; so as
He must;, for the future, lose his Interests and Power, and be defeated in the expected events of his Malice, and in short, have his Tyranny wholly broken by the Seed of the Woman; this was what alone could comfort Adam after his fatal Error: But this Victory was not to be so easily gotten, but that the Seed of the Wo∣man must be partaker of the Inconveniences of the War; the serpent must bruise his heel, or wound his inferiour Part, that which was at the greatest distance from his Vitals and from the Head, that governing, directing, advising, instructing Part; so that the Go∣vernment and Power of the Woman's Seed was not to be ended, but he was to lose some Blood in that Conflict in which the Serpent's head was to be crush'd; without Blood-shed then there could be no Victory obtain'd, nor must the Seed of the Woman be absolutely in∣vulnerable; for had he been so, there could have been no shedding of Blood, and conse∣quently no hope for remission to miserable Man. Now those Sacrifices afterwards of∣fer'd,  wherein the blood of living Crea∣tures was shed, were propitiatory, or de∣sign'd to atone that God who was justly dis∣pleased with Sin and Sinners, not as if the blood of Bulls, or Goats, or Lambs had any thing propitiatory in their own Nature; but they were to represent continually to the Offerers minds, that effectually propitiatory Blood which was to be shed in the great Combat between the Seed of the Woman and the Serpent, wherein the former was to suffer in his less noble and inferiourly origina∣ted part; and if those outward a scrifices effect∣ed so much, they did as much as possibly they could, and as much as was necessary for them to do; for while Men had daily before their Eyes a representation of that bloody Contest, wherein that great and malicious Enemy of Mankind was to be entirely conquer'd, Men had reason always to live in hopes, and to reap inviolable Comforts from those hopes. But now after all, if those Commemorative or
Typical Sacrifices did bring to mind that Blood afterwards to be shed, then, when that Blood so represented was actually shed, there was no need of any farther prophetical Representation, and if the several Washings and Purifications, under the Law, related to that inward Cleanness and Purity, which was afterwards, by a more proper medium, to be effected, then when upon the Con∣quest gain'd by the Woman's Seed over that infernal Serpent, that Sacred Blood was shed,  which was able to cleanse Mankind from all Sin, the inward Purity of the Soul was effe∣ctually procured, and ceremonial Purificati∣ons were rendred altogether useless, and therefore that Law enjoining such Ceremo∣nies might very well be disannull'd, since Types or Shadows were never invented by any with any other design but to be vacated and abolished at such times as those things appear'd, of which they were design'd at first to be the Shadows or Representati∣ons. The Ceremonial Law, though given to the Jews at first by God himself, yet might very well be abrogated, because in it self it was not essentially necessary to the being or well-being of a Church; had it been so, it had been un∣changeable, because it had been a part of the Law of Nature, as the Moral Law was, that receiv'd no additions or diminutions by the Ceremonial Law, nor by the coming, or the inherent Legislative Power of the Messias. The truth of this reason, that the Ceremo∣nial Law is not necessary to the being or the well∣being of a Church, we find by the existence of the Christian Church among our selves at this day, and by a due reflection upon the Church of God existent in the World before the time of
Moses's receiving a Law from Mount Sinai. We cannot deny but that the Roman part of the Christian World is as much, nay infinitely more, clogg'd with Ceremo∣nies than that of the Jews ever was, though  we take in the traditional part of Jewish Cere∣monies, which had no foundation in what was delivered by Moses; this our Church takes notice of in that preface concerning Ceremoníes, prefixt to the Liturgy, where giving the reason why many Ceremonies were taken away, which had been used in times of Popery, She tells us,Preface of Ceremonies why some abol. some kept. It is partly because the great excess and multitude of them had so encreas'd in these latter days, that the burden of them was intolerable, whereof St. Augustine, in his time, com∣plained, that they were grown to such a multitude, that the estate of Christian People was in worse case, concerning that matter, than were the Jews, and therefore he advised the taking away that burden as there was opportunity: but if he complain'd then, much more would he have done so had he seen the number of those in use at the time of the Reformati∣on, to which the Multitude he had seen was nothing to be compared: which mul∣titude of Ceremonies was so great, and many of them so dark, that they did more confound and darken, than declare and set forth Christ's Benefits to us. This Persuasion was so rationally settled in the minds of
our first Reformers, that whatsoe∣ver the Enemies of it may pretend, the esta∣blished Church of England, as distinct from that of Rome, was settled with the fewest and the most decent Ceremonies of any National  Church in the Christian World; and upon that reason, among others, has been accounted the Glory of the Reformation, by all but a few Ingrateful, and Hypocritical Schismaticks, whose viperine Rage has always been endea∣vouring to tear out the Bowels of their Mo∣ther. Indeed under the Roman Cloud of num∣berless Ceremonies, true Christianity has been almost lost, and the Strength and Purity of that Holy Religion delivered to the World by our Saviour and his Apostles, perverted into gaudy Show and ridiculous Pageantry: Simplicity, as far as it interferes not with Brutality and Slovenliness, best becomes the Oeconomy of the Gospel; and to be sure the Everlasting Truth will shine brightest there, where there's no Artifice made use of to disguise it, nor more of Weight in mat∣ters of Salvation laid upon outward Circum∣stances than upon inward and solid Sincerity and Holiness. This was the Ornament of God's Church before the Mosaic particular Dispensation, for though it were impossible for Adam, or any of the Antediluvian Patri∣archs, or for Abraham and his Posterity, till the Redemption out of Aegyt, to per∣form their Sacrifices without somewhat of Ceremony, yet neither the same nor the same number were required of them, as were af∣terwards enjoined the Israelites in the Wil∣derness; and yet we cannot deny but the Church of God was as inwardly glorious, and their Services as really acceptable to Almighty
God, as the Jewish Service was, when a∣dorned with all those beautiful Circumstanti∣als which the Law of Moses had appointed. But now if the Church had a Being in the World, and a Well-being too, before the Mosaic Service was determined, then it fol∣lows plainly, that those Ceremonies enjoined by Moses, though directed by God himself in every particular, were not essential to, nor inseparable from the Church of God. Nay that very great Ceremony of Circumcision, though it began as high as Abraham himself, that particular Friend of God, was no way essential to the Church, and therefore not laid on Noah, not used by Melchisedech, nor known by the Saints of the Antediluvian World. Besides, supposing the Patriarchs had had a whole sett of Ceremonies, and those Typical as those of the Jews afterwards were, yet we may certainly conclude, that they were not the same with those the Jews had, for then that Exactness required of Moses in every punctilio, and by Moses requir'd of the Levitical Priests, would have been need∣less, for that Method of serving God, which Men are brought up to is easie and strongly enough retain'd by them, without any such extraordinary Niceness. But then, if these Ante-Mosaic Ceremonies were not the same with those from Sinai, and yet could be a∣bolished to make room for them, then those from Sinai might, with as little Inconve∣nience, be laid aside, for the
Prescriptions of  the Messias, and those very few Ceremonial Circumstances, the simplicity and significancy of the Gospel it self required: Besides, if we consider the whole reason why so many par∣ticular Ceremonies were enjoined the Jews, we shall find that they had a double respect, i. e. either to the future Advent of the Mes∣sias, or to the securing the Jews from the pest of Idolatry, with which all their Neigh∣bours, and indeed all other Nations, at that time, were infected. God design'd the Israelites a peculiar Inheritance to himself; he, by entering into a peculiar Covenant with them, married them to himself, as to one Husband, and therefore was Jealous over them,Vid. Hottingeri Historiae Oriental. l. 1. c. 8. p. 162. Spencerum de legibus Heb. l. 2. p. 237. Witsium de Oeconomia Foederum. l. 4. c. 14. p. 634. Ʋbi plurima de fictis Zabaeorum ritibus quo∣rum nomen ex Alcorano pri∣mitus depromptum exinde à Maimonide excultum, pluri∣mum negotii nequicquam do∣ctis ddit. Cum quod de Zabiis particulariter quasi de peculiari quodam Idolola∣trarum genere disputatur, gentibus quibuscunque Idolo∣latricis tribui debuisset; à quibus omnibus aeque ac à quibusdam Israelitis lege Mosaicâ cautum erat. Vid. Seldenum de Jure Nat. & Gentium se∣cundum Hebraeos l. 2. c. 7. p. 207. Edit. Argentorat. lest they should fall into spiritual Adul∣teries, and so alienate his Love from themselves, as the Nati∣ons round about them had done, by prostituting their Souls to numberless Idols, and the more immediate service of the Devil in Magick Arts, &c. God knew how much prejudi∣ced they were for the Idolatry of the
Aegyptians, among whom they had long con∣vers'd, and with whom doubt∣less they had comply'd very far  during the time of their Vassalage to them. He consider'd how he had drawn Abraham himself, that great Father of the Faithful, from the Worship of the Idols of the Chaldaeans, to whom the rest of his Kindred sold them∣selves: He consider'd how tempting the fair Words and Fashions of their Neighbours might be in time to come, and how fair a prospect of Advantage, from a Corre∣spondence with them in sacred Matters, might prevail upon gross and carnal Minds; on all these reasons, God gave the Israelites such Laws, and prescrib'd them such parti∣cular Rites and Ceremonies in religious Af∣fairs, as might alienate them wholly from the ill examples of their Neighbours, and might make their Neighbours think them as strange and singular a People, and a People the less proper to be tamper'd with, because of that high Opinion they had of the Origi∣nal of their own Laws, and their resolute and punctual Obedience to them. Yet af∣ter all, this foolish and stiff-necked People, not wise enough to conquer their own Prejudi∣ces and carnal Thoughts, fell frequently in∣to those very Sins God had so well fortified them against; and the Captivity of Babylon contributed more to the purgation of that People from their mighty Inclinations to Idolatry, than all the Ceremonial Laws put together could. But when God, by the seve∣rity of that Chastisement, had corrected them in good earnest, and a more punctual obser∣vation
of the appointed Rites had created in them an irreconcilable aversion to that Ido∣latry they had so severely smarted for before, then the very reason of those Rites began to vanish, as their just Prejudices against the Idolatrous Customs of Pagans grew stronger and stronger, and the coming of the promised Messias, to whom so many of those Ceremo∣nies pointed, concurring with this natural cessation of the reason of them, as tending to the Nation's security against Pagan Idolatry, the Jews themselves had such reasons to ex∣pect the abrogation of those ritual Laws, as nothing but a wilful and obstinate Blindness could have hinder'd them from discerning; for, from what they read in their own Sa∣cred History, they could not but find them of a changeable Nature; for Instance, where∣as they were ordered by God's immediate Command to eat the first Passover with their Loins girded,Exod. 12.11. their shoes on their feet, their staves in their hands, and in a great deal of haste, this particular mode of eating it was dispensed with when they came to be settled in the Land of Canaan. Whereas God himself had ordered nothing in respect to the Solemn Services of that Temple which was afterwards to be built to his Name, they saw David instituting a new Method for the Priests attendance and services, very different from what had been before pre∣scribed,1 Chron. c. 23.24, 25, 26. of which we have a large account; yet David's Ordinances in that Matter
were held to be authentic ever after. They had seen, that though God himself, by Moses, had appointed that the Passover should always be kill'd and eaten on the fourteenth day of the first month, and had allow'd a Dispensation in no cases but that of Ʋncleanness by touch∣ing a dead Body, or being in a journey,Numb. 9.5. v. 9, 10. 2 Chron. 30.2. yet Hezekiah upon a different reason, and by com∣mon advice had kept the Passover on the four∣teenth day of the second Month: Nay, they had seen but lately the Law of the Sabbath broken (as they thought) by the Macca∣bees, by a solemn Resolution;1 Macc. 2.41. therefore the Jews must have own'd them changeable, and we must conclude, though appointed by God himself, they might justly be laid aside by an equally Divine Authority. The Ceremonial Law might justly be ab∣rogated, because, though it were given by God himself, yet God always put a vast difference between an exactness in that and an exact obedi∣ence to the Moral and perpetually obliging Law; now the Difference between them must lye, as in their different Relation, the last to the Soul, the former to the Body; so in that, that One was of its own Nature mutable, the other was not so. It was indispensibly ne∣cessary that all those who hoped to live in God's Holy Hill, should walk uprightly,Psal.
15. per totum. and work righteousness, and speak the Truth in their hearts, that they should no way injure their neighbours, that they should be faithful, merciful, kind, &c. but it was not indispen∣sibly  necessary that they should be circumcised, for Adam, Seth, Noah, Enoch were not cir∣cumcised, yet Enoch in particular is obser∣ved to have walked with God, and to have been translated by God; and Noah was the onely Man found righteous by God in the whole An∣tediluvian World. It was not necessary that they should All eat of the Paschal Lamb, for Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and the rest of the Jewish Patriarchs were wholly stran∣gers to that Solemnity; but it was absolute∣ly necessary all Men should live in exact Obe∣dience to the Law of Ʋncorrupted Nature, and should be ready to submit themselves to whatsoever should be reveal'd by Almighty God as his will; and it was absolutely necessary that all Men, under a clear sense of their own Inability to do their own Duties, should have respect to some Powerful Media∣tor between themselves and God, and some effectual Satisfaction to be made the Laws of God, on account of that deficiency of theirs; that consquently, there should be some Sacrifice offer'd to Almighty God of a Real and Intrinsic Worth, which might have power to atone in earnest for Sin, and this necessity the generality of Mankind might learn, as well from those many bloody Sacrifices they were wont to offer as propiti∣atory to Heaven, as the Jews could from their
Paschal Lamb. It was a Duty not to be intermitted, that Men should be very care∣ful of and very charitable to the Poor, that  they should make a Provision for them, pro∣portionable to their Necessities, the Rich so proving themselves careful Stewards of that Good which God had bestow'd upon them, and ready to distribute it among their Fellow-Creatures; yet all were not tyed just to Jewish Rules,Lev. 19.9.23.22. to leave the corners of their fields unmown, to leave a considerable gleaning on their vines, and olives, and fig-trees, to leave the forgotten handfuls in the field, &c. So it was an universal Task to follow Judg∣ment, Mercy and Faith, which by our Savi∣our are call'd the weightier things, not of the Ceremonial Law, but of the Moral Law, though all were not bound to pay their particular Tyths of Mint, Anise and Cummin, or of every little Plant which grew upon their ground; though paying the Tenths of Mens general Increase for the Sustenance of their Priests, has been sufficiently prov'd by Learned Men to have been an acknowledged Duty in most, if not in all, Nations, long before the Mosaic Institution; but it's need∣less to run out into any more Instances of this kind. But meer Reason it self will teach us how light and inconsiderable Ceremo∣nies are, when they stand in competition with the Essentials of Religion, how con∣venient or useful soever they may other∣wise be; for besides that, as Religious Servi∣ces Publick and Solemn cannot be performed without some
Ceremonies, let Men aim at what Simplicity they please, so there may be  Variety of them invented and used, yet ve∣ry proper to express one and the same thing, as the Turks express their respects to Divine Services among them, by pulling off their Shoes, where we mean the same Reverence by uncovering our Heads; but there can be but one Course and Method of true Practical Piety concerning all Men and at all times, the doing all the good and avoiding all the evil possible, being that general Course or Method. So it's farther to be consider'd, that if Cere∣mony stood on any equal ground with inward Holiness, the best bred and the richest Men must needs, if they pleas'd, be the greatest Saints, for good reeding and Gentile E∣ducation will enable a Man to make his Ad∣dresses to Heaven in the most taking and humble ways; a Man so accomplisht knows best how to express an outward Reverence and Humility, how to speak in the most pro∣per Words, and to accompany those Words with the most decent Gestures and the most melting Accents; He knows how in com∣mon Transactions with Men, to set off a little Good with a great deal of Gaiety and Lustre, and to manage those Interests with a few soft and obliging, but meer empty Words, which others, less debonair, know not how to advance with a plain unadorned Charity and Liberality; at this rate, if Goodness must not be accounted for by
in∣ward Sincerity, the gayest Show must unque∣stionably make the best Man. Again, if out∣ward  Ceremony and Circumstance were a∣vailable, the Man of mighty Wealth would be able to purchase the Friendship of Hea∣ven, since he could load the Altars with such multitudes of Sacrifices, as Men of meaner Fortunes must never pretend to: the Gen∣tiles often had their Hecatombs, their Sacri∣fices of an hundred Oxen offer'd to their Gods at once, and it was observ'd by the more sagacious Pagans, That the worst of Tyrants and of Men were always the most pro∣fuse in their Offerings to their Gods. Hence Ammianus Marcellinus, though no Enemy to his Religion, observes of Julian the Apostate, that before his fatal Expedition against the Persians, Hostiarum sanguine plurimo Aras crebritate nimia perfundebat, tauros aliquando immolando centenos, & innumeros varii pecoris greges, avés{que} candidas, terrâ quaesitas & mari, He washed the Altars with the blood of too many Sacrifices, offering some∣times an hundred Bulls at once, and innu∣merable Flocks of several sorts of Cattel, and white Birds, brought from every quar∣ter both by Sea and Land: insomuch that the same Authour, one of his own Souldiers, adds, that his Army was meerly debauch'd by their constant participation of such nu∣merous Victims, and withal, Quod augebantur Caeremoniarum ritus immodicè,Ammian. Marc. Hist. l. 22. c. 12. p. 327. & 8. Edit. Va∣lesian. cum impensa∣rum amplitudine adhuc inusitatâ ac gravi,
That the Ceremonial Rites of their Reli∣gion were encreas'd without Measure,  with such an extraordinary Expence as was very burdensome, and to that time un∣usual. And it's observed elsewhere by that same Author, That had he returned safe from that Persian Expedition, and continu∣ed his Sacrifices at the same rate, he would scarce have left oxen enough to have suppli∣ed the necessities of the Roman Empire. But we can scarce allow that wretched Apostate to be the better Man for that immoderate Pro∣fusion. Offering Sacrifices to God was the plea which Saul make for himself to Samuel, after his transgression of God's Command in his Invasion made upon the Amalekites; The people took of the spoil sheep and oxen,1 Sam. 15.21. the chief of the things which should have been de∣stroy'd, to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in Gilgal; but Samuel answers him to the pur∣pose,v. 22. Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and in sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold to obey is better than sa∣crifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams: All which does not import but that Sa∣crifices might be very good; nay, we know that they were commanded, and they were to be made of the best of every thing; but those external Performances were not at all to be compared with an absolute submission and resignation of our selves to the positive De∣terminations of God, or that entire Obedi∣ence which he requires at our hands. To the same purpose God argues with the peo∣ple of Israel by the Psalmist, I will not re∣prove
thee for thy Sacrifices or thy burnt Offe∣rings to have been continually before me.Psal. 50.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. I will take no Bullock out of thy house, nor Hee-goat out of thy fold, for every Beast of the forest is mine, and the Cattel upon a thousand hills; I know all the Fowls upon the mountains, and the wild Beasts of the field are mine. If I were hungry I would not tell thee, for the world is mine and all the fulness thereof: Will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the blood of Goats? All along God speaks as if he set no value at all upon those very Rites and Ceremonies which himself had appointed, and the Assi∣duity of which he required upon very se∣vere Penalties; but it's indeed only the Comparison between these things and more important Duties, which makes these ap∣pear light and of almost an indifferent E∣steem; for God speaks at another rate when he commands,v. 14. that we should offer unto God Thanksgivings, and pay our Vows unto the most High: and when he concludes with that, Whoso offereth Praise glorifieth me, i. e. he glorifieth me more than if he made never so expensive Offerings without that care, and to him that ordereth his conversation aright will I shew the salvation of God:v. 23. this Recti∣tude of Conversation was that which God al∣ways required, and the want of which he'd make no allowance for. God, by the Pro∣phet Isaiah, carries this Argument yet high∣er, To what purpose, says he,Isai. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me? I am full of the
burnt Offerings of Rams, and the fat of fed Beasts, and I delight not in the blood of Bul∣locks, and of Lambs, and of Hee-Goats: when you come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hands to tread my courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, Incense is an abomination to me, the new Moons and Sabbaths, and the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is Iniquity even your solemn Meeting. Your new Moons and your appointed Feasts my Soul ha∣teth, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them; and when you spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from you, and when you make many Prayers I will not hear. It's strange that Sacrifices, New-Moons, Sab∣baths, Solemn Religious Meetings, nay, their Prayers themselves should not only be undervalued, but be hated by God himself, that God who had enjoined them; but they must be understood as that of our Saviour, which requires us to hate our Fathers and Mothers, &c. i. e. not absolutely, for that's a damning Sin, but comparatively, or when the Love of them may have any ill influ∣ence upon our Love to our Saviour; so God hates these things, not of themselves or positively, but as they exclude true substan∣tial Holiness; as a dependance upon, or a confidence in such outward Services, might make men forget that Worship required in Spirit and in Truth; for would but the Is∣raelites have perform'd those Moral Duties set down in the following Verses, would  they but have wash'd and made themselves clean, ceas'd to do evil and learn'd to do good, &c. their Prayers, Solemn Assemblies, Sab∣baths, New Moons and Sacrifices would all of them have been accepted well enough; from the clear evidence of such passages as these Moses ben Maimon, himself a Jew, ob∣serves, That God, by his Prophets,More N∣v. p. 3. c. 32. oft∣times reproves Men for their too much Nicety and Exactness in their Rituals, in∣culcating that he did not intend them principally and for any intrinsic Worth of their own; nor because he had any need of them, but only as collateral and subser∣vient to more solid Acts of Piety, without which they were of no value, and with which, every thing ornamental outward∣ly to Religion, would be acceptable in his sight. From all this it appears, that the Mosaic-Ceremonial Law was very much inferiour to the Moral, the Moral obliging perpetually, which the Ceremonial Law did not: If then it did not perpetually ob∣lige, it was of a mutable nature in it self, and being so changeable, it might be actually changed, whensoever a Power equal to that which gave it its first Obligatory Authori∣ty, should appear and undertake that Mat∣ter. Notwithstanding all the reasons why the Law of Moses, so far as Ceremonial, was changeable in its own nature; our Saviour, when he convers'd in the World, was very
careful to give it its due Weight, and to make the World have a right estimation of it; hence he comply'd with it in every particu∣lar, nay, even in those which were not of equal Antiquity with the body of ceremonial Laws, as delivered by Moses. Thus we find him observing the Feast of the Dedica∣tion,Joh. 10.22, 23. 1 Macc. 4.59. a Feast instituted by Judas Maccabaeus and his Brethren, in remembrance of the Temple's Purification from the Prophanati∣ons of the Gentiles, but without any pre∣tence to the prophetic Spirit in that Institu∣tion. So whereas a kind of Baptism had been taken up by the Jews, in pursuance of which John, sirnamed the Baptist, began his work of Preaching with baptizing in the Wilderness (no new Ceremony we may be sure, for the Jews had been lash'd into more Wisdom, than to run so greedily after No∣velties) and the captious Pharisees, when they were sent to examine his Commission for what he did, found no fault with him for putting in practice an uncouth or new-fangled Ceremony, but they ask him what Authority He in particular had to baptize, seeing he had declared He was neither that Christ, nor Elias,Joh. 1.25. nor that Prophet? from whence it may seem, that the Jews had some expectations of an Improvement of Baptism, about the time of the
Messiah's coming; and did be∣lieve, that Elias himself, whom they ex∣pected as the Fore-runner of the Messiah, should take up that Employment, therefore  they look'd upon even their Baptism, though an adventitious Ceremony, of a very excellent and obliging nature; and our Saviour him∣self gave it a yet much stronger Confirmati∣on, in that he came and demanded Baptism of John, and with this particular reason, For thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness.Matth. 3, 15. Now, though I doubt not but our Saviour had a further respect in his submitting to John's Baptism, yet I question not but he really meant, that that Baptism ought to be regarded as a part of the righteousness of the Law, though it were no where prescribed by the Law; therefore we may be sure He would not have fail'd in his Obedience to any thing which really was a part of that Law; but again, neither would he have been exemplary in his Obedience either to the one or to the other, had not the Latter had a just and reasonable Foundation in the Former, and the Former an authentic and truly obligatory Foundation in the Will of God. He shew'd himself too resolute an E∣nemy to the generality of groundless Tra∣ditions, any way to teach others to set a greater value on them than they deserv'd. Had he altogether slighted it, as a thing of no value or of no authority, it had been im∣possible for all the Miracles in the World to have conquer'd those very reasonable Pre∣judices the Jews must have taken up against him and his Doctrine; for having an infalli∣ble
Assurance, that the Law given from  Mount Sinai was really Divine, and having suffer'd so deeply for their contempt of it as Divine, they could only have look'd upon one who came to impeach it, though attend∣ed with never so many Miracles, as an Impo∣stor, permitted by Almighty God to tempt them and to make tryal of their steady Obedi∣ence to his Law: and they had been wan'd of this long before by Moses,Deut. 13.1, 2, 3. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of dreams, and giveth thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spake unto thee; saying, Let us go after other Gods which thou hast not known, and let us serve them, Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or that Dreamer of dreams, for the Lord your God proveth you to know, whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul; Now our Saviour be∣ing himself God, and acting in such a man∣ner as could not but proclaim his own Divi∣nity, and being taken notice of by the Jews as so doing, they had a great deal of reason to stand upon their guard; and had he shewn
an open or a secret Contempt of what they knew was Divine; that Dihonour, by such an action accrueing to the God of their Fa∣thers, would have made them oppose him justly, and to have concluded it impossible that such an Innovator could have been from God, much less that he could have been the Son of God. But our Saviour's business was, by glorifying his Father, to draw Mankind  to a sense of their own Good; and therefore he came not to abolish the Law or to destroy the Law, but to fulfil it, that is, to shew that relation the very slightest Ceremonies in it had to himself, and that great design upon which he came into the World, to accom∣plish every thing it related to, and to do, and to suffer such things as might make all considering Persons plainly apprehend, that whatsoever was Typical and Ceremonial in the Law, was really consummated in him∣self, at whom onely all such Types and Ce∣remonies pointed; and therefore that it would be unreasonable to expect any other Person on whom their Import was to be ter∣minated. While therefore our Lord took this mighty care, the more he exalted the Obligation of the Mosaic Law, the more ex∣emplary he was in Obedience to it, the more reason the Jews had to believe that he could have no ill design upon them, and the more justly could he reproach them with that, That he honoured his Father,Joh. 8.49. but they dishonou∣red him; there was not an Iota or tittle of the Law, could or should pass away, till all were fulfilled; and as to his part in the work, he could justly challenge any of them to con∣vince him of Sin, and they, though malici∣ous and captious enough, had nothing to answer to the challenge. Indeed they had some Dreams of their own, empty and trou∣blesome Traditions, which they taught, and for their sakes slighted the Moral and perpe∣tually  obliging Duties laid upon them, these our Saviour cast a just contempt upon, and frequently and sharply reprov'd them for; and he did so the rather, to shew the world what a difference they ought to put between the Institutions of God, and the weak and un∣reasonable Inventions of Men. Now the Yoke of these Jewish Traditions extreamly galling the Necks of the vulgar Jews, upon whom their Law-Expounders lov'd to lay heavy Burdens, such as themselves would not put so much as one of their fingers to support; we find, upon several occasions, they were ready to receive the Messias with open arms, to endeavour to take him by force and to make him a King, and to welcome him to Jerusa∣lem with their loud Hosannaes, nor could the Chief-Priests and domineering Pharisees, without a great deal of malicious Industry, manage thse who long'd for Liberty, to their own turn. Those who were
overaw'd, and therefore durst not murmure aloud, knew well enough they were under the hands of worse than their old Aegyptian Task-Masters, and therefore it could be no wonder they should be ready to close with every one whom they thought capable of as∣serting them into Liberty; and yet, though their Imperious Task-Masters determined concerning them, that that People who knew not the Law were accurs'd, that People were not so ignorant, but that had they observ'd our Saviour, either breaking the Law him∣self,  or persuading others that it was lawful for them to do so, they would have taken Publick notice of it, and at least, when they saw Jesus a Prisoner to his implacable Ene∣mies, and the great loss they were at for Witnesses against him, they would soon have come in, and laid him open to his Judges, as a Criminal deserving the severest Usage. Our Saviour had taken upon him the Office of an Expositor of the Law, the People easily found the difference between Him and their common Instructers,Matth.
7.29. for he taught them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes; he cast away the putid Phari∣saic Glosses, and he laid open their true Im∣port and Meaning. We cannot reasonably question, but that, among Christ's nume∣rous crowd of Auditors, there were at that time, as we find frequently afterwards, some Scribes and Pharisees; or if there were none, what he deliver'd was not in a Corner, and therefore doubtless they had a full account of what he preach'd; but we no where find any offer at a refutation of what he deliver'd in his Sermon on the Mount; That Exposition of the Law which he there gave, was a perfect Test, where∣by himself was afterwards to be try'd; He could not reasonably refuse to stand to that Tryal, but neither do we find that his Ene∣mies ever went about to shew the Discre∣pancy between his Doctrines and his Pra∣ctice; and therefore when they thought to  cajole him into their snares, by a most ma∣licious Complement, they gave him indeed no more than a true and proper Character, Master we know that thou art true,Matth. 22.16. and teach∣est the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the persons of men; this Character was really his due, whatsoever they meant by it, and they, who were unwilling to acknowledge their own Hypocrisie, could never fairly go off from so remarkable a Testimonial. If then the Blessed Jesus were so signally innocent, He was above all other the fittest to assert and vindicate the Authority of his Father's Laws, and this he carefully did, and made his appeal to all those Laws without excepti∣on, according as occasions offer'd them∣selves. After all then, if he would really put an end to the Ceremonial Law, and yet maintain to the last his Character of Truth and Justice, He must of necessity be the Son of God and God himself, his Autho∣rity otherwise notwithstanding, the muta∣ble Nature of those Laws, not being suffici∣ent to bear him out in so great an Alterati∣on. Our Saviour was Incarnate, That the Law of God, as given to the Jews, might in our Nature be fulfilled exactly, and according to the Letter; and so that he who fulfilled it might be a compleat example of Holiness and Obedience to us: and how great an Underta∣ker
this required, we shall have hereafter Opportunities enough to understand. Now when I lay down this reason, by the word Law, I understand, whatsoever was given to the Jews, whether Moral, as confirming the Law of uncorrupted Nature, or Political, as relating to their Civil Government, or Ceremonial, as referring to their various Religious Rites, both the last, so far as they could, concern the Practice of a pri∣vate Person: so that indeed the whole Law, as given to the Jews, contain'd in it what∣soever could have been expected from Adam had he retain'd his original Innocence, or whatsoever humane Nature, in its utmost perfection, could possibly attain to: Now that such a compleat Obedience should be ex∣pected from some One Partaker of humane nature was but reasonable, when the great work of Man's Redemption was in hand; for, since Man, created in all that Perfecti∣on his Nature was capable of, had yet fall'n from that Obedience which was justly ex∣pected from him, he being in a condition every way capable of performing it; and by that fall of his had necessarily involv'd all those who should be deriv'd from him in all those Miseries attending the guilt of Sin, and since the intent of God's Goodness was, that from the Obedience of one man, descend∣ed of the same flesh and blood,
many should be made righteous, or be blessed with those Rewards attending upon Righteousness, as  the Apostle assures us it came to pass, it was but just and reasonable that that Man, from whom that righteousness was to descend to Mankind, that that Man should compleatly make up that Character of the first Man, when in Innocence, which, had he per∣sever'd in as he ought, his whole Posterity had been entirely happy; and yet that task was abundantly greater for the second A∣dam, our Lord Jesus Christ, than it was for the first Adam, our great Parent; for Adam had no Corruption deriv'd down to him from his Original, from whence it has been not impertinently question'd, Whether be∣fore Sin enter'd into the World, and Death by Sin, He was liable to the common Rules of Mortality? But our Saviour, when he took Flesh of the Virgin, took it up at such a time as Humane nature was sunk into its utmost depravation; nor would an allow∣ance of that Roman Foolery, That the Blessed Virgin was born without any Original Sin or Guilt upon her, help the matter: For so long as she was descended from such Parents as had their share in the Corruption of Hu∣mane Nature, her Freedom would not, of consequence,
free every one who should be born of her; but she being no way beyond other Women, but only on account of her Practical Holiness, our Lord, as descended from her, must be in all things like his Bre∣thren, liable to all the Inconveniences at∣tending a Body certainly mortal, for as for  his being without Sin, it depended on the U∣nion of a Mortal to an Immortal Being: the very nature of which superiour Being was more effectual than the Refiner's Fire on Gold or Silver, purifying that otherwise corrupt Body it was united to, and fortifying it against all that proclivity to Sin and easie succumbency to Temptation which the rest of Mankind was obnoxious to. Nor was it any thing, but such a coacting Omnipotence, which could possibly have produc'd a clean thing out of an unclean, or a Body without Sin out of that which was naturally sinful. There is certainly such a state as that of E∣ternal Happiness, but it is attainable only as the reward of Merit in a proper sense, or, as we ordinarily say, it's as Wages, which he who faithfully performs his work deserves, and may justly lay claim to as his own, and there∣fore cannot be deny'd without Injustice; as for instance, whereas the condition of eter∣nal Life is, This do and live, whosoever it is that performs the Condition, and does what's requir'd, he has for so doing, pro∣vided there be no circumstantial failure in the performance of the work, a just and rightful claim to that eternal Life propoun∣ded, and God himself could not be just, should he deny the propos'd reward to such a One as should compleatly perform the Condition set before him. Had Man conti∣nued in the state of Innocence, he had had this proper claim of his own to eternal Hap∣piness,  he might justly have claim'd it, and could not without extremity of Injustice have been deny'd it; but that eternal Happi∣ness which we now expect is of Grace, or it's the free Gift of God, which we, as Sin∣ners, and such we are all without exception, have no proper or inherent right to; but it's not the immediate free Gift of God, as if he, without any performance of incumbent du∣ty on our part, would bestow upon us an eter∣nally glorious Inheritance, for this would be as inconsistent with that infinite Justice which makes up the Idaea of the Supreme God, as it would be to deny Wages or a Reward to him that had truly deserved it; nor is it a free giving Man such an inward Ability to perform all the punctilio's of the Divine reveal'd Will, as by which they might make a full compensation to Divine Justice for the original pravity of Nature, and do all such things to the utmost, as could be requir'd from the beginning to the end of Life; for this were to alter the whole frame of Hu∣mane Nature, and to give it in the present state of things an universal advantage of Adam's primaeval Innocence; but this eter∣nal Life is the free Gift of God: as he has been pleas'd to send his Son into the World, to perform that work of perfect Righteous∣ness which was incumbent upon us, to suffer that Punishment which our Sins had deserv'd for us and in our stead, by this means God's infinite Justice was compleatly acquitted, and
the impossibility of Sins escaping without Impunity demonstrated, since rather than it should pass without Punishment, it was punish'd even in Him, who of himself knew no Sin. Besides, the infinity of God's Mer∣cy and Goodness was manifested, because he found out and bestow'd upon Man such a Me∣diatour, as was able to do and suffer so effectually on his behalf, and this, when sinful Man could find out no way whereby he could pretend to Pity or Mercy at the hand of God, nor could he ever possibly have pitch'd on such a Mean, as by virtue of which any Mercy could have been hop'd for rationally from him; but it's certainly as great an effect of infinite Goodness, where a Man is naturally blind and has a difficult way to find out, to give him Eyes whereby he may see his way, and a guide who may direct him in it, though he must go it him∣self too; as it is to leave a Man still in his miserable Blindness, and to carry him so hood-wink'd to his journey's end; since by so doing the Man shall be happy indeed, but shall neither know what Dangers and Difficulties he escap'd in his way to Happi∣ness, which yet render it the more valuable, how kind and knowing a Guide he had to as∣sist him, nor how great that Happiness is he enjoy'd at last, nor how wonderful his Goodness who gave him Eyes and Guide for his Journey, when of himself he knew no possibility of attaining either. That Man  is made perfectly Blind by Sin, is unquesti∣onable; and that Blindness without assi∣stance must end in Misery, is so too; God, of his infinite grace and goodness, when poor Man was not able to conceive of such a thing, opened a way for him to recover that Happiness, which by Sin he had utterly lost all pretences to, and that was the powerful Interposition of One mighty to save, of One who could do what Man in his dark conditi∣on could not, even Jesus Christ the righteous; by his Word and Will declared to Man, he gave him Eyes whereby he saw the way so laid open; he gave him the Mediatour him∣self, whose Mediation was the Way, to be his Guide and to direct him in all the Mazes, and Turnings, and Difficulties in the way to Happiness, and he demonstrates to him the glories of that Happiness, which was attainable only by such wonderful means: and is not this more, than if God had im∣mediately carry'd wretched Man, accoutred with all his Sins and Impurities, into Abra∣ham's Bosome, or the Seats of eternal Bliss, whose Glories yet he, with all those mise∣rable Incumbrances, could never rightly ap∣prehend; but only, as a Man corporeally blind, feels some little refreshment of his Spirits when the Sun gets up on a chearful day: while he who has Eyes open has an in∣expressible contentment in those various and delightful objects that immense body of Light exposes to his Sense? A Blind man  would scarce believe himself had the Ad∣vantage. The Socinians pretend they mightily ad∣vance the Glory of God, and set off his in∣finite Mercy with an extraordinary Lustre, when they represent God forgiving the Sins of Men without any meritorious Mediation at all, or without any thing of Satisfaction re∣quir'd at the hands of Men for those Sins and that Guilt they are burdened with; which, that they may the better defend, they have set up new Notions of Goodness and Justice in God, from what the rest of the Christian World have hitherto enter∣tain'd; they own indeed, in their account of the Divine Nature,Cat. Raco. §. 3. c. 3. p. 12. Crellii E∣thica Arist. par. 2. c. 16. p. 187. that God is summè Justus, vel perfectè Justus, that he's infinitely or perfectly Just: Now when Crellius comes, in his Ethicks, to give us a definition of Justice, at first he tells us, that it's Virtus quâ praestamus quae alteri debentur, That it's a Vertue, whereby we make good to others all those things that are due to them; and afterwards giving us a definition of that which he calls universal Justice, he tells us, It is Virtus omnia ea praestans, quae legibus â vera prudentia profectis, sunt constituta,
A Vertue performing all those things or∣dain'd by the Laws of true Prudence: and a while after reduces it to the first de∣finition. The same Crellius, in his Book concerning God and his Attributes, makes  no mention of Justice at all, as any distinct Attribute of God, but reduces it, I know not how, to that of Sanctity or Holiness; whereas yet, in our discourses concerning the Nature of God, we are wont to have distinct Notions of every paricular Attri∣bute, however they all concentre in, and all those Notions together represent to us but One true God: and the Racovian Catechism, when it comes to teach us what it is to know God to be infinitely Just, makes it to amount to no more than this, That it's to know Quod rectitudinem in omnibus actionibus sequa∣tur, ab omni autem pravitate adeó{que} ab injuria quavis, sit alienissimus, That God follows what's right in all his Actions, and is wholly a Stranger to all corrupt and inju∣rious Dealings; when they come to show how it's necessary to Salvation, that we should know God is infinitely Just, their Reasons are, First, that we may from thence be sure that God will perform eve∣ry thing which He has promised to us; and then, Secondly, that we should pati∣ently undergo all those Temptations, Ca∣lamities and Crosses we meet with in this World, considering there can be no Inju∣stice in them, since they are permitted by God. Now we are generally ready to think, that as nothing terrifies ill Men more either in Church or State, or lays greater Restraints upon them in their vicious Cour∣ses, than an Apprehension of the Power and
Justice of their Governours, so nothing should deter Men from Sin and Wickedness more than a just sense of the same Attri∣butes in God, for so our Saviour teaches us, That we should not fear them who can hurt the body, and afterwards can proceed no further,Luke 12.5. but that we should fear him, who after he hath killed hath power to cast into Hell; where our Saviour joins Justice and Power together, Ju∣stice in killing, so punishing for what's done amiss, Power in casting into Hell, in com∣manding eternal Torments, the force of which the Soul it self, that spiritual part, may be sensible of; and Power and Justice are co-incident: Power enables to punish temporally and eternally those that are dis∣obedient to the Will of God, and Justice requires it; so that our Saviour's Argument is not design'd to exempt us from all fear of Humane Authority or Justice, but it's à minore ad majus, from the less to the greater. If we should be afraid of humane Justice, which can only inflict temporal Punishments, much more should we fear that of Heaven, which equally extends to body and soul, to tem∣poral and eternal Punishments; so that when the fear of one comes in competition with the other, we may chuse rather to undergo humane Severities, than to cope with ever∣lasting Burnings. But if we look upon Justice in its own Nature, it's moral and good from Eternity, and therefore the obligations laid upon us to follow Justice, are indispen∣sible.  Now, as I formerly observ'd, the excellence of Moral Virtues flows from their agreeableness to the nature of Almighty God, who is the great and inexhausted source of every thing that's good; there∣fore whatsoever there is in Man that's really commendable, that Commendation flows from his endeavours to resemble God, to be holy as He is holy, and perfect as He is perfect; and every such part of true Goodness is infi∣nite in God: so it's good for a Man to be Wise, and he may, by endeavours, acquire a considerable Talent in Wisdom, but God is infinitely Wise, so that, without any assistance or forecast, he knows and under∣stands every thing at once with all those Circumstances attending on it; It's good for a man to cleanse and purifie himself as far as possible from all filthiness and pollution both of Flesh and Spirit, to avoid the very gar∣ment spotted with the Flesh, every appearance of evil; endeavours of this Nature are al∣ways requir'd of all Men, and those who are pure in heart have Blessedness ascertain'd to them; but God is infinite in Purity, no∣thing polluted can possibly approach him, nor can the least thought of it be affixt upon him, without denying him: It's good for a Man to be Tender, Compassionate, Loving, no Duty's more inculcated upon Men, no∣thing more agreeable to the temper of the Gospel, there will yet be some strugglings in corrupt Nature against it; but God is  Love it self, Infinite and Essential, yet, as Wisdom in a Man consists in knowing some things rightly, but in God consists in know∣ing all things; as Purity in Man consists in honest Endeavours after Innocence and Blamelesness in every respect, but in God exalts him infinitely above every thing that is corrupt or imperfect; as Love in Man shews it self in doing Good as we have opportu∣nity within the narrow Sphere of our Acti∣vity, but in God is diffusive to all his Crea∣tures; so if it be Justice universal in Man to make good, as far as he's capable, every thing that's due to others, universal Justice in God must be of the same nature, only infinitely perfect in him, because it's impos∣sible he should be deceiv'd or mistaken in any particular; and therefore consequently if it be Justice in any Man, according to that Power he's entrusted with, to punish those who do ill, and to reward those who do well, and if no Man can be counted universally Just, howsoever he may manage himself in all o∣ther Instances, if he be defective in this; It's then as certainly Justice in Almighty God to bestow Rewards and Punishments upon all Persons according to their Actions; and there∣fore the Apostle sets off the consummate Justice of the great Tribunal at last, by this, that when we appear before it,2 Cor. 5.10. we shall all receive according to what we have done in the Flesh, whether it be good or evil; and there∣fore if it should be suppos'd that God should
fail in this particular Distribution, we must, upon this supposition, conclude, God can∣not be infinitely Just; and if he fail of Infi∣nity in any one proper Attribute, he can re∣ally be infinite in none: so not infinitely Wise, or Merciful, or Holy, if withal he be not infinitely Just. But if we allow that God is indeed infinitely Just, then though we allow him to be infinitely Good and Merci∣ful, yet his Justice must as certainly be satis∣fied in the punishment of Criminals, who are obstinate in their Crimes, as his Mercy in pardoning Criminals, who are truly sen∣sible of that Guilt they lye under: Now a∣mong the Sons of Men there are none who are not great Sinners, therefore they are all properly the objects of God's Justice, and in∣finite Justice can never be at rest till those who are Sinners are punish'd; therefore that must be true, that that Mercy is as infinite which pardons one Criminal who has de∣served punishment, as that Justice is which condignly punishes all Delinquents, and this stands good, let the Pardon be granted on what considerations soever: for, for Ju∣stice to punish the guilty is but natural, but for Mercy to pardon them seems not so
natu∣rally necessary, since Mercy shews it self in∣finite in giving all things their Being, in providing every thing necessary for them, in giving them Rules and Laws of all kinds to act by, and all possible Encouragements for them to manage themselves by those  Rules, and all this when there was no Merit on the side of the Creature to oblige him to it, and that God, being infinitely happy in himself, had no need either of their Exi∣stence or their Services, therefore the very Being of all things is only the effect of his eternal Will, as the four and twenty Elders acknowledge in their Eucharistic Hymns to God, Thou art worthy, say they,Rev. 4.11. to receive Glory, and Honour, and Power, for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were Created. Now after all this Mercy shown, and this Mercy abus'd and de∣spis'd, Justice might very properly take place in punishing the Despisers; nor in∣deed could Mercy, however infinite, have taken place to the prejudice of Justice or the Obstruction of its free passage, had there not been a proper Mean found out for the Satisfaction of Justice otherwise than by immediate or extream Punishment, that is, by the Interposition of our Saviour, in and by whom Mercy and Pardon make their free approaches to undeserving Sinners. He that shall go about to make one Attribute in God inferiour to another, goes about to ruine the right Notion of a God, for in an infinite Being nothing can be but what's infi∣nite, and among Infinites there can be no in∣equality; but they go about to degrade Di∣vine Justice exceedingly, who make all the effects of God's punishing Justice only Arbi∣trary, and not natural or necessary, and
therefore determine, that he punishes those who are eternally damn'd only because it's his pleasure to do so, whereas he could for∣give them all freely, were they never so guilty, and those who are at all Forgiven he really does forgive so, without any regard to any Merits of their Own, or to the Me∣rits of any Other on their account; and all these things the Socinians assert, merely that they may take away all the Merit of our Saviour's Life or Death, and make good their Assertion, That there was no need of Satisfying God's Justice on the behalf of Sin∣ners, and therefore that all what our Saviour did or suffer'd was not of a satisfactory Na∣ture, and from hence too they endeavour to confirm their Heretical Opinion, That our Saviour was not God equal with his Father, for that Truth being throughly cleared, all the Socinian Chain of Heterodoxies is broken and comes to nothing. But They say, Christians generally think that Christ suffered proportionably for our Sins,Ca. Rac. §. 6. c. 8. p. 145. or, that He underwent Punishments equivalent to what we Sinners should have undergone, and that by the Merit of his Obedience, he made a compleat compensation for our Disobedi∣ence; but this Opinion, say they, is fallax & erronea & admodum perniciosa, it is falla∣cious and erroneous and of very dangerous Consequence, and this they assert upon these grounds,
Because such an Opinion is not founded upon clear Scriptures, and then,  Because it is repugnant to the Rules of right Reason; and when they come to discourse of its not being founded upon Scripture, the great ground they go upon, is, "Because the Scriptures testifie, that God remits the Sins of Men freely: Now, this we assert as well as they, and are infalli∣bly assured, that it's only by Grace, by free and unmerited Grace, on our part, that we are saved; and when we remember that it has been proved, by unanswerable Argu∣ments, that our Saviour is the Son of God, that He is God himself, and that He, when there was no help left for guilty Mankind, according to the eternal purpose of his Will, came down from Heaven to Earth, and took our Nature upon him, only that, by what he did in that Nature, he might procure our eternal happiness: when we consider his eternal Father as acting in agreement with him, and, for his Son's sake, forgiving mi∣serable Sinners, and the One willing, and the other doing and suffering so much on our accounts, when it was impossible we should have any Motives in our selves that might serve to excite so immense a Goodness: when we remember all these things, we can∣not but say, that as many of us as have our Sins forgiven, have them
freely forgiven; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost all concurring jointly in the Par∣don, and all the Motives procuring that Pardon, proceeding wholly from the Deity  it self. And this Truth will receive yet more light, by considering the Import of those very Texts, which the Socinians, in their Catechism, bring to make good their own Opinions; so they prove the free Par∣don of Sin from that of the Apostle,2 Cor. 5.19. That God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses to them; we need not here take any notice of another gross Error, founded by them upon this Text, viz. That by the Death and Obedience of Christ God was not reconciled to the World, for he never was angry with it, but the World was reconciled to God, the World having foolishly forsaken him, and being altogether ali∣enated from him by Sin: not to reflect any further directly on that Position; we find, by the Text now cited, that God does not impute the Trespasses of those who believe, to them, but why? only because they are reconciled to him in Christ, not because he passes by their Trespasses purely on account of his own Will, or because of his immediate Love to the Trespassers; but it is for the sake of Jesus Christ: their Trespasses must have stood imputed to them, had they not been reconciled in him; but if he particularly procured the Reconciliation of Sinners to his Father, then it's plain enough, they were incapable of making any such Recon∣ciliation for themselves, and so could not procure the Remission or the non-Imputati∣on of their Sins; the reason of which could
be no other than their want of Merit, for had they had any inherent Merits of their own to plead, the same infinite Justice which was concern'd to punish their Sins, was equally concern'd to reward their Merits; but if the want of Merit hinder'd their procuring their own Reconciliation, there must have been some Merit in Christ which was able to effect it, and that Merit must have been exhibited on our account, and that Merit, supplying the Sinners defect, must have been satisfactory to divine Justice, which other∣wise must have fallen upon Sinners, while they had no better deserving to plead on their own accounts; but if God reconcile the World to himself in Christ, and Christ be One eternal God, co-essential with his Fa∣ther, what's done by One is done by the O∣ther, and so, though the Son merited at his Father's hand the Sinner's pardon, yet the Sinner is freely forgiven of God, the Son freely interposing between him and Divine Justice, and freely concurring in the same Pardon of his Trespasses. Again, the So∣cinians prove the Freedom of God's Grace or Favour to us by that,Rom. 3.24,
25. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God hath set forth to be a Propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; here we own Free Grace, or Pardon, or Justi∣fication, which signifie all the same thing,  with respect to this passage, is plainly and clearly set forth; but still this free Pardon or Justification is the consequence of that Redemption wrought for us by Jesus Christ, that Redemption is effected by the offering of his Blood; that Blood which is of a propitiatory or atoning Nature, our Faith in, or our certain belief of the infinite value of which Blood, is necessary to procure us any good by it; but neither would that Faith of ours be necessary, nor would that Blood be so intrinsecally valuable, if it were no way meritorious: nor could Redemption be wrought for us, if there were no Price paid on that account; for a Prince is not said to
redeem a guilty Prisoner, when he sets him at liberty without any ransome, but he is said to redeem the Prisoner, who pays down that Price, or undergoes that Penalty which is set on the Criminal's head; so our Saviour paid that Price which was set on our Heads, without Blood there could be no Remission, therefore he gave his Blood for us; without Punishment for Sins there could be no acquittal of Justice, therefore he suf∣fered to the loss of his Life, beside those unknown Sorrows, as the Ancient Church has stiled them, which his innocent Soul under∣went on our account: But after this Re∣demption effected, this Propitiation offer'd, the Remission of Sins follow'd. Now, the Punishment of Sins being the effect of Ju∣stice, and the Remission of them the effect  of Mercy, this Redemption-Price paid down satisfied Justice and made way for Mercy, and therefore that Price so paid down was meritorious, and meritorious for us, who had no Merits of our own; therefore this Re∣mission was really free with respect to us, howsoever God the Son satisfied his Father's Justice to procure that Remission for us. The last proof the Socinians alledge, is, that Parable of our Saviour's, Matth. 18.23. &c. The great business of our Saviour in that Parable, is, to urge Men to mutual Charity and Forgiveness of one another, in case of any Trespasses by one committed against the other, this he urges from the Greatness of that Remission which is made to us, and the Smalness of the greatest Tres∣passes which can be committed against us, in comparison of those Trespasses we are guilty of against God; so the Argument a∣mounts to this, If God forgive us our ten thousand Talents, a debt which we are utterly uncapable of ever discharging, we ought to for∣give our offending Brethren those hundred pence, which it's possible they may be engaged in to us, or those little inconsiderable Injuries, they may have done us, and for which, on occasi∣on, they may be capable of making us a rea∣sonable Compensation. If it be urged, that Forgiveness which we partake of is free, we own it, for it proceeds from one God, without any other Motive but what proceeds from himself; but the Father, and the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, are that one God; therefore that Remission of our Sins, which is given by the Father, purchased by the Son, and sealed by the Holy Ghost, is, with respect to us, wholly gratuitous or free. But to this they presently object, At remissioni gratuitae nihil adversatur magis quam ejusmo∣di, qualem Christiani vulgo volunt Satisfactio & pretii aequalis solutio, That nothing can be more contrary to the free Remission of Sins, than such a Satisfaction as Christians generally talk of, or a purchace of such a Remission at a
just Price; for, say they, when a Creditor is satisfied, either by the Debtor himself, or by some other in the Debtor's name, it cannot be truly said, That such a Creditor, so satisfied, hath freely forgiven his Debtor. This In∣stance may be true, but nothing to the pur∣pose: for if a Debtor pay not what he ows me, Justice requires a legal Prosecution of that Debtor, nor can that Justice, with re∣lation to the publick or my own private Concern, be satisfied, unless the Debtor be so prosecuted; but if I, considering the extreme necessity of the Debtor, and the certain Ruine which must fall upon him if prosecuted, do therefore contrive a way to satisfie the Justice of the Law, that no ill Example be drawn from my remisness, and withal, to shew my Kindness and Compassi∣on to the poor insolvent Person, do, by a se∣cond Hand, but equally concerned, con∣vey  so much to the Debtor, as wherewith, if he apply it as originally design'd, he may discharge the Debt, and so satisfie the eter∣nal and immutable Law of Justice; yet af∣ter all, if the Debt be paid, as, when the Summ is truly and honestly laid down to the Creditor, it is truly and legally paid, then the Remission of that Debt is truly and pro∣perly call'd free: Free, because undeserv'd by the Debtor; Free, because the Debtor was, in himself, absolutely insolvent; Free, because this Method of Kindness was freely and without any adventitious or external Motive resolv'd on; Free, because the Per∣son so assisted is discharg'd of the Debt, as if the Payment had proceeded wholly and only from himself. But in the mean time, we may safely assert, howsoever some may seem very shy in the matter, what Socinus himself, and after him Crellius, so strongly oppose, That God,Vid. Crell. in Groti∣um, c. 4. p. 99. with a due and necessary regard to his own Justice, could not pardon the Sins of Men without some satisfaction offer'd on their account; nor is this to deny God's Omnipo∣tence, any more than it is to deny the possi∣bility of Transubstantiation; but it's to vindicate and make good the true Notion we have of the Supreme God, in whom Ju∣stice and Mercy are co-existent from Eterni∣ty, and consequently, the
just distribution of Rewards and Punishments essential to him, and whatsoever Men or Angels now do or ever have done, whatsoever they shall or do  receive in consideration of their Actions, whatsoever by Guilt they are liable to and must suffer, and whatsoever Effects infinite Mercy could have in respect to all or any of them, all these things were present from Eternity, with all Circumstances attend∣ing them, in the Divine Mind; so that no Methods nor Rules of God's dealing can now be changed, without supposing God himself changeable, concerning whom yet the Apostle assures us,James 1.7. That with him there is no variableness nor shadow of turning. Now all these things being necessarily true to make up the Idaea of an infinite God, whatsoever Notion we have of Justice or Mercy consider'd
abstractively or simply in their own Natures, without any Object whatsoever on which they might be exerci∣sed, the same Notions we must have of that infinite Mercy and Justice which is in God, notwithstanding all the Variety in their Ob∣jects daily observable, and all the most mi∣nute Circumstances attending them; be∣cause all these Varieties and Circumstances were before God from Eternity, and so co∣existent with that Justice and Mercy essential to the Divine Nature, and therefore can of∣fer no reason why God should, now or in time, limit, or dilate, or change, his eter∣nal Judiciary or Merciful Determinations. So if it be beyond the reach of Omnipo∣tence for God to contradict himself, then it's beyond the reach of Omnipotence that  the Effects of any Divine Attribute relating to Mankind should be frustrated, or Sins, being so direct a Contradiction to his holy Nature, should go unpunished, or Good∣ness, so agreeable to his Nature, and his revealed Will, should go unrewarded. The Socinians themselves confess, as I shew'd you before, that God cannot be injurious or do any wrong to any, because he is perfectè justus, perfectly or infinitely just; but if God could without any satisfaction on the part of Man, forgive all those Sins Man was guilty of, and yet did not, nor does forgive all, but only some particular Persons, (for some will cer∣tainly be damn'd, and it's as certain that those who are damn'd were never pardon'd) then while God extends his Mercy to some, and those not the least, but even the greatest of Sinners, as St. Paul owns himself once was, and punishes others for the same, or it may be fewer or less aggravated Sins, God must be very unmerciful and very injurious to those so punished, unless we suppose ar∣bitrary and irrespective Determinations of all things, to be the most powerful efforts of Di∣vine Goodness or Justice, which few Per∣sons, of any tolerable sense, will be per∣suaded to believe, Besides, could God for∣give the Sins of Men, without any Satisfa∣ction offer'd on their behalf, and yet not lay any Imputation on his own perfect Justice, I know not how to prove that he is not inju∣ious to all those from whom He requires  Faith, and that vigorous and persevering, and Obedience uninterrupted and universal, at least it must be said He's very unkind; for He who can forgive, and, as Socinus asserts, does forgive all our Sins without any Satis∣faction tender'd to his Justice, might as well forgive us without putting us to the trouble of informing our Minds, or regulating and restraining our Actions, for we cannot easi∣ly give any reason why he should exact such Duties of us, as Conditions of our Salvati∣on, when, if it pleas'd him, he could give us Salvation without any Conditions at all. If it be objected, that He has declared other∣wise in his reveal'd Will, and it's Justice in him to be true to his own Declarations; that Plea again reduces all to perfect Arbitrari∣ness, and he will be irrespectively Merciful, merely because he will be Merciful, and he will be irrespectively Vindictive, merely because he will be so; which things seem somewhat to contradict our common notion of Justice, That it does
suum cui{que} tribuere, give to eve∣ry one what's due and proper to him; We believe, more safely, that God lays those Duties, which yet we are unable to perform in that perfect manner we ought, upon us, that they might be as continual Remem∣brancers to us of that Satisfaction which he really requires at our hands; for could we perform all God's revealed Will, with∣out any failure either in Time or Circum∣stance, God's Justice would be otherwise  satisfied, and employ'd wholly in distri∣buting Rewards among us; but since, when we take the utmost pains, our Duties are either at one time or other essentially or circumstantially sinful, therefore we our selves ought to conclude some such Satisfaction ne∣cessary as may make up for our unavoida∣ble defects; and since we are assured by God's Word, that One has undertaken that Work who was every way capable of per∣forming it, we are obliged, in gratitude to so great a Benefactor, to endeavour after all that Holiness and Perfection (how little soever it is that we are capable of) and we are oblig'd to do it for our own sakes, be∣cause it's no way reasonable those should be Partakers of any benefit from Christ's Satis∣faction, who do not perform those Conditi∣ons upon which only that Satisfaction can be any ways beneficial to us. To this we may add yet further, That if God can forgive Sin∣ners without Satisfaction made for their Sins, without any derogation from his Justice, how merciful soever God may seem to Man∣kind, yet he seems wholly to have forgotten all that Mercy with respect to the fallen An∣gels; for if no Satisfaction was needful for Sin, why could not their Maker forgive their Transgressions too without it, as well as Men's? there might have been a thousand Means doubtless found out to confirm a Co∣venant of Grace with them, as well as that of the Death of Christ to confirm the same
Covenant with Men; but it seems God would not so forgive them though he could, they could offer no Satisfaction for themselves, therefore they are eternally and immediately damn'd; these Conclusions are necessary and inevitable from Socinian Principles, but in themselves are detestable and damnable. But, what the Socinians fail to effect by God's Word, they make no doubt of ma∣king good by dint of Reason, in which they look upon themselves as wholly invincible. Here then they assert, That if Christ have made Satisfaction for us, and that suitable to our Necessities, then Christ must have suffer'd the pains of Eternal Death, because Mankind by Sins were liable to such Eter∣nal Death; but here we may observe, that they fasten upon that single Instance of Christ's Sufferings, viz. his Death, in the matter of
Satisfaction for Sinners, onely; whereas our Lord was a continual Sufferer on that account, from his first Condescension to take our Nature upon him, to his Cruci∣fixion; and I make no question but what he underwent when he bore humane Infirmi∣ties, when he was in that bitter Agony in the Garden, when he cry'd out upon the Cross, My God, My God, why hast thou for∣saken me! I make no question but his Suffe∣rings in those Instances were much greater than what he underwent in Death it self: and so the very Story of his Passion repre∣sents things in relation to those latter Scenes  of his Life on Earth; for what prodigious Cause must we imagine there was that he de∣clar'd to Peter and the Sons of Zebedee,Matth. 26.38. My Soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto Death, , my Soul is compass'd round about, or even overwhelmed with Sorrow, for so the Original imports: In his Agony in the Garden, what through a clear Appre∣hension of that dreadful Task he was then to set about more immediately, what with the Fervour and Earnestness of his Prayers to his Father, either that, if it were possible, that Cup, that bitter Cup, he was then to drink, might pass from him, or that what he was then suffering might be truly effectual to that great End for which he suffer'd,Luke 22.44. his Sweat was as if it had been great drops of blood falling down to the ground: the Terror of his instant Sufferings to that Flesh and Blood he had assumed, as well as the Strength of his Enemies, and the greatness of the Conflict he was then engaged in, might be the occa∣sion of that stupendous Sweat; for experi∣ence tells us, that Fear opens the Pores of the Body and emits as grumous Sweats as the most earnest Intention whatsoever of the Body, or the Mind; and the Angel ap∣pearing to Christ, in the Garden, and strengthening him, seems more necessary with respect to those Terrors ready to seize on Flesh and Blood engaged in mighty Sor∣rows and oppressing Woes, than meerly to re-inforce that Earnestness in Prayer,
which, the greater the Danger is, so long as the Soul is consistent with it self, will naturally be the more earnest and importu∣nate for Assistance or Deliverance. His Sufferings yet seem to work more violently upon him when he comes to that bitter Cry, My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me! why dost thou seem to hide thy Face from me, and to leave me wholly to the barbarous Cruelties of wicked and malicious Men? the Complaint was more natural, and carri∣ed with it a greater Emphasis when pro∣ceeding from that Son of God, that onely, that beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased; so far his holy Soul seems to be upon the rack, but when he receives his last bitter Draught, and owns the mighty work, as well as the Types and Predictions, relating to him, were finished; the Storms that ruffled him before, seem to sink into a Calm, and he breath'd out his Sacred Life with those charming eruptions of unbounded Love, Father forgive them,Luke 23.34. for they know not what they do; and those full expressions of abso∣lute Satisfaction in what he had undergone, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit;v. 46. Our Lord's Sufferings ended there, and there, with his dying Breath, he rais'd to himself the first Trophies of his glorious Victories, for though the bringing the Son of God to Death, who had so terribly over∣aw'd and baffled him before, were the ut∣most reach of Hell's impetuous Malice, yet  that very Death of his, gave the infernal Tyrant that fatal Blow, which he strove by that very Prosecution to put off; that mighty Wound, which Hell, with all its Stratagems and Strugglings, can never re∣cover; and this great Event, the vanishing of that thick Darkness at that very Instant of his Expiration, which before, when Na∣ture's Lord was in his Agonies, cover'd the Face of the whole Earth, the terrible Con∣vulsions of the Earth, the Dissolution of mighty Rocks, the Rending of the Tem∣ples Vail, and long buried Saints starting from their Graves, as if at that very In∣stant of their Saviour's Death, all the Chains of that King of Terrors had been broke at once; with that great Event all these mighty Wonders seem'd to sympa∣thize. Now if with these greater, and more inexpressible Sufferings, we consider all the rest which our Saviour's Life was obno∣xious to, from his Cradle to his Tomb, and withal reflect with due reverence upon the dignity of the Sufferer, the distance may not seem so immoderately great as the Soci∣nians would have us believe, between the Satisfaction given and the
Necessities of those it was given for. But further, we are to consider, that the Eternity of that Death Adam's Sin had laid him open to, did not proceed from the nature of the Sin it self, for no Crime infinite in its own Nature can proceed from a finite Being; but the Eternity of that  Penalty annex'd to Sin in Man arises from the absolute Infinity of that God against whom he sinn'd, and whose Anger when irreversi∣ble must be eternal, from a respect to that infinite Goodness and Justice, essential to him, whereby he had conferred such mighty Bene∣fits upon Man, and laid so very
reasonable Duties upon him, which yet Man had in∣gratefully slighted and abused: Now if the greatness of the Penalty arise from the great∣ness or immensity of the Being offended, then the Greatness and Value of the Satis∣faction tender'd in lieu of that Penalty, a∣rises from the same Consideration, viz. the greatness of that God it's offer'd to and ac∣cepted by, and as we believe God to be infi∣nitely Wise, and therefore not to be impos'd upon so as, with Glaucus in the Poet, to ex∣change, , things of the greatest consideration for Trifles, Gold for Brass, so we reasonably conclude, That God understands the true Value of that Satisfa∣ction offer'd to Justice in the Sufferings of his Son, we are assured, that he has accepted of what his Son has done on our behalf, therefore we are assured too, that what he has so acted for us, was and is equivalent to those Punishments we ought, as Sinners, to have undergone for the Satisfaction of eternal Justice. Our Adversaries indeed would persuade us, That if we insist so much on the Dignity of the Person suffering, we must suppose that Christ suffer'd for our Sins, as  he was God, or in his divine Nature, which Supposition would be blasphemous, and the Conclusion impossible; but by their leave, we neither mean nor pretend to any such thing: We know, and assert, that Immor∣tality cannot die, and that the Deity cannot suffer; yet we believe that He who was and is true God, did both suffer and die, but we know, He that was God took upon him the Nature of Man, and therefore though he could not, nor did die as God, yet that Hu∣mane Nature which he assum'd, both could and did suffer and die, and by that Suffering and Death, among other Proofs, evidenc'd the Reality of his being Man, as well as he demonstrated his Divinity by his continual Words and Actions. But now let us consi∣der God condescending to take upon him our Nature, that very
Condescension alone is of infinite weight; we look upon it as a very meritorious piece of Humility, for a Sove∣raign Prince to take upon him the Habit of a Beggar, only to procure good for some miserable undeserving Wretches; the Athe∣nians therefore long celebrated the glorious Memory of their last Monarch Codrus, who put on the ignoble Arms of a private Centi∣nel, meerly that he might die by the hands of those Enemies, who had been fore∣warn'd by an Oracle not to kill him, by which private Habit assum'd, he procur'd the safety of his Country; but we never ad∣mire much the Humility or Condescension of  that Beggar, who wears Rags, because he has no richer Habits to put on. Now, had the Son of God taken upon him a Royal Grandeur, had he been wrapt in purple, a∣dor'd by all Mankind in his Cradle, worn the Imperial Crown even in his Infancy, or had he taken any other Methods we could fancy to our selves, which might have ren∣der'd him considerable to the World, yet this had been an infinitely greater Humilia∣tion; than for a Cyrus, or an Alexander, or a Trajan, or a Constantine, or a Tamerlane to have taken upon him the Person of the most contemptible Wretch in the World, and for the noblest End. It cannot well be questioned, whether it was possible for God to take into his Own an Humane Nature or not? Humanity it self being the product of his own Eternal Power, was, as all o∣ther parts of the Creation, wholly at his command; and though God's assuming a Bo∣dy might be suppos'd enough of it self to render that Body immortal, yet we may rea∣sonably be assured, that he could make it ac∣cording to his own good Pleasure,
liable to Death, as well as other Humane Bodies were; but the Union between the Divine and Humane Nature being so close and abso∣lute, the Humane Nature, howsoever sub∣mitted to Mortality, must contract an infinite Honour and Dignity from thence; but after all, the Condescension is not a whit the less, that he who is God should assume that mortal  Nature, nor is his Love less admirable who should assume it for our sake, or who should stoop so low purely to make up that breach that was between his Father and Mankind; but if to this Condescension we add a due consideration of those many Calamities or ex∣treme Sufferings this Humane Nature was all along obnoxious to, if we consider the Son of God, as he was Man, always in a state of Persecution, and that carried on by various Degrees to the utmost Extremity, and then recollect again that Honour it had contract∣ed from that close and inseparable Union there was between the Divine and Humane Nature in Christ; such Sufferings in such a Person, must be acknowledg'd infinitely meri∣torious, and consequently capable of atoning or satisfying for infinite Guilt, though such Sufferings were not Eternal, as those of sin∣ful Men are or ought to have been; for it's not necessary that the
Satisfaction given for Humane Sins should be of the same kind, as if Divine Anger could have been averted by no Method but that of the Lex talio∣nis, or like for like, but that the Redempti∣on-Price, paid for the guilty Prisoner, should be of equal value to those Injuries done by that Prisoner to him, to whom that Redemption-Price is paid down; as if I take up Goods or Silver Coin of any one, for which I my self am wholly insolvent, and another undertakes for me to discharge the Debt, the Creditor will scarce take it ill, if  he paid to the full in Gold or Jewels for that Silver or those Goods he had given credit for, though the Debt be not paid in kind. Cat. Rac. §. 6. c. 8. p. 146.But, say They, it's ordinary to say, That one Dp of Christ's Blood was enough to wash away the Sins of the whole World, therefore God must be very unjust to exact so extraordi∣nary Sufferings at the hand of his Son, that he should shed so much of his Blood, and die at last, and so pay a Price for Man's Sin, so much greater than necessary: We might easily an∣swer this Cavil by saying, that an Argu∣ment drawn against an Article of Faith, meerly from an Hyperbolical Expression, is altogether invalid; nor is the Christian Church, in general, bound to answer for e∣very passionate Expression which one of her Sons may use. But we may consider further, that whereas the reason of the Bloody Sacri∣fices, offer'd by Men in former Ages, was to signifie to the World, that an Expiation was to be made for the World's Sins, and to keep up their hopes and expectations of it; and whereas we are assured in God's Word, that without Blood there is no Remissi∣on, though the shedding one Drop of the Blood of the intended Sacrifice, be as real
Blood-shedding, as the drawing out of all is, and though one Drop of that Blood of the Sacrifice had as much Virtue and Efficacy in it, as the whole Mass could be thought to have, yet that was not all that was aim'd  at; for the Blood of the Sacrifice was so to be shed, as that Death might naturally follow on that Action, which was not likely to fol∣low on the shedding one or only a few Drops; and without this Death the Beast was not fit for Sacrifice; so much Blood being requi∣red as was necessary to sprinkle on several things, in agreeance with which, the Blood of Christ too is called ,Heb. 12.24. the Blood of sprinkling. The Blood then, shed of old, represented somewhat Expiatory, but not as it was the Blood of an Animal, but as it was the Blood of such a Creature sacrificed on the Altar to that God who was to be atoned: so though the Blood of our Saviour, in every Drop of it, as shed for us, was of an infi∣nite Worth; yet the Worth of that Blood, with respect to us, depended on his being Sacrificed, or made an Offering for Sin, which he could not have been, had not his Life been taken away by the pouring out of his Blood before; for as we easily apprehend, that the fairest Beast design'd for Sacri∣fice by Men, if yet it dy'd alone, or acci∣dentally, was no Sacrifice; but that to make it such, it was necessary the Priests should make it bleed to Death: So had our Saviour's Humane Nature submitted only to the com∣mon Rules of Mortality, or fallen by a na∣tural Death, he had been no Offering, no Sacrifice to God; but he really was a Sacri∣fice, and is own'd as such in Scripture, therefore his Blood too was to be shed, and
that so far as to put an end to his Humane Life, or the Union between his Rational Soul and his Mortal Body; so that the ex∣traordinary Sufferings of our Saviour take not away from the Worth of his Blood, in it self, but his Blood could have had no ef∣fect upon us, for the washing away of our Sins, had it not been the Blood of our Sacri∣fice, our Propitiation, as well as it was the Blood of the Son of God; and therefore we own, with all Humility and Thankfulness, the Goodness of our Lord in offering up himself a Sacrifice for Sin on our account, by permitting those Powers to kill him, which he could have destroy'd with one revenging Word: Nor can we less acknowledge the Goodness of his and our Father, who was pleased to accept of that Propitiation for our Sins, his Son's Satisfaction for our Debts, which he was no way oblig'd to, but by the Concurrence of the Divine Love and Goodness of the Father and the Son, from all Eternity. But from this Doctrine of Christ's making Satisfaction to his Father for our Sins, they draw a very unhappy Conse∣quence, for they tell us, Quod Hominibus fe∣nestram ad peccandi licentiam aperiat, aut cer∣tè ad socordiam in pietate colenda invitet, &c.
That it gives Men an open Liberty to sin, or at least, gives them great encourage∣ment to Slothfulness in the Duties of Re∣ligion: for if Christ has satisfied for all our Sins, then we are free from all obli∣gation  to any punishment for Sin, and therefore there can be no Conditions rea∣sonably propounded to us, by virtue of which we should be free from those Pu∣nishments; or it's unreasonable that God should still make Practical Holiness a Con∣dition of our Salvation, when Christ, by his Death, has fully satisfied his Fathers Wrath, with respect to all our Sins, past, present, and to come: This Charge would be very heavy if it were true; but would they consider those very Texts they endeavour to confirm this Objection by, they would easily see how they confound themselves, and slander that Holy Doctrine. The Apostle tells us of Jesus Christ,Tit. 2.14. That he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works: All this we stedfastly believe.2 Cor. 5.15. And that Christ died for all, that they which live, should not hence∣forth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again: We believe, that our Lord Jesus Christ gave himself for our Sins,Gal. 1.4. that he might deliver us from this present evil World;Eph. 5.27. That he might present his Church to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish: We believe,Heb.
9.14. that our Lord offer'd himself without spot to God, that he might purge our Consciences from dead works to serve the living God;1 Pet. 1.18, 19. and that we are redeemed from our vain conversation,  not with corruptible things, but with the pre∣cious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot: and from all these things we conclude, That our Saviour's Suf∣ferings for us, were originally design'd to free us both from the Punishment and Guilt of Sin; and therefore as we look up to our Saviour as our Priest and our Sacrifice, so we acknowledge him to be our Prophet and our King, our Instructer and our Governour; that he has been our Instructer in all Ages, by his Messengers Prophetical and Aposto∣lical, and those, to this day, lawfully en∣trusted with the Dispensation of his Word and Sacraments; that he is that great and glorious King, in perpetual Obedience to whose Commands we are oblig'd to live, and without Obedience to whose Com∣mands, perform'd according to our abi∣lity, we certainly merit Eternal Punish∣ment: and this power over us as a Prophet and a King, we doubt not, took its Origi∣nal from that Sacrifice he offer'd for our Sins in the fulness of time, but on account of the certainty of which,Rev.
13.8. he was effectually, that Lamb slain from the beginning of the World. Well then, our Saviour, in his Suffering, paid a sufficient Price to satisfie for the Sins of all Mankind, to atone God's anger a∣gainst them as Sinners, and to prevent their eternal Damnation: but these Advantages accrueing from his Priesthood and his Sacri∣fice, can only be participated in by those  who submit to his Instruction and his Go∣vernment; he purchas'd that Interest in us at a dear rate, and the Connexion between the one and the other is indissoluble: He therefore that would reap any Benefit from the Sufferings of our Saviour, must obey his Directions, submit to his Laws, do his Will; he who acts so, must certainly be very per∣fect in all Religious Duties; therefore those who are eternally saved by Christ's Death, must, as far as possible, be perfect in all Religious Duties; therefore, the true ge∣nuine Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction must infer a necessity of Practical Holiness, not destroy it: thus we see when God ap∣pointed the brazen Serpent to be set up in the Wilderness, for the relief of those who were bitten by fiery Serpents, that brassy Representation had a power sufficient an∣nex'd to it to heal all that were hurt; but if any bitten Israelite, out of an obstinate hu∣mour, would not have cast his eyes upon the brazen Serpent, though the Serpent had been just over his head, he would have dy'd by the Wound, because the Condition on which alone the Cure was to be had was an∣nex'd to the appointment of that Serpent, viz. that the wounded Person should look up to it. Or let us take our view of the Doctrine of
Christ's Satisfaction from an∣other place, then we shall find Faith as an originally necessary Condi ion of receiving any Benefit by it, and Faith, to be true,
must as necessarily work by Love; for if I am cast into Prison as a Debtor, and another out of pity to my deplorable state, go and discharge all my Debts, and receive an en∣tire acquittance of all such Debts for me and in my name, this is Love and Kindness, and sufficient in the case, in the Judgment of all Rational Men; but if, after all this done, and the Acquittance shew'd me and attested, I'll not believe one word of all the matter, and to prove I do not be∣lieve, will continue a Prisoner still, though always complaining of the sadness of my own Condition, my Friend did enough for me, but what am I the better? my Incredu∣lity makes my state and condition still as sensibly lamentable as before; so, whereas by Adam's Transgression, all Men are brought into a state of Guilt, and all stand as Prisoners under the hand of God, justly incens'd against us, and are such Debtors to his Justice, as unless that Debt be discharg'd by or for us, we must be eternally misera∣ble. Our blessed Saviour, assured of our Insolvency, has, by himself, satisfi'd his Fa∣ther's Anger; he has discharg'd that Debt we stand engaged in to Heaven; his whole Gospel is a sufficient Evidence of what he has done for us, in it we are acquitted by God the Father from those Punishments we were liable to, for the sake of his Son; and the truth of that Gospel has through all A∣ges been sufficiently attested to the World;  but if, after all this, we all turn Socinians, if we will not believe that our Saviour has re∣ally extended any such Goodness towards us, and to prove that we do not believe it, we slight all those Rules of Holy Living which are given us, and resolve, with the rebelli∣ous Citizens in the Gospel, that we will not have this Man to reign over us, that we will not submit to his Laws, nor acknowledge his Soveraignty, his Satisfaction is ineffectual to us; and though we groan under never so deep a sense of our natural Misery, we can reap no good from that: we must therefore believe in our Saviour, we must believe him able, willing, and really to have satisfied his Father for our Debt: we must believe that, by virtue of that Satisfaction so made, He's able to save to the uttermost all those that come to God in and by him: We must believe he's really able to Teach us, and that he certain∣ly has a Right to Command us; and when we sincerely believe all these things, and that as it was one great end of our Lord's offering himself for us to free us from the Punishment, so it was another to free us from the Slavery of Sin, so that we should not o∣bey it in the Lusts thereof, it will be impossi∣ble that we should indulge our selves in Sin; nay we cannot confirm the Truth of our profest Faith, or make it credible to the World that we really Believe what we pre∣tend to do, unless we endeavour, as he that has called us is holy, so to be our selves holy in all manner of conversation.
Let those then who talk so freely of the Doctrine of our Lord's Satisfaction, who would persuade us that it's so irrational and pernicious to believe any such thing, find out any Arguments from their own Scheme of Doctrine, which may serve to enforce Practical Holiness more vigorously than what we have delivered, if they can: Will They tell us we are oblig'd to it out of pure Gratitude to Heaven, bcause God is pleased to forgive us our Sins past freely, and to con∣firm that free Pardon to us by the Death of his Son, as if he meerly dy'd a kind of Mar∣tyr for that Truth, which they make almost the sole end of all our Saviour's Sufferings? Gratitude, it's true, may operate powerful∣ly upon a generous Soul, but the most
generous of all would be willing to understand the nature of that Obligation they have to be so grateful, and the reasons of it. We are then obliged by God's free pardoning of our Sins; how do we know he has done so? By the Testimony of Scripture, that Word of God, which is sufficient to instruct us to Eternal Life: Well, we own Scri∣pture does inform us, That our Sins are freely pardoned by God, and we should build very confidently on that evidence, did not those we have to do with teach us a great deal of Diffidence, and show us that such Passages of Scripture are capable of very different Interpretations, and that when we think we have a very clear proof of this or  another Particular, when we come to scan things accurately by our own Reason, we find we have none at all; for the same Scripture which tells us we are freely pardoned, tells us as plainly, and as intelligibly, That the Lord Jesus Christ is that Lamb of God who takes away the Sins of the World; that Christ died for us, or for our Sins; that he bore our Sins, and carried our Transgressions; that he re∣deemed us with his own most precious Blood; that he gave his Soul a Redemption-Price for many; that he's our Mediator; that he has reconciled us to God, and is a Propitiation for our Sins; and that the Scripture has very di∣stinctly stated the Comparison between Le∣gal expiatory Sacrifices and the Sacrifice of Christ, the former being only so many Types and Shadows, the latter the Anti∣type, or the thing so long and so often re∣presented by them: And yet, according to
Socinian Doctrine, we must not believe one word of all this, but we must fly to foolish Glosses and impertinent Figures to elude the force of all these Assertions; and Scri∣pture must be made a Nose of Wax, that it may the better be subservient to the ridicu∣lous prejudices of pretended Rationalists. But if we may so slightly pass over these Assertions, we may as slightly pass the rest, and deny that we ow any Gratitude to God on account of the forgiveness of our Sins; according to true Catholick Principles we believe, both that our Saviour has satisfied  for our Sins, and that our God has freely forgiven them: and none but a Socinian Rea∣soner would find any difficulty to reconcile those Truths to one another, as we have shewn before. But we'll suppose Gratitude to Heaven for Mercies receiv'd, especially that of Salvation by Christ, would oblige us sufficiently to Holiness of Life; it will follow from thence, that that Doctrine which sets off the Love and Mercy of God and Christ to the greatest advantage, must needs offer the most considerable Motives for our Obedience; but here a new Vindicator of Socinianism acknowledges,Defence of the Hist. of Ʋnitar. p. 50. That the Soci∣nian Doctrine makes the Love of God less won∣derful than the Trinitarian; therefore the Socinian Doctrine affords us less effectual Motives to grateful Obedience than the Tri∣nitarian Doctrine does; and since the Love of God is of so extraordinary a Nature re∣ally that it passes knowledge,Eph. 3.19. as the Apostle assures us; since no words can set it off ac∣cording to its Excellence, nor the very Con∣ceptions of Men reach it, (for if they could, Men might know the utmost dimensions of it) then whatsoever Scheme of Doctrine goes about to
lessen that Love under a pre∣tence of making it more intelligible, that is really destructive of true Piety, and, as far as possible, takes away all Obligations to Obedience arising from Gratitude for God's Love to Mankind. So the Doctrine of our Saviour's great Humiliation, in being incar∣nate  for our Sakes, seems a very powerful rea∣son why we should be meek and lowly in spi∣rit; will their Opinion, that he was a meer Man, taking his first and sole Original from the Blessed Virgin, promote Humility more powerfully? that he was very great on that account, that he did many Miracles, we rea∣dily own; but we cannot but imagine our mighty Man of Reason talks Nonsense, when he tells us,Ib. Def p. 51. That Christ by the power bestow'd upon him cast out Devils, cured all sorts of Diseases, raised the dead, commanded the Winds and the Seas, and was then indeed in the likeness of God, but it was a great Humility in him, that he was so far from making an Ostenta∣tion of his Glory and Greatness, that he became like a Servant, &c. If indeed he had that power of doing such great Mira∣cles, and had conceal'd it, or had never done any thing miraculous but in Corners, and where the Noise of it could never have crept out into the World, it might have look'd like somewhat of our Author's Humility; but the greatest part of our Saviour's Mira∣cles were done openly, in the Synagogues, on the Sabbath Day, and elsewhere when Multitudes were gathered together, and this, as we take it, was to own and publish his Greatness and Power to the World; and it was but necessary he should do so, for these Miracles of his were the authentic Evidences of his Messiahship, the Evidences
to which he appeal'd when he declar'd, that If he had not done among them the works which never man did,John 15.24. they had had no sin, but that now they had no cloke for their sin, because they themselves had been Eye-witnesses of those great things, which they could no more prove were done by any Diabolical Power, than our Socinians can that they were not done by a Power, Inherent, Na∣tural, and Divine in himself; and the same Evangelist, after having given us the Histo∣ry of Christ's turning Water into Wine at the Marriage of Cana in Galilee, adds this Remark to it,2.11. This beginning of Miracles did Jesus, and manifested forth his Glory, and his Disciples believed on him: so that, in this particular, we see our Saviour not expressing an unwillingness to be known, or to have it known what and how great he was; and as for his becoming a Servant, notwithstanding all that Power, it was no matter either so great or so peculiar to him, as should ren∣der him so extraordinary an Example to us; for his Birth, as to his Condition in this World, was very mean, and if we believe, as some do, that for many Years he follow'd the same Employ which Joseph, his sup∣pos'd Father, did, and that he had an
illite∣rate Education,7.15. as the Jews object to him, (which particulars are almost unquestion∣able) his Condition was servile from the be∣ginning, and therefore not so strange, that he should willingly be a Servant to others,  especially since it has always been the Policy of those who endeavour to head a Party, to manage themselves with all the obliging Con∣descensions in the World; so Menelaus, in Euripides, tells Agamemnon, he should re∣member when he sought the Command of the Grecian Army,Euripid. in Aulide. , How humble he was, taking every Man kindly by the Hand, and having his doors always open to the meanest Plow-jobber, and courteously speaking to all, though they seem'd to take no notice of him. If this were the Mode of Great Men, aspiring after more Grandeur, what of wonder was there that He, who had not so much as where to lay his Head, should be so humble and so much a Servant to every one? especially since he came to call Men to follow him, and set up for the Soveraign Head of the greatest Soci∣ety of Men in the World? As for our Savi∣our's Sufferings, notwithstanding his Power of doing Miracles, he was far from stand∣ing alone in that particular, for Moses him∣self, though so great, by God's own appoint∣ment, among his own People, though he were a King in Jesurun,Exod. 17.4. though he did many Mi∣racles, was in danger of Stoning by the dis∣contented Israelites; Elijah, a Man of a very considerable Character, acted as a Ser∣vant when he girt up his Loins and ran before Ahab to the entring in of Jesreel,Numb. 14.10. and as a
poor persecuted Man when he was forced to fly for his Life from the fury of Jezebel: the Prophets generally died Martyrs for those Truths they published; and the Apostles, tho'mighty in those signs and wonders which they did in the World's View, yet several of them died by ways as cruel and tormenting as our Saviour himself: from whence it will follow, that Moses and Elijah, that the Prophets and Apostles, were as great Ex∣amples of Humility and Condescension as our Saviour himself, and therefore St. Paul, when he set Christ as an example of Humility before the Philippians, did it only at ran∣dome, and might as well have named him∣self or any of his Fellow-Apostles on the same account; and doubtless this Doctrine tends very much to the Advancement of Chri∣stian Piety. But now, if we quit Socinian Reason, and consider the Truth of things; if we look upon our Saviour, as pre-exi∣stent to his appearing in the World, as be∣ing God of God and Light of Light, and that from Eternity, and consider him as con∣descending to assume our Nature, as appear∣ing without those Terrors of Divinity, and clothed with all the Sweetnesses of innocent Humanity; if we respect him who had all things originally at command, and did yet  become poor for our sakes, (where we cannot but take notice of our new Author's pitiful Criticism, who tells us, that Word signifies not to become poor, but to be poor;
yet Suidas tells us, that  signifies,Suidas in Verbo. , one that falls into want from having been sufficiently provided for, which we think is becoming Poor from being Rich, and not being originally Poor; and so whereas Poverty in the Poet Aristophanes tells us,Aristoph. in Plut. p. 58. I.B.E. , The Life of a Beggar is to be without any thing of his own, but what he receives from the Charity of others; which was really our Sa∣viour's Case; Gerard, a better Critic than our Authour, defines, according to anci∣ent Etymologists,Car. Ger. in locum. , a Beggar as one falling or descending from Riches to Pe∣nury, from Sufficiency to extream Want, so far as to have nothing but what's given by others) thus our Saviour became Poor, nay a Beggar, others administring to his Main∣tenance of their Substance; and he descend∣ed from that celestial Glory, with which he was robed from Eternity, to assume Hu∣mane Nature, and in that Nature to be so poor and despised on that account, as the E∣vangelists represent him: and we know, as well as he can tell us, that God, as God, cannot be poor; but we are as sure that that real Flesh and Blood, assumed by our Savi∣our, was liable to the same inconveniences with the rest that were Partakers of the
same Nature, among which one was Pover∣ty, very incident to those who are born to no worldly Estates. But how Men come to be Rich and Glorious, by having the power of doing Miracles conferr'd upon them, we cannot easily discover; our Saviour's Mira∣cles brought him in no Treasures, and his Apostles, notwithstanding that Power of doing the like conferred on them by Hea∣ven, were in a very low Condition in the World; and Paul, among his numerous Converts, was but , a poor Man, fain to get his Living by the Labours of his own hands: Now certainly the Jews were as much obliged to observe our Saviour's Hu∣mility as others, and they saw him low e∣nough, but they, who very well knew the Meanness of his Birth, that could ask the Question, Is not this the Carpenter's Son? could not make any extraordinary Remark upon that; but could they have believ'd him the Son of God, which those converted a∣mong them afterwards did (by which they understood his being equal with God) they would have been very ready to admire his Humiliation, as his Disciples did, when, owning him their Master, they saw him stooping to wash their Feet; so that our Savi∣our was no way visibly Rich or Glorious in the World, unless they'll say he was so be∣cause contented, which every Wise and Good Man is, and they who saw neither any Riches nor Glory, that he had upon Earth,
could not have been easily drawn to set him as a pattern of Humility before themselves, be∣cause they saw him in the form of a Servant; if he were a meer Man, when he was once more than a Servant, when all power was given to him both in Heaven and Earth, he appear'd as a Master on every occasion, and quickly withdrew himself from the sight of Men: and the humility or condescension of one that has nothing, is neither admirable nor exemplary. If we could dwell longer on this Sub∣ject, I make no doubt but it would ap∣pear, that, above all other Doctrines, Socinianism should never be embraced as tend∣ing to the advancement of true Piety; and since we have had so many holy Martyrs living and dying in the belief of Christ's Satisfaction for our Sins, we may conclude that Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction is nei∣ther so pernicious nor destructive of Ho∣liness as those Hereticks would persuade us; and therefore we may the better assert this Doctrine, and make good our Founda∣tion of it, i. e. the notion of infinite Justice in God, which does necessarily infer, that every Sinner ought to be punished. But they tell us,Cat. Rac, §. 6. c. 8,
p. 147. That we make God's Mercy such as cannot but forgive all Sin, and his Justice such as cannot but punish all Sin, and so we set God's Attributes at irreconcileable odds one with another; but I do not remember infi∣nite Mercy defin'd, by any of Ours, by that particular Character of necessarily forgiving
every Sin: We believe indeed, that the Sins of those who are pardon'd, could not be pardon'd, were there not infinite Mercy in God; but we generally believe, that infi∣nite Mercy exerted it self, when Christ came into the World to redeem Sinners; and that in∣definite Expression of our Saviour, that God so loved the World, that he gave his onely be∣gotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish but have everlasting Life, teaches us as much. Now, if Faith be so necessary a Condition, that without it the Sins of none can be pardon'd, then infinite Mercy cannot imply a necessity of pardoning every Sin; and if that Condition of believ∣ing be requisite, I know not why
another Condition, such as a Christ offering up him∣self a Sacrifice to atone his Father's displeasure for Mens sins, should not be so too: As for infinite Justice, we believe it necessarily in∣fers a Punishment for every Transgression, and therefore we believe, that had not our Savi∣our undergone that Punishment for our sins which was due to us, every Sin of ours must have been inevitably punish'd; and there∣fore whereas we conclude, agreeably to Scri∣pture, that the greatest part of Mankind are eternally damn'd, we conclude their Damnation is the effect of infinite Justice, and that they have no more than they de∣serve; and whereas all those who believe in Christ have their Sins pardoned, and are eternally saved, we believe that the conse∣quence  of the same infinite Justice; for since Christ has really satisfied for our Sins, and his Father has accepted it for us, and the Will of God the Father and of God the Son, being eternally the same; so that the Satis∣faction and the Acceptance were of eternal Determination; God could not evidence that Justice to us, but by making good that Original Contract or Agreement, and so by bestowing Pardon and eternal Happiness on all those who believe in his Son; and the same Justice is as much evidenc'd in the condemna∣tion of the Wicked, because the Satisfaction offer'd by Christ being sufficient to atone for all Sins, upon condition that all Sinners believe in him who has so satisfied, that sleight put upon the Condition, or the Un∣belief of the greater part of Mankind, ex∣poses them justly to Divine Vengeance, as even common Reason teaches us. The Soci∣nians tell us, as if they were the Privadoes of Heaven, that God's Mercy and Justice are both moderated by his Wisdom and Goodness, as if they needed somewhat of Limitation or Restraint: but why should Ju∣stice and Mercy be moderated or governed by Wisdom and Goodness, more than Wis∣dom or Goodness should be managed by Ju∣stice or Mercy? God's Attributes do not superintend one another, but they are all infi∣nite, concentred in one infinite Being, there∣fore
all equal, and no more capable of in∣terfering one with another, than God can  be supposed capable of disagreeing with himself; and whereas we are taught by those Men of Reason, that that Justice which is exercised in punishing Sinners, is called in Scripture God's Severity, his Anger, and his Fury; if we allow it, will they say,
that Seve∣rity, in God, or Anger, or Fury, are unjust? We know those words are generally under∣stood in an ill sense; Severity, among Men, can admit of no more favourable Character than that of Summum Jus, or extremity of Law, which is thought to be Summa in∣juria, or extremity of Injustice; and Anger and Fury, in Men, are generally taken for vicious Excesses, and such, as till a Man can govern or conquer, he's not look'd upon as any extraordinary proficient in Vertue; but we hope there are no such vicious Excesses in God, therefore such words are made use of only according to Mens Capacities, to shew us how very angry God is with Sin and Sin∣ners, (and yet no more than Justice, in con∣sistence with Mercy, will allow) and to strike a just Aw and Terror upon Men; then they who will avoid breaking such or such a Law, out of Fear of the Indignation of the Law-giver, whose superiour Power and Authority may render him formidable, may much more be afraid of breaking the Laws of that God, whose Anger is irresista∣ble, and whose Justice is inevitable: and though there be neither Justice nor Mercy in punishing the Innocent, or in acquitting  the Guilty, yet there is no trespass upon either, in pardoning the Guilty, when the Innocent Freely and Voluntarily takes that Guilt upon himself, especially when the Quality of that Innocent, so offering himself, is such, that the same degree of Pu∣nishment, or Punishment as heavy falling upon him, cannot possibly bring eternal Ruines upon Him, as it would upon inferiour Offen∣ders; as we often see among meer Men, some of so strong and vigorous a Constitu∣tion, that the same Pains shall scarce disor∣der them, which bring present Death to those of feebler Tempers. And if it were no In∣justice for the Jewish High-Priests, by God's immediate Command, to transfer the Crimes of themselves and the People upon the Heads of those Beasts they offer'd in Sacri∣fice for Sin, which Translation of their Guilt they signified by laying their Hands upon the Head of the intended Sacrifice,Exod. 29.10. (which Beasts were really innocent, yet then died for Mens Sins; not as in their own nature expiatory,Vid. Ough∣tram. de Sacrificiis. l. 1. c. 22. but as referring to the Sa∣crifice of Christ, which alone was so in it self;) then neither was it Injustice in God, to lay upon Christ the Iniquity of us all, and, by so doing, to expiate our Sins in earnest, though the same Blessed Jesus were Holy, Harmless and Ʋndefiled, as we are sure he was: Nor indeed could any thing but what was truly innocent be substituted to suffer for the Guilty, since otherwise, its native
Crimes must have needed Expiation; whence among other Reasons, I conclude, Humane Sacrifices abominable to God, because all were Sinners, and one Sinner could not rea∣sonably atone for another, which was no Exception to the Sacrifice of Christ. But our Adversaries have their artificial Glosses, whereby to put off the plainest Evi∣dences of Scripture that assert, His Satisfa∣ction for our Sins; for when we are told, that our Saviour Died for us, that He laid down his Life for Sinners, &c. they allow no more to be signified by it than this, That Christ was a Sacrifice for us, in the same manner as former Sacrifices were for those who offered them; so that as those Sacrifices were never look'd upon as any Compensation for the Sins of the Offerers, neither could that of Christ be a Compensation for theirs for whom he offered himself; only his Offering Himself so seems like the others, as a certain Condition on which Remission of Sins should be granted; But if common Sense may be our Guide, the Dif∣ference must be very great between this of Christ and all former Sacrifices offer'd by the Jews, as generally the Antitype is accounted of a superiour Nature to the Type: for tho' Remission of Sins were granted to the Offerer upon his Sacrifice being offer'd, yet it was not upon account of that Sacrifice offered, but upon account of the Sincerity and Obe∣dience of the Offerer, and that respect his Sa∣crifice had to the Death of the Messias yet
to come; for, though Beasts were innocent, there was nothing meritorious in their being sacrificed, their Sufferings being involunta∣ry, and themselves in a corrupt and insensi∣ble state; because there was nothing in the ancient Holocausts considerable but their re∣lation to the Messias, therefore they were offer'd continually, from their first Instituti∣on to the time of our Saviour's Death; but when the Messias was once come, and had offer'd himself, knowingly and voluntarily, for Sin; the former Sacrifices were all effe∣ctually to cease; and our Lord to offer him∣self no more than once, therefore there must be something extraordinary in that one Sa∣crifice, which was not in others, and
once offering of that must be more than equiva∣lent to all the former; that really and effe∣ctually in it self expiating Sin, which the others did not; and this the Apostle him∣self urges, when he tells us,Heb. 9.9 11, 12. That the Jewish Tabernacle was a figure for the time then pre∣sent, in which were offered both Gifts and Sa∣crifices, that could not make him that did the service perfect, as concerning the Conscience, but Christ being come an High-Priest of good things to come, not by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood, he enter'd in once into the Holy Place, having obtained eternal Re∣demption for us: that eternal Redemption is an absolute Freedom from the Punishment of Sin, effected by Christ, but only signified by Jewish Institutions, the utmost of the virtue of those  Symbolical Rites. The same Author pre∣sently subjoins, the Blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the Ʋnclean, sanctified to the purifying of the Flesh, i. e. God having, for the use of the Jews, ordained those Rites and Sacrifices, and promised to receive them as Clean who punctually observed his Institutions, they were consequently Legally clean who so obser∣ved them; but otherwise than in the Sense of the Law, no cleaner than the rest of Man∣kind, who never heard of those Institutions, but the Argument follows, à fortiori, How much more shall the Blood of Christ,v. 13, 14. who, through the eternal Spirit, offer'd himself with∣out spot to God, purge our Consciences from dead works to serve the Living God. The Difference then between the Sacrifices, is apparent enough, those could only give a Legal Purity to Jews, and that only to their Flesh, without which Ceremonial Purity Men may be saved; but the Sacrifice of Christ reaches the Pollutions of the Soul, takes a∣way the Defilements of the Mind, and opens a free passage for us to the throne of Grace, without which means,
Remission of Sins, and eternal Salvation are never to be obtain∣ed. Again, the Apostle, speaking of that Blood which, according to the Levital Law, was to be sprinkled upon several things, adds, It was necessary that the Patterns of things in the Heavens should be purified with these; or rather the Patterns of Heavenly things,  for so the following Words explain the Phrase, but that the Heavenly things them∣selves should be purified with better Sacrifices than these, for Christ is not entred into the Holy places made with hands, which are the Figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us, i. e. as a Mediatour on our behalf; but he enter'd not there that he might offer himself often, as the High-Priest entred into the Ho∣ly place every year with the Blood of others, for then must he often have suffered since the foundations of the World,v. 22. ad 27. but now once , in the perfection or com∣pletion of Ages, i. e. in the fulness of time, hath he appear'd to put away sin, by the Sacri∣fice of himself. The same Divine Author urges the matter further in the following Chapter, and directly
confirms what I before asserted, That the Law having a Shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of the things, can never, with those Sacrifices, which they offered year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect, for then they would not have ceas'd to be offered, be∣cause that the Worshippers once purged should have had no more Conscience of Sins: and if the Worshippers could have been so purged at once by those Legal Sacrifices, the successive continuance of them, would, in the same manner, have purged all those con∣cerned in them; and then another and a better and greater Sacrifice would have been  altogether needless; but alas! in those Le∣gal Sacrifices, there was every year made a Remembrance of the same Sins, and of the Guilt of the same Sinners,Heb. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 14. for it was not possible that the Blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away Sin; But now by the will of God, we are sanctified through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all; Every Jewish High-Priest stood daily ministring and offering the same Sacrifices which can never take away sin; but this Man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sin, for ever sat down on the right-hand of God, nor did he need to offer of∣tener, for by one Offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. The Difference then between the Sacrifice of our Saviour and those of the Law is notorious; but now, if Remission of Sins could be granted to the Offerer of a Legal Sacrifice, and yet a Legal Sacrifice could not take away the Sins of the Offerers; and if the single Sacrifice of Christ did really take away Sins, both which things are asserted in the Texts now cited; then a great deal more must be meant, by Christ's Sacrifice taking away sin, than the bare Re∣mission of Sins amounts to; It must signifie taking away that Guilt of sin, by which Men are render'd obnoxious to Punishment: which, considering that Justice inherent in Almighty God, cannot be removed but by substituting somewhat so innocent in the Sinner's room, that the Sufferings of that Innocent may satisfie for the Impunity
of the Sinner; but it being inconsistent with Justice to punish the Innocent for the Sinner, if the Innocent be unwilling, or de∣pend upon his Innocence as his Security from Punishment; therefore our Saviour, for the acquittal of Divine Justice, offer'd himself voluntarily to die for us, and that when no Power on Earth could have taken away his Life from him; which Offer of his being the effect of his eternal Will, and his eter∣nal Will the same with that of his Father. Eternal Justice required his Sufferings, and accepted those Sufferings (though to be un∣dergone in time) as really, and in their own intrinsic Nature, equivalent to those Punishments otherwise due to a sinful World. Upon the whole, Christ died for, or in the room of Sinners, not to prevent their temporal but their eternal Death; and by his Humiliation and his Death, who was so Innocent and so Great, gave eternal Justice as absolute Satisfaction as the eternal Punishment of all those who are now saved through Him would have done, and therefore when Socinians seek for a reason, for their denying Christ's Death to have been in our stead, and fly to that of St. Paul,
, that Christ died for our Sins,1 Cor. 15.3. and plead from thence, that since it cannot be said that Christ died in the room of our Sins, no more can it be said, that he died in the room of Sinners, this is meer Stuff and Cavil;  for if Christ died on account of our Sins, which is the direct English of , it's then the more probable, He died in the room, and stead, of those Sinners, or suffer'd a vicarious Punishment for them, for, or on account of whose Sins he resign'd himself to the Death upon the Cross. Or they know it's no uncommon thing in Scri∣pture to put Sin for Sinners, and they'll con∣fess, though not in that sense which we do, that He who died for Sin died for Sinners, they being inseparable from one another: But the Socinians tell us otherwise, that Christ's dying for us, signifies his procuring a great deal of good for us by his Death; this we certainly believe he did, but cannot ima∣gine it's any detraction from the Worth of that Good he procured for us, to conclude, that he suffered instead of Sinners; for if he offered himself to Divine Punishment in the place of those, who were unquestionably obnoxious to it, and if his Father accepted of that Offer, then all those Sinners who accept of those Conditions, on which alone his Death is effectually beneficial to them, are certain of the pardon of their Sins, and of eternal Happiness, the natural Consquence of that Pardon. But they have yet a far∣ther Shift, and because St. John tells us, We ought to lay down our Lives for the Bre∣thren,1 John 3.16. Col. 1.24. and St. Paul tells the Colossians, that by his sufferings he fill'd up what was behind of the afflictions of Christ in his flesh, for his
Body's sake which was the Church, they con∣clude, that as those who die for the Brethren cannot be said to die in their stead, nor St. Paul to satisfie by his sufferings for the sins of the Church, so neither could Christ, on account of his being said to die for us, be reasonably thought to satisfie for our sins; but this Al∣legation is impertinent; for, though we are obliged to expose our Lives to the ut∣most hazards for the Conversion and Edifica∣tion of others, yet where was it ever said, We should be wounded for the Transgressions of our Brethren, or be bruised for their Iniqui∣ties? or that they should be healed by our stripes? that God should lay on us the Iniqui∣ties of all our Brethren? that We should make our Souls an Offering for Sin? that We should be delivered for the Offences of our Brethren, and should bear their Sins in our own Bodies on the Cross? all which things, with more to the same purpose, are spoken of Christ, and ought to be the Explications of the o∣ther. As for that of St. Paul, if we tran∣slate it, as we very well may, all their pre∣tences from it are lost, I rejoice in all my suf∣ferings for you all, or in those Troubles and Persecutions I undergo for Preaching the Gospel to you, and in my turn fulfil in my flesh the latter parts of Christ's Afflictions for his own Body, that is, the Church; and so Afflictions or Sufferings for the Church are not apply'd to St. Paul, but to Christ, who really laid down his Life for his Flock, and
all the Afflictions of the Servants of Christ, are but the Counterparts of what Christ has done for them; it being their Duty to man∣tain what he has delivered to them, and to be faithful to Death as he dy'd before for them: and the Church, the Body of Christ, is exceedingly edified and benefitted by the couragious Sufferings of their Fellow-Mem∣bers, Martyrs and Confessors giving the best evidences of the Excellent Nature of the Gospel, and confirming and encouraging others in the same Resolutions, of dying ra∣ther than forsaking Truth; but neither can any of the former passages be applied to St. Paul, therefore his Words cannot bear the same sense as applied to him, as the same Ex∣pressions do, when they are apply'd to Christ, Scripture, which is its own best Interpreter, no where explaining it in the same manner. But further, our Saviour is said to have born our sins, and to have carried our sorrows; this seems to be a Metaphor taken from a Man carrying that Burthen himself which another ought to carry; and this is commonly lookt on as a considerable evidence of Love and Kindness:1 Tim. 3.16. c. 2. the same has carried Men out to a willingness to die for one another, so Pylades was willing to die for his Friend O∣restes, only that he might escape a Tyrant's Fury; and Nisus, in the Poet, would glad∣ly have redeem'd his lov'd
Euryalus from the Enemy's Sword, by putting himself in∣to their hands in lieu of him: but the ten∣dry  in these Cases was certainly a vicarious Death, and the Persons so offering them∣selves, without all doubt, concluded, that whatsoever could be pretended to by the most severe Justiciaries, would be well sa∣tisfied by an Innocent's offering his own Life for an Offender, and that voluntarily; by virtue of which Consent or Desire, there could be no wrong done to the innocent Suf∣ferer; and hence St. Peter tells us of Christ, that he suffered , once for sins,1 Pet. 3.18. the Just for the Ʋn∣just (where, by the way, we may observe the phrase of dying for Sins, is authentically explain'd by dying for Sinners, or for the Unjust) i. e. He bore that Burden of God's Displeasure in himself, though he were Just and Righteous, which was due to the Un∣righteous; and yet, as among Men, those generous Offers made by Friends for one another are not wont to be displeasing to the greatest Princes, nor are they a whit the more angry with the vicarious Innocent, though, to satisfie the Rules of Justice, they accept the Offer; no more was God dis∣pleased with his Son for taking upon him that Burthen due to Sinners, since it only was the Sin which had trespass'd so much on Ju∣stice, and provided that were punished, ei∣ther in the real or the
substituted Offender, who was only putatively Criminal, infinite Ju∣stice would be satisfied, Sin condemned, and all Mankind be afraid of committing that  which they saw was, in its own Nature, unpardonable. One would think too, that other passage of the same Apostle were plain enough,1 Pet. 2.24. That Christ bore our Sins in his own body upon the Cross, Sins are there put for the Punishment due to Sins, and the bearing them in his own Body, must signifie his Body's being punished for them, and if for them, then for those who had committed them; now if Christ did not take our place, or appear in our room in those Sufferings, there can be no reason, suitable to Divine Wisdom and Justice, why he, an Innocent, should die at all for our Transgressions; for to say, That his Father had design'd him for it before, and therefore he must die, would be impertinent; to say, that without dying a vicarious Death for us, he could procure any good, with respect to our Sins, would be very hard to prove; for he might Die to make good the Truth of those things he had preach'd, to set us an exam∣ple of Patience, Submission and Humility, which, Socinians tell us, were the great Ends of his Death, and yet we be as far from obtaining Remission of Sins, by the means of his Death, as we were at first. So we believe that St. Stephen was murdered for giving Testimony to Evangelic Truths, the very Circumstances of his Death prove him an eminent Example of Patience, For∣titude and Resignation; his Resolution ap∣pearing, upon a Socinian view, much be∣yond that of our Saviour himself, yet
St. Stephen is not said to have died for the sins of the World, nor to have carried Mens sins, or
to have born them in his own Body, at the place of Execution; and it would be absurd and ridiculous to apply any such passages to him; and yet, as they say, the Sins of Men were the cause of the death of those Victims offered to Almighty God by the Sinners, and in the same manner, were the cause of our Saviour's Death; so the same Sins may truly be said to have been the cause of the death of St. Stephen and every Martyr; yet the former Expressions being inapplicable to them, and they contributing nothing to the Remission of Mens sins, (Christ onely being that Lamb of God who takes a∣way the Sins of the World) those Scriptural Expressions concerning the Death of Christ, must signifie a great deal more than bare Dying upon Common Reasons can amount to. But to answer this, they tell us, that where∣as God proclaims himself,Exod. 34.7. a God keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquities, Transgressions and Sins, according to the Hebrew Original, it ought to be, bearing or carrying Iniquities, &c. which is the same attributed here unto Christ, and yet we cannot say, that God, as there named, has satisfied for any sins, therefore neither can Christ have satisfied for sins, notwithstand∣ing any such passages concerning him; but this the Ancients easily answered, by assert∣ing our Jesus, the Son of God, to have been  that very Being, so often and emphatically called God, who all along convers'd with the Israelites, during their wandrings in the Wilderness, as I formerly shewed; and that Testimony given to their Opinion by St. Paul, when dehorting the Corinthians from several Sins, by the example of those Israelites,1 Cor. 10.9. he inserts, Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, i. e. the same Christ, and were destroyed of Serpents; where Moses tells us they tempted God when they fell under that Judgment; therefore that God was Christ, therefore he really did converse with Israel in those days, other∣wise he could not have been tempted, that Testimony, for any thing I have yet seen, may pass for unanswerable. But, with all respect to their Critical Skill, we must as∣sert they are mistaken; the Hebrew word , from whence  in the cited Text, not signifying to carry in its primary acceptation, but levare to ease, or to take away,Marin. Brinxia. in verbo. and so Marinus, in his Arca Noe, translates this very Text by levare or tollere, and so God, when he pardons or forgives sins, is rightly said to ease Men of that burthen they bear, or to take them away; and consequent∣ly our translating the word by forgiving is true, and agreeable to the general sense of Interpreters; hence the Authors of the Septuagint Translation, as good Criticks as our Socinians, render it , taking away, not carrying,
Sins, and they  could scarce be suspected of being Athana∣sians; no more could the Chaldee Paraphrast who interprets it by those, , leav∣ing or remitting Iniquity, the word , ne∣ver signifying Carriage, or any thing of that Nature, but only leaving or remitting, with what else may be genuinely deduced from that Interpretation;Vid. Castel. Lex. Hept. in verbo. so  in the Sy∣riack Version, signifies, leaving, remitting, pardoning, sparing, but no where signifies supporting or carrying; the Samaritans use , a word signifying easing and pardon∣ing too; the Arabic , taking, or dri∣ving, as a flying Enemy is driven away by a pursuing Army: So that for them, because in a foreign sense the Hebrew word some∣times signifies to carry, to interpret it so in this place, contrary to the sense of all the World beside themselves, is absurd, and only shews what mean Shifts they are put to, to find some Parallels to their abusive Con∣structions of Plain Scripture. As for the Evangelists application of that Text, Isa. 53, 4. He hath born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, to our Saviour,Matth. 8.17. upon healing all the sick that were brought to him; he only applies that to a particular there, which re∣ally is of a general Import; therefore, what he applies to the removal of bodily Diseases, St. Peter applies to Sins, the Diseases of the Soul; our Saviour visibly and openly re∣moving
the former, as a sign of his removing the latter; but not doing both in the same manner, he cured bodily Distempers, by a Word, a Touch, an Application of out∣ward, though seemingly unpromising, Means; but removing the Distempers of the Soul only by his Death, and so by his blood cleansing us from all Sin, satisfying his Fa∣ther for all our Sins by his shedding of it, purging our Souls from all the Filthiness and Corruption of Sins by the Application of it, and by Faith in it; and that Blood-shedding of our Saviour, as tending to his Death, prov'd it's infinite Price and Value, so often taken notice of in Scripture, by being equivalent to those Punishments Divine Justice might and must have laid upon Transgressours; the Socinians indeed say, He takes away our sins, i. e. He makes a shew as if he died, and bore the Punishment due to our Sins, eorum quasi poenam in se recepit, so putting a sham upon the World, pretending or seem∣ing to do what he never did, from which, if the World were convinced of the Truth of what they assert, it would be very hard to persuade them, that he did, by such seem∣ing Means, eos à vera eorum poena exsolvere, discharge Mankind really from those certain Punishments attending upon Sin; so for that further put off,
That our Saviour may justly be said to procure Salvation for us by his Death, because, by that Obedience show'd to his Father in dying  at his Command, he had all Power confer∣red upon him both in heaven and earth, and so had power to forgive our Sins, and to confer eternal Life upon us. It's against Reason to believe it, for all Power in Hea∣ven and in Earth is infinite Power, infinite Power must have an infinite Subject to reside in, Christ, being meer Man, can be no such infinite Subject, therefore no such Power can be confer'd on him, on account of his Obe∣dience, for he cannot receive an impossible Reward; but that infinite Power being essen∣tial to him, as an infinite and eternal Spirit, his Humane Nature, as united to that, is made Partaker of that infinite Power, and consequently Christ, God and Man, can indeed bestow on us those mighty Bles∣sings. To fix in our Minds the Notion of Christ's Satisfaction for our sins the more, we are told by the Apostle, as I formerly cited him, That we are justified freely by his Grace,Rom. 3.24, 25, 26. through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus; whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his Righ∣teousness for the Remission of sins: to declare at this time his Righteousness, that he might be just, and the Justifier of him which be∣lieveth in Jesus; the last Verse teaches us that Care taken to vindicate Divine Justice, in the World's Eye, by the Death of Christ, which could scarce have been done, had not Christ laid down his Life for us, and in our
room, so satisfying the Justice of his Father; and so the Justice of accepting as righteous every Believer in Christ, is apparent too: for, if he have paid an entire Satisfaction, a full Redemption-Price to his Father for our Sins, on that Condition, that those who believe on him should be Partakers of the Advantages flowing from thence, God then could not be just, should he refuse to justifie such Believers; so that God's Justice is as deeply concerned in the Pardon of Believers, as in the Punishment of Infidels. Again, St. Paul tells the Elders at Miletum,Acts 20.28 that God had made them Overseers of that Church, which he had redeemed with his own most pre∣cious Blood; Now whereas God is said to have redeem'd his People Israel from their Aegyptian Bondage, that Redemption be∣ing really effected by Jesus Christ, who was that great and powerful Agent in that migh∣ty Work, what was done for Israel then, was but the pre-signification of what he in∣tended in due time for all Mankind; so that he is called their Redeemer, especially with respect to that
future Design; though the rescue of them from the Power of their Enemies be a Metaphorical Redemption, and applicable, in such a figurative sense, to all those, who, even by an unjust Violence, set open the Prison-doors, and make a way for the escape of the most notorious Criminals. Again,Acts 7.35. it's true, Moses is stiled a Redeemer, , and a Leader to Israel, God ma∣king  use of him as his Instrument to execute Vengeance upon rebellious Aegypt, and to lead out Israel from thence with a mighty Hand and a stretched out Arm; but we no where find that the Israelites were redeem'd by the Blood of Moses from their Slavery; We find not that the Sins of the Israelites were forgiven on account of that deliverance; God indeed sometimes heard the Intercessi∣ons of Moses for those ingrateful Wanderers, and, for his own Name's sake, was pleased to pass by their Offences, and to glorifie his own Name in that constant protection he af∣forded them, among their observing Ene∣mies; but the deliverance it self was no cause of God's remitting the Punishment due to their Trespasses; nay their Ingrati∣tude for that Mercy was a frequent reason of their Sufferings, and amongst the rest of the total Destruction of that Generation of People who came out of Aegypt; it's fur∣ther observable, that that God who con∣vers'd with Israel in their passage to Canaan, calls them his Son, his First-born, and threa∣tens Pharaoh, that if he would not let them go, He would destroy his Son, his First-born;Exod. 4.22. besides, He required the Sanctification of the First-born of all Israel to himself; which requiry of his obey'd, together with the exact execution of his former Menace, was a kind of Redemption-Price, accepted by God, on account of which he gave them delive∣rance from their Enemies. Nor was the
Blood of the Paschal Lamb insignificant in the case, that Blood prefiguring the Blood of the Lamb of God, which did really atone for the Sins of the World. Upon the whole, howsoever we may allow others, besides our Saviour, to be called Redeemers, yet so long as there is no Parallelism between the Circumstances of those Redemptions they have wrought, and the Circumstances of Christ's, we must of necessity conclude, that Scripture means a great deal more by naming Christ a Redeemer, than by giving Moses or any other eminent Person the same Character; that Name is figurative as ap∣plied to all others, it is proper as ap∣plied to Christ; we may illustrate the Case by such an Instance as this, A Soveraign Prince, blest with One onely and infinitely beloved Son, having in his power a Capital Offender against his Laws, in concert with that Son, determines that such Punishment as is proportionable to his Crimes, ought to be inflicted on him; yet pitying the Weakness and deplorable Condition of the Criminal, and designing to make his Cle∣mency towards the Offender evident, He, in concert with his own Son, orders it to be proclaim'd every where, that if any Person, not obnoxious to the same Punishment by reason of personal Guilt, loves the Con∣demn'd so well, as to offer himself freely to undergo proportionable Penalties to what the Law would have inflicted upon him, the Criminal, acknowledging the Kindness
offer'd, and his mighty engagements to his Deliverer, shall be free; this Condition once propos'd, the Prince's Son lays hold on the Opportunity to express his Love to the Offender, offers himself to die for him, and, since the Law requires it and must be satisfi'd, really does so; the Prince, accor∣ding to his Proclamation, accepts of his Son's vicarious Punishment, the Law and Justice have their Course, and the grateful Criminal obtains his Freedom: thus are Be∣lieving Sinners redeemed from that Punish∣ment they are obnoxious to, with respect to infinite Justice. The Socinians tell us indeed, That Christ's Obedience to his Father, even to Death, was no more than was due, on his own account; and that, though it was perfect and blame∣less, yet he received Rewards for it, infi∣nitely beyond what he could merit by such Obedience. This is to put our Saviour into the State and Condition of the com∣mon World; for all those Glories, pro∣mis'd to repenting Sinners, are infinitely greater than they, by any personal merit, can pretend to; but it seems very unrea∣sonable, that he should take upon him as a Mediator between God and man, or that his Name should be so powerfully influential for the advantage of others, who had just cause to be wholly employ'd in expres∣sions of Gratitude for his Father's Kind∣ness to himself; or to be wholly ecstasi'd
with Admirations of that unbounded Good∣ness, which had confer'd such mighty Bles∣sings on him beyond his deserts; this we rationally suppose will be the Employ of beatified Souls, and ought to be Christ's too, upon the Socinian Hypothesis; we own Christ's Obedience, as he was Man, to his Father's Will to have been most perfect and absolute, his Original Divine Nature never knew any thing of dissent with his Eternal Father; therefore that Humane Nature he assum'd, could not be liable to Disobedi∣ence.2 Cor. 5.21. It's observed of him, that He knew no sin, he neither had nor could have so much as a deprav'd Inclination; he had no strugglings within himself between the Law of his Members and the Law of his Mind, which yet he could not have been without, had he been a meer Man, a Partaker of Flesh and Blood, at the same rate as the rest of Mankind were; but the Deity assuming Humanity, and so being naturally incapable of Sin, we are not wont to assign Merit to his Life and Conversation, any farther than as it laid him open to Sufferings, but only to his Death and Passion, and the Prelimina∣ries to them: that absolute Innocence reign∣ing in his Humane Nature, rendering all those Sufferings, to which Humane Nature alone was liable, the more meritorious; and that inexpressible Condescension of the E∣ternal Son of God to take our Nature upon him, join'd with his consequent Suffer∣ings,
made one entire sufficient Oblation and Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. But to suppose, as Socinians do, that one great meaning of the Death of Christ, was, that God, by that means, might give Men a pledge of that Favour or Pardon he intended for them, is idle: those who had any thing of a true Notion of a God, would have de∣pended upon his Word, authentically re∣vealed, without any such extraordinary Pledge; those who had perverse Notions of him, would take very little notice of such a Pawn given; for the Argument would be very obvious to a Sceptic; If God be such as some define him, infinitely Wise, Good, Power∣ful, True, there's no need of such extraordi∣nary Methods to confirm Men in an opinion of his Veracity; if he be of a different or less perfect Nature, a thousand such Strategems can give us no sufficient reason of Confidence in him. We find indeed the Ancients, upon Leagues or Compacts between them, offer∣ing Sacrifices to their Gods, and with their Hands laid upon the Victim's Head, calling their Gods to witness their Sincerity in such Leagues, and making their solemn Protesta∣tions one to another to observe
propounded Articles; the design of that Ceremony seems to be onely to intimate the agreeing Per∣sons serious Imprecation, that their own blood might be shed in the same manner as that of the dying Victims, in case they falsified that Con∣tract then made; but we can imagine nothing  of this nature to have pass'd between God and man in the Death of Christ; Men were so far consenting indeed as to shed the blood of Christ, but far from promising Faith and Obedience to their God at the same time; no, they acted in plain defiance to those Revelations God had made of himself, and those very Persons, who pretended to the most immediate Dependance upon Christ, had very little Confidence in him, till such time as his Resurrection from the dead recon∣firmed their fading Hopes, and made them believe he was capable of being their Savi∣our and Redeemer. But if, at last, it were necessary that Almighty God should so seal the assurance of his Pardon to Mankind, a meaner Victim might have serv'd than that of his onely Son; since nothing could possibly create in guilty Men a greater Diffidence in God's Mercy, than so severe a procedure on so very slight and impertinent a Reason, with that Son, concerning whom he profest, that
he was well pleased with him: After all, the Socinians would flamm us off with a meta∣phorical Redemption, the Consequence of which, I fear, must have been but a meta∣phorical Pardon of our Sins, in spite of which we might still be really and properly damn'd; St. Peter, drawing the parallel be∣tween ours and a proper Redemption, teach∣es us to believe, that our Redemption is proper too, forasmuch as we were not redeem'd with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold,  the ordinary means of redemption for Crimi∣nals or Captives,1 Pet. 1.18, 19. but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without Spot; which precious Blood, being of infinitely more value than Silver or Gold, could and did effect as proper a Redem∣ption for them, for whom it was offer'd, as the greatest Summs of Treasures, paid down for their Ransom, possibly could. To convince us yet further of Christ's Satisfaction for our Sins, the Scripture repre∣sents him to us as a Mediator; but our Ad∣versaries reply to this, that Moses is called a Mediator too, yet Moses never satisfied for the Sins of Israel; to prove that Moses is so called, they allege that of the Apostle, That the Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator;Gal. 3.19. yet it's well known that Ancient Writers and Interpreters gene∣rally understand that Passage of Christ, whom they certainly and truly conclude to have been that God, more particularly ap∣pearing to the Israelites in their passage from Aegypt to Canaan; and so he deli∣vered the Law to them by his own power, or with his own Hand, as we may well ex∣press it, the Decalogue, the great binding part of the Law, being written with the
Finger of God, as Moses informs us, and so put into the Hands of Moses, and the blessed Angels, as ministring Spirits, at∣tending their Lord in the Solemnity, and this Interpretation is not easily to be e∣luded.  But if by , a Mediatour, we only understand, with Suidas, one that is , a Peace-maker, it then is applica∣ble to
Moses, or to any other, who goes be∣tween contending Parties, to make up a∣ny quarrel or breach that may be between them. But in this case we must always con∣sider the Persons between whom matters are to be rectified, their Natures, and the na∣ture of that Offence which may have caus'd a breach between them, and he who under∣takes such a Work had need to have a consi∣derable Interest in both the Parties who are at odds; for an Ʋndertaker, in such a case, who is liable to any exception on either side, is like to mediate to very little pur∣pose. Now, it's no very hard Task to find Persons fit enough to take up quarrels be∣tween Men and Men, all Men agreeing in one and the same Nature, and Offences be∣tween them generally arising from both sides; but that breach there is between God and man, is not so easily made up, their Na∣tures are infinitely different, one absolute∣ly pure and unchangeable, the other misera∣bly corrupt and humourous; man continu∣ally offending, God continually obliging; man proud, haughty, disdainful, insensible; God kind, condescending, essential Love and Goodness: yet a Mediator, such as should be able to procure Peace between God and man, must have a very great In∣fluence on both sides, to which purpose,  it's indispensibly necessary he should be com∣pleatly Innocent: Moses was uncapable of such a Mediation, though he interceded for the People of Israel, by his Prayers, and was earnest and importunate with God, to turn from that fierce Anger he had justly express'd against a stubborn and ungrateful Generation; but Moses himself, at the very time of his zealous Interposition for
Israel, was, as other Men, obnoxious to God's an∣ger, and felt the effect of it, when, for his Transgression at the Rock, he was deny'd entrance into the Land of Canaan; so that in effect he did no more than what's parti∣cularly incumbent on God's Priests in all A∣ges, i. e. to offer Prayers and Supplications for the People they live among, and by such means, to the utmost of their ability, to stand in the Gap, and to divert threat∣ning Judgments from guilty Heads. Our Saviour, as necessity required, was Holy, Harmless, Ʋndefiled, separate from Sinners, one that needed not first to pray for Pardon for his own Sins, and afterwards for the Sins of others, and therefore he might be, and is, properly called the one Mediator between God and Man, exclusively of all others;1 Tim. 2.5. as we are told in the same Text, there is One God, exclusively of all other Deities; which could not be, if Moses had been a Media∣tor of the same kind and in the same man∣ner, as Christ was: and it's further added of our Mediator, That he gave himself a ran∣som  for all, which Moses never did; and tho', in the heat of his charitable Zeal, he was willing to have been blotted out of the Book which God had written, that God, by that means, might have been reconciled to his People, that Offer neither was nor could be accepted, because it could be no Satisfacti∣on to Divine Justice, to punish one Sinner, and, on account of that punishment, to par∣don another; for why should I pretend to satisfie that Justice, on behalf of another, which, should it proceed severely, would pass upon me without any such pretence; but he who conscious of his own Innocence, is secure from any legal Danger, may, with reason, interpose vigorously for another. In our present Case, our Lord endeavours to put an end to that difference there is be∣tween God and Man, arising from Sin; God is the Supreme Law-giver, and has, in his own hand, the uncontroulable Power of pu∣nishing Trespassers upon his Laws; Man is the continual Transgressor, having, by that means, wholly forfeited all pretences to Grace and Favour; therefore his Case, be∣ing it self desperate, the Mediation begins on God's part, our Lord not being stil'd,
the Mediator between man and God, but be∣tween God and man, the whole Mediation arising not from man's hopes, but from God's mercy and goodness, which found out the means of reconciling us to himself, by his Son. Perhaps a Socinian would find it  difficult to give a satisfactory reason why, seeing the first Covenant, or that between God and Israel, could be made by the Me∣diation of Moses, and confirm'd with shed∣ding the Blood onely of ordinary Victims, the Evangelical Covenant managed by the Blessed Jesus, a Person very much superiour to Moses, could not be confirm'd with Blood of like Sacrifices as the former? We'll own freely, the Covenant of the Gospel is a better Covenant, the Promises in it more plain and numerous, the Hopes rais'd in Men by it stronger and more vigorous; but all these things are accounted for in the Dignity of the Undertaker; and why Christians should not confide in God, upon the same terms, on which the Jews did, is not easie to deter∣mine; I am sure they are generally repre∣sented as the most tractable Persons. Be∣sides this, there appears a vast Difference between the Mediatorship of our Lord and Moses on these accounts; our Saviour, by virtue of his Mediatorial Power, was able
to remit sins, was able to give eternal Life to Be∣lievers; but Moses could do no such thing; he was only a Suppliant to God for Pardon for Israel; and Socinians will scarce allow, he gave them so much as a Promise of Eternal Life, throughout the whole Systeme of his Laws, so that though we allow there ought to be some resemblance between the Type and the Anti-type, yet we must allow a mighty distance between a Common Man  and one on whom the Title of the Son of God, his onely begotten Son, was fixt, and the re∣semblance must be between Circumstances capable of being represented, and not be∣tween those which are incapable of it. The Death and Passion of our Saviour, as an ex∣ternal Accident, attending his Humanity, might be represented by the Death of those Creatures offer'd in Sacrifice frequently to God; the Intercession of our Saviour with his Father for a sinful World, by the Intercessi∣on of
Moses for a sinful Nation; but that Sa∣tisfaction by Christ given for Sinners to his Father's Justice, was so great a thing, as nothing could make any proportionable ad∣umbration of it; the Confession of the Peoples Sins over the Victim's head, and laying their Iniquiries on the Head of the Scape-Goat, as a devoted Creature, might keep up somewhat of an Idaea of what the Messias was afterwards to do and suffer, and the manner how; but the Symbol was so dark, that even the prophecy of Caiaphas pointing at the Anti-type, made very little Impression upon the Jews, and made them expect very little from Christ, though they saw frequent evidences of his Divine Missi∣on, and his Death (as a Person devov'd and made Sin, as the Apostle expresses it) for the safety of the Nation. But there's ano∣ther Fetch, as subtle as the rest, that sup∣posing a Mediator ought to partake of the Nature of both the Parties, between whom  he is to make peace, yet this touches not our Saviour; for his Mediatorship was only to be employ'd in reconciling men to God, for so say they, we find God reconciling the world to himself in Christ, but there's no men∣tion of
reconciling himself to the World, sup∣posing this assertion true, is it therefore impossible that God should be angry with a sinful World? If so; how comes it to pass he sends so many Judgments, particular and general, upon Men, Cities and Coun∣tries? does he lay his Rod on Mens backs at randome? without any displeasure a∣gainst their Crimes, or without any respect to their Demerits? did he drown the old World without being angry with them? burn Sodom and Gomorrha with their neigh∣bouring Cities, and yet not displeased with them? these things are incredible: That he was often angry with the People of Is∣rael, we find frequently attested in Scri∣pture; that, as an evidence of his Anger, he punish'd them severely too, we meet with upon record there: If he could be angry with the Sins of a particular People, he may certainly be angry with the Sins of the whole World; for Sin loses not its odi∣ous Nature by being more diffusive: If God be angry with their Sins, he must be angry with the Sinners too, especially if they be active and obstinate in their Sins; for tho' Man, as created at first in the likeness or in the image of God, be good; yet Man, where∣in  that sacred Image is defaced by Sin, is odious and detestable, a proper object of God's Displeasure, and, of himself, inca∣pable of avoiding it; but if God may be displeased with Sin and Sinners, and if (his Nature being pure, and his Laws holy, just and good) he must be so, then he must be reconciled to Man, or Man must be eternal∣ly miserable; and though we find God fre∣quently in Scripture calling upon Men to turn to Him, as if all the Work lay on their hands, yet he promises withal, that He will turn to them;Mal. 3.7. and those kind repeat∣ed Calls are only evidences, that He, who has a great deal of reason to be averse to it, will yet be as ready to be reconciled to them, as they can be to return to their Obe∣dience to him; and he is said to reconcile the World to himself in his Son; because He, in concert with his Son, determined on that means of Pardon and Remission, to be grant∣ed to Sinners, which Sinners themselves could never have pitched on, and because Man was naturally backward to his own good, but God ever seeking it: Yet when we consider , as a word of Ec∣clesiastical use, and signifying particularly such a Reconciliation as is of Penitents to the Church, by which, for their Crimes, they had been before excommunicated. We look upon our Saviour, as our great High-priest, making that Peace for us; and as Penitents are not required to
forgive the  Church which they have offended, but the Church kindly forgives them, though Offen∣ders; so the World, reconciled to God, do not forgive God, or restore God to their Favour, but God, by the Sacrifice and In∣tercession of their High-priest, forgives them and restores them to his Favour; to which end the Doctrine of Reconciliation, i.e. the Do∣ctrine of Repentance is committed to God's Ministers, and we,2 Cor. 5.19, 20. as Ambassadours from Christ, entreat Men that they would be re∣conciled to God, that is, that they would turn every one from the Wickedness of their Ways, and so be re-instated in his Fa∣vour. It might seem not very easie to pervert the meaning of Scripture, when it calls our Saviour a Propitiation for our sins; so St. John,1 Joh. 2.1, 2. If any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, , and he is the Propitiation, or the propitiatory or atoning Sacrifice for our Sins; and again, In this is Love, not that we loved God,4.10. but that he loved us, and sent his Son a Propitiation for our sins; and so St. Paul,Rom.
3.25, God hath set forth Christ to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, &c. Now would I fain be satisfied what is the Benefit of our Faith in the Blood of Christ, a Faith peculiar, extraor∣dinary and indispensibly necessary to Salva∣tion, if the shedding of that precious Blood had no effect, with relation to atoning  or satisfying God's Displeasure, justly ex∣prest against our Sins? That Christ's Blood had a real intrinsic Value, it would look somewhat harshly to deny; yet it was not necessary it should have any such Worth, to render it capable of confirming the new Co∣venant; mutual Compacts made, among the Ancients, with the Solemnity of a Sa∣crifice, depended not at all on any inherent worth in the Blood of that Sacrifice, nay, Cataline's Conspiracy, though confirm'd with Humane Blood, was not so confirm'd because Humane Blood was of a greater va∣lue in it self than that of other Creatures, but that, by joining at first in so horrid an Action, they might desperately conclude it to no purpose to stand out at any Wickedness whatsoever; but our Saviour's Blood is par∣ticularly preferred in its Worth to Silver and Gold and any corruptible Riches whatsoe∣ver, therefore must be in it self of infinite or transcendent Worth, and that infinite Worth, could not but effect some mighty good for us, on account of which we were to de∣pend on that Blood; nor could the Blood of our Redeemer, or his Sufferings be less Satisfactory, because God is said to have given him; for so he might, though our Lord's Humiliation was voluntary: the per∣fect agreement of the Divine Will in the Father and the Son, neither detracting from the Father's Bounty, nor the Son's Willing∣ness or Freedom; so Isaac, who was a Type
of our Saviour, must have been able to have resisted his aged Father, when he was pre∣paring to sacrifice him, but he did not, imi∣tating the Antitype, in that very particu∣lar, of being led as a Lamb to the slaughter; yet Isaac's Willingness did not hinder, but that, had the Solemnity gone on as begun, he would have been his Father Abraham's Sacrifice, or his Gift to Almighty God, as would Jephtha's Daughter too, notwithstand∣ing her ready complyance with the Import of her Father's Vow. But it's objected, That the Covering of God's Ark, appointed to be made by Moses according to the Pattern in the Mount, is called the Propitiatory,Exod. 23.22. which we translate the Mercy-seat, the Septuagint , the same Title by St. Paul affixt to our Blessed Saviour, the was certainly in its original Signification no more than what answered to its position about the Ark, that is, a Covering, or that which clos'd it up on the Top, translated by the Word which signifies a Propitiatory, on account of that immediate Residence which God promised to keep there; from the Cherubims placed on which Covering he gave Answers to the Pe∣titions of his Supplicants, thence called emphatically, That God who dwelt between the Cherubims; from whence it may appear, that when the Apostle applies that Word to our Lord, of whom that Propitiatory or
Mercy-seat was always accounted a Type, he means, that the Man Christ Jesus was the  peculiar Residence of the Deity, or, as he ex∣presses himself, that Person in whom dwelt the fulness of the Godhead bodily: from which Body of his, God himself gave his answers of Mercy and Compassion to Mankind; and this must necessarily have been, if he in∣form'd his Disciples rightly when he told them, He and his Father were One, and that whosoever had seen Him had seen his Father also. The Socinians seem very willing to own that our Saviour's Passion serv'd to ex∣piate our Sins,Cat. Rac. §. 6. c. 8. p. 153. Cum Joannes eum Propitiatio∣nem pro Peccatis nostris appellat, significat per eum Peccata nostra expiari, when St. John calls him the Propitiation for our Sins, he means, that our Sins are expiated by him; but nothing can expiate Sins, but what is sa∣tisfactory for Sins, or what bears that Punish∣ment for Sinners, which Sinners themselves should have born; hence Expiation is often explained by Satisfying; so the Beasts of∣fer'd in Sacrifice were put to death, to in∣timate the Demerits of the Offerers, who ought to have died for their own Transgres∣sions; hence those Offerings made for the Sins of Men were stiled Expiatory or
Pur∣ging: not as if the Beasts, offer'd by Men to Almighty God, had any thing expiatory in themselves, but they were call'd so, on ac∣count of that relation they had to the great Sacrifice of our Saviour, which really did what they only shadowed out, i. e. made a sufficient Satisfaction for the Sins of the  World, otherwise why should the Apostle tell us, that it's impossible the Blood of Bulls and of Goats should put away Sin, since they were ap∣pointed by God himself to be sacrificed as expiatory for Sin, but that their whole Effect depended on their relative Nature, and their Praesignification of that glorious Offe∣ring to be made for Men at last? it had been only to put a Sham upon miserable Wretches, to tell of expiating their Sins by those Means by which it was impossible they should be expiated; and to put them to ex∣traordinary Troubles and Expence for those things, by which, in themselves, they could reap no good, and which further had no re∣spect to any thing that could advantage them: the Jewish Rabbins therefore always understood by such Expiations the Transfer∣ring of that Punishment due to One upon some Other to whom it was not due; whence that Wish,Vid. Bux∣torfii Lex. Talmud in voce . May those Chastisements which I un∣dergo be expiatory or satisfie for Rabbi such a one, and his Children; and again, Let thy Expiation be upon us, and let us suffer in thy room, whatsoever thou oughtest to suffer; and Rabbi Moses ben Maimon, commenting on that Phrase used by one, May I be an Expia∣tion for them, tells us, it's as much as to wish, that He might be a Redemption,Oughtr. de Sacrif. l.
2, c. 6. p. 336, or the Redemption-Price, or the Ransome for them: and it's a mode of Speaking, whereby is ex∣press'd an extraordinary Love; to this the Apostle St. Paul alludes, when he wishes he  might be Anathema,Rom. 9.3. Gal. 3.13. for or in the room of his Countreymen, and our Lord really was made a Curse for us, or in our stead, and so became indeed an Expiation, or a Propitiation for our Sins. We allow it may be true, that He who is once reconciled may remit what he pleases of his Right; but he must be recon∣ciled first, now that infinite Justice, essential to Almighty God, could not be reconciled to Man, without a compleat Satisfaction, and yet he may be said justly to abate of the Rigour of his Right, who will accept of a Satisfaction offer'd, which he's not bound to do; as among Men it's wholly at the de∣termination of the Supreme Power, whe∣ther they will execute the Malefactor him∣self, or accept of the Punishment of some other, who voluntarily offers himself to die for the Malefactor; Justice may if it please insist on the One, and it's no Injustice to accept the Other. What the Socinians at last endeavour to avoid, is, that Agreement between the Le∣gal expiatory Sacrifices, and that of our Re∣deemer; where they would fain impose on us a new Fancy of their own,
i. e. That our Saviour's Sacrifice was not compleated, till he ascended into Heaven to present himself there before his Father; and this they conclude from the custom of the High-priest's en∣tring into the Holy of Holies, with the Blood of the yearly Sacrifice, offer'd for the Sins of the People: We must certainly  own, that the High-priest did enter that Sacred place with Blood; but we are to con∣sider, that there were other expiatory Sacri∣fices beside that which was offer'd once a Year, and which prefigured the Suffering of our Lord, in which no such Ceremony was used: as all those Sacrifices offered by par∣ticular Offenders for those Sins they were personally guilty of, they endeavouring, by such means, to make an Atonement for their Sins, and these particular Sacrifices were compleat in themselves, and procu∣red Remission of Sins for the Offerer, and were certain Types of that great Sacrifice, afterwards to be offered; and the Paschal Lamb it self, of all others the most lively representation of that Lamb of God who, in fulness of time, was to die for the Sins of the World, was killed and eaten without any such Circumstances, as carrying the Blood of it into the most Holy place, and the Annual Sacrifice was really offered, when it was kill'd, and afterwards burnt without the Camp:Levit. 16.16. the End and Design of sprinkling the Blood of the Goat and of the Bullock upon and before the Mercy-seat, was, to make an atone∣ment for the Holy place it self, because of the Ʋncleanness of the Children of Israel, and because of their Transgressions in all their sins, as the Text teaches us, i. e. though the Ho∣ly of Holies were the place of the more
special Presence of God, which render'd it venerable and glorious, yet, it being among  Men who were very disobedient and rebelli∣ous, it contracted somewhat of Uncleanness and Pollution from them, a Pollution so in∣fectious,Psal. 78.60. that it made God forsake his Ta∣bernacle in Shilo, even the Tent which he had pitched among Men; it was on account of such Pollutions, that God threatned Israel afterwards, to destroy that House which was called by his Name; and commands them, Go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh,Jer. 7.12, 14. where I set my Name at the first, and see what I did to it for the Wickedness of my People Is∣rael; therefore will I do unto this place which is called by my Name, wherein ye trust, as I did to Shiloh, i. e. I will make it a desolation, for such was Shiloh made on the same rea∣son: This was then the case of the Holy of Holies, and it stood in need of a formal Sanctification, in the ceremonial way, for the Wickedness of those who were con∣cern'd about it; now this Expiation of the Holy place, had no relation to the Remission of Mens Sins, as the devoting, and killing, and burning the Sacrifice had; but the great Sacrifice there offered by the High-priest was that of Prayer and Supplication, sha∣dowed out in that,Levit. 16.12, 13. That he was to take with him into the most Holy place a Censer full of burning Coals of fire from off the Altar of the Lord, and his hands full of sweet Incense beat∣en small, and to put the Incense upon the fire before the Lord, that the cloud of Incense might cover the Mercy-seat, that was upon the Te∣stimony,  that he might not die: by all this, signifying that Sinners, appearing even be∣fore the Seat of Mercy, without offering an Atonement to Heaven in the most hum∣ble and solemn Devotions, can expect no∣thing but Ruines and Destruction; and as we rationally conclude, that the Priests were not wont to offer Sacrifices without Prayers in general, so we conclude, that e∣ven this Symbolical Ceremony was not per∣form'd without some Prayers and Ejaculati∣ons at least, God's Priests being appointed, under the Mosaic Law too, not only to offer Sacrifices of several kinds, but to offer up Prayers and Praises to God, in the name of that People over whom they presided in Re∣ligious matters. But now, though we com∣monly look upon the Holy of Holies, whe∣ther in the Tabernacle or in the Temple, as an Emblem of Heaven, being guided by the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, yet we know that Heaven can be the Recep∣tacle of nothing defil'd or impure, there∣fore it can contract no Impurity from any thing in it or about it; therefore our Sa∣viour's Sacrifice was compleat in dying on the Cross for our Sins;Heb. 9.12. but by his own Blood he entered into the most Holy, that is, into Heaven, in his humane Nature, or that Body in which he had suffered on Earth; his free offering himself, and freely sacrificing himself, he being our Priest and Sacrifice both at the same time, opened him that entrance into
Heaven; but there, as our great and never-dying High-priest, he makes Intercession for us to his Father, he presents to his Father's view those mighty Sufferings he had under∣gone on our Account, which serving as a Memorial of that eternal Determination of the Deity for Man's Redemption, has the same and greater Efficacy on our behalf, than a Plea from divine Truth and Justice it self; he being invested with that Almighty Power of bestowing those Blessings he has purchas'd for us, and the Demonstrations of his Merits, his Will, and his Goodness be∣ing all one Act. It's true, the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews tells us,Heb. 9.7. that the High-priest went not into the Holy place with∣out Blood, which he offered for himself and for the Errors of the people; but how that was we have explained before, since that Blood was made use of for purifying even the Holiest Place, render'd impure by the Sins of the High-priest himself, and by the Errors of the People. Perhaps it would not be a∣miss, to take some notice of those different Expiations of Sins in the Old and in the New Testament, which the Socinians, in their discourses concerning Christ's Priesthood, tell us of, i. e. That Legal Sacrifices were on∣ly appointed for such Crimes as were commit∣ted by Imprudence or Infirmity, greater Offen∣ders not being directed to make use of any, but were doom'd to die for their Crimes; whereas, as they say, the greatest of Sins, provided Men  persevere not in them, but are truly peni∣tent, are expiated by the Sacrifice of Christ; and this they prove from that of St. Paul, Be it known unto you,Act. 13.38, 39. that through Christ is preach'd unto you the forgiveness of Sins, and by him all that believe are justify'd from all things, from which ye could not be justi∣fied by the Law of Moses: But here we are to consider, that the Political as well as the Religious Laws of the Israelites, being given at one time by Almighty God, they are so blended together, and made Dependents on one another, that where an ordinary Sacri∣fice could not, there the Death of the Of∣fender himself might satisfie for the Crime committed: A Sacrifice offer'd, though by its Institution it were expiatory, yet if the Sinner, however ignorant or weak, persist∣ed in his Sin, or approach'd the Altar of God without true Humility and Repentance for the Sin committed, his Sin could not be pardoned on account of the Sacrifice offer'd, but if such a Sinner did truly repent and a∣mend his Errors, his Offering was then ac∣cepted, and not only temporary but eternal Judgments diverted from him; for such Sa∣crifices typified the Sacrifice of Christ, which was powerful to save us from both Worldly Punishments and the Damnation of Hell; and as we have before observed, the Virtue of those Sacrifices consisted wholly in that re∣lation the Types had to their Antitype. Now, where the Jewish political Laws
reach'd the Life of the Delinquent, and took his Blood, there it would have been an Impertinence to offer the Blood of other Creatures for him; but it follows not, but that the same Conditions of hearty Repen∣tance, and true Resolutions of amendment, might procure the Offender's pardon from God, though he suffered under the Rigour of the Sanguinary Laws; and the daily Sa∣crifices were of some import, with respect to such Criminals; and the Blood of Christ, though to be shed afterwards, was available to the Salvation of such; so a Terrour was struck upon Others by the Delinquent's out∣ward Sufferings, and Encouragement was gi∣ven to the greatest Sinners to repent by the reasonable Hopes of their being pardoned by Heaven, who yet were to suffer upon Earth. And so we find among Christians in Christian Governments, the Laws take no∣tice of and animadvert upon notorious Sins, some are punished by lighter Penalties, some by Death it self; yet the Prayers and Intercessions of the Church offer'd to God, in the name of Christ, may be, and fre∣quently are effectual to the Eternal Salvati∣on of such Persons, so justly suffering for their Crimes; but for the Text alledged, the Import of it is this, That by the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ we are really and effectually freed from all Sins, whereas the Ceremonies of the Law had no such intrinsic purging Power of themselves, all their Validity depending  wholly and onely on their Relation to this All sufficient Sacrifice of the Son of God. But we are taught by these Innovators, that this Sacrifice was not compleat till our Savi∣our enter'd Heaven,Cat. Raco. §. 7. p. 173. nor he possest of his High-Priesthood till that time; yet at the same time they own, Christ was a Priest when hanging on the Cross; if he were a Priest he must be our High-priest, for we meet with no Gra∣dations in that Office of his in Scripture, nor that by executing the Office of an infe∣riour Priest very well, he purchas'd a title to an higher Dignity: If he were an High-priest, he was compleatly so, else he was and he was not the High-priest at the same time; but the Socinian Error, in this matter, lies in not distinguishing rightly of the Priests Of∣fices: the Apostle teaches us,Heb. 5.1, 2. That an High-priest, taken from among men, is ordain∣ed for men in things pertaining to God: Now, things pertaining to God are not only external Gifts and Sacrifices, but those that are internal and Spritual too, such as are Prayers and Supplications, with respect to which, it's necessary an High-priest should have compassion on the Ignorant, and on them who are out of the way, for that he himself al∣so is compassed with Infirmities; a Sense of his own Wants is apt, in any Man, to raise a sympathizing Tenderness for others; so that when he begs of God Pardon for his own Sins, he may at the same time implore
Divine Mercy for the Sins of others: now,  the High-priest is compleatly such in doing both or either of these; so upon the Cross, our Saviour was our High-priest, and his ex∣ternal expiatory Sacrifice was compleatly offer∣ed; in Heaven, interceding for us with his Father, he there presents that Sacrifice, sha∣dow'd to us by what we commonly understand to be the meaning of Prayers and Supplica∣tions, i. e. Christ, in Heaven, intercedes as powerfully and effectually for us, as if he really did pray and supplicate as present on our behalf; but that he should literally do so is unnecessa∣ry, and not to be understood by his Inter∣cession for us; for he's an Intercessor, not on∣ly who prays and supplicates immediately for another, or on his behalf, but He's one who, by some extraordinary Action, plea∣sing to him with whom he intercedes, pur∣chases a Power of doing that thing, or shewing that Kindness to his Friends at all times by himself, which, without that pur∣chace, he must make continual and repeated Intreaties for; such a Power has our Lord purchased for himself, by offering himself a Satisfaction for the World's Sins, in his Sufferings, compleated by those particular Sufferings upon the Cross; for his Father accepting that Price so paid down, Christ, as Man,Heb. 7.25. acquired that Power, as to be able to save, to the utmost, all those that come to God by him, and therefore his humane Nature is immortal, that he may always be capable of exerting such a Power. But the Socinians
would prove their position by that,Heb. 8.4. That if Christ were on Earth he should not be a Priest, seeing that there are Priests which offer Gifts ac∣cording to the Law; but here they are vastly wide from the Apostle's meaning; for the Apostle, writing there to Jews, and argu∣ing the matter with them concerning the Messiahship of Christ, shows them, that though he asserted Christ's High-priest∣hood, yet he pretended not that he was any Successor of Aaron or the Legal High-priests; for, says he,7. 13. 14. it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Moses spake nothing concerning the Priesthood, there∣fore our Saviour was a Priest, according to Prophecy, after the order of Melchise∣dech, and not only after that Order, but for ever so, a High-priest never to die, ne∣ver to be succeeded in that sacred Office by any other: now, being after that Order, and under a necessity of having somewhat to offer as a Priest; for so we are taught (and,8.3. as a Priest, having no right to offer any Jewish Sacrifices or Gifts, the Order of Mel∣chisedech not having any relation to them) Christ offered himself, the greatest, the no∣blest Offering in the World: having made that glorious Offering, he soon left Earth, having there no further immediate concern, for could he have made his Title to Priest∣hood never so plain, and offered himself ne∣ver so freely among the Jews, to execute the Priestly Office, it had been to no purpose,
they having Priests of their own, of the Aaronical Line, of whom by Divine prescri∣ption they were to make use in things per∣taining to God, those Priests properly offici∣ating so long as Sacrifices were legally neces∣sary, and when they were render'd unneces∣sary by the perfection of our Saviour's Sacri∣fice, there being no need of any Priests at all to offer such external Sacrifices or Gifts, the Apostles of Christ, and their Followers, succeeding their Master onely in the Instruct∣ing, Governing and Interceding Parts of his Sacerdotal Function. As for some part of their Argument, to prove that Christ was not a compleat High-priest till his En∣trance into Heaven, it's more dark and unin∣telligible to me than all those Mysteries in Re∣ligion which they pretend to explode:
for, say they, since the Apostle asserts, that he ought in all things to be like his Brethren, that he might be a compassionate and faithful High-priest in things pertaining to God, and for ex∣piating the Sins of the People, it's plain that, so long as he was not like to his Brethren in all things, i. e. in Afflictions and in Death, so long he was not a compleat High-priest: well, is the Consequence from all this, therefore he was not a compleat High-priest till he ap∣peared in Heaven before his Father? no∣thing less: It will only follow, on their own Principles, that, upon his Death, without that Consequence, the expiatory Sa∣crifice was compleated; for there was no  need of sanctifying the highest Heavens with his own Blood; nor does this at all abate the necessity of Christ's Resurrection or Ascensi∣on into Heaven, since, without these, that Faith fixt in one who had been false to his own Promises concerning himself, who could neither have rais'd himself nor others, who could neither have possest those eternal Mansions in his own Person, nor have pre∣pared them for his Followers, who could neither have protected nor assisted them to the end of the World, could have been no way justifiable; but Christ's assimilation to his Brethren, could proceed no further than to the end of his Sufferings, which ended with his Death upon the Cross; since none of his Brethren had been so glorified, or had so risen as he did, or so ascended into the presence of God to make Intercession for Sinners; but indeed Death it self was not so essential to that Resemblance as they imagine; for whosoever is liable to common Infirmities, and obnoxious to Sufferings, must of necessity be obnoxious to Death on the same reason, though he should actually be translated with Enoch, or carried up into Heaven with Elijah; for though those holy Men, after such a Translation, were no more in a mortal state, yet all that was no greater Privilege than all are Partakers of, who af∣ter their final Resurrection die no more; or than those who shall be found alive at the day of judgment; for though such shall only be
subjected to a change, and not really die as others, yet that hinders not but that, in their own Natures, they shall be mortal, and as liable to Distempers, so to Death, as well as others. To say truth, our Saviour, during the whose course of his Life, and in all its particulars, liv'd as Men do, and being a Partaker of real, and not fantastical Flesh and Blood, it was not probable he should live otherwise, only in his exemption from Sin, he was beyond that general Rule, the Deity not being capable of an Union with any thing imperfect or impure: But having liv'd as real Man, and suffer'd as such, and having by himself throughly purged our Sins,Heb. 1.3. he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high; the Socinians indeed seem to point at somewhat of an Interstice between his A∣scension and his Session at the right hand of God that's not at all grounded upon Scri∣pture: for though we know he convers'd some time with his Disciples before he left them, that was not the time of presenting himself before his Father, and for any thing of a formal presenting himself before his Fa∣ther, as a Suppliant, with his own Blood, it's an irrational Dream, neither becoming Men pretending to Scriptural nor to Philosophical Reason; for since we must, to please their Fancies, make an exact Parallelism between the Annual Sacrifice and that of Christ, we must consider, that the High-priest, entring into the Holy of Holies, had really with
him the Blood of the Victim already dead, and in that state of Death to continue, till con∣sumed by fire without the Camp, and so never capable of a Resurrection: but our Saviour
rose again from the dead, and though those of Rome would persuade us, some of his Blood was gathered from under the Cross, and preserv'd as a venerable Relick by some very Pious and Devout Persons, and may be seen at this day by those who have Faith e∣nough; yet we doubt not but that Blood so shed was re-united to his Body, being easily gathered, by Almighty Power, from that Diffusion it had suffer'd at his Crucifixion: so that though our Lord had died, yet his Blood, after his Resurrection, existed only as in a living Body, therefore it could be pre∣sented before God only as in such a Body; therefore it could not be presented so as the Blood of the Annual Sacrifice was by the Jewish High-priest; nor could the Blood of Christ be so sprinkled, as that was, to∣wards Heaven, or toward the Mercy seat; but our Lord's Ascension into Heaven, and sitting at the righ-hand of God, were one con∣tinued, uninterrupted Act, and that Blood, which had been once offer'd upon the Cross, needed not to be offer'd again; he was made a perfect Messias, a real Saviour through Suf∣ferings, a Saviour every way sufficient for those who should believe on him: and ha∣ving, through his own Blood, made way to the Exaltation of his Humane Nature, he  had no more to do, but to satisfie his Fol∣lowers in the truth of his Resurrection, and to give them proper Instructions, with re∣spect to their future Employs, and so im∣mediately to ascend to, and to sit on the right hand of the Majesty on high, i. e. to exercise that absolute Dominion and Soveraignty o∣ver Believers, as Man, which, as Man, he had purchas'd at the dearest rate; and, as such, we find him appearing in Apocaly∣ptical Visions, though at the same time bearing that Title, King of kings, and Lord of lords; and thus have we cleared those Proofs, justly alledged for our Saviour's Satisfaction for Humane Sins, from Soci∣nian Glosses, and irrational Interpretati∣ons.
I shall now add only some short positive Evidence of the same Truth, from particu∣lar Circumstances attending his Death, and so conclude this particular. It must there∣fore be remember'd, That one End of our Saviour's exact fulfilling the Law, was, that he might be an example of Holiness and Obedience to us; but if our Saviour's Suf∣ferings were of such a nature, as to import a great deal more than barely such an Exam∣ple, then it was really to be considered fur∣ther, and the Reasons of that Import to be enquired into. Holiness includes all sorts of Vertue, amongst the rest, Patience, For∣titude, Courage, and the like; supposing our Saviour to have satisfied our Heavenly  Father for our Sins, to have atoned that Anger justly excited against a Rebellious World, these Vertues were prodigiously emi∣nent in him: the weight of God's Wrath against Sin and Sinners was enough, had it been permitted to take its course, to have crush'd a world of miserable Wretches; therefore it had been impossible for a meer Man to have struggled with, and to have a∣verted that terrible Indignation from us; but if we take away this particular Considera∣tion of his treading the wine-press of his Fa∣ther's Indignation alone, nothing seems more mean, among the various accounts of the Sufferers for Truth, than the Carriage of our Blessed Saviour; that Man, whom yet Socinians themselves acknowledge to have moved in a Sphere superiour to the rest of Adam's Race. If we look upon that Death our Saviour dy'd, it must be own'd, it was grievous and painful, yet when we consider it duly, the Shame and Ignominy in it, was the heaviest Circumstance attending it: other∣wise, when we come to compare his Death, as to its outward Circumstances, with the Sufferings of Prophets and Martyrs of old, they were meerly Trifles and inconsidera∣ble: The Apostle tells us, among Faith's ancient Heroes, of those who were sawn a∣sunder, so we are told, in particular, that great Prophet Isaiah was sawn with a wood∣en Saw, the more dull, the more lingring, the more tormenting; so the three Children
were cast into the burning fiery Furnace by Nebuchadnezzar, and Daniel into the Lions Den, to have been torn in pieces under the cruel Paws of ravening Beasts; where we are not to look upon the Miraculous Deli∣verance those illustrious Sufferers met with, but upon the barbarous Cruelties intended a∣gainst them: but if, from them, we come to view the cruel Subtilties of Heathen Persecutors, there we find all the variety of Tortures exquisite Malice could invent, ex∣ecuted upon poor Christians; the terrible Racks stretching their disabled Limbs, and leaving no sound Joint in their Bodies, a Torment terrible indeed to the strongest natural Constitutions, they out-living their Pains, and recovering Strength only to en∣able them for renewing Miseries; some bro∣ken upon the Wheel, dying piece by piece, and Nature, in the mean time, sustain'd by Puddle-Water and Excrement; some burnt alive in scorching Flames; some broiled or roasted before lingring Fires; some wor∣ried to Death by enraged Wild Beasts; o∣thers cloath'd with Pitchy Vestments, and so set on fire, to fry away in inexpressible Pains, meerly to make sport, or to serve for Flambeaus to midnight Wanderers: What, should we descend lower to the poor persecuted Protestants in Merindo! and Cha∣brieres, or the unhappy
Piedmonteses of late Years? to see Mens Mouths and Womens Privities stufft with Gun-powder by barba∣rous  Villains, and so their Bodies or their Heads blown in pieces by that murdering Artifice, to name no more of those inhu∣mane Cruelties, managed so, that Holy Men, admirable Christians, have been Days, and Months, and Years a dying; and beside all this, it was oft-times the Ag∣gravation of their Sorrows, to see their Friends and nearest Relations murder'd first before their Eyes, to have all the unjust and scandalous Reproaches in the World fixt upon them; for Women to see their sucking Infants thrust through with Swords, their own Blood, and their
Mothers Milk flow∣ing from their bleeding Wounds together; to see them tost and carried triumphant upon their Spears, torn from their dying Mo∣thers ript up Wombs, and thrown immedi∣ately into consuming Flames; these Sights, such as might rack the most resolute Soul, and almost squeeze sympathizing Tears from brute Beasts or insensate Rocks; the very reading those dismal Tragedies are e∣nough to make Men shiver with Horror, and survey the Bloody Scene with Amazement and Consternation; yet, after all, we find those glorious Martyrs so far from Fear or Apprehensions of their approaching Fate, that never Happy Pair went, with more cheerful Looks, to the Bridal Bed, than they went with to Racks and Wheels, to Flames and Gibbets, or whatever else their angry and malicious Enemies could inflict  upon them; nay, they were so far from being daunted with the cruel Executions of their Fellow Saints, that ambitious Princes were not more active to grasp at Crowns and Sceptres, than they at the more splendid bloody Crown of Martyrdome; nay, so desirous were they of that Honour, that whole Multitudes, made up of Men, Wo∣men and Children, readily, without being sought for or accus'd, offered their Throats voluntarily to Pagan Governours, to the Amazement and Confusion of their most violent Persecutors: If we observe the Be∣haviour of those admirable Persons under their Sufferings, their Management is all of a piece,
though they were all the day long as Sheep appointed to be slain, though they found their Portion in this World never so severe or uncomfortable, yet in all these things they were more than Conquerours, through Christ who loved them; they fear'd not the Cruelty of their Enemies, but the Kindness of their Friends, lest, out of Compassion to them, they should find out any means to rob them of that Crown they long'd for, Death, though in its most dreadful shape, was never half so terrible to them as such a Disappointment: in the midst of all their Pains, not Victors in the fam'd Olympick Games, not young Generals after mighty and unexpected Victories, were possest with a more exulting Joy, than those triumph∣ant Saints on their Natalitial days, for such  they accounted those times of their Suffer∣ings; then happy Visions pleas'd their par∣ting Souls, and an expiring Stephen could see the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man, his glorious Redeemer, sitting at the right-hand of God; Flames were to them so many Beds of Roses; Racks and Wheels like yielding Down, or soft as Fanning Briezes on a Summer's Evening; no Mourn∣ings, no Complaints were heard, no Tears were seen among them, but Songs of Joy, and Praise, and Triumph were the Exer∣cise of their suffering Hours, and their a∣spiring Souls mounted on them, as on Sera∣phic Wings, to Abraham's Bosom; and what was the original Ground and Reason of all these Joys, but only the certain Good∣ness of their Cause, the extraordinary Assi∣stances of their King and Saviour, and an infallible Assurance of God's Love to them, and consequently of their future and eter∣nal Happiness;Rom. 8.18. They reckoned that the Suf∣ferings of the present time were not worthy to be compared to the Glory which should be revealed in them; and therefore,Heb. 11.35. though they were tortured, yet they accepted not of Deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection; and all this was agreeable to the Doctrine of the Cross, as laid down by the Apostles in Scripture; here then was the Faith and Patience, the Courage and Resolution of the Saints; these were indeed to be imita∣ted, the Spirit and Power they acted with  was wholly Divine and irresistible; but if, after all this gallant Prospect of the noble Army of Martyrs, we turn our Looks upon the dying Jesus, or his behaviour of himself under his Sufferings, things will look very differently; we find in him all the evidences of Fear, and Sorrow, and cruel Apprehensions of that Death he was to un∣dergo; His Soul was exceeding sorrowful e∣ven to death, he beg'd of his Father, if it were possible, that that bitter Cup might pass from him, and though he concluded his Prayer with that resigning Expression, ne∣vertheless not my will but thy will be done, yet he repeated his deprecatory Prayer three times, to shew how earnest and real he was in his Requests, his Fear and Earnestness produced that Bloody Sweat, and brought down the Angel from Heaven to strengthen him, all these were Prefaces to his Suffer∣ings of a very disagreeable Nature to the sacred Ambition of his own martyr'd Fol∣lowers; when he was in the Agonies of Death, he was so far from any Triumphant Expression on the occasion, that he vented his sorrowful Spirits in that despondent Cry, My God, my God, why hast thou forsa∣ken me! we cannot pretend the Blessed Jesus, at this time was under any alienation of Mind, under any distraction of Spirit, by reason of the extremity of his Pains; we have shewn before, that many suffered much greater Cruelties for his sake, than the pains of the  Cross amounted to; consider it only as the Roman Method of putting Slaves to death, and even Pagan Philosophers have suffered much more to the World's eye, voluntarily and involuntarily, without any such inward distemper, as Anaxarchus and Calanus the In∣dian, the former being beaten to pieces in a Mortar by Nicocreon the Cyprian Tyrant, the latter walking gravely into the Fire, pre∣pared for that purpose before Alexander the Great, and there Philosophizing seriously and rationally, till his Breath was stopt by Smoke and Flames; and our Saviour shew'd as great a Mastery of his own Thoughts, and as undisturbed Apprehensions of things, when up∣on the Cross, as at other times; as in refu∣sing Gall and Vinegar, in discoursing with the penitent Thief, in taking care for his blessed mourning Mother, &c. we cannot pretend it was the
Delicacy of our Saviour's Body, who being conceiv'd in an extraordi∣nary Manner, was accompanied with a pre∣ternatural Tenderness, for we know its the Soul that sees in the Eyes, feels in the seve∣ral Members, hears in the Ears, suffers in every bleeding Wound, the Body, without its Activity being only a stupid and insensible Lump of Earth, and the Soul of our Savi∣our being, according to the Confession of all, of a Nature far exalted above the com∣mon Standard of Mankind, having no Guilt to clog it, no Sin to render it uneasie, and therefore could not be but far above any  groveling Earthy Thoughts, infinitely sen∣sible of the Advantages of Death, to those that died in God's Favour, and therefore would more perfectly despise all the Effects of humane Rage or Malice: we cannot say our Saviour was the first that suffered under the Inhumanity of Persecutors, so many of the Prophets had been brought to violent Deaths before, not to mention that Persecution the faithful Jews underwent from the Tyranny of Antiochus Epiphanes; it cannot be al∣ledged that Sufferings were the more heavy and insupportable to our Saviour, because he was conscious of his own Purity and In∣nocence, such a Conscience of inward Inte∣grity must needs be the most comfortable Circumstance in the World for a dying Man, such an Innocent being infallibly cer∣tain of eternal Rest and Happiness in a fu∣ture World; and it was, among other things, a clear Sense of their peace being made with God, (which those who are ho∣ly and harmless can never want) that made those eminent Servants of God so eager to be Martyrs, knowing it was better for them to be dissolv'd and to be with God, than to linger upon Earth, though compassed about with all the Grandeur and Felicity a state of Infirmity can be susceptible of: nor can it be supposed that the Ingratitude and Baseness of the Jews, among whom he had preach∣ed, and for whose Conviction he had done so many mighty Miracles, could work upon
him so much as to press him with such ex∣ceeding Sorrows; it's true indeed, Ingrati∣tude to Benefactors is a Crime, it's a very pungent Thought to Men in Adversity, to see those, on whom they have laid the great∣est Obligations, stand among their Enemies and promote their Ruine; and it's further true, that never were any Generation of Men more unworthy, or more insensible of the most powerful Obligations, than the Jews contemporary with our Savi∣our; but, after all this granted, why should our Lord at that time more particu∣larly pray to his Father, that the bitter Cup might pass from him, when he had all along, through the whole course of his Life, found the Jews as ill inclin'd to him as then, but only wanting proper Opportunities to shew it? or why should the Blessed Jesus cry out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me! only because the Jews had repay'd his Goodness with Ingratitude and Cruelty? besides, this was the Case of our Lord's Disciples and Followers, as well as of him∣self; they preached among both Jews and Gentiles the glad Tydings of Salvation, they, assisted by the Influences of the Holy Spirit, did a great many Miracles among them both; yet, where they were most venera∣ble for their Miracles, where most zealous to spend and to be spent for the propagati∣on of the Gospel, they met with very un∣kind Returns, and commonly seal'd those
saving Truths deliver'd, with their own Blood; so that when we have turn'd our selves which way soever we can, we must of necessity conclude, either that the Mar∣tyrs were abundantly more exemplary in their Deaths, than Christ himself, their Lord and Master, which is either Blasphe∣my or very like it; or else we must con∣clude, there was somewhat distinct from a∣ny thing yet mentioned in the Death of that Lamb of God, which made it more terrible and heavy than all those exquisite Tortures expiring Martyrs underwent; for, is it pos∣sible, that, without any such Circumstan∣ces, He, who was emphatically stiled the Son of God, the Son of his Love, that Son in whom he was well pleased, He, who was One with his eternal Father, should be afraid of Death, of Humane Cruelties, or complain of Dereliction? is it possible he should be able, at any time, to send such Assistances to those who believed on him, as should make them despise all the Terrors and Fu∣ries of a malicious World, and yet himself be weak and timid, start at the sting of that Death, which dying Martyrs smiled at? is it possible that He who knew no sin, nor had any guile found in his Mouth, should tremble before that King of Terrors, over whom his own Followers, and only by Faith in him, so gloriously triumph'd? these things are incredible. But let us again consider our Dearest Lord as appearing as our Pledge  and Surety before his Father, as paying in his Death a satisfactory Price to his incensed Father, for the Transgressions of Mankind; let us consider him as dying for our Sins, as being made a Curse for us, therefore ap∣prehensive of Divine Displeasure, on our behalf; as being made Sin for us, as being made by God Justification and Redempti∣on for us, as having redeem'd us by his most precious Blood, as having reconciled us to God by his Death; let us remember that he is a Propitiation for us, through Faith in his Blood, that He bore our Sins in his Body upon the Cross, that he was sacrificed for us to take away our Sins, for all which Conside∣rations we have the undeniable Warrants of Scripture; in short, let us consider our Saviour as undergoing those bitter Pains, in his last Sufferings; which, for the Qua∣lity of him the Sufferer, and for the Immen∣sity of the Sufferings themselves, being in∣ternal as well as external, were equivalent to those eternal Punishments prepared for Impenitent Sinners; let us but seriously weigh these things, and that the Humane Nature of him who was the Son of God him∣self, should startle and recoil, can never be incredible; if we look'd upon him as en∣gaged in this dismal work, how prodigious was his Patience, how inexpressible, incon∣ceivable his Charity! for him that was origi∣nally undefiled to be made Sin, him that was the well-beloved Son to be made a Curse, him,
whom an ungrateful World rejected, to be∣come an
expiatory Sacrifice for that World; for him, who had never done any Sin, nor deserv'd any Punishment, to undergo the severest Agonies, and Death it self, for the sake of obdurate and unconsidering Sinners; these are the stupendous Effects of inscruta∣bly mysterious Love; such as, the more a pious Man meditates on, the more he is rapt into Amazement, and the more close∣ly he reflects on Humane Demerits, his A∣stonishment grows the more profound; that Man, so miserable, should be consi∣der'd, that the Son of Man should be so mercifully visited, these things observ'd, the sufferings of Martyrs, were not worth the naming on the same day with the Sufferings of the Son of God; their Agonies were sports compared with his, and he dearly purchas'd, by taking off that bitter Cup, all those Comforts, and Joys, and Triumphs, which they afterwards pretended to; He, in his own Person, conquer'd first those gigantic Monsters, Sin and Death and Hell in open field, he triumph'd over them upon the Cross, He led Captivity captive, and how easie was it then for the Sons of Faith to follow the Captain of their Salvation, and to wear those Crowns of Righteousness which he had purchas'd for them, with his own most precious Blood? when they knew God's Anger was aton'd, that they had One able to save, continually sitting on the Right-hand  of God, as an Intercessor for them, when they were infallibly assur'd, those Per∣sons were blessed who were persecuted for Righteousness sake, for that theirs was the Kingdom of Heaven; it was no wonder that they rejoiced and were exceeding glad; nor was it strange, that those who suffer'd for the sake of Truth, before the Incarnation of our Saviour, should express the same Courage, they being Partakers of the same Faith, and depending as unmoveably upon God's Promises made to them, as if they liv'd upon Earth to see their utmost accom∣plishment; so that they too had the same Mediator, the same Redeemer, the same Saviour, the same glorious Hopes and Ex∣pectations. Having thus largely insisted upon some rea∣sons why it was necessary that God, and par∣ticularly God the Son, should be incarnate, and consequently suffer for the Salvation of Mankind; we are now to consider the Force and Import of those Arguments, as laid to∣gether. That a Messias was to be sent, and on such a saving Errand, is a Truth questio∣ned by none, but that in a meer Man such things should be made good, as were fore∣told concerning him, was impossible: for in a meer Man all the Families of the earth could never have been blest, though they were all ruin'd in one that was no more; for the Repairer of Breaches, the Restorer of Ru∣ines, the
Raiser to Life, ought to be greater  and more powerful than the ordinary Instru∣ments of procuring one, or taking away the other; for we see how every little Creature can do mischief, where it requires a greater Care and extraordinary Industry to repair that Mischief when once done; it was no meer Man who should reign for ever, and of whose Kingdom there should be no end: for such a Kingdom requires Eternity in the Ad∣ministration; the story of Scripture tells us, that, when Solomon had finished and dedica∣ted his Temple, and the Ark was carried into the Holy of holies, upon the Priests coming out from thence,1 King. 8.10, 11. the Cloud filled the House of the Lord, so that the Priests could not stand to minister because of the Cloud, for the Glory of the Lord had filled the House of the Lord: We meet with no account of any such Glory filling the Second Temple, built after the return from
Babylon; yet the Com∣fort given by the Prophets to the mournful Elders of Israel, when they were dejected on account of the Meanness of that Second Building, was, that the Glory of the Second House should be greater than of the First; which yet could not be true, if God did not afford his more immediate Presence to the Latter than to the Former; but we read in the Gospel of no such Presence, unless in the Presence of Christ, which he frequently af∣forded to that Temple, during his Converse upon Earth, and the Text it self was al∣ways applied by the ancient Jews to the  coming of the Messias into that Temple, nor did they pretend to a contrary Opinion till after their destruction by Titus, as even Grotius himself asserts on that Prophecy;Grotius in Hagg. 2. 8. therefore the Jews themselves could not but acknowledge God more especially present in the Messias, than in that Glory which ap∣pear'd in Solomon's Temple, which could not have been, had not the Fulness of the Godhead liv'd bodily in him, according to the Apostle's Phrase; or been essential to him, which it was not to that Cloud appear∣ing in the Temple: nor could our Saviour have been God with us, if he had not been God at all while he was with us, nor God at all, truly or properly so called, if he had not been so from Eternity: nor could he have done Miracles in his own Name, nor have forgiven Sins in his own Name, &c. had he not been God: or have been the proper Subject of those glorious Titles given him by the Pro∣phets, had he not been literally and properly Partaker of the Divine Nature. Again, the World's Saviour was to destroy the works of the Devil; to dispossess the strong Man armed he must be stronger than he, it's our Saviour's own Argument: now God, we know, is stronger than the Devil; Man, we know, is weaker when in his best Condition, the strength of good Angels we only guess at; but we are sure our Saviour appear'd as a Man, and really and truly was such, we
are sure that he was no Angel, we are sure that he did destroy the works of the Devil, for he did not lose the end of his Coming, therefore we are sure he was God, as well and as really as he was Man; and though we find, among Prophetic Miracles, some go∣ing so far as to heal Bodily Distempers, nay, as to restore Life to the dead by their Pray∣ers; yet we meet with no pretences among them to cast the Enemy out of their Souls, or to work upon their Inclinations so as to change their Natures by a word's speaking, or knowing and understanding the Thoughts and Hearts of Men: Further yet, the Law of Moses being to be repealed, so far as it was his, and not natural or of eternal Obli∣gation, it was necessary the Repealing Power should be as great as that which gave its first Sanction: now this, if we look upon our Saviour as a meer Man, he was no way qua∣lified for; Moses was a King in Jeshurun, authoriz'd, in a manner miraculous and ex∣traordinary, to be the Leader of God's own People, taking him for his inward Qualifi∣cation, he was the meekest Man upon Earth, a Person of wonderful Love, Condescensi∣on, Charity, one of a peculiar Intimacy with God, so that God declares of himself, that he would not speak to him by Dreams, or Visions,Numb. 12.6, 7, 8. or Revelations, as he did to other Pro∣phets, but he would speak with him face to face, as a Man speaks to his Friend: besides, he deliver'd the Law to the Jews with a great  deal of Majesty and Terror, after long Converse with God, so plain and evident as was undeniable; and he had evidence of that Familiarity with Heaven in his glorious Countenance, so bright and terrible that the People were afraid to look upon it, till he put a Veil upon his Face, and, while he was in this mighty employ, none could so much as murmur against him or repine at his Au∣thority, though it were Miriam his Sister, and herself a Prophetess, but immediate Vengeance from Heaven vindicated him; all these Circumstances were enough to con∣firm the sacred Nature of that Law he de∣liver'd, and the Danger that might arise from trespassing upon it. But if we come to our Saviour's state and condition in the World, it was such as could procure him no Veneration, nor pretend to get him any Au∣thority in the World; nothing, to outward view, could be meaner or more contempti∣ble than He, and though his Life were, be∣yond that of Moses, absolutely blameless, and indeed impeccable, yet the Obscurity of his Birth, and manner of Living were such as could conciliate no Reputation to him a∣mong the Jews; and yet, even in that low∣er Sphere wherein he moved, they could pick quarrels with him, and charge him as if he had been some very obstinate and da∣ring Sinner: He never pretended to any ex∣teriour Dignity among the Jews, but de∣clin'd it, and, though he were ill used by a  malignant World on every hand, there was no sudden Vengeance executed on his Abusers; but he submitted with that Patience and Unconcernedness to all Wrongs offer'd him, that it seem'd to the Jews like somewhat of a Conscience of his own Guilt that made him so silent: we have no account in Scri∣pture-Story of any particular Familiarity he had with Heaven, by ascending Mount Sinai, by receiving his Gospel with Thun∣ders and Lightnings, and all those Terrors that strike an aw upon mean Souls, nor was he, at any time, withdrawn from ordinary Converse, but only when he was tempted in the Wilderness by the Devil, or when, some∣times for a few Hours, he went apart by himself to pray; for as for the Socinian Dream, of his bodily Ascent into Heaven, as a School where to learn his Lesson, we have exploded that before; and his several with∣drawings from Company were so very pri∣vate, that the World could take no notice of him on that account; nor do we hear of any Radiancy in his Face, any awful Glory in his Aspect, unless when he was transfigu∣red on Mount Tabor, of which there were but three Witnesses, and they forbidden to divulge it, and even then he held Commu∣nion but with Moses and Elias, not face to face with God himself, as
Moses had done; now, compare these two Law-givers toge∣ther as meer Men, and Moses has in every respect the advantage of our Saviour, he  carries more of Lustre and Authority with him in his Person and his Actions, and therefore that Law given by Moses must be more authoritative and obliging than any thing deliver'd by Christ could be, there∣fore nothing given by Moses could be disan∣nulled by Christ, as being every way an In∣feriour Person; and therefore the Jews could not have been reasonably condemn'd for ad∣hering to Moses in all particulars against Christ: nor could Almighty God have been lookt upon as so equitable and merciful to that unhappy People as he really was, had he sent one who was a meer Man, and so ill accoutred externally as our Lord was, on so weighty and surprising an Errand, as a∣bolishing the
Mosaic Law. But after all, state the matter rightly, acknowledge our Saviour to be God as well as Man, all the difficulty vanishes at once, his Person was more august, his Power and Authority grea∣ter, his Will uncontroulable, his Holiness and Dignity incomparable. Moses was but the Servant, he the Lord, and therefore, without any Impeachment to the Fidelity and Honour of Moses, he might reverse e∣very Institution of his as he pleas'd, since he, as God, was able of himself, without any circumstantial Delay, to give the World a more compleat and perfect Rule, whereby humane Happiness and God's Glory, the great ends of all divine Institutions, might be more directly promoted; the great work  he undertook was proper to the Deity it self, but superiour to any humbler Being: this requiring so much, the Satisfaction of God's Anger, rais'd against a stupid sinful World, cannot be suppos'd more easily brought about; for the weight of God's Anger against Sin being insupportable to meer Flesh and Blood, Help must of necessity be laid upon One mighty to save, or else Man∣kind, who had so long subsisted upon the lively Hope of a glorious Deliverance, must have perish'd without Remedy at last; and finally, the Justification of our Faith, Pardoning of our Sins, and the bestowing upon us Everlasting Life, are things compatible only with God, yet really and properly ascri∣bed to our Saviour, therefore He must be God, therefore He that was incarnate or made Flesh for our Salvation must be God. But now, if we observe the Nature of this great Work for which God was manifested in the Flesh, we shall find it was wholly the effect of Immense Love and Pity to Mankind; and of extraordinary Interest and Power with the great Father of all things, there∣fore an Undertaking more peculiarly pro∣per to God the Son, than to any other Per∣son in the Trinity.
Man's Redemption was an Effect of the Father's Love, the Deity it self is Love, the Design of saving such Sinners as should make use of Means to be offer'd, in due time, to that purpose, was an Effect of  Love; the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, were all consenting in the Design; from the Father, as the beginning of Order, must the first motions of Eternal Love, and Goodness, and Will take its Original: not as if there were any Interstice of time be∣tween the Actions of Eternal Minds, (for Time can have no place or consideration in Eternity;) but we must speak of such things suitably to Humane Apprehensions, by which kind of Expressions, tho' our Idea's of God's Acts, cannot be adequate or proportionable, yet they may be true and safe; so we speak of God the Father as propounding, of God the Son as declaring his readiness to execute what's propounded, of God the Holy Ghost as
consenting so to influence the Objects of Love and Mercy, that neither the Proposal nor its Prosecution should be frustrated; all these, though the distinct Acts of Three distinct Substances, are yet all one uninter∣rupted Act, and Determination of one Infi∣nite and Eternal God; for where Infinity, or Eternity, or any other Attributes peculiar only to God, are given to Three distinct Sub∣stances, yet those Substances, which are infi∣nite, howsoever really distinct, must of ne∣cessity be inseparable, therefore they must of necessity be One; for be the Substances never so much distinct, and never so perfect in themselves, yet Ʋnity must follow upon Insepa∣rability: But, according to our common way of speaking, God the Father, designing the  greatest Goodness to Men, could shew that Love and Pity to them by no other effectual Means, than by giving them his onely Son, the very relative Term of Father and Son implies the greatest Nearness and Love in the World; and the kinder and more loving a Father is to his Son, the greater, of ne∣cessity, must that Favour and Love be, which can be content to part with a Rela∣tion so dear, for the Advantage or Satis∣faction of another; hence God accepted it as an Effort of compleat Love and Obe∣dience in Abraham, that he had not with-held his Son his onely Son from him, but was ready, without any murmuring, to sacrifice him at his Creator's Command; and if our blessed Redeemer was the Son of God, the Son of his Love, the Son in whom he was well pleased, the Apostle urges it home and excellently, He that spared not his own Son but deliver'd him up for us all,Rom. 8.32.
how shall he not with him give us all things? the Gift of his Son was the great∣est Effort of Tenderness that was possible, therefore when Men had receiv'd that Gift from the Father's hand, there could be no reason of doubting whether they should re∣ceive any thing else that was fit for God to bestow, or for Man to receive. Indeed, when the Father had determined to express the greatest Love and Pity to his Creatures, there did remain nothing else to be done, but to send his Son into the World upon that Occasion; for he was still to move so as not  to impeach his Justice, Justice could not be free and universal without Satisfaction in e∣very respect; Man was, so soon as fallen, a continual Criminal, therefore Man was the Object of that irresistable Justice; the acquitting him from the stroke of Justice, was the effect of the greatest Love, yet Ju∣stice, not being perverted, must be, and was satisfied on that particular account, therefore it must be, and was satisfied by the grant of God the Son, to put himself into a passible state, and to suffer a Punish∣ment equivalent to that due to Sinners, and this could be effectually performed by none other but the only Son of God; for,
The Redemption of trespassing Mankind from the stroke of Justice, according to the Father's Intention, required the most absolute Obedience, the greatest Interest, and the most extraordinary Compassion and Tenderness to∣wards Mankind: Now, these things were all most naturally to be expected from the Son; for Identity or Sameness of Will in God the Father is Command and Determi∣nation, in God the Son is Submission and Obedience, in God the Holy Ghost is Con∣currence and Assistance. Now, if we con∣sider the Severity of the Condition, on which Man was to be redeem'd from sinking under Wrath to the utmost, and without which it was impossible Man should be re∣deem'd at all; if we reflect upon the weight of God's Displeasure due to Sin, the infi∣nite  Power of the Being displeas'd; the ex∣tream Provocations whereby it's continually exasperated; these Considerations must con∣vince us, that it required the greatest Obe∣dience possible in the Undertaker, such an Obedience as could be startled by no Diffi∣culty, diverted by no Temptation, nor conquered by any Extremity it could engage with. Of such an Obedience
Isaac was a considerable Type, who, though so dear to his Father, so vigorous and strong, as he might have been able enough to have secu∣red himself from the violent Zeal of his A∣ged Father, though Nature must have had some Reluctance against Death, against Death by the hand of his own Father, by his hand from whom he had deserv'd all Kindness and Love by his habitual Obedi∣ence, yet he stopt upon none of these Con∣siderations, but was, for ought we can find by the Sacred Story, as ready to be offered as his Parent was to offer him; now, such a kind of Obedience cannot reasonably be expected from any but a Son, nor from any but the best of Sons, such was Isaac; but as the Burden the Son of God undertook was infinitely greater than what Isaac was concerned in; the Eternal Determination of Heaven in respect of Man, infinitely hard∣er to comply with, so it required a Son more Powerful, more Obedient, more united with his Father than any Earthly Son could be with the most obliging Earthly Parent;  therefore, there being that Eternal U∣nity of Will between God the Father and God the Son, it was impossible there should be the least Reluctance in the Son, against what was resolv'd on for the rescue of Sin∣ners from the Wrath to come; and there∣fore that declining the terrible Hour which appears in his Prayer before his being seiz'd on by the Jews, was purely the Effect of Humane Nature, necessarily infirm, but clearly understanding the Terror of the ap∣proaching Conflict, and therefore shewing the result of the purest Flesh and Blood, yet without Sin. Again, when we reflect on the Relation between a Father and a Son, as it's very close, so their mutual Loves and Affections must needs be very extraordinary and tender; this is observ'd and expected among earthly Parents and Children, and it's what Nature commands, and Religion, so far as true, obliges to: this then must be much more eminent between God the Father and the Son, and so our Lord himself teaches us, The Father loveth the Son, and, as the greatest evidence of that intense Love,John. 3.35. he has given him all things into his hand; he as∣serts the same again, The Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that he doth,5.20. which is an Expression of the greatest Inti∣macy and Unity; the same Jesus declares, that his Father hears him always;11.42. and the Palmist, in the Person of the Father speak∣ing to the Son, says,Psal. 2.8.
Ask of me and I will  give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession; and on assurance of this, Christ, when he reproves St. Peter for using his Sword against those who came to take him, tells him, he could pray to his Father, and he should presently send him more than twelve Le∣gions of Angels; from all which Circum∣stances we may be assured, that the Interests of an infinitely Obedient Son with an infinitely Loving Father, must be infinite; therefore, whereas Mens Sins were infinitely odious, and that Vengeance infinite, which was by conse∣quence to fall upon Men for those Sins, there was nothing but an infinite Interest that could possibly, by any means whatso∣ever, divert that Vengeance, and this infi∣nite Interest was proper to God the Son, that is, to such a Son as was at Unity, nay, was One with his Father; from whence it is that we are taught by the Rules of Christi∣anity, and a Socinian himself will scarce contradict it, to present all our Prayers to God in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ; so, whereas our Lord teaches his Disciples, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name,John 14.13,
14. that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son; if ye shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it;16.23, 26. he afterwards varies thus, In that day ye shall ask me nothing; Verily, verily I I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Fa∣ther in my Name he will give it you; Hither∣to ye have askt nothing in my Name, ask and  ye shall receive, that your Joy may be full; which two Texts compared together, shew the absolute Prevalency of the Name of the Son of God with our Heavenly Father, and the absolute and indissoluble Union of the Father and the Son; so that it may properly, and without any thing like a Contradiction, be asserted, that what One does the Other does, and what the Father grants for the Son's sake, that the Son grants; nor can any thing of an Heavenly Nature be granted to Mankind but by the Deity so united in it self; by which Consi∣deration all inferiour Intercessors between God and Man are excluded from being in themselves the Objects of our Religious Ado∣rations, because there can be no such ade∣quate Unions of Persons between them, nor any such absolute Power, or immediate In∣terest in such inferiour Beings, as there can be no reasonable Competition of Interests be∣tween a Son adopted out of Commiseration, and an onely begotten, and universally loving and obedient Heir; as then the Interest of a Son with the Father was necessary for Hu∣mane Redemption, so it was necessary, that God the Son, particularly, should assume our Nature, to do and suffer for us, in such a measure as we might be redeem'd, upon acceptance of the proper Conditions, from Eternal Destruction: Finally, the Tender∣ness of the Son oft-times shews it self, when the Gravity and just Severity of a Father
seems inexorable to an Offender; yet even then when the Father seems of himself, and otherwise would be, inflexible to the Cri∣minal, he is pleas'd to see the Tenderness of his Son, and will frequently encourage and accept of his Intercession; so, if we may compare small things with great, our Hea∣venly Father deals with us, in respect of the Intercession of his Son; and though Justice cry'd out for Vengeance against Sinners, he was particularly well pleased when he saw Him cloth'd with Flesh, for accomplishing that great Work of Mercy and Goodness; he was pleas'd at his Interposition between the Criminals and impendent Punishment; and since the Divine Nature was wholly in∣capable of flexible Affections, nothing but unbounded Love, Mercy, Justice, &c. concentring in it, the Apostle teaches us, that our incarnate Lord, our great High-priest was such an One as could be affected with our Infirmities,Heb. 5.7, 8,
9. could have compassion on the Ignorant, and of them that are out of the way; who, in the days of his flesh, when he offer'd up Prayers and Supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was a∣ble to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared; Though he were a Son, yet he learned Obedience by the things which he suffer'd, and, being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation to all them that believe; the Assumption of our Nature created in him a sympathetic Tenderness  of Humane Infirmities, as appear'd by his Tears over Jerusalem, and at the Grave of Lazarus, yet he was free from all Sin in those condescending Tears of his; now, he that had such extraordinary Compassion for miserable Sinners, could not but exert the utmost of his sacred Interests on their be∣half, and make a free access for them to the Throne of Grace; where such Obedience, Interest and Compassion being indispensibly necessary for our Good, and those Qualifi∣cations being naturally most incident to the Person who stands in the Relation of a Son, therefore it was necessary that the Son of God should take upon him our Nature, and pity us, and plead for us, that how deplo∣rable soever our Condition might be in it self, we might be in a Capacity of Eternal Salvation. It was proper, that He, who first gave a Being to all things by his Power, should, when the Work of his hands was decay'd, if he de∣sign'd Mercy for them, rectifie their Dis∣orders, and resettle them in such a state, as might, in some measure, answer the original Design of the Creation; that our Saviour, the Eternal Word of God, was the Maker of all things, we have formerly prov'd at large from the beginning of St. John's Gospel, and several other Scripture Passages: and it's a Truth, which even Arians themselves acknowledge. In that first Creation, as the wise Man observes, Man was made upright,Eccles.
7.29.  but he has now sought out to himself many In∣ventions; were he but left a little to himself he would need no other Vengeance to be poured upon him but what he'd soon draw down on his own Head: but God, in pity to him, was pleased to determine other∣wise; but, as we observ'd before, though an inferiour Creature was able to bring one, in a happy state before, into a ruinous Con∣dition, as any little mischievous Agent may, yet those Ruines, so easily procured, could not be so easily repair'd again. We are taught, in the History of the Creation, that Man was created at first in the Image of God, that was his Glory and Excellence beyond the other Members of the visible Creation; but that Image of his Maker was miserably defaced in him by Sin: the Blessed Jesus, the Eradiation of God's Glory,Heb. 1.3. and the express Image of his Person, therefore the most proper to renew, in Obedient Man, the blotted Image he had at first created him in, , says Athanasius, whom we may just∣ly alledge now, in a matter little contro∣verted,Athan. de Incar. T. 1. p. 72. It was not in the power of any other but him who was the Image of the Father, to create again or resettle that Image in Men. It's true, the Socinians would persuade us, the original Image of God consisted in no∣thing but Dominion over his Fellow-Creatures; but that Dominion over the Creatures,
could not answer that Perfection the Wise Man adverts to in Man's first Creation, no more than we can prove Kings and Princes the more Perfect because of that Domini∣on God entrusts them with, or that, among Princes, those who command the largest Empires should be the best and most com∣pleat Men; but the original Image of God in Man, consisted in that Purity and Holiness which Man was adorned with in his first Creation; and in that vast Wisdom and capacious Understanding, whereby he knew every thing that was ne∣cessary to his own Happiness; this Purity and Wisdom was ruined by his Fall, and this our Saviour came effectually to restore, by making such as believe in him new Crea∣tures, by which they are again renewed in Knowledge, and in Righteousness,Col. 3.10. Eph. 4.24, and true Holiness, after the Image of that God who created them; now, when we speak of an , or a Renewal of any thing, we re∣fer to somewhat that was before, for that can∣not be renewed now, that never was formerly; but if the
Knowledge, and Righteousness, and Holiness in the new Man be the Image of God, at present, and there was such Knowledge, and Righteousness, and Holiness in Man before his Fall, (without which it could not be renewed by him who came to repair the ruines of that Fall) then that Knowledge, and Righteous∣ness, and Holiness was originally the Image of God, in which Man was created; and we need not fly to Dominion, as the sole In∣stance  of God's Image in Man, especially, since his Dominion was no more an Image of God's Soveraignty, than the Govern∣ment of all Princes since has been an Image of that, for God was Lord of all things, Man was not, and yet Princes, as well as others, have had their shares in the Mischiefs arising from Man's Fall, though their Governments be as absolute as ever. To this we may add, that Regenerate Persons being ordain'd to that Title of the Sons of God, it was most proper, that he who was the Son of God by Nature, should be their great Guide and Conducter to that Honour; this we learn from St. Paul, who, laying down that my∣sterious Doctrine of God's Prescience and Predetermination as to the future state of Men,Rom 8.29. tells us, that whom God did foreknow he did also determine beforehand that they should be conform'd to the Image of his Son, that he might be the First-born of many Bre∣thren; where, by the way, we may ob∣serve, that those Persons who, by this very Apostle, are elsewhere said to be renewed according to the Image of God, are here said to be conformed to the Image of his Son, therefore the Image of God the Father and of God the Son are the same thing; and those whose Image is the same must be One, not metaphorically but
really One; our Lord became our Brother, by assuming our Na∣ture, by submitting to all the Infirmities of Humanity, Sin onely excepted, and he was the kindest and the tenderest Brother, who  laid down his own sacred Life to restore a crue of wretched Prodigals to the embraces of their Father, he envied not that, where there were many Mansions, repenting Sin∣ners should be admitted to them; but after his Death and Resurrection, he ascended to his Father and our Father, to his God and our God, that he might prepare those very Man∣sions for those who believe in him; Behold what manner of Love the Father hath bestowed on us, that we, through the Mediation of his onely begotten Son, should be called the Sons of God; that I insert that on good reason will appear to any one who considers with the Apostle, That,Gal. 4.4, 5. when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were in Bondage in general, and that they might receive the Adoption of Sons; this then was the reason of the incarnation of God the Son, and the reason of his Suffer∣ings we have from an equally authentic hand, the Blessed Jesus, by the grace of God,Heb. 2.9. —18. tasted death for every Man; He was the Cap∣tain of our Salvation, being made perfect thro' Sufferings, is not ashamed to call us Brethren; Forasmuch then as the Children are Partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil; And deliver them, who, through fear of death, were all their life subject to Bondage; wherefore, in all things, it behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be  a merciful and faithful High-priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the Sins of the People, or to atone for them, i. e. to reconcile God to People that had sinned, for in that he himself hath suffered, being tem∣pted, he is able to succour them that are tempted. There remains nothing more on this Sub∣ject to be done, but to draw a practical Infe∣rence or two, from our Apostolical doctrine, that God was manifest in the flesh, or that He who really and eternally was God, took upon him humane Nature for the Salvation of Mankind. From hence we should learn a just Admi∣ration of that transcendent Love and infinite Compassion extended to us by God the Father, in sending, by God the Son in being sent to, and condescending to come among us. Words are too weak to express the mighty debt of Gratitude we are engaged in to Heaven, on that account, only
Actions may, in some measure, express our Acknowledgments; let us not conceit our selves exempt from the Condition of the rest of Mankind: We lost our original Innocence, we were pre∣cluded from Paradise, from tasting the Tree of Life, by Cherubims and a flaming Sword, whan could we then hope for? We were created happy, we forfeited it too too easi∣ly, what could we afterwards pretend to? But God, however provok'd, by the eternal Intercession of his Son, had reserv'd Mercy for us, therefore he allow'd Mankind a time and space of Repentance; Repentance was the sole possible Condition of Eternal  Happiness; Repentance, invalid yet and unfruitful in it self, had it not been render'd acceptable by the Blood of the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; the Truth of what I do assert in this particular appears, from the Song of the four Beasts and the twenty four Elders, when they ado∣red this Lamb of God, and prais'd him in the name of the Saints, Thou wast slain,Rev. 5.9. and hast redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and na∣tion; those so redeemed from all parts, in∣clude all Persons, dying in the true Faith of God, from the beginning of the World, some of whom we find mentioned and prais'd for our Example in the Eleventh to the Hebrews, and therefore, when St. John afterwards gives us an account of those who received the Seal of God on their Foreheads, he first reckons up 144000 of the Tribes of Israel, a certain for an uncertain Number, but after them, he tells us, he saw a great multitude,7.9, 14. which no man could number, of all nations, and kindred, and people, and tongues, who stood before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and with Palms in their hands; of whom, and what they were, when the Apostle enquired of one of the Elders, he received this Answer, these are they which came out of great Tribulation, and have wash'd their Robes, and have made them white in the Blood of the Lamb; now this
numberless Number of happy Souls, mark'd by Heaven for its own, represents all those  walking and dying in the Fear of God through all Ages; for Tribulation was the Characteristic of a pious Man, before God was manifest in the Flesh, as well as after∣wards; but they had all their Robes wash'd in the Blood of the same Lamb, therefore that Blood was effectual for Man's Salvation and render'd all their Religious Performances, of which Repentance was a chief, accepta∣ble in the sight of God, before such time as it was actually and openly shed upon the Cross. That Mankind might be apprehensive of their Duties, and be as certain in their Re∣pentance as they had been in their Miscarri∣ages, God, who had given them all the Providential Encouragements possible to serve him faithfully and willingly, was plea∣sed to send his Messengers from time to time to call them to Repentance; so Enoch, by the transcendent Holiness of his Life, which doubtless was accompanied with as edifying Instructions, preach'd Repentance to a World, even so early grown old in Sin; so Noah, for an Hundred Years together, preach'd Repentance to a perishing Genera∣tion; after the Renewal of the World again, from that Stock purposely preserv'd in the Ark, Prophets and Holy Men were frequent∣ly inspired by Heaven, and sent through the World on the Reforming, that too rarely successful, Errand; nor were they so wholly confin'd to Israel, the Lot of God's own Inheritance, but that they sometimes deli∣ver'd Messages to the adjacent Gentiles; so
Obadiah to Edom, Jonah and Nahum to Ni∣neveh, &c. this was certainly an Effect of wonderful Compassion, that a God, so just∣ly offended at Humane Crimes, should have any respect to them, or use so many Methods of bringing them to a Sense of their own Er∣rors, and that Misery attending them; but what measure did those Messengers meet with? the same with those Servants in the Parable, whom their Lord sent to the Hus∣bandmen to receive of the fruits of his Vine∣yard, some were beaten, some wounded, some murder'd, all slighted and disregarded. Yet, to evidence his Love further, God, when he observed how unsuccessful his Ambassadours had been, He sent his Son, the Conclusion was rational, they will reverence my Son, but the Event was contrary, even that Son, by foolish Husbandmen, was cast out of his own Vineyard, and cruelly murder'd: And was not that senseless Barbarism too much? was it not too much to affront Mercy so no∣toriously? would we thus requite the Lord, O foolish People, and unwise that we are! ill would it become those now, who call them∣selves Christians, to trample under foot the blood of the Gospel-Covenant, to crucifie to themselves afresh the Lord of Life, and to put him once more to an open shame: Did he come down from Heaven to Earth, from Glory to Mi∣sery to save us, and shall we be so much Fools, as, having a Prize put into our Hands, not to have Hearts to make use of it? shall we refuse to be saved by him? nay,
shall we not Love him? shall we not Admire him? shall we not Adore him? shall we not obey him in all things? shall we not be ready to suffer all that Hell and wicked Men can invent to our prejudice, rather than forsake his Truth or dishonour his Gospel? Reason would teach us these things; for they who have received the greatest Favours, ought to repay them with the greatest Gratitude; but alas, we generally discourse to senseless Walls, or try our Charms on deaf Adders, for who hath believed our Report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? The Leo∣pard may sooner change his Spots, or the Negro his Skin, than those who are inured to Wickedness be persuaded to relinquish it by the most cogent Arguments in the world; but how base and ridiculous does it look, that Holy Men of old could live upon God's Promises of redeeming them, that in con∣fidence of his Veracity, in a full and strong Faith in his Goodness, they could account themselves but Pilgrims and Strangers here on Earth, and, by religious Lives and Acti∣ons, prove to the World they were in quest of a better Countrey; and yet, We, who have seen the Performance of those Promises they depended on, their Obscurities all clear∣ed, their
Certainty vindicated, We, who are beset with such a Cloud of Witnesses, cannot cast aside every Sin, and the Weight that does so easily oppress us, and run, with Joy, the Race that's set before us? Were we Bond-slaves to Hell, and has the Son of God  struck off our Chains and Fetters, and do we love them still? is Light come into the World, and can we love Darkness rather than Light? were we all liable to eternal Vengeance, and has our Lord redeemed us with his own most precious Blood from the dismal strokes of that Vengeance, and shall we not believe in him that has alone trod the Wine-press of his Father's Wrath for us? We were Sinners; we were Enemies; we were foolish and obstinate Enemies; yet the Son of God, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, came to seek and to save that which was lost; and can we be his Enemies still, who was so much our Friend? I'm sure, what∣ever corrupt Nature may tempt us to, it would be wretched Policy in us, to reject what he has done for us; the wicked Hus∣bandmen kill'd their Lord's Son indeed, but it was to their own Confusion; the rebelli∣ous Citizens refus'd to have their rightful King reign over them, but it was to their Destruction; the First or Primary End of our Saviour's Coming, was, that Men might be saved; but if Men foolishly neglect that End, there is a Secondary De∣sign in it,
that those who still continue in Sin may be without Excuse, that they may have nothing to plead for themselves at the great Day; but that the Justice of his Wrath a∣gainst Sin and Sinners may appear to Men and Angels. Where an Ambassadour of Peace is sent and slighted, the Dignity of the Ambassadour aggravates the Contempt;  the Apostle therefore, having, in the first Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, de∣monstrated the Dignity of Christ, and pro∣ved his pre-eminence to Men and Angels, (who yet, after the several Methods God had formerly taken to reveal himself, had in those latter days spoken himself to the World.) makes this rational Deduction from all, Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we hear in the name of Christ,Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. for if the word spoken by An∣gels was stedfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience receiv'd a just Recompence of re∣ward, how shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began to be spo∣ken by the Lord, and was confirm'd to us by them that heard him? If we repent not at his Call, if we submit not to his Admoni∣tions, nor lay hold on his Grace, we must not please our selves with empty Dreams of entring into his Rest, there remains now no more Sacrifice for Sins; His indeed is suffici∣ent to those who believe in and obey him; but for those who obey not the Truth, there re∣mains nothing but Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish to every Soul that doth Evil, let his State and Condition be what it will: this Wo, I hope, all those who profess Christianity will endeavour to avoid, and that all those who name the Name of Christ, that glorious saving Name, will de∣part from Iniquity. If our Saviour be the Son of God, if he be God himself, infinite and eternal, and yet humbled
himself, and took upon him the Form of a Servant for our Redemption; if it were ab∣solutely necessary, that he, who undertook so great a Work, should be real God as well as real Man, or else must have sunk in that prodigious Attempt; it behoves all those who expect Salvation by his Name, to ad∣here to this Doctrine, to believe in Christ as he is set forth to us in Sacred Writ, that is, as God co-equal and co-essential with his Father; I would to God the Caution were needless! There were some Hereticks in the Ancient Church, who would needs maintain our Lord was not true Man, had only a
phantastical Body, but not real Flesh and Blood as we have; others, as it were to ballance them, would assert our Saviour was a meer Man, and no more, that he was not real God, nor his Love to us, nor his Un∣dertakings for us, so great as we are ready to conclude; God's Blessing upon the La∣bours of the Governours of the Church in those days crusht the growing Heresies, and they bequeath'd to us a Faith unde∣prav'd, unchanged; nor had the Trent-Conventicle an Opportunity to propound their additional Articles of Faith, till be∣sides the Eastern Churches, God was pleased to raise up Men in these Western parts of the World, of extraordinary Piety, and Learning, and Industry, who had rescued the genuine Christian Faith from Fraud and Obscurity, to give it us, so as the Ancient Christians had left it, without Additions  or Alterations: by which Cares they pre∣vented the malignant Designs of the Roman Church; but, as the Devil will always be sowing his Tares of Heresies and Falshoods among the good Wheat of Divine Truths; so, with the Reformation of Religion, be∣sides the bloody Severities of Romish Bigots, several of the ancient Heresies were reviv'd, and particularly that which denied the Eter∣nal Divinity of the Son of God; which, as it walk'd about formerly under several Names, so it has of late, though, as the Presbyterians and Independents, the other day, in spite of former Feuds, are pleased to give themselves the painted Title of Ʋnited Brethren, so those wretched Here∣ticks, however at odds among themselves, agreed in the gay Name of Ʋnitarians, un∣der which Name Turks and
Jews come as well and properly as they, if they could be true to their own Principles. They unite indeed all in that one impious Error, in de∣nying the Divinity of our Saviour; a He∣resie detestable to every sober and intelli∣gent Christian; a Heresie proper only to introduce Deism and Sadducism, and to thrust true Evangelical Christianity out of doors: This, all those who love their Re∣ligion ought to oppose and declare against, with as much Zeal and Care, and more than they would against the foulest Errors of the Roman See: for, though there are so many Falsities and Absurdities propounded to us in that Communion, yet there's nothing  flies so directly in the face of Almighty God as this; it's Folly enough to believe the Bishop of Rome Christ's universal Vicar upon Earth, but it's a greater Stupidity to believe that Christ himself is no more truly and originally God, than that pretended Vi∣car; it's Idolatry to pray to Saints or An∣gels, and to make them the ultimate Object of our Adorations; it's greater yet, to make a meer Man the Object of the same Devo∣tions, and to suppose him a made God, and capable of doing every thing for us we beg at his hands, though he were no more but a Creature, as others, at his first existence; it's Madness to believe that Saints or pious Men may have a Surplusage of Merits, such as may not only serve themselves and their own Necessities, but accommodate others who were defective in themselves; but it's yet a greater Madness to believe that the Son of God had no Merits, and was able to pur∣chase no Pardon for our sins by his Sufferings, or that by dying for our Sins he was unable to satisfie his Father's Displeasure against Sinners; the Mischief and Falshood of such Opinions, I have proved at large in the for∣mer parts of this Discourse; yet God, in his Wisdom, and for the Tryal of those who can adhere stedfastly to the Truth as it is in Christ Jesus, is pleased to permit these Er∣rors to be divulged, and defended, and propagated with a mischievous Diligence, by Men of mighty Names and Interests, who, presuming upon the present Indul∣gence,
assume boldly to vent and spread those Poisons they were forc'd to conceal within their own Breasts before. Time was, when, by the just Judgment of God upon the Lao∣dicean Temper of the generality of Christi∣ans, Arianism got strength, and clouded all the native Glories of the Church of God, it was then when, as St. Hierome says, the World stood in amaze to see it self grown Ari∣an at once; God grant the Plague of Soci∣nianism be not permitted to infect the Church of
England with as fatal a Success; that those Damnable Heresies, wherein the Lord who bought us is denied, gain not a∣mong us too many Proselytes and Patrons too! they have indeed their oyly Words, their plausible Arguments, their extraordi∣nary pretences to Morality, and extremity of Confidence, yet could they never hope to prevail, did they not observe the ex∣tream Debauchery and Loosness of the Age; they consider the Principles of solid Reli∣gion as generally slighted, the lazy Hu∣mours of Men as little careful to enquire in∣to the Nature of Doctrines propounded, but ready either to sink into down-right Atheism, or to take up with the first Scheme of Religion that may come to hand; Men aim more at eminence in what they abusive∣ly call Wit, than at serious Piety; and therefore subtil watchful Hereticks pretend only to reduce Religion to the Rules of Rea∣son, i. e. of their own Reason, who have started so many Impieties, though the Rea∣son  of all Mankind beside themselves appear in contradiction to them; as if a company of Opinators, who neither value their own nor others Souls, were to fix their particu∣lar Sentiments, as the only Standards of Sense and Truth, when indeed they have only the Fucus of Sophistry to make a shew of, easily observ'd by those who stand upon their watch, and are willing to be certainly convinced of the Truth of things before they entertain them. There are others, be∣sides Papists, who are only Wolves in Sheeps clothing, and by how much the more vene∣rable Name they assume to themselves, by so much the more dangerous they are: Every Man is ready to stand upon his guard, if he fears being attacqu'd by a Roman Priest, or by a pragmatick Jesuit; but who would suspect, that any of those who pretend to Tenderness of Conscience, and a superfine∣ness in Religious matters, should blaspheme God the Son, or God the Holy Ghost? who would imagine, that those who dare call themselves Sons of the Church of England, nay, Attendants at her Altars, Hers, who particularly declares against these very He∣resies, in those Articles they are oblig'd to subscribe and to defend, should so affront their Sacred Mother, and go about to seduce her Children from her sound and wholesome Doctrines? But, if Apostolick times could be pester'd with such False Teachers, we may expect worse Measure, upon whom the Ends of the World are come; but, above all,  what can be more astonishing, than that those who pretend so great Good Will to our Sion, should charge the Practice of our Church, in praying equally to God the Fa∣ther, Son and Holy Ghost, and proposing the Creeds of Constantinople, and that call'd by the Name of St. Athanasius, as guilty of Popery, and those things as Reliques of that Idolatrous Religion? Popery is a hated name, and those, who would have any thing hated, need to fix nothing more odious upon it; but if it be Popery, to believe, that our Savi∣our is the Son of God, that he is God, that, by his Sufferings, he has satisfied for our Sins, and now sits at the right-hand of his Father, making Intercession for our Sins, God grant we may live and die in that Faith: since our Case is such, take heed how you hear, or what you read; let none deceive you with vain Words; you have heard and read the Truth; and if now, or hereafter, We, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than what we have prea∣ched, in this particular, Let him be accur∣sed! and again, Let him be accursed! Amen. FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE Principal Heads IN THIS DISCOURSE. THE Design of the present Discourse. Page 1 Socinian Endeavours to change the Text answered. Page 4 A Mystery, what. Page 12 Doctrines may be Mysterious tho' revealed. Page 13 Humane Reason enquired into, as used in Reli∣gious Matters. 1. Its original Excellence. Page 19 2. It's very much impair'd by Man's Fall. Page 21 3. It's yet sufficient to convince us of a gene∣ral Necessity of Religion. Page 25
4. Well employ'd it meets with Divine Assi∣stance. Page 32 5. By Exercise it grows more knowing and comprehensive. Page 38 6. Yet it's not compleat till the Future Life's attain'd. Page 44 Deductions from thence, 1. God's Goodness to be admired because it continues us a discursive Faculty, use∣ful towards Salvation. Page 47 2. We should use our Reason, in Matters of Religion, with all Humility and Sobriety. Page 55 The Necessity of Enquiring into our Lord's Divinity, no breach upon that Humility or Sobriety. Page 63 The Text further explained, and, The Mystery of Godliness prov'd not appli∣cable to the Gospel, or God's revealed Will. Page 66 Not applicable to God the Father. Page 68 The true Meaning of the Text with the subse∣quent Instances laid down, and applied to our Saviour. Page 73 And Paraphrased. Page 79 I. The First Position then laid down, That the Foundation of Christianity is indisputably Great and Mysterious, and that prov'd neces∣sary, 1. By the World's universal Agreement, that Mysteries, both fundamental as to Faith, and externally essential as to Rites, are ne∣cessary in Religion. Page 83
Rites, among the Jews, mystical by God's Ap∣pointment. Page 94 Those of the Gentiles the same naturally. Page 96 The first Design and Mystery of Sacrifices Page 98 The Devil imitating God, and why. Page 107 Sacrifices yet not believed sufficient to appease Heaven, by any Intrinsic, but only by a Rela∣tive Virtue. Page 108 Our Saviour intended not the Abolition of eve∣ry thing Mysterious in Religion. Page 113 Mens Sentiments about the true Ends of Reli∣gion, before our Lord's Incarnation, enquir'd into. Page 114 Those of the Jews. Ibid. Those of the Gentiles. Page 119 The Ends of Religion, how depraved By the Jews. Page 127 Sadducees what, and their Opinions Page 129 Essenes, what. Page 131 Pharisees what, and how character'd by Jews. Page 133 By the Gentiles. Page 140 Their Philosophers, what. Ibid. Things essential to Religion unchangeable. Page 145 Therefore the Law of Regular Nature nei∣ther changed by Moses nor our Saviour, nor any thing as essential added to them. Page 148 And therefore Mysteries not taken away, either in Faith's Foundation or Symbolical Rites. Ibid. Advantages of Religion founded on Mysteries. 1. From them Men learn the Imperfection
of their own Reason. Page 160 2. Fundamental Mysterious Truths the di∣stinguishing Characters between several Religions. Page 168 3. Mysteries in Religion create a due Reve∣rence for it. Page 177 The Conclusion from all, That Mysteries are essential to Christianity as well as to any other Religion. Page 190 It's then Essential to Salvation to know Christ is God. Page 193 Scripture conclusive of it. Page 201 II. Jesus Christ was truly and properly the Son of God. Page 209 This prov'd, 1. By the Promises and Predictions con∣cerning his Birth, &c. Page 219 Several instanced, in Page 221 &c. Christ expected by the Gentiles. Page 234 2. By the Manner and Circumstances of his Birth. Page 237 3. By the Doctrines of himself and his Mi∣nister. Page 259 The gentle and peaceful, yet prevailing, Nature of his Doctrine. Page 267 Scripture prov'd the Word of God to Deists. Page 283 God necessarily perfect in all his Attributes. Page 287 His Love in particular. Page 289 Which obliges him to reveal his Will to those intelligent Creatures, from whom he ex∣pects Obedience to it. Page 294 Scripture such a Revelation of his Will, and has all requisites in it. Page 299
III. Jesus Christ the Son of God was God equal with his Father. Page 309 Prov'd, 1. By the Old Testament. Page 311 The first Chapter to the Hebrews occasi∣onally cleared. Page 315 2. By the New Testament. Page 324 3. By Actions done by himself in Person, or in his Name. Page 381 By himself while on Earth Ibid. By his Apostles in his Name. Page 400 4. By the Faith of the Ancient Ante-Nicene Church. Page 409 Fathers alledged, Greek, Clemens Romanus. Page 411 Ignatius Antiochenus. Page 415 Justine Martyr. Page 420 Irenaeus Lugdunensis. Page 425 Clemens Alexandrinus. Page 427 Origen. Page 430 Latin, Tertullian. Page 439 St. Cyprian. Page 447 Arnobius. Page 452 Lactantius. Page 457 Zwicker alledges, Socinus rejects the Ante-Nicene Fathers. Page 462 Why the Fathers suppose a Difference between God the Father and God the Son. Page 466 The Confessions of the Ante-Nicene Coun∣cils. Page 470 The Judgments of Eusebius and Constan∣tine the Great. Page 477
5. By the generally allowed Practice of Pray∣ing to our Saviour, he is prov'd true God. Page 481 Ʋnder this Head is prov'd, 1. That all Worship terminating on any but the One True God, is Idolatry. Page 483 The Ancient Notion of Idolatry. Page 486 Ʋnitarians divided about Worshipping our Lord. Page 496 Their Vindication reflected on. Page 515 2. That Christians, worshipping our Lord, are no Idolaters. Page 518 Therefore our Lord is True God. Page 536 The Summary of the precedent Discourse. Ibid. The Filiation of the Son of God enquired into. Page 541 The Racovian, Lushington's Account, and that of Thoughts on Sherlock, &c. prov'd insufficient. Page 542 Therefore a Necessity of Eternal Generation. Page 550 IV. It was necessary that God the Son should be Incarnate. Page 562 1. That he might destroy the Works of the Devil. Page 563 He was Tyrannical over Mankind. 1. With respect to their Bodies. Page 566 Possessions by the Devil not bodily Dis∣eases. Page 567 The Devil permitted to possess Bodies,
1. For Tryal of Faith and Patience, and to excite the greater Longings  for a Messias. Page 573 2. For the Glory of the Incarnate Son. Page 577 2. He was Tyrannical over Mens Souls, cor∣rupting them, 1. With false Interests. Page 583 2. Violent and unreasonable Prejudi∣ces. Page 588 3. Prodigious and unaccountable Lazi∣ness. Page 592 A Second Reason why the Son of God was In∣carnate, 2. That he might repeal the Mosaic Law by a just Authority. Page 595 The Law of Moses, though Divine yet re∣pealable, prov'd, 1. By its general Import, it being wholly Typical, and referring to somewhat Future. Page 601 2. The Ceremonial Law was not essen∣tial to the Being or Well-being of a Church. Page 610 3. God always put a great Difference between the Ceremonial and the Mo∣ral Law. Page 617 Hence necessary that the Repealer should be equal with the first Maker of that Law. Page 625 3. The Son of God was Incarnate, that in our Nature He might fulfil the whole Law for us, and give us a compleat Example of Holiness and Obedience Page 632
God's Mercy not diminished by what Christ  merited or suffered on our behalf. Page 639 Crellius his Notion of Infinite Justice consi∣dered. Ibid. Justice in God no hindrance to his Mercy, and vice versâ. Page 645 Christ's Sufferings Proportionable or Equivalent to our Demerits necessary. Page 646 Satisfaction consistent with free Remission. Page 652 Christ not necessarily to suffer Death Eternal, his Temporary Sufferings sufficient and equi∣valent to what was our Due. Page 658 Why so much of Christ's Blood shed as to pro∣cure his Death. Page 666 Our Lord's Satisfaction no Encouragement to Sinners. Page 668 But a greater Encouragement and Obligation to Holiness than the Socinian Hypothesis. Page 674 Confest by the Defender of the Unitarians. Page 676 Christ a Real and Effectual Sacrifice for us. Page 688 Christ's Obedience in his Exinanition not neces∣sary but on our account. Page 707 His Sacrifice Expiatory. Page 722 Compleated before his Ascension. Page 724 His Dying for our Sins prov'd positively Page 731 From the Circumstances of that Death. Page 738 Otherwise His inferiour to the Sufferings of Martyrs. Page 739 God the Son therefore necessarily the World's Redeemer, because that Redemption was 1. An Effect of the greatest and Divinest Love. Page 758
2. It required the greatest Interest in God the  Father, and the greatest Tenderness to∣ward Mankind. Page 761 3. He who made all things was fittest to re∣store them. Page 767 The Image of God not founded in Dominion of Man over his Fellow. Creatures. Page 768 The Conclusion of all, in two Practical Infe∣rences, 1. We learn, from the whole, to admire God's wonderful Love and Compassion in condescending so far to us as to be Incar∣nate and to die for us. Page 772 2. We ought to adhere constantly to that Faith by which we believe Jesus Christ our Lord to be the Eternal Son of God, true God himself, and the Propitiation for our Sins. Page 778 Places of Scripture more particularly Explained and Vindicated. GEnesis 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Cain and Abel's Sa∣crifice. Page 98 3.15. I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman. Page 607 18.2. Abraham stood still before the Lord. Page 311 32.28. Jacob wrestling with the Angel, called Israel. Page 313 49.10. The Sceptre shall not depart from Judah. Page 241
Exod. 4.16. Moses a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron his Prophet. Page 343 7.1. Moses a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron his Prophet. Page 343 14.21. They believed in the Lord, and in his Servant Moses. Page 329 25.22. The Propitiatory or Mercy-seat. Page 721 34.7. Forgiving Iniquity, Transgres∣sion and Sin. Page 699 Levit. 16.12, 13. Censer of Burning Coals in the Holiest Place. Page 726 v. 16. To make an Atonement for the most Holy Place. Page 725 2 Kings 3.26, 27. King of Moab offering his Son. Page 105 2 Chron. 30.18, 19, 20. Hezekiah's Prayer for the Ʋnprepared. Page 603 Psalm 40.6, 7, 8. Sacrifice and Burnt-Offer∣ings not desired. Page 225 45.2. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. Page 314 82.6, 7. I have said, Ye are Gods. Page 342 Isaiah 9.6. Ʋnto us a Child is born, a Son is given. Page 320 Jeremiah 23.5, 6. I will raise unto David a Righteous Branch. Page 321 Micah 5.2 Thou Bethlehem Ephrata, &c. Page 323 Haggai 2.8. The Glory of the Second House greater, &c. Page 753 Matth. 1.23. Thou shalt call his Name Ema∣nuel. Page 325 18.23. The Parable of the Debtors to their Lord. Page 651
28.18. All Power is given to me in Hea∣ven and Earth. Page 407 v. 19. In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Page 328 Luke 4.29, 30. They led him to the Brow of the Hill. Page 382 24.45. He open'd their Ʋnderstandings. Page 395 John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word. Page 332 3.13. No man hath ascended up into Heaven, &c. Page 337 5.23. The Father hath committed all Judgment, &c. Page 202 10.30. I and my Father are One. Page 354 10.34, 35, 36. Is it not written in your Law? Page 558 17 21. That they all may be One, as Thou, &c. Page 358 20.28. My Lord and my God. Page 360 Acts 7.59. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Page 524 Rom. 2.6. God will render to every Man, &c. Page 124 3.24, 25, 26. Justified freely by his Grace, &c. Page 649 703 8.19, 20, 21, 22. The earnest Expecta∣tion of the Creature. Page 490 9.5. Of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came. Page 370 10.13. Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord, &c. Page 203
1 Cor. 1.14, 15. Lest any should say, I had bap∣tized in my own, &c. Page 402 10.2. All were baptized into Moses, &c. Page 329 15.3. Christ died for our Sins. Page 693 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. Reconciling the World, &c. Page 648, 719 12.7, 8, 9. For this cause I besought the Lord thrice. Page 527 Gal. 3.19. In the hand of a Mediator. Page 711 Philip. 2.5,—11. Being in the Form of God, &c. Page 374 Col. 1.24. What was behind of the Afflictions of Christ. Page 694 1 Thess. 5.17. Pray without ceasing. Page 505 Heb. 1.8, 9, 10. &c. When he bringeth his First-Begotten, &c. Page 314 5.5 Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Page 549 6.1, 2. Leaving the Principles, &c. Page 184 8.4. If on Earth he should not be a Priest, &c. Page 733 c. 9. &c. 10. Page 689, 727, 728. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, &c. Page 87 1 Pet. 2.24. Bore our Sins in his own Body on the Cross. Page 698. 3.18. He suffered for our Sins, the just for the unjust. Page 697
1 John 2.1, 2. He is the Propitiation for our Sins. Page 719 5.7. There are Three that bear Record in Heaven. Page 458 v. 20. This is the True God, and Eternal Life. Page 205 ERRATA. PAge 3. l. 5. after Salvation dele. p. 5. l. 20. put a Period after Text. l. 30. after Attentatam d. p. 6. l. 3. r. Wissowatius. p. 130. in the Margent r. Ser∣rarii. p. 142. l. 19. r. seem'd. p. 148. l. 31. r. Posterity. p. 200. l. 14 r. One. p. 209. l. 26. r. really and indeed. p. 221. l. 7. r. Paradisiacum. p. 239. r. this. p. 139. l. 21. r. p. 149. l. 21. d. And. p. 289. l. 29. r. those p. 312. l. 3. r.  In the Margent r. Sandii Hist. Ec∣cles. Enucl. p. 318. l. 6. r. for. p. 332. l. 16. r. those. p. 336. l. 25. r. Stranger. p. 364. l. 29. r. at. p. 413. l. 21. r. far. p. 448. l. 20. r. Libraries. p. 467. l. 22. r. Separation. p. 492. l. 26. d. One. p. 511. l. 10. r. deliver. p. 539. l. 3. r. Lazarus. p. 552. l. 31. in Marg. r. Epistolarum. p. 602. l. 12. r. . p. 609. l. 13. r. Sacrifices. p. 666. l. 1. he be. p. 690. l. 29. r. Levitical. p. 700. in Marg. r. Brixi∣an. l. 3. r. curing. p. 704. l. 31. r. . p. 720. l. 11. r. Catiline. p. 752. l. 10. r. Administrator. Several smaller Mistakes, especially in the Pointing, the Reader will easily observe and pass by, or correct as fitting.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's Church-Yard. TEN Sermons, with Two Discourses of Conscience. By the Lord Archbishop of York, 4to —'s Sermon before the House of Lords, Nov. 5. 1691. —'s Sermon before the King and Queen on Christmass-Day, 1691. —'s Sermon before the Queen on Ea∣ster-Day, 1692. Henrici Mori, D. D. Opera omnia. Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book, 1606. concerning the Government of God's Ca∣tholick Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World, 4to Dr Falkner's Libertas Ecclesiastica, 8vo —'s Vindication of Liturgies, Ibid. —'s Christian Loyalty, Ibid. Mr. Lamb's Fresh Suit against Indepen∣dency, Ibid. Mr. W. Allen's Tracts, Ibid. Bishop Fowler's Libertas Evangelica, Ib. Jovian, or an Answer to Julian the A∣postate, Ibid. Animadversions on Mr. Johnson's Answer to Jovian. In Three Letters to a Country Friend, Ibid.
Turner de Angelorum & Hominum Lap∣su, 4to Mr. Raymond's Pattern of Pure and Unde∣filed Religion, 8vo —'s Exposition on the Church-Cate∣chism, Ibid. Mr. Lamb's Dialogues between a Minister and his Parishioner, about the Lord's Sup∣per, Ibid. —'s Sermon before the King at Windsor. —'s Sermon before the Lord Mayor. —'s Liberty of Humane Nature, stated, discussed and limited. —'s Sermon before the King and Queen, Jan. 19. 1689. —'s Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24. 1690. Dr Hickman's Thanksgiving-Sermon be∣fore the Honourable House of Commons, Oct. 19. 1690. —'s Sermon before the Queen at White∣hall, Oct. 26. 1690. Dr Burnet's Theory of the Earth, 2 Vol. Folio. —'s Answer to Mr. Warren's Excepti∣ons against the Theory of the Earth. —'s Consideration of Mr. Warren's Defence. —'s Telluris Theoria Sacra, 2 Vol. 4to Bishop of Bath and Wells Reflections on a French Testament, Printed at Bourdeaux. —'s Christian Sufferer supported, 8vo
Dr Grove (now Lord Bishop of Chiche∣ster) his Sermon before the King and Queen, June 1. 1690. Dr Hooper's Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24. 1690/1. Dr Pelling's Sermon before the King and Queen, Dec. 8. 1689. —'s Vindication of those that have ta∣ken the Oaths, 4to Dr Worthington of Resignation, 8vo —'s Christian Love, Ibid. Religion the Perfection of Man, By Mr. Jeffery, Ibid. Faith and Practice of a Church of En∣gland Man, 12o The Fourth Edition. Kelsey Concio de Aeterno Christi Sacerdot. —'s Sermon of Christ Crucified, Aug. 23. 1691. Mr. Milbourn's Sermon, Jan. 30. 1682. —'s Sermon, Sept. 9. 1683. An Answer to an Heretical Book, called the Naked Gospel, which was condemned and order'd to be publickly Burnt by the Convocation of the University of Oxford, Aug. 19. 1690. With some Reflections on Dr Bury's new Edition of that Book; to which is added a Short History of Socinia∣nism, by W. Nichols, M. A. &c. Two Letters of Advice, I. For the Susce∣ption of Holy Orders. II. For Studies Theo∣logical, especially such as are Rational. At the end of the former is inserted a Catalogue of the Christian Writers and Genuine Works that are Extant of the First Three Centu∣ries, By Henry Dodwell, M. A. &c.
