O181B 12962059 96088
A STANDING LOTTERY Of his own BOOKS Design'd and to be Erected by the AUTHOR, JOHN OGILBY Esq who hath in several years last past, Printed and Published at his own charge, several Volumes of great Value and Beauty, such as our English Imprimarie had been altogether unacquainted with heretofore, viz. AEsop's Fables Paraphrased and adorn'd with Sculptures, Virgil, Prince of Latine Poets, Translated, Illustrated with Notes, and adorn'd with Sculptures; Homer, Prince of all Poets, his Iliads in like manner, set forth and Dedicated to the King's most Excellent Majesty; and next, a Royal Bible Printed at Cambridge, Dedicated to His Majesty, Illustrated with Maps and Chorographical Presentations, fifty of them being Imperial, to be bound in two, or three great Volumes, with not only Chorographical, but Historical adornations; and lastly His Majesties Entertainments on the 22. of April, 1661. passing through the City to His Coronation, and His Coronation, wherein is Engraven the whole Caval-Cade, the Triumphal Arches, their Inscriptions, Figures, Aenigmatical Emblems, indeed the whole Poetical Conduct, Illu∣strated and defended by noted Observations, drawn both from Modern, Antient and most Authentick Writers. The Author therefore having a virtuous Ambition, to perfect these his former Labours, being the Work of twenty years, by the Addition of Homr's Odysses, long looked for, and now in the Press, with all expedition to be Published, with Notes also and Sculp∣tures; and his Aesop's Fables, a scarce Book to reprint, with additional Annotations, and the adaption of it for the better joyning and binding up with his other Works in a Royal Folio; and having yet upon his hands, to his great prejudice, several of all the fore∣mentioned Volumes, though many of them had a fair reception, by his munificent Friends and Patrons: And that his Majesties imployments calls him suddenly elsewhere, doth as he supposeth by very good advice propound an expeditious means to dispose of this his whole Stock in a few moneths, which else would not drop off Book by Book, in many years. And to those  are desirous of them at less than half their well known Price and Value, by putting them thus into the hands of  LOTTERY, who, though a blind dispencer of her favours, and oftener mistaking on the wrong side, than on the  send all those Adventurers, who are pleased to put in for their Chance, home contented more or less, since they To be ordered and disposed after this manner, FIRST, Whosoever will adventure for a Lot, may be pleased to put in fourtie Shillings, OF VVHICH These are the number and value. The first and greatest, containes these BOOKS. 1 Lot Numb. 1. His Majesties Entertainment passing through the City to His Coronation; and Coronation, Valued 2l. Aesops Fables Paraphrased, in Folio with Sculps and Annotations, never published before, Val. 3l. Homers Odysses Translated with Sculps and Anno∣tations, never Published, Val. 4l. Homers Iliads Translated, and already Published, Val. 5l. Virgil Translated with Sculps and Annotations, Val. 5l. A Royal Bible with Chorographical Sculps, Val. 5l. An Imperial Bible with Chorographical, and an hun∣dred Historical Sculps, Valued 25l. In all 49. Pounds. The second Prize contains. 1 Lot Numb. 2. One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, with Homers Works in two Volumes, Valued 34l. The third Prize. 1 Lot Num. 3. One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, and an English Virgil, Val. 30l. The fourth. 1 Lot Num. 4. One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, and a new Aesop, and the Kings Entertainment, Valued 30l. The fifth. 1 Lot Num. 5. One Imperial Bible with all the Sculps, Val. 25l. 25l. 1 Lots Num. 6. Twenty Prizes, each an Imperial Bible with Choro∣graphical Sculps, at twenty Pound a Lot, Val. 400l. 400l. The twenty sixth Prize. 5 Lots Num 7. One Entertainment, one Aesop, one Virgil, one Bible Royal, Homers Iliads and Odysses, Valued 25l. 25l. Four Lots more of the same Books, Val. 25l. 100l. Five Prizes each containing, 5 Lots Num.8. One Aesop, one Virgil, two Homers, Valued 17l. 85l. 5 Lots Num. 9. Five Prizes, one Virgil and two Homers, Valued 14l. 70l. 25 Lots N. 10. Twenty five Prizes, two Homers, Valued 9l. 225l. 90 Lots N. 11. Ninty Prizes, Bibles Verney Royal, Valued 5l. 450l. 90 Lots N. 12. Ninty Prizes Virgil, Translated, Valued 5l. 450l. 350 Lots N. 13. Three hundred and fifty Prizes, Homers Iliads Val. 5l. 1750l. 500 Lots N. 14. Five hundred Prizes, Odysses, Valued, 4l. 2000l. 500 Lots N. 15. Five Hundred Aesops, Valued 3l. 1500l. 225 Lots N. 16. Two Hundred and five and twenty Entertainments, Valued 2l. 450l. The number of Blanks, One; Which whosoever draws, shall be presented by the Author. His Majesties Entertainment, being the lowest Prize is a very fair and a scarce Book, valued at fourty Shillings, which is the money that is put in, and it is eight to one, if you draw not higher: The whole value of all the Books as they are apprized at above (being the prices they have been usually disposed at Book by Book) comes to 7620l. The number of Lotts in all 1820. at 40s. each, amounts to 3640l. So that the adventurers will have the Books above-said, for less then half of what they would yield in process of time Book by Book.
