P2185 17204303 106235
Imprimatur, C. Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Lond. a Sacris Domesticis. October 17. 1685.
THE LAW and EQUITY OF THE GOSPEL. OR THE Goodness of our Lord AS A LEGISLATOR. Delivered first from the Pulpit in Two plain Ser∣mons. And now Repeated from the Press, with others tending to the same End. To which is added, The Grand Inquiry to be made in These Inquisitive Times; to∣gether with The Resolution of Paul and Silas. AS ALSO An Improvement of That Inquiry, Containing, in its Parts, A Resolution unto It self. AND A Scriptural Prognostick of Jesus Christ's Second Advent to Judge the World. LASTLY A Proeservative against Ambition. By THOMAS PIERCE D. D. Chaplain in Ordi∣nary to his MAJESTY, and Dean of Sarum. London, Printed by S. Roycroft for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1686.
A PREFACE TO THE READER. Christian Reader, THô some Disputes are made Needful by needless Questions which are raised by 2 Tim. 2. 14. strife of Words; and thô when Malice, or Curiosity, Carnal Interest, or Ambition, have brew'd and broach∣ed such Doctrines, as are dishonourable to God, and his holy Gospel, or have a Ten∣dency to the Ruin of Church and State, The
greatest Lovers of Peace and Silence must so dispute against the Former, as by their Ar∣guments to assert and secure the Later; Thô the most peaceable Dr. Hammond, Iohannes Ox∣on in vitâ H. H. p. 45. et 53. the Best of Men, and Humfredus Sarum in Ope∣rum Hammondi Vol. 4. p. 853. The Divinest, (as two eminent Prelats have publickly stiled him from the Press,) thought it his Duty to be the Author of more Disputes and Defen∣satives, than I and my Betters have ever yet been, (as his Controversial Writings do make apparent, his second Volume being spent like the Eighth Volume of Erasmus) yet 'twere heartily to be wsh'd such powerful Courses could be taken, as might prevent the every Cause and Occasion of them. Experience tells us 'tis often easier, by Obstinate Silence to prevent, than by Reason to confute, or to shame an Error. And next to such a Resolved Silence, I know not any better Preventive of needless Controver∣sies and Questions, than our Mediting on Questions which are not needless; But of great Consequence to be asked, and of greater Necessity to be Answered. And such as to which we ought to give our selves 1 Tim. 4. 15. whol∣ly. As Acts 16. 30. what we must do that we
may be sav'd? What is the certain Matth. 7. 16, 19, 20, 21. Mark 16. 16. Di∣agnostick whereby to judge without Sin of our selves, and others? and as well of our present, as future state? What is that we call The Gospel? and wherein especially does It consist? What is it to be able to Eph. 3. 18, 19. com∣prehend with all Saints, the Breadth, and Length, and Depth, and Highth, and so to know the Love of Christ which passeth Knowledge? to know the Immensi∣ty of his Love, expressed to us (as by an Emblem,) by all the Dimensions of the Cross he was fastned to; Extended upwards, and downwards, and on Both the sides of it; a Type of the Fathomless love of Christ, whereof the Knowledge is supereminent, sur∣passing and transcending All other knowledges in the World. In so much that we may fit∣ly espouse our Apostles Resolution, 1 Cor. 2. 2. Not to know any thing in comparison of Je∣sus Christ, and Him Crucified; whereby is pithily represented The Law and Equity of The Gospel, which is the Summ of All the Theology a Faithful Steward needs Preach, to∣wards 1 Tim. 4. 16. the Saving of himself, and of Them that hear him.
And as in the Days of our Forefathers, when Christian Simplicity was at its purest, A vitious Life was justly reckon'd, not only the greatest, but the worst Haeresie in the World; So of Convictions, and Confutations, Reli∣gious Practices were the most Cogent.  (as St. Chrysostom some∣where calls them,) Convincing Syllogisms and Arguments, not to be answer'd by the A∣cutest, nor ever heartily gainsaid by the worst of men. And therefore as Controvert∣ed Doctrines have taken up much of my Time pass't, so These (I am sure) are the Grand Requisites, which 'twill be better to advance for the Time to come. I easily guess what will happen, to me and others of the Old Stamp, (the envied Friends and Disciples of Dr. Hammond,) whilst we ingage in This Course of Preaching up Christ as a Legislator; and of celebra∣ting The Law, as well as the Equity of The Gospel; of walking evenly in our Doctrines 'twixt two Extremes; to wit Socinians on the one side, and Solifidians on the other. Even the same that befell the Antient Fa∣thers of the Church; who for distinguishing
the Persons or Subsistences of the Deity, were called Tritheites and Arians by the Followers of Sabellius; and yet were called Sabellians too, both by the Tritheites and the Arians, for not dividing the very Sub∣stance, or the Deity it self. So for teach∣ing that our Saviour did consist of two Na∣tures, they were branded as Nestorians by the whole Sect of the Eutychians; and yet were stiled Eutychians too by all the Gang of the Nestorians, for asserting that our Savi∣our was no more than one Person. After the very same manner; We, for holding the Necessity of impartial Obedience to Christ's Commands, and (by consequence unavoidable) a Necessity of Good Works, as Part of the means of our being saved, do commonly pass for Socinians in the Rash Censure of Solifidians; and yet are accompted Solifidi∣ans by the like Rashness of the Socinians, for our disclaiming All Merit in our Obedi∣ence and Good Works, as to the making Satisfaction to the Justice of God for our Transgressions; and for desiring with St. Paul, To be found only in Christ,Philip. 3. 9. not having our own Righteousness,
But That which is of God by Faith. But we must not be afraid to assert and propagate The Truth, because there are who infer it from diverse Falshoods; Nor may we dishonestly let it go, for other mens hold∣ing it in unrighteousness. For for us toRom. 1. 18. deny our Obligation to Good Works, because there are who do contend for the Merit of them; or for us not to own the perfect Ne∣cessity of Obedience, which does naturally tend to the Glory of God, because Socini∣ans own the same to his great Dishonour; or for us not to infer it from the Divinity of our Saviour, (as well as from the Perfe∣ction both of his Covenant and his Com∣mands,) because such Haereticks do infer it from their Denial of His Divinity, and of his Plenary Satisfaction for the Sins of the World; is just as bad as if the Christians should now begin to dogmatize, That there are Three distinct Gods, (the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,) because The Jews and The Mahomedans do constantly hold there is but ONE.
I shall therefore so order the following Parts of my Design, betwixt the Enemies of Truth upon either side, as to hazard the displeasure of both Extreams. But yet be∣cause I am convinc'd by the best Searches I can make, That the preaching up of Faith in its vulgar Notions, hath been generally the Cause of such a Carnal Security, as hath shrunk up those Sinews of Vertuous Living, wherein the strength of Religion doth chief∣ly stand; and that Men are made Infidels (not to say Atheists) in their practice, by no means more, than by their Errours a∣bout the Nature and the great Privilege of the Gospel, and so of their Belief in the Lord Jesus Christ; I shall give such a By∣ass to my ensuing Meditations, as may in∣cline them most strongly to the Advantages of Obedience, and strict Converse. Whe∣ther by solving such Objections, as still remain to be Consider'd; or by the clear∣ing of such Scriptures, as men have Ap∣petites to obscure; or by shewing the A∣greement, of such as may seem to contra∣dict, or else by pointing at such Instru∣ctions, as all the Premisses put to∣gether
shall chance to yield us. And this I shall do, if God permit up∣on some future Opportunities; if This I pre∣sently lay hold on shall prove as worthy of Acceptation, as by Me it is well-intended. That it may, I think fit to premise before∣hand This Declaration: That if in any Thing I have spoken, I seem to have spoken some∣what Austerely; I have not done it with any particular Reflections, upon any man's Per∣son, alive, or dead. My Propositions are Universal, as well as True; and my Seve∣rities to the Guilty lye All in common. As many as find themselves concern'd, may make their personal and their private Applicati∣ons of my Reproofs; so as they carry it in their Memories, that I have made None at all. For the longer I live, the more I am of this Opinion, that Truth it self may be asserted, and Questions about it deci∣ded also, without reflecting upon the Per∣sons (thô we must intimate the Parties) from whom we differ. And here I am tempted to take Occasion (where None is offer'd) to tell my Reader for his Service, (if I can rightly apprehend
it,) that when I am now and then consulted by a young Student in Divinity, and a Candidate for the Priesthood, what kind of Cynosure he shall steer by, when he is newly launching forth in the vast Ocean of Theology; I do not presently direct him, (as Dr. Steward at St. Germans directed Me,) to begin with Vincentius Lirinensis; to proceed with Baronius and The Magdebur∣genses; Then with the Fathers of the Church for the first Three hundred years; Nor do I presently ingage him in the Learned and E∣laborate and laudable Method of Mr. Dod∣well, whose Parts, and Piety, his Patience, and his Pains-taking, many Theologues may imitate, but few can equal; But first I tell him, that the shortest and surest way, whereby to make himself a sufficient and sound Divine, is (next to his reading and revol∣ving the Word of God,) to study the Works of Dr. Hammond; beginning with his Annotations, at least with his Paraphrase on the New Testament, His Practical Ca∣techism, and His Book of Fundamentals. For I have been long of this Opinion; that He whose important Office it is, to be a Lea∣der
of other men in the Way of Truth, and either not at all to err, or else to err as inoffensively, as 'tis possible for him to do in a state of Frailty, will find it Safest to be a Follower of the most Excellent Dr. Ham∣mond, who (if any man ever was) was a Circumspect Follower of Jesus Christ. To whom be Glory for ever and ever.
ERRATA. PAge 13. line 17. read dear. and l. 18. r. dearer. p. 14. l. 12. after of r. That. p. 27. l. 3. in marg. r. . p. 31. l. 5. from the bottom, r. Receive. p. 53. l. 2. from the bottom, r. Good. p. 103. l. 10. in marg. r. c. 47. p. 106. l. 9. r. streight. and l. 18. after Them r. in. p. 110. l. 17. after option r. to be. p. 119. l. 18. r. Six and twentieth. p. 126. l. 5. in marg. r. tra. p. 216. l. 11. for at r. of. p. 253. l. 3. from the bottom, r. art. p. 277. l. 9. r. most Congregations do consist. p. 280. l. 10. after elegantly r. call's it. p. 313. l. 4. after Spouse) r. we are. p. 331. l. 19. after or, blot out to. p. 423. l. 7. after near add to. p. 431. l. 17. r. Modre∣vius. p. 433. l. 14. dele The. p. 434. l. 18. after and dele The. p. 485. l. 12. r. pro∣mised. p. 571. l. 18. r. especially. p. 704. l. 1. after is r. many thousand.
THE NECESSITY OF WEARING THE Yoke of Christ. JOHN XIII. 13. Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am. § 1. THat we may see how well the Text may be made suitable to the Time, both to the Day of the Month, and to the Buis'ness of the Day, we shall do well do bear in mind, throughout the Tenor of my Discourse, that our Saviour's last Supper did consist of two
parts. There was a Coena, and a Post-Coenium: which we may fitly enough express, by cal∣ling them the first, and the second Course. Our Saviour rose from the first, to wash and wipe his Disciples Feet, (v. 5.) which as soon as he had done, he sat him down unto the second, (v. 12.) And then designing to insti∣tute the tremendous Sacrament of his Body, he prepared his Communicants with these words following, (v. 13.) Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am. The word Lord, and the word Master do so agree in the Translation, and yet in the Original do so much differ, that we must bring in the Greek to explain the English, or else we shall miss of its full Importance. § 2.  is a word which refers to Pow∣er.  a word which relates to Know∣ledge.  is from , which properly signifies Authority; but  from , which properly signifies to Teach. Our blessed Saviour is the first in his Kingly Of∣fice, and the second in his Prophetical. He is [] a Lord, to protect and govern; He is [] a Master, to direct and teach us; And Both he is , in such a degree of supereminence, as is not common to him with
others; , THE Lord, and , THE Master. In as much as he is the Lord, we are to serve in his House; And in as much as he is the Master, we are to learn in his School. He is  the Lord, to stretch his Scepter over our Hearts; And  the Master, to light his Candle within our Heads. As a Master, he instructs us to know our Du∣ties; but as a Lord, he commands us to do them also. He is proposed to us as Both, for our Observance and Imitation. That looking on him as our Lord, we may be humble; and taking after him as our Master, we may be wise. § 3. And this which helps us to Under∣stand, may help us also to divide, and apply the Text. For First of all, If he is , which proper∣ly signifies a Lord, whose Prerogative it is to Command and Rule us; then must we pay him a strict obedience, in as much as we are his Subjects, or as being his Soldiers, and Servants too. (Such as promised in our Baptism to fight manfully under his Banner.) Secondly, If he is , which pro∣perly signifies a Master, whose property it is to instruct and teach us; then do we owe him
obedience too, as being his Followers and Dis∣ciples, placed under his Discipline, and trained up in his School. Thirdly, It follows by way of Inference from two expressions in the Text, (towit the first, and the last,) that he is not only to be called our Lord and Master, but to be serious∣ly received and own'd as such. For mark the manner in which he speaks. Ye call me Lord, and ye call me Master; and in that ye say well, because what ye call me, I truly am. But to say well, is one thing; and to do well, another. And therefore be∣cause I truly am what ye call me, be you as truly what you pretend. If I your Lord and your Master have washed your feet, re∣member then to do as ye have me for an Ex∣ample, and see that ye wash oneanothers feet. If they have called me Belzebub, who am the Master of the House; how much more should such as You (who are but some of my Houshold) be content to be called as bad, or worse? In the two first of these Particulars we have the Doctrin of the Text; and in the last we see the Use. Not an Use of my framing, but such as the Author of the Text was pleas'd
himself to draw from it for our Instruction. § 4. The Result of the Doctrin is briefly this. That we must not expect to live as Li∣bertines under Christ, who is not only our Elder Brother, to make us partakers of his In∣heritance; but our Lord and our Master, to make us obedient to his Commands. Not our Lord only to Save us, but especially our Lord to be served by us. Nor our Master only to teach us by the Veracity of his Doctrin, but more especially to reform us by the convin∣cingness of his Life. Our Lord and Master in the Text hath such a twofold Importance, as comes to one and the same end in the Ap∣plication. We may distinguish the Notions, but must not separate or divide them. They must be coupled in my Discourse, as here they are in the Subject of it. For as Scholars of Christ, we ought to imitate his Example; which how can we do, unless as Servants of Christ, we obey his Will? When Acts 1. 1. Iesus be∣gan both to do, and to teach, he taught accord∣ing to what he did. As were his Precepts, and his Doctrin, such exactly was his Life, and his Conversation. He led his Life by the Rule of the Moral Law; by his perfect obedi∣ence unto which, he was pleased to blunt the
edge, and to abate the Rigour of it. So that 'tis absolutely Impossible for us to follow his Example, unless by yielding our Obedience to his Commands. We cannot embrace him as a Master, unless we receive him as a Lord too. § 5. And with this I am desirous to fill my Readers so much the rather, because I take it to be a point, concerning which as it is dangerous, so it is easie for us to err. And so much the easier, because it is acceptable and pleasant to the natural Appetites of the flesh, to look on Christ as a Redeemer, but no∣thing else. To entertain him as a Lamb, fit to be fed upon at his Table, whereby we may be nourished to Life Eternal; But not at all as a Shepherd to guide and govern us, and by the strictness of his Discipline, to keep us from straying out of his Pastures. For let us look a little within us, and examin our own hearts by our own experience. Do we not natural∣ly esteem it an happy Thing, to have as much of this World as we know what to do with? as much as we can sacrifice to all our Senses? to live in as great a superfluity of Sports and Pleasures, as a Tiberius can in joy, or a Petronius think of? And (when we are deeply run in debt by our expenseful Sen∣sualities)
to have all our Debts paid out of Another man's purse, all our recknings made even, Acquittances put into our hands, and nothing more required to be done on our parts, than to believe we owe nothing, and that if by continuing in our Exorbitant expences we plunge our selves in new Debts, they shall all be discharged out of the very same Trea∣sure? Nay, is it not yet a more pleasing Er∣ror, a more delicious kind of mistake and mad∣ness, to think our Debts were all remitted be∣fore we were able to contract them? And then with a greater force of Reason, Are we not apt to look on Them (I do not say as the most rational, but) as the most comforta∣ble Preachers, who bring us Tidings even from Heaven, that all our Duties are done already by Another man's obedience in our be∣half? that all our Sins are discounted by Ano∣ther man's Sufferings? all our Punishments inflicted upon Another man's Shoulders? And that 'tis safe for us to Sin, upon con∣dition we despair not of being pardon'd, but believe without doubting that we were justified from Eternity, and that our Sins were all for∣given before they could possibly be commit∣ted? not only all the Sins that are, but all that shall be?
§ 6. I need not say who they are, by whom this Carnal Christianity is preach't and printed; Nor can we choose but confess, that to the men who have embraced this pre∣sent world, as did Demas, (the men who are afraid there is a Heaven, because it infers there is a Hell too, the men who live after the flesh, and most pretend unto the Spirit, the men who pray and despise dominion, the men who praise God and defraud their Neigh∣bour,) it is an admirably pleasant and glad∣som Doctrin. And this I take to be the Reason, why so much of the Libertine doth shew it self with bare face in the Christian world. For what the Sons of Disobedience do think most pleasant, they do passionately desire to have most true. All their Wits are set on work to find our Arguments and Reasons, whereby to evince it, and make it good. What soever they feed upon is so exceedingly fer∣mented by this four Leven, that the wholsom∣est of meats is made to nourish their Disease; and none so much, as the Bread of Life. Even Sermons and Sacraments are most per∣verted to their destruction. And therefore the Tendency of Opinions ought to be dili∣gently Weigh'd. For when men's Opinions
in Religion are gratifications to the Flesh, and when they are Servants to those Opini∣ons, and transported with the pleasure of be∣ing Such, there is hardly any passage in all the Scriptures, which they will not prevail with to sound that way. But seeing the Ioy and Contentment which is wont to arise from a pleasing Falshood, is but like the Ioy of Hypocrites, exceeding Job 20. 5. short, and cannot last any longer than a Natural man's life, (which, if it continue till he is old, is much too young to be but the childhood of Aeternity,) we ought to look upon Them as our surest Friends, who are so curteously severe, as to awaken us out of our Reverie; not permitting us to go on in our merry Dream, for fear it prove a dead sleep by long continuance, whose danger will not be discern'd, until we awake in Another world. § 7. They indeed do say truth, who say that Christ is our Saviour, our Sacrifice, our Elder Brother, and our Advocate, and that by him we are redeemed from the Curse of the Law; (Gal. 3. 13.) But nothing hurts more than Truth it self, when 'tis not solidly and wholly, but only partially deliver'd. And they
say not the whole Truth, until they add this unto all the rest, that Christ is our Joh. 13. 13, 14. Master, our Joh. 13. 34. Gal. 6. 2. Lawgiver, our Rev. 19. 16. King, and our Mic. 5. 1. Iudge; and that he came not to abrogate, but to perfect the Law. To fulfil it, saith the Eng∣lish; To fill it up, saith the Greek; for  is the word, Matth. 5. 17. Hence there∣fore I shall argue the obligation lying upon us, that we exceed the Iews as much, by our obeying the moral Law, as They did us, by their obeying the Ceremonial. And this I shall do by three such steps or Degrees, as may serve for three Rounds of a Iacob's Lad∣der; whose Bottom, although it touch the Earth, yet it reacheth at the Top within the Heavens. § 8. First, If Christ were nothing more than our Lord and Master, we must be con∣cluded to be his Servants; because they are Relative and Correlative, which do mutual∣ly infer the one the other. And were we no∣thing more to him than hired Servants, we could not sure but be obliged to do his work: which is not only to believe he is true, and righteous, and will pay us the wages which he hath promis'd; But (over and above) it is to
come when he calls, to go when he sends, and to do what he bids us, without exception, or delay. For was it ever yet the work of an hired Servant, to believe that his Master is an honest meek man, who first will suffer himself with patience to be abused by his Servant, and then besides his forgiveness, will give him al∣so a great Reward? No. 'Tis the keeping of his Commandments which is the Doing of his work; And that is strictly recommended by Christ himself, as the  or touchstone whereby to judge what we are; whether lo∣ving, or faithful, or knowing Servants. If lo∣ving Servants, we will keep his Command∣ments, Iohn 14. 15. If faithful Servants, we will be sure to do whatsoever he commands us, Iohn 15. 14. If knowing Servants, and such as know that we know him, his best beloved Servant tells us, we will keep his Commandments, 1 Iohn 2. 3. Still the keeping his Command∣ments is as 'twere the great Vein, carrying spirits and life throughout the Body of the Gospel, that is, Health and Salvation to them that read it. Let men write never so much; let them Dispute never so well for the cause of Christ; or let them preach never so often; this
at last will be the product and Sum of All, Fear God, and keep his Commandments. And there∣foreEccles. 12. 13. the keeping of his Commandments, which is the doing of his work, is every where set be∣fore us as the only-sufficient Proof, or Demon∣stration, that we do not only call him our Lord and Master, but that we practically re∣ceive him as truly such. But this is not all. § 9. For he is such a Lord and Master, as deserves more of us than bare obedience; in as much as he hath not only hired us, but hath bought us out-right. So said St. Paul to his Corinthians, We are not our own, for we are1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. bought with a Price. And therefore if he had been pleas'd, he might justly of Servants have made us Slaves. Lord! how exactly should we be dutiful to this our Master, if we would only do for him, as we would that our Servants should do for us? we look for absolute, impartial, universal obedience, from a Servant only hired from year to year. And sure much more from such a Servant, as is bound in an Apprentiship for six or seven. Much more yet from such a Servant, as we have bought out of the Gallies, and dearly paid for, and made as much our Peculium, as ei∣ther
our Sheep, or our Oxen, or as the Fur∣niture of our House. But now the blessed Lord and Master speaking to us in my Text, hath bought us all from what is worse than the Turkish Gallies; even as much as a Lake of Fire and Brimstone is worse than a Sea of Salt and Water. Nor must we serve him the less (with the Antinomians,) but rather the more for our being bought: because being bought, we cannot possibly be our own; And sure the less we are our own, the more we must needs be his that bought us; He having bought and deliver'd us out of the hands of our Enemies, as well to the end that we might Luke 2. 74. serve him, as to the end that we might be safe. He bought us for his own sake, as well as ours. We indeed were deer to him, but he was deerer unto himself. The very Disgraces which he suffer'd as having a Tendency to our Good, were first and chiefly suffer'd by him as having a Tendency to his Glory. And however he intends our present Good, in or∣der to our Future Glory; yet he intends our Glory too, so far forth as 'tis in order, and sub∣ordination unto his own. So that if when he bought us, and made us His, he aymed
sooner at his own Glory, than our Salvati∣on, it cannot but follow from that supposal, he aymed sooner at our Salvation from the Tyranny of Sin, than from the Torments of Hell as the wages of it. And this he did as for his own sake, so very particularly for ours. I say for ours; because the Tor∣ments of Hell could not possibly come neer us, were it not for the Tyranny and Filth of Sin. When men do sin as with a Isa. 5. 18. Cartrope, (to use the Phrase of the Prophet Esa,) with the strength of the Cartrope, they draw Hell to them. But especially for his own; because the Tyranny of Sin is an impudent Rebellion against his Will, and immediately tendeth to his Dishonour; whereas the Torments of Hell are great Discouragements from Sin, and executions of vengeance on them that do it. Hell is God's Bridewell, or House of Correcti∣on; but Sin is that Tyrant which drags us thither. Hell is God's Creature, but Sin is Satan's. The Torments of Hell are extream∣ly useful, as well to satisfie the Iustice, as to set forth the Glory of our Creator; whereas the Tyranny of Sin doth oppose itself against Both. In so much that the Reasons are great,
and many, why we are bought with a Price by our Lord and Master, that we might live in obedience to Him that bought us. Sin was the object of his Hatred, for being the subject of his Dishonour; And therefore the Scope of our Saviour's Purchase, was rather to purifie, than to forgive us, although it was to forgive us too. To forgive in the second place, thô to purifie in the first. According to the Method St. Peter us'd in his Preaching; Re∣pent and be converted, that your Sins may be blot∣ted out, (Acts 3. 19.) Without Repentance and Conversion, no such Blessing as Forgiveness can ever be. § 10. But neither is This the greatest Ti∣tle, our Saviour hath to his being our Lord and Master. For as he hath not only hired, but bought us out-right, so neither hath he bought us with any Corruptible things, as Sil∣ver, or Gold, or pretious Stones, but with his own most pretious Blood, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Now had we been People never so lovely, or been worth never so much, he could not have bought us with more expense; He could not have paid at a Deerer Rate; even Almightiness it∣self could not have given more for Us. For
he that bought us was the Word, the Word that was in the Beginning, the Word that was with God, the Word that was God, the Word by whom all things were made, (John 1. 3.) And sure the Word that was God, was Almightiness itself; Add He it was who gave himself for us, (Tit. 2. 14) And more than Himself he could not give. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, Rom. 11. 36. & Heb. 2. 10. § 11. Lord! by how many Rights and Titles, may He pretend to our obedience when he commands us? All the Relations of sub and supra are made use of in Scripture for our Conviction. Not only here in This Text, is he said to be our Lord, and we his Servants; He our Master, and we his Scholars; But he is every thing to us (in other passages of Scrip∣ture) which may oblige us to the Love, and the Service of him. He (for Example) is our Head, and we his Members. He our Bridegroom, and we his Spouse. He is our Shepherd, and we the Sheep of his Pasture. He our Everlasting Father, and we his Chil∣dren. He our King, and we his Subjects. He is our God, and we his People. He our
Potter, and we his Clay. He our Creator, and we the work of his hands. And as if all this together were hardly enough to indear him to us, He is also our Redeemer, and we the Price of his Blood. Now to what purpose, or for what reason, should our Saviour be said to be All this to us throughout the Scriptures, unless it were to afford us this general Lesson, That whatsoever can be due, in any measure, from any Inferiour to a Superiour, of any Quality or Degree, the same is due in perfection, and out of all measure, from Us to Christ. In one Capacity our Love, our Fear in ano∣ther, our veneration in a third, our meek submission in a fourth, our delectation in a fift, our admiration in a sixt, our perfect dependence in a seventh, and our absolute obe∣dience in every one. 'Twould be a profitable Impertinence (if an Impertinence) to insist on this Last, from every one of our Saviour's Relations to us. But not to run out be∣yond the time which is allow'd for this Ser∣vice, I shall press it no farther, than the Text and the Context will give me warrant. § 12. First then let us consider, that see∣ing our Saviour is , a Master to
Teach, and to Instruct us; nor only so, but also  a Lord, to Command, and Govern us; It is not only our Duty, to learn the knowledge of his Doctrin, as his Disciples; but withal as his Servants, we must yield obedi∣ence to his Commands. For if we follow him as a Master sent to principle, and teach us, and nothing else; so that as Scholars of his School we hold his sentiments or tenets, and entertain his Propositions as sure and certain, but go no farther; what then do we more by way of Reverence to Christ, than the se∣veral Sectaries of the world to the several Authors of their Opinions, whether their o∣pinions are true, or false? shall we be fol∣lowers only of Christ, as they of Geneva are of Calvin, or as they of Helvetia do follow Zuinglius, or as they of Saxony follow Lu∣ther, or as the brethren of Scotland do fol∣low Knox? shall we be factious only for Christ, as the Franciscans are for Scotus, and the Dominicans for Aquinas? Nay shall we follow Christ no otherwise, than as the Sto∣icks did Zeno, or the Academicks, Plato? or as Iulian did Iamblicus, and the old Ma∣gi, Zoroastres? shall we think we are Chri∣stians
good enough to serve turn, for having been baptiz'd in the name of Christ, and for historically believing his holy Gospel? the very Scholars of Pythagoras were most exactly of his Creed, and great Admirers of his Philosophy, and perfectly led by his . His Mouth was their Oracle; his words their Text; what he said, they were sworn to, because He said it. And shall we who are Christians give no more Reverence unto Christ, than the old Pythagoreans were wont to give unto Pytha∣goras? or than the Turks at this day do give to Mahomed? shall we live as if we believ'd, that Christianity is but a Sect, if not a Fa∣ction? And that nothing is to be done, but to be orthodox Professors, embracing the  (as the Heathen call'd it,) that is, the Doctrin, or Tenet, or Faith of Christ? whilst at the very same time we do abjure him by our neglects, revile him by our Oaths, spit upon him by our uncleanness, buf∣fet him by our Blasphemies, strip him by our Sacriledge, and even Murder him by our Rage? methinks the Blindness of the Heathen may be of some vertue to clear our Eyes. For the Disciples of Pythagoras did not only
give assent to their Master's Dictates, but also did imitate his Example, and were obe∣dient to his Commands. Just as Alexander's Soldiers did so ambitiously affect to be like their General; that they were loath to speak plainly, because He stutter'd. Or as the Scholars of Plato were so exceedingly con∣cern'd to have a similitude with their Master, that they espoused his Deformities, and prided themselves in his Imperfections. They would have Cushions under their Dublets, because he was Gibbous, or too thick Back't. So de∣voted they were to their Master Plato, that because he was not strait, they would reckon none hansom who were not Crooked. § 13. Lord! what a shame it is for Chri∣stians, to be less conformable to a Master, who is infinitely fairer than the Children ofPsal. 45. 2. men, most accomplished and perfect in every kind? And yet we know without Obedience we cannot possibly be conformable, either to his Precepts, or his Example. For notwith∣standing he was a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffer'd, (Heb. 5. 8.) And being made perfect through suffrings, he thereupon became the Author of Eternal
Salvation, (not to them that believe him on∣ly, but) to them that obey him also, (v. 9.) not to any Believing Rebels, not to Treacherous Believers, of which the world is too full; but to them who have Faithfulness, as well as Faith; who so believe, as to serve him, and do his Will. He is not the Author of Salva∣tion to them that know it, but do it not; or to them who do promise, but not perform it. (For almost All do know his Will, and all do promise to perform it, not only in their Baptism, but over and above on their Bed of Sickness.) No to Them, and Them only, is he the Author of Salvation, who live accord∣ing to what they know; and justifie their Promise, by their Performance. Our Savi∣our intimates by a parable (Matth. 21. 28, 29, 30, 31.) that the obedient Churl is much better, than the mealymouth'd Rebel. It is a vain thing to say, we are Sons of God, and Servants of Christ, unless we practically Shew, as well as Say it. A Son honoureth his Father, and a Servant his Master (said God hereto∣fore by the Prophet Malachi;) If I then be aMal. 1. 6. Father, where is mine honour? if I be a Ma∣ster, where is my Fear? Now what was thus
said to others, by God the Father under the Law, is as effectually said to us, by God the Son under the Gospel. Luke 6. 46. Why call ye me Lord Lord, and do not the things that I say? To say, Sir your Servant, is either a Complement, or a Ieer, when we say it with our Lips, but with∣out our Actions. And this doth seem to be intended by the words of my Text, if we compare it with the Inference deduced from it. Ye call me Lord and Master, and ye say well. But to say very well, is not sufficient; For the Mat. 8. 29. Mar. 5. 6, 7▪ Luk. 8. 28, 30. Devils said well, in saying that Christ was the Son of God. And the World∣ling Mat. 19. 20. said well, in that he said unto our Sa∣viour of the Commandments of the Law, All these things have I kept from my Youth. But not every one that saith unto me Lord Lord,Mat 7. 21. shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; for the Life of Christianity consists in Practice. And therefore the Inferences are These, which☞ are drawn from the Text by Him that spake it. If I then your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash oneanother's feet, (v. 14.) If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, (v. 16.) And by the same Logick he argues in the very next
Chapter, which is another part of his Fare∣well-Sermon: If any man love me, he will keep my words, (v. 23.) and He that loveth me not, keepeth not my words, (v. 24.) which is as if he should have said, [He that loves me will o∣bey me, and do the Things that I appoint him; which if any man does not, let him say what he will, he does not Love me.] For no good Tree can bear ill Fruit, (that's an Aphorism of Christ, Matth. 7. 18.) there is not any thing more impossible, than that sincere Love, and a solid Faith, should ever bring forth Rebellion, and Disobedience. (Or so much as consist with that which does.) No, no moreLuk. 6. 43, 44, 45, 46. Jam. 3. 12. than a Vine can bring forth Thorns, or no more than a Fig Tree can bring forth Thistles. From whence the Sequel is Unavoidable, That if we do not justly Obey our Master, we neither heartily Love him, nor do we cordially believe him. For let our Faith and our Love be what they can be, they are no more than a Couple of Trees, which must be known by their Fruit. That's the great Diagnostick commended to us by our Saviour, whereby to judge of ourselves and others, Matth. 7. 20. If the Fruit is Disobedi∣ence
to the Commandments of our Lord; then the Love that is pretended is but a Thorn, and the Faith so much talk't of, an arrant Thistle. Let the Lover or the Believer be commonly call'd what he will, either a Vine, or a Fig Tree, A Godly man, or a Saint; And let the Leaves or the Branches be ne∣ver so specious to the Eye, (I mean Professi∣ons, and Shews, and Forms of Godliness,) YetMatth. 3. 10. our Master's Affirmation is still as true, as it is Terrible, Every Tree [without exception] which bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the Fire, (Matth. 7. 19.) Lord! what a change of men's manners☞ would this one word produce, were it but throughly Understood, or but sufficiently con∣sider'd? had it the happiness to be taken, as well into the Hearts, as the Ears of men? behold the only sure way whereby to judge without Sin of our selves or others. If we are fraudulent persons, or Drunckards, if we are Schismaticks, or Rebels, if we are Slanderers, or Railers, or fals Accusers, or any other∣ways abounding in the fruits of the Flesh, (Gal. 5. 19.) 'tis plain that God, when he cuts us down, will also cast us into the Fire. I
say he will and must do it, because of his Iustice and Veracity, unless Repentance step in timely 'twixt Us, and Death. And still, by Repentance, I mean Amendment. Not an empty confession that we have sin'd, nor yet a cheap wishing we had not sin'd; no nor ex¦pressions of Attrition for having sin'd; but a bringing forth fruits meet for Repentance; A Renovation of the outward and inward man; such a thorow Reformation as does make a 2 Cor. 5. 17. New Creature; A Change of mind, and of manners, even the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5. 22. In a word; If we are not our own, but are bought with a Price, and bought out right by our Lord and Master, and that as to the whole of us, both Soul and Body; Then (as St. Paul does well infer) let us glorify him that bought us both in our Bodies and in our Souls, because they are not truly ours, but his that bought them, 1 Cor. 6. 20. § 14. But there is yet another Lesson to be derived from this Doctrin, and such as our Master in the Text has taught us how to draw from it by his Example. For it being to be praemised, that the Disciple is not above hisMatth. 10. 24. John 13. 16. Master, nor the Servant above his Lord; we
must not only do as our Master did, But (when God shall call us to it,) it is our Duty also to suffer, as he hath suffer'd. First we must do as our Master did; For 'tis his own way of arguing in the next verse after my Text; If I your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash oneanother's feet; for I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done. Here he argues from his being our Lord and Master, the ob∣ligation lying upon us to give an active obe∣dience to his example, and (by way of con∣secution) to his Command. And this being so, what manner of men ought we to be in the2 Pet. 3. 11. course of our Lives and conversations? we ought to Love oneanother, as He did Us; not only unto the Death, but to the fulfilling of the Law too. And how far are they from that, who are (, that is) Inventors of evil things? of Lyes, and Slan∣ders, and most malitious Accusations, a∣gainst a People more Innocent, and better Reputed than themselves? This is not to do as we would be done by. Much less is it to love our Neighbour as ourselves. Much less yet to love our friends, as our Lord loved us
when we were his Enemies. To be Imita∣tors of Christ, (which men must be, if they will be Christians,) we ought to . Chry∣sost. serve one∣another, as he did us; yea to serve our In∣feriours, as he did His; and that with such a kind of Service, as is the washing of their feet. And his reason to inforce it is chiefly this, [the Disciple is not above his Master, the Servant is not above his Lord, and I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done.] But now besides that this Ar∣gument does evince the moral Necessity of our Active obedience and conformity to his Ex∣ample and Command; it also shews us our obligation of having a fellowship with hisPhilip. 3. 10. suffrings, and a conformity to his Death, which connotates our Passive obedience also; and is the main thing intended in this second Lesson the Context yields us. § 15. For when he had said to his Dis∣ciples, that he would shortly send them out as so many Sheep amongst Wolves, from whom their usual entertainment should be to be per∣secuted, and hated, and to be scourged in their Synagogues, and all for the sake of him that sent them, (Matth. 10. 17. &c.) he labour'd
to give them an acquiescence in all their Suffrings, from this one single Considera∣tion, that 'tis enough, for the Disciple, if he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord, (v. 24.) If they have called the Master of the House Belzebub, how much more shall they call them of his Household? (v. 25.) There he argues from his being our Lord and Ma∣ster, the obligation lying upon us, to suffer the evils which he hath suffer'd. Then if at any time we shall fall into the Enmity of the World, into a Cross or Disgrace which is un∣deserved; we may relieve ourselves enough with this one Remembrance, That 'tis the friendship of the world which is enmity with God, (James 4. 4▪) and that 'tis well for the Servant, if he be as his Lord; we must not be ambitious to be above him▪ It will be use∣ful to expostulate and reason the matter with∣in ourselves. Shall we be such mad Disciples, as to expect, or but desire, to fare any bet∣ter than our Master? shall we be such over∣nice, or such delicate Servants, as to repine at those hardships, which were the Portion of our Lord? shall we expect to be applaud∣ed, and well reported by all the world, not
only by the Best, but by the worst of men also, when our Blessed Lord and Master is call'd a winebibber, a Glutton, an Hypocrite and a Deceiver, a Blasphemer, and a Boute∣feux, a Conjurer, and a Demoniack? or shall we shamelesly be seeking great things for our∣selves, whilst our Master is the outcast and Scorn of men? (when he who is at once the King, and also the Bishop of our Souls, is trod∣den down into the Dust, It may seem a thing improper, an Absurdity, and a Soloecism for us to prosper.) Shall we who are not our own, but are bought out right by our Master Christ, be either so arrogant, or so stately, as to be stretching our selves on Couches, and Beds of Ivorie, whilst he our Lord, and our Lawgiver, our King, and our Head, our Advocate and our Iudge too, is either grov'ling upon the Earth in a bloody sweat, or stretched out upon the Cross in Tears of blood, as well as Brine? shall we be drinking wine in Bowles, (like theAmos. 6. 6. Wantons of whom we read in the Prophet Amos,) whilst our Master cry's out, he is a thirst, and has nothing wherewith to quentch it, but the Cup of Trembling and Astonish∣ment, not only sharp as vineger, but bitter as
Gall too? shall we be crowning our selves withWisd. 2. 8. Rosebuds, (like the Atheists of whom we read in the Book of Wisdom,) whilst our Lord and Master's Diadem is made of Thornes? shall we be dancing to the sound of the Viol, whilst His Ears are bored through with the most sharp-pointed Sarcasms, that the Wit of Insul∣tation can well invent? Let us look upon the Case in another colour, and admit it were our own. Would we not wonder at such a Servant, and think him mad, who should affect to eat finer, and take less pains, to be much better clad, and to lye softer than his Master? It is enough then for us, that we fare at least as well as our Master Christ; that we suffer no more, than to be spit upon, and buffeted, and scourg'd, and Crucified. If a Christian is but beggar'd, or if but rail'd at, and slander'd for conscience sake, he fares a great deal better than his Master Christ did; if he is Crucified, or hang'd, he fares no worse. The Thought of which will be suf∣ficient, (if we are qualified with Faith,) to make us smile upon our suffrings when they are wrongfully cast upon us, and to furnish us with Patience (if not with Pleasure) in all
our Pains. I say with Pleasure, because our Master taught his Disciples, to Rejoice in that Case, and to leap for Ioy; for that is the English of our Saviour's , Matth. 5. 12. Rejoice (saith he to his Disciples) and leap for joy, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak all manner of evil against you falsly, for my Sake. § 16. Thus having seen the obligation, laid upon us by Iesus Christ as our Lord and Master, both to imitate his Example, and to yield obedience to his Commands, as well by doing him Passive, as Active Service; I shall conclude with the Necessity, the Indispensa∣ble Necessity we all are under, either of rising to life eternal, if we accomplish this Conditi∣on; or of incurring (if we do not) by so much the greater Condemnation. For let our Professions be what they will, of Faith in Christ as a Redeemer; we cannot own him as a Master, Unless we are Followers of his Life; nor without sincere obedience, can we Recive him as a Lord. And yet unless we so receive him, He will not then receive us, in the great day of Discrimination, when he shall solemn∣ly put a Difference betwixt the Wheat, and the
Chaff, taking the one into his Garner, and burning up the other with Fire unquentcha∣ble. For not to him, who hides his Talent in the Earth; much less to him, who vainly throws it into the Aire; But to him who does employ and improve his Talent, the righteous Judge of all the world will use that Sentence of Approbation, (Matth. 25. 21.) Well done thou good and faithful Servant, Enter thou in∣to the Ioy of thy Lord. From whence it fol∣lows as unavoidably, as that God cannot lye, That we must All without exception be first well Doers, we must first of all be good and Faithful Servants, before the Iudge can say to us, well done good and faithful Ser∣vants. And yet again he must be able to say That to us, before he can possibly bid us Enter into the Ioy of our Lord. He can∣not say well done, to an Evil Doer; He can∣not call him a Faithful, who is an unfaithful Servant; He cannot say Come ye blessed, and Enter ye into the Ioy of your Lord, to whom the Sentence of Go ye Cursed into everlasting Fire does of right belong. § 17. And if these things are so; then as we tender the greatest Interest both of our
Bodies and of our Souls. Let no man cozen us to Hell, by making us believe we are sure of Heaven. Beware of Comfortable Preachers (as they that love to be flatter'd do fasly call them,) who either write or speak much in the Praise of Faith, But in Disparagement of obedience to the Com∣mandments of our Lord. And often quarrel at the necessity of being rich in good works, as if Salvation were to be had at a cheaper Rate. Let me put the case home, as well to others as to myself, in the fewest words. Have we an earnestness of Desire to live for ever in Bliss and Glory? or are we careless and indifferent what shall become of us hereafter? Do we seriously believe an Immortality of our Souls, a Life after Death, and a Day of Iudgment? Or do we but talk of these things in civility to the men a∣mongst whom we live? if we are in good earnest in the Rehearsal of the Creed, of the two last Articles in particular, the Resurrecti∣on of the Body, and the Life everlasting; Then let the Condition of the New Covenant abide forever in our Remembrance. And seeing this is the Condition on which the promise of
Salvation is given unto us, that we receive and own Christ as our Lord and Master, as our Saviour, and our Prince, as our Advo∣cate, and our Iudge too; And that we so own him in our Lives, as well as in our Beliefes, as well in our practice, as specula∣tion; Let us not flatter ourselves for shame (as so many Traytors to our own Souls,) that Salvation will be found upon easier Termes. For to such as cannot pretend to be Babes, or Ideots, or never to have liv'd within the sound of Christ's Gospel, the words of the Apostle are very positive and Express, That without Holiness and Peace, (that is to say, without our Du∣ties both to God, and to our Neighbour,) No man living shall see the Lord, Hebr. 12. 14. And this I think may suffice us to have learn't at this time from the Text in hand. For thô I say not that these are All, yet these Especially are the Lessons we are con∣cern'd to draw from it, and such as wil∣lingly flow to us from its most rational Importance.
Now to him who is able to do ex∣ceeding abundantly above all that we are able to ask or think, according toEphes. 3. 20, 21. the power that worketh in us, unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Je∣sus, throughout all Ages, world with∣out end.
THE Yoke of Christ Easier than That of MOSES: AND HIS Burden a Refreshment to such as Labour. MATTH. XI. 30. For my Yoke is Easy, and my Burden is light. (A Text not unsuitable to all the Se∣verities of the Lent, which is (if St. Ierome may be believ'd, and o∣ther Fathers more antient,) of Apostolical Institution. A Time sequester'd by That Autority, for the Exercise and Practice of Christian Strictness, expressed pithily in my
Text, by our bearing both the Burden and Yoke of Christ.) § 1. The Affinity and Connexion is as obvi∣ous, as it is close, betwixt my present, and former Text. For it was the last Ser∣vice which I perform'd in this Place, to shew how Christ is our Lord and Master. Such as he was pleas'd to assert himself, in the thirteenth of St. Iohn, at the thirteenth verse. It now remains that we Contemplate the Moderation of the Laws, whereby our Lord is exceeding Gratious, and our Master extreamly Good. For it seems not sufficient that he is known to be a Lord, in Exacting obedience to his Commandments, unless he be as well known to be good and gratious, in that his Commandments are not grievous. (Nothing neer so insupportable as they were thought by those Gnosticks St. Iohn alludes to, 1 Iohn 5. 3. who fell away from Chri∣stianity, and disown'd Christ himself, for fear their Loyalty and obedience should cost them dear; living then, as they did, in Times of Trial, and Persecution;) He is our Lord, and our Master, in respect of the Yoke with which he binds, and in regard of the Burden
wherewith he loads us. But this our Master is Good, and our Lord Gratious, in respect of the Easiness which he gives unto the one, and in regard of the Lightness wherewith he qualify's the other. But § 2. Our Translation, however True, is so far short of the Original, that (as be∣fore, so now also,) the Greek must come in to assist the English, or else we shall miss of its whole Importance. For 'tis not only my Yoke is Easy, But , my Yoke is Good. My Yoke is profitable and useful. My Yoke is an indearing and delectable Yoke. For all this and more is imported by the word , as Lexicographers and Glossa∣ries do make apparent. That is, (to express it without a Metaphor) The Service of Christ is a most gratious, and Desirable Service. What he commands us to perform, is not only very possible, but facil and easy to be perform'd. Nor only so, but sweet and pleasant in the performance. It is not only our Bounden Duty, but 'tis our Interest, our Delight, our Reward to serve him. § 3. And such as the Yoke is with which he binds, such is also the burden wherewith
he loads us. Whatsoever his Burden may here import. If the Burden of his Precepts, then 'tis absolutely light. For then the Bur∣den and the Yoke are Terms aequivalent. The lightness of the one explains the Easiness of the other; and the later clause of the Text is but an Exegesis of the former. Or admit that by his Burden is meant the Bur∣den of his Cross; yet even then we must confess it is comparatively light. And so in∣deed it is in two considerable respects. First in respect of the endless punishment, which will fall upon Them that refuse the Burden; and again in respect of that unspeakable Re∣ward, which will be given unto them that shall take it up. The Cross of Christ at its heaviest is but a Burden of Afflictions, which St. Paul accompts light for these two reasons. First because it is but for a moment; next be∣cause it works for us a far more exceeding and2 Cor. 4. 17. eternal weight of glory. For as the same A∣postle saith to the same Corinthians, (what seems at first hearing a contradiction,) , that That which was glorious was not glorious at all, in respect of the2 Cor. 3. 10. glory which excelleth. So 'tis as true That
our Afflictions are no Afflictions, in comparison with the Beatitudes which they work for us as our Reward. § 4. This is the meaning of the Text consider'd simply in it self. Wherein are two Things especially which offer them∣selves to our Consideration. First the Greatness of Christ in the Extent of his Authority; and Secondly his Goodness, in the merciful use or employment of it. First his Greatness is very evident, in that he has the power to impose a Yoke, and a Burden. A Yoke of Injunctions upon our Necks, and a Burden of Suffrings upon our Backs. Next his Goodness is as apparent, from the easiness of the one, and from the lightness of the other. For besides That Eternal and exceeding weight of Glory, which gives an easiness to the Yoke, however hard; and a lightness to the Burden, however heavy; The one is so easy in it self, and the other in it self is so truly light, (considering that dolor, si gravis, brevis, is just as much, as si longus, le∣vis,) that even the Yoke of his Injunctions does
give us Freedom, and the Burden of his Suf∣frings affords us strength. If we put them both together, they make a Text without length extremely copious; for it exhibits to us at once the Law and E∣quity of the Gospel. The Yoke and the Bur∣den do prove the first, as the easiness and the lightness infer the second. It serves to keep us in the Fear, and the Faith of Christ. For first the nature of a Yoke implies a Bridle to our Presumption; and then the easiness of this Yoke does also forbid us to despair. Christ is here both in his Kingly, and Priestly Office; at once to rule, and to bless us too. He is an Absolute Soveraign, because to Him it does belong to put a Yoke upon our Necks, But yet withal he is a good and a Gratious So∣veraign, because It is not only easy, but gives us ease too. And though it may some∣times vex the Body, yet it brings Vers. 29. Rest unto the Soul. The Reason of which is wrapt up in the causal For, being consider'd in its Retrospect on the Verse going before. Where no sooner had he said, Take my Yoke, and ye shall find rest; but immediatly it follows,
For, or Because my Yoke is easy. And this again affords us a double Reason, for which we should come at his Invitation, (v. 28.) First because my Yoke is easy, Therefore come un∣to me; Next because it is so gratious as to give Rest unto your Souls, Therefore come unto me all ye that labour. And this is the meaning of the Text in its relation to the Context. § 5. To Contract my meditations with∣in the compass of the time, and withal to go forwards with the design I have in hand, (which is not only to shew the Law, but also the Equity of the Gospel,) I must not now consider Christ in the extent of his Authority, as he is , (that is to say) an Absolute unaccomptable Master, to whom of right it does belong to impose a Yoke, and a Burden; (for That was properly the Sub∣ject of the last Service which I perform'd;) But only in the exercise and usage of it, as he is , (that is to say) a Mild, and a Gratious Master; whose Commands are so far from being burdensom and grievous, that e∣ven his Yoke makes us able to bear his Bur∣den, and his Burden does enable us to wear
his Yoke. At which Paradox to Nature if any Natural man stumble, he may illu∣strate it to himself by the Wings of an Ea∣gle, which are indeed a Real Burden, and of Considerable Weight to the Eagle's Body, but such a Burden as by which she soars up loftily towards Heaven, which for want of That Burden would be a Groveler on the Earth. Or he may clear it by the weights of a Vulgar Clock, which, the heavier they are, do make it go so much the faster. § 6. A Subject upon which I do the ra∣ther indulge my Thoughts, (thô better handled I doubt not by other men, and somewhat often by my self upon Ezek. 18. 31. Ch. 3. § 9. Mar. 10. 17. Serm. 3. Joh. 14. 15. Ch. 2. & 4. § 10. and 1 Cor. 16. 22. Ch. 3. other Texts,) because we have Libertines in our days, as there were Gnosticks in St. Iohn's, who make the Law by which we live (I mean Rom. 3, 27. Jam. 2. 8. 12. 1 Cor. 9. 21.  the Law of Christ's Gospel) to need our Apologies and Defensatives, by bringing up an ill Report of the Christian Yoke, as if it were as hard as the Yoke of Moses, which neither we, nor our Fathers, neither the Pro∣phets, nor the Apostles, were ever able well to bear, (Acts 15. 10.) Just as They who went to spy out the Land of Canaan, giving
it out to be a Land which did eat up its In∣habitants;Num. 13. 16, 27, 30, 32, 33. a Land full of Gyants, the Sons of Anak, in comparison with whom Themselves were Grashoppers. Yet they confessed it was a Land which even flow'd with milk and hony, excellent Figs, and Pomegranates, and such Gygantaean Grapes too, (in full proportion to the Inhabitants) that one single Cluster was fain to be carried on two men's shoulders. And Caleb thought it not impossible to take Pos∣session of the Land, in order whereunto he pressed earnestly for an Essay; implying that All the Explorators, excepting Iosua andNum. 14. 6, 7, 8, 9. Himself, deceiv'd the People with their own Fears; thereby tempting them to murmur against the means of their Redemption, and to think hardly of their Redeemer, as if he had put them upon the doing of things im∣possible to be done. So there are Multitudes even in Christendom, (and at this very day) Antinomians and Solifidians, who having not courage enough as Christians to make a Trial of their Ability, how far forth they are im∣powred to wear the Yoke of Christ's Com∣mands, or bear the Burden of his Cross; And being unwilling that other Christians should
be less cowardly than Themselves, have gi∣ven it out among the People, that Christ commands Impossibilities. Which is as much as to say, that His Yoke is too hard, and his Burden too heavy, and that by consequence their Rebellions are but the Infirmities of their Nature, which might have been possi∣bly in their Wishes, but not at all in their Abilities to be avoided. Whereas the Truth is, they are resolv'd to sit still, to be at peace with their Temptations, and not to make the best use of the Powers within them; So that the Devil becomes strong, in that they make themselves weak; and 'tis in stead of Wisdom to him, that he finds men foolish. If at any time He conquers, it is because they do not fight; yea if he does not fly from them, it is because they do not re∣sist him; for so saith St. Iames expres∣ly,Jam. 4. 7. Resist the Devil and he will fly from you. But Cowards call their mean Submissions, their Inabilities to resist, that so they may Sin without Scruple, or at least stop the Mouth of a clamorous Conscience. For building (as they do) upon a very great Falshood, that Christ commands Impossibilities;
They make their Error the more Incurable, by adding to it as great a Truth, [that ha∣ving done all we can, in our submission to the Burden and Yoke of Christ, we shall ne∣ver be accountable for All we cannot; be∣cause where our utmost obedience Ends, our Saviour's begins to be reckon'd to us.] Thus Truth and Falshood are tyed toge∣ther by the Necks, (as Iupiter in Plato serv'd Ioy and Sorrow,) that if they will not be friends, they may be made to be Compani∣ons; and even forced to conspire against their Wills, to make us tamely submit our Necks to the Yoke of Satan, in Pretence that our Saviour's is too ruggid for us to bear. And Truth it self becomes hurtful, by being dis∣honestly tack'd on to as great a Falshood. § 7. But God be thanked there are others of Caleb's brave Judgment and Disposition; who think of Christ with more Reverence, than to believe that His Yoke is insupportable, or that he looks for harder Services than he enables us to perform. They judge that Christ commands nothing but what is rea∣sonable, and congruous, and therefore Possible to be done; at least in That sincere measure
wherein he mercifully exacts it, and with all those Assistances which He continually af∣fords▪ and with those Equitable Grains, which as a Saviour he allows for human Frailty. And therefore they strive so much the har∣der to put his Commands in Execution; to wear the Yoke of his Precepts in all parts equally. They think the Difficulties are such as by the strength of his Grace they are impowred to overcome; more Invited by the Pomgranates and Grapes of Canaan, than discouraged with the Gyants, which are to be grapl'd with in the way. And thence it is that they neglect not the Visible means of being happy to all Eternity, for fear of a temporary unhappiness 'twixt Them and It. § 8. Indeed the Sons of Disobedience, who court the Friendship of the World, and thence are said by St. Iames to be The Ene∣miesJam. 4. 4. Phil. 3. 18. of God, may make an Objection of their Experience against the Saying of our Savi∣our touching the Easiness of his Yoke, and against St. Iohn's Exposition of it, when he1 Joh. 5. 3. saith of Christ's Commandments, they are not grievous. For hath not Christ commanded
all men to love their Enemies? and is not That a Grievous Precept unto Them who forsake and detest their Friends? Hath not Christ commanded all men to be content with their Own, nor so much as to covet their Neighbours Goods? and is not That a Grievous Precept, to such as live upon Plunder, or Defraudation? Hath not Christ commanded all men the rigid Duty of Self∣denial? and is not That a Grievous Precept to our Proverbial Apolausticks, who deny themselves nothing that Heart can wish, but indulge themselves in all that either their Appetites can crave, or their Fancies call for? Nay hath not Christ commanded all men to take up his Cross, and to bear That after him? and is not That a Grievous Pre∣cept, to such as love to lay it heavily up∣on other mens Shoulders? How then are his Yoke and his Burden easy, when the great∣est part of men do slip their Necks out of the former, and cast the later (not upon, but) be∣hind their Backs? § 9. Thus in the person of a Demas, who hath embraced this present world for want of a2 Tim. 4. 10. Confidence in the next, I have objected a∣gainst
my Text as strongly at least as I am able, and against the Exposition St. Iohn made of it against the Gnosticks: And I think I have done it with very great Rea∣son. For as an Objection is never stronger, than when it is borrowed from Experience; So Truth is never more Glorious, than Oppositions and Objections (by being well answer'd) are apt to make it. Nor can an Objection be better answer'd, or more to the Snarler's satisfaction, than when Experience as well as Reason, even in the Greatest and Best of men, is opposed to the Experience and Wants of Reason in the Worst. The An∣swer cannot be Categorical, but must be adaequate to the Objection, and so proceed by several Steps; First in general, and then in some of the choisest or the most difficult of the Particulars. First I answer in general, That when 'tis said by our Lord, his yoke is easy, and burden light, it is not meant in re∣lation to That inveterate rank of Sinners, in whom the God of this World (as St. Paul2 Cor. 4. 4. 2 Tim. 4. 2. calls the Devil) hath blinded the Minds; whose Consciences are callous, and cau∣teriz'd,Acts 7. 51. who (like Them in the Acts) do al∣ways
resist the Holy Ghost, and have not on∣ly1 Thess. 5. 19. grieved, but even quench'd the Spirit of Grace. It is not meant of Those Profligates, who shake Christ's Yoke from off their Necks,Heb. 10. 29. and tread his Burden under their Feet. But as 'tis meant that his Yoke is smooth and easy in it self, or easy to Them who are wont to wear it, (whereby they have fitted it for their Necks, and their Necks for It,) so 'tis meant that his Burden is not absolutely and simply, but comparatively light; in respect of That Glory, whereof it works for us a weight unspeakable; and in respect of That Burden, of God's heavy Vengeance, from which it frees us. In like manner when St. Iohn affirms of Christ as a Legislator, that his Commandments are not grievous, it is not meant with respect to the Rom. 8. 7. Carnal minded, who are said by St. Paul to be at Enmity with God; (for to men of sore Eyes the glorious Boun∣ty of the Sun is the greatest Nuisance, and so to men of sick Palates the very best meat is the most unsavorie;) But 'tis meant that his Commandments are not grievous in Them∣selves, nor to such as have the Patience to try them throughly, nor have forfeited or lost
the moral honesty of their Nature, which The God of good Nature implanted in them. Shall sore Eyes object against the soundest, that of All noxious things, Light it self is the most hurtful? or shall a Blind man infer, (and that from the Topick of Experience,) that the Sun in his Meridian is in reality but a Shadow? Or shall a man of the most depraved and paved Palate, be al∣low'd to argue well from his own Experience, that Salt it self has no Savour? nor any thing else that is season'd with it? and is thereforeLuk. 14. 35. fit for nothing but to be cast unto the Dung∣hill? No, the Objection lyes clearly against the Soreness of the man's Eyes, and the Sick∣ness of his Palate, Not at all against the Sun, and as little against the Salt, which are e∣vinced by the Experience as well of the Most as the most judicious, (indeed of All mortals who are not mad,) to be as good and useful Creatures, as any are in the up∣per, and lower world. This is the Monogram of the Answer I purpose in general to the Objection, (be∣fore I descend to the most difficult of the Particulars,) And I am now to fill it up
with as good a Zographesis as I am able. § 10. First then to strengthen our Reso∣lutions of accustoming our selves to Law and Discipline, And not to wear the Yoke of Christ, just as the Ox wears his Master's, meer∣ly for fear of being goaded, but from a prin∣ciple of Love to the Yoke it self; let us con∣sider how those Commandments, which do make up the Law or the Yoke of Christ, do but exact the things of us which are agreea∣ble to our Reason, and therefore suitable to our Nature, and therefore consonant to our Desires. I mean our Rational Desires, which we Injoy, as we are Men; though not our brutish ones, which we suffer, as we are A∣nimals, and which (without any difference) are common unto us with the Beasts that pe∣rish.Psal. 49. 12, 20. It should be natural for us (as Men, indued with Reason,) to Love the Beauty of our Lord, and to fear his Power. Because we naturally incline to the Means of Safety, at least as far as we do know them, or believe them to be such. Now all that tends unto our Safety may be reduc't to two Heads, Seeking God, and Eschewing Evil. And Ra∣tionalJob 1. 1, 8. 1 Pet. 3. 11. Nature does incline, as well to the first,
as to the Second. Nay as Things which are good, and have a Tendency to our Safety, are more or less excellent, and useful to us; so Nature, whilst it is Rational, must needs incline to That of the Higher, more strong∣ly than to That of the Lower Value. And that which saves a man for ever, being of much an higher value, than that which saves him but for a Time, 'Tis plain that Nature, being Rational, does most incline towards the former: And all the Commandments of our Lord having a Tendency unto That, are by consequence agreeable to human Nature. Especially when our Nature is also rectified by Grace, which does not fail to work with a∣ny, who do not fail to work with It; And however insufficient to make us Sinless, is yet abundantly sufficient to make us single and sincere. Less than which in our Ser∣vice our Master's Iustice cannot exact, And the Equity of his Gospel exacts no more. § 11. The Truth of which may be evin∣ced, from the Absurdity which would follow its being supposed to be False. For the Moral Commands of Christ, like the Moral commands of Moses, must be acknowledged
to be Rom. 7. 12. Holy, Iust, and Good. Which yet I know not how they could be, were they not adequate to the Faculties of Grace and Rea∣son. For what Goodness can there be, in an Impossibility of doing the Good that is requi∣red? or what holiness can there be, in una∣voidable transgressions for want of strength? Or what Iustice can it be, that any Rational Agent should be accomptable for the Things he could never help? To command Impossi∣bilities is not agreeable to Reason, in Him who threatens an Endless Punishment for not performing what is commanded. And therefore no such hard Yoke can be imposed by our Lord on the Neck of Any. No such heavy and grievous Burden can be laid by a Saviour on any Shoulder. For though 'tis true that the Reprobates, (both men, and Devils,) being left, and forsaken, and finally given over by the Iudge of all the world, areGen. 18. 25. Rev. 22. 11. Ezek. 24. 13. under a sad Impossibility of doing Good; yet it is as true too, that they drew upon them∣selves such a deplorable Necessity of doing evil, They were not created in That Condi∣tion. For God created them upright, and made them capable of Duty; But they found
out and follow'd their own Inventions, whereby to lose the Capability which God had given them, Eccles. 7. 29. If men are so wilful in using the Liberty of their Wills, as to make an absolute Covenant with Death, and with Hell to be at Agreement; if theyIsa. 28. 15. will Sin with both hands, (as one Micah 7. 3. Prophet words it) and draw Iniquity as with a Cart∣rope, (as it is in Isa. 5. 18. Another) No wonder if in the words of the Book of Wisdom, they Wisd. 1. 12. pull Destruction upon Themselves with the work of their hands. And in These considerations, All who are Lovers of Christ indeed, and think ingenuously of him, and are not grosly injurious to him, nor have an evident pique at him, must either say that he commands us in proportion to our Talents of Grace and Reason, or will not punish us for the Not doing what is impossible to be done. Thus as the Antinomian Error may be sufficiently confuted by Arguments leading ad Absur∣dum, so the Truth of Christ's Doctrin is as sufficiently confirmed, by the Absurdity which would follow its being supposed to be false. § 12. Again if we are not out of our
Wits, nor have cast off the Gentleness and Humanity of our Nature, we are not able to give an Instance in any one of Christ's Com∣mands which is truly grievous; we cannot pitch on That precept which is not agreeable to our Nature. For what other is the Sum of all his Commandments put together, than that we do to all others, as we would thatQuod Tibi non vis fieri, Alteri ne feceris. Quam Senten∣tiam usque ad∣eo dilexit, ut in Palatio & in publicis operibus praescribi jube∣ret. Aelius Lam∣pridius in Alex▪ Severi Vitâ. all others should do to us? And what is That, but the Law of Nature? not only written by Severus (a meerly Heathen Emperour) in all his Plates, and publick works, But by the invisible finger of God, in the natural Heart and Conscience of man as man, till Tract of Time and Evil Custom (in some de∣praved persons) have raz'd it out? Let us keep but This precept, and break the rest, if we are able. For what does our Lord re∣quire of us in any one or more parts of his Royal Law, which is not easily reducible to this one Head? Deal we as righteously with men, as by men we would be dealt with; And let us do the Will of God, with as much single∣ness and Zeal, as we desire that God himself will be pleas'd to do ours; And then we have at once fulfill'd the Law of Nature, and ofMatth. 7. 12. Christ too.
§ 13. Now if the Yoke of Christ's Pre∣cepts is thus easy in it self, how smooth and easy is it to Them, who have inur'd them∣selves to it by their Obedience? an Argument taken from Experience will be as cogent as any can be. David found, after a great and a long Experience, that the Command∣ments of God were sweeter to him, than the Ho∣ny, and Hony-comb, Psal. 19. 10. where the word Hony being us'd, by a kind of a Pro∣verb among the Hebrews, for all imaginable objects of Sensual Pleasure, 'tis plain the meaning of the Prophet must needs be This; that the Pleasure arising to him from the Rectitude of his Actions, and an uniform obedience to Gods Commands, was as much greater than any pleasure which he had ever yet injoy'd in the Breaches of them, as the Pleasure which smites the Soul, is greater than That which affects the Body. Betwixt which two there is so signal and wide a Dif∣ference, that (by an obvious Antimetabole) the Pleasure of the Soul is the Soul of Plea∣sure; to which the pleasure of the Body is in comparison nothing more than a putrid Carcass. And as the Pleasures of the Soul are
by much the greatest, so 'tis the Soul's great∣est Pleasure, to arrive at an Ability to despise That of the Body. Such was the Savour and the Gust which David had of God's Precepts, and such was his Accompt of the Delight he took in them. And surely All People of Vertue in all the Ages of the World, have ever said the same thing from the same Ex∣perience. So that if any body is not of David's Mind, 'tis meerly for want of his Experience. For the Proof of sweet things lyes in the Trial, and the Taste. As the Psal∣mist cry'd out in one place, Lord how sweetPsal. 119. 103. are thy words unto my Taste! yea sweeter than Hony unto my Mouth! So he prayed in ano∣ther, Lord open thou my lips. For he knew he could not Taste that Food from Heaven, whilst carnal prejudice and perversness had shut his Mouth. First therefore having pray'd that God will open our lips, (as the Psal∣mist did) we must indeavour (as He did too) to taste, and see, how gratious the Lord is, and not only in his Promises, but Precepts also. Which the oftner we taste, with the more Appetite shall we desire them. But we know not how they taste, before we taste them. As
he who covets, knows not the sweetness of Contentment. Nor he the Delights of living chastly, who has Eyes full of Adultery. Nor he the deliciousness of Temperance, who hath made himself a Slave to Debauch and Sur∣fet. Fraudulent Persons could not be Frau∣dulent, if they experimented the Pleasure of upright Dealing; But they must actually be upright in all their Dealing, before they can find out the Pleasure of it. The Royal Prophet therefore said well, That WHENPsal. 119. 167. he had KEPT the Commandments, he loved them exceedingly; Not that he loved them exceedingly before he kept them. What else was it which induced him to speak so kindly of his Afflictions, to say that God of very Faithfulness had caused him to be troubled, but that he was thereby much Ps. 119. 72, 75. assisted in the keeping of the Commandments, which, he knew by much experience, are naturally apt to rejoyce the Heart, Psal. 19. 8. and that in the very keeping of them is great Reward, Psal. 19. 11. But where a Cloud of Vitious Ha∣bits doth incessantly interpose bewixt the Eye and the Object, how can the Beauty of the Commandments be rightly seen, or ap∣prehended?
The Prophet David was sain to pray, not only that God would open his lips that he might taste, But also his Eyes, that he might SEE the wondrous things of his law, Psal. 119. 18. And by the help of his Grace, (which we must pray for, as well as David,) we are to cast out the mote, (per∣haps the Beam) out of our Eyes, before our Eyes can be ravish't with the Charming Beau∣ty of Christ's Commands. And the way to do That, is ipso facto to obey them. For they are Pure (saith the Psalmist) and inlightning the Eyes, (Psal. 19. 8.) they give wisdom unto the Simple, are altogether undefiled, and con∣verting the Soul; moreover by Them is thy Ser∣vant Taught, (v. 7, 11.) From which expres∣sions of the Psalmist it plainly follows, that the Commands of the Law Moral (which are common to Moses with Christ and Na∣ture,) do make an excellent Collyrium, a So∣veraign Oyntment or Eyesalve, to clear our Sight of those Mists, which the Devil and the World have cast before them. § 14. Say then Thou Demas, Thou Crude, and unexperienced Christian, or whoever thou art who hast a share in the
Objection. Dost thou find within thy self nothing of Appetite or Love to the Yoke of Christ? It is because thou dost not know, how pleasant a thing it is to wear it. And wilt thou know the true Reason why thou dost not know That? It is because thou art not us'd to the wearing of it. For how can any man find the Pleasure of keeping close to Christ's Precepts, before he keeps them? Do but live a strict life, (and begin now in Lent) till thou hast got into an Habit of li∣ving strictly, and my life for thine thou wilt find it Pleasant. But He who will not live exactly, till he arrives at those Pleasures, which nothing less than Experience can bless him with, is neither more nor less foolish, than the meer Scholar in Hierocles his , who would not adventure into the Water, until he was certain that he could swim; or one who utterly refuseth the putting of meat into his Mouth, until he shall have tasted the Goodness of it. For as thou canst not taste meat, till thou hast put it into thy Mouth, nor find its goodness, till thou hast chew'd it, and (by digesting it into Blood) hast made it a parcel of thy self too; so thou
canst never discern the sweetness of the Com∣mandments of Christ, until for some time they have been thy Diet. Do but feed up∣on them enough, and digest them into thy Soul by obedience to them, and Then how soon wilt thou resemble the men in Homer? who having eaten a while of Lotum gustâsse non inconcinnè dicantur Illi, qui simul atque voluptatem re∣ctè vivendi de∣gustârunt, ad pristina studia revocari non possunt. Lotos, were as much captivated in Love with the Place it grew in, as our Ecstatical St. Peter with the Delights of Mount Tabor. ,Odyss. 9. . Wer't thou but wonted, and inur'd, as much to the keeping of Christ's Commands, as now thou art to the breaking of them, Thou wouldst find as great a change, as from Hell to Heaven. And if from this Instant where∣in I speak, Thou wilt but serve The Lord Christ with as much Zeal and Assiduity, and as long as thou hast served thy Master Satan; (,) I dare lay a Wager of Gold to Brass, Thou wilt not change Masters for all the World. § 15. But here perhaps it may be said,
that the main Aking Tooth is not drawn out of the Obection. For thô the Yoke of Christs Precepts is thus evinced to be easy, yet the bur∣den of his Cross is not hence proved to be light. Nor does it follow his Yoke is easy in That ruggidest part of it, wherein both his Yoke and his Burden meet. For so we know they Both do in his Precept of Self∣denial, and of bearing his Cross after him, whether laid upon us by others, or freely ta∣ken upon our selves. § 16. To which I answer by these fol∣lowing Degrees, (beginning with the least and lowest.) First when laid upon us by o∣thers, there is matter of Comfort in it, from the Consideration of its bare Nature For we know 'twas the Prerogative of Goodly men heretofore above other Mortals, that they were able out of choice to be bravely Miserable, (if such a Latinism as That may be us'd in English.) Fortiter Ille facit qui miser esse potest. Many Examples of which we have, not on∣ly in the Christian, but Heathen World. It
was for no other reason, that Hierocles flung his Blood in his Lictor's face; that Zeno spit out his Toung into the Teeth of his Tormentor; that the Indians in Valeri∣us did chose to suffer the Extremities of Heat and Cold; that the Brachmans and the Gymnosophists maintain'd their Paradox e∣ven to Victory, Nihil jucundius esse quàm pa∣ti; I say for no other reason, than to de∣monstrate that their Souls were above the Infirmities of their Bodies. Somewhat like the Brave Martyrs in the Eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, (thô not from the same reli∣giousIleb. 11. 35. Principle,) who having been tortur'd, would not accept of a Deliverance. In the midst of all their Agonies, they would not admit of a Relaxation. And we know that an Army of Frogs and Lice (as in Egypt) may have the power to do Mischief, But are ut∣terly incapable of being Injur'd. They are the Great and the Good, who are most of all subject to suffer wrong. Regium est & Magnificum, bene facere, & male pati. We may explain it out of St. Peter; If ye do1 Pet. 2. 19, 20, 21. & Matth. 5. 12. well, and suffer for it, Happy are ye. For this is thankworthy, This is acceptable with God.
And hereunto are ye called, because Christ also suffer'd for us, leaving an Example that we should follow His steps. God himself is most capable of insolent Usages and Affronts, by the Transcendency of his Being, and the Prae∣rogative of his Omnipotence; most obnoxious to Indignities, by his being All Goodness; and the most lyable to Dishonours, by his be∣ing All Glory. So next and immediately un∣der God, the most susceptive of Abuses are His Vicegerents? Whose highest priviledge it is, and that which makes them most like their Maker, (whose Lieutenants they are on Earth,) that All the Subjects put together are not obnoxious to the wrongs which their Soveraigns suffer. In so much that we should scorn to need a more Effectual Mo∣tive, to make us an Obedient and Loyal People, than our resentment of the hard∣ships they suffer for us. Besides that All Crowns are so lin'd with Crosses, and All Crown'd Heads so apt to ake, (even ab∣stracting from all the injuries which they are ever subject to as the Butts of Envy,) that they deserve the Ease and Comfort of their Best Subjects good Affections, if but to make
them some Amends for All the Malignities of the Worst; and in Requital of their Cares for the Common Safety. And here I am tempted to a Digression I cannot easily for∣bear: For if it is profitable and short too, it will be pertinent enough. It is but This; that if the People of these Realms will either All travel abroad into Foreign Parts, or at least take the pains to be taught at home, how much like Princes rather than Subjects, they live in the Land of their Nativity, (being compar'd with other Subjects throughout the habitable World,) they will say of our British Soveraign, what No other People can say of Theirs, that his Yoke is very easy, and his Burden exceed∣ing light. § 17. Another Comfort the Cross af∣fords, when laid by the Guilty upon the In∣nocent, does lye in This; that the Iudge up∣on the Bench can but condemn a Malefactor; The King himself can but reprieve him; 'Tis GOD only who can forgive him. So that Mischievous men have This common to them with the Devil, that they are able to wrong the Innocent; whereas the Innocent man
hath This derived to him from God alone, that he is able (as to himself) to acquit the Guilty. Here then we may demand withPsal. 52. 1. the Royal Psalmist, Why boastest Thou thy self, ô Tyrant, that thou canst do mischief? so can a Toad, so can a Spider, so can a Pest, or an Imposthume. Why dost thou glory in thy ability of blasting thine Enemy with a Lye, or of bearing False witness against thy Neighbour? so can the Father of Lyes the Devil, who thence is call'd by way of Eminence , the Detractor, and , The Accuser of the Brethren. Nay why dost thou pride it in thy power of being skilful to destroy, either the Livelyhoods or the Lives of a world of men? so can the Palmer-worm, or Mildew, so can a Deluge, or a Drouth. Which if seriously consider'd by him who suffers, as well as by him who does an Inju∣ry; 'twill yield the First matter of Comfort, and the Second matter of Terror. For Qui tulit injuriam ignoscere potest; Qui fecit, nun∣quam: whilst he who suffers Injury has a divine Opportunity of giving Pardon, He who does it has nothing left as the Issue of it, but Bitter Repentance, or Condemnation.
Hence therefore we must learn to discrimi∣nate two Things, which most commonly are confounded, and apprehended to be the same. For 'tis one thing, to Insult, or to do∣mineer; And quite another, to gain a Victory. Just as 'tis one thing, to be wrong'd; And quite another, to be worsted. The Devil and Pilate (for example) did Domineer over our Saviour, who yet (we know) had the best of Both. Dives insulted over Lazarus, (as 'tis expressed by way of Parable,) though Lazarus in the end had the better of him. Anytus and Melitus could not hurt Socrates, though they could kill him. And though St. Paul could be beheaded by the Emperor. Epict, Nero, yet he could not be conquer'd or worst∣ed by him. The Mode or Fashion of a Vi∣ctory does not detract from the Essence of it. It does not cease to be a Victory because 'tis got by not fighting; as That against Cade by King Henry the Sixth. Nor does it cease to be a Victory, in case 'tis purchased by Delays; as that against Hannibal by Fabi∣us Maximus. Nay 'tis a Victory, though it be won even by flying out of the Field; which was the way by which the Parthians were
wont to Conquer. And so 'tis Victory never∣theless, though obtain'd by suffering; as by the noble Army of Martyrs against the whole Heathen world. It being impossible that a thing should cease to be what it is, through the Nature of the means, by which it is so. It is so far from being necessary, that Conquest should consist in making Ha∣vock of an Enemy by wounds and slaughter, That 'tis but one sort of Conquest, and that the Meanest. Let us therefore set it down as a Truth unmoveable, upon which we may ad∣venture to lean with safety; That to be mightily overborn, whilst by Impiety, must needs be either none at all, or a glorious O∣verthrow. Because 'tis clear that God's Mercy is overborn by men's Impenitence; And even his greatest Longanimity may be quite beaten out by our Provocations. § 18. Thirdly the Burden of the Cross, when 'tis laid upon us by others, is made ex∣ceedingly lighter to us than I have hitherto shew'd it to be, by our looking up to Him, who hath born it for us, and before us; and by our reflecting on the Reward, towards which it does lead us, and lift us up.
Eusebius tells us of some in Egypt, who, how∣everEuseb. Hist. Ec∣cl. l. 7. c. 17. groaning at once under Three sorts of Tyranny, that of Poverty, and Pestilence, and Persecution, did yet express so great a Ioy at the Return of Good Friday, upon which they were to celebrate their Master's Suffrings on the Cross, as that the sense of Their suffrings seem'd to be wholly swallow'd up, by the far greater sense which they had of His. Though they were scatter'd and dispers't as far asunder, as the Ingenie of Malice could well contrive, (some impri∣son'd upon the Land, some under Hatches upon the Sea, some in Caves of the Wilder∣ness, and some condemn'd upon the Scaf∣fold,) Yet, as the Angles of a Pyramid, how∣ever distant at the Basis, do still come near∣er as they Ascend, and at last Concenter in the Conus; so how distant soever the one from the other those Christians were, in respect of their Bodies here below, They met together in their Affections at the same Throne of Grace. And though Our Church, like Theirs, in the late ill Times, was truly Militant, when with the Burden she labour'd under she sadly hung down her Head, yet Sursum Corda,
she lifted up her Heart to the Lord of Glo∣ry, And by an union of Affections kept all her Holy Days and Feasts with the Church Tri∣umphant. It would be certainly a volumi∣nous, if not an Endless Undertaking, (thô otherwise easy enough) to prove by way of Induction, or by a Catalogue of the Par∣ticulars, how many Myriads have been ena∣bled to run with Patience the Race that was set before them, by meerly looking unto Iesus the Author and Finisher of their Faith, so far forth as for the Ioy that was set before him, he endured the Cross, and despised the shame,Heb. 12. 1, 2. and so sate him down at the right hand of God. Nor indeed can it be otherwise, with such as Love and believe in the Lord Jesus in sincerity, And give an Evidence of Both by their new obedience. For so long as we are such, the Spirit it self (saith St. Paul) beareth witness with our Spirits, that we are children of God. And if Children, then Heirs; Heirs ofRom. 8. 16, 17. God, and joynt Heirs with Christ; if so be we suf∣fer with him, that we may also be glorified toge∣ther with him. And suffer with him we shall with the greater ease, (if not Ambition,) be∣cause we shall reckon with St. Paul, That theVers. 18.
Suffrings of this present Time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be re∣vealed in us; and because the whole Trinity is clearly ingaged in our behalf: (For so St. Paul tells us in the following Parts of the same Chapter.) God the Father gave us hisVers. 32. Son, and all good things together with him. God the Son gave us Himself, not only that he might dye, but also rise from the Dead, and be an Advocate for us incessantly at the right hand of God. Thirdly God the Holy Ghost in∣gagethVers. 34. for us as much as either; both by helping our Infirmities, through which we know not what we should pray for as we ought, And by making Intercession for us with GroansVers. 26. not to be utter'd. And whilst so great a Care is taken both of us, and our Interest, by God Himself, It cannot but follow that all the Crosses which shall be laid upon us by others, will work together for our Comfort in this life present, as well as for our Glory in that to come. § 19. Lastly the Burden of Christ is light, when freely taken upon our selves; as (in particular) when he Commands us (some∣what like what the Ammonites commanded
the men of Iabesh Gilead) to pluck out an Eye, (a right Eye too,) and to cast it from us. For First it is not an Absolute, but a Conditional Command. We are to pluck out an Eye, up∣on a supposal that it offends us; that is to say, If it is scandalous, and makes us stum∣ble into Sin; and into such wasting Sin, as makes us fall headlong into Hell; for so our Saviour does infer in his very next words. In such a formidable Case, and for the preventing of such a Mischief, It is not only not grievous, but  (saith our Saviour) It is profitable for thee, that oneMatt. 5. 29, 30. & Matt. 18. 8. of thy Members perish, and not that thy whole Body be cast into Hell. So that Secondly 'tis not a Positive, but a Com∣parative Command. And 'tis the Dictate of Common Sense, That of two evils of Pu∣nishment, we are in Prudence to choose the least. As rather to lose one Eye than Both, and rather Both than the whole Body; and ra∣ther the Body than the Soul. To suffer any thing, rather than Death; and Death it self, rather than Hell. A man having a Gan∣graene in any Limb of his Body, will not
only permit, but hire the Artist to cut it off. And by consequence will confess it very much better and more desirable, to Pluck out his Eye, and to cast it from him, than, by keeping it in his Head, to be Cast into Hell. Better suffer under Them who can destroy the Body only, than under Him who can destroy both Body and Soul. YeaMatth▪ 10. 28. Thirdly 'tis the Dictate of Sanctified Rea∣son, That of any two evils, whereof the one is of Sin, the other of Affliction, we must choose to Suffer the greatest, rather than wil∣fully Do the least. Our first Care must be, to make a Covenant with our Eyes, not to lookEcclus. 9. 7. upon a Maid. Next in order to That De∣sign, we should not look round about us in the Streets of the City, for fear our Eyes become our Enemies. Or if our Eyes chance to wander beyond the Bounds of That Coun∣sel, our third degree of Care must be, not to gaze upon a Woman, lest we fall by those things that are pretious in her, (v. 5. & 8.) Or if This cannot be done, 'tis better to out them whilst they are innocent, (as Virginius did his Daughter,) than continue them as Inlets to Sin and Hell. Nor should we be
griev'd at our Advantage, though it be bought with great Pain, whilst it is for the Preven∣tion of a very much greater. Last of all, this Commandment which is so grievous to us in Sound, is very far from being such in its intrinsick signification. For, in our Saviour's gratious sense, 'Tis but the Vanity of the Eye which we are bound to pluck out; 'Tis but the Violence of the Hand which we are bound to cut off; And the ob∣liquity of the Foot which we are bid to cast from us, (as is shewn more at large in an See the third Sermon on Mar. 10. 17. Part 2. § 5, 6, 7. other Place.) Several vices of the Soul be∣ing fitly enough expressed by so many Mem∣bers of the Body. And That severest of our Lord's Precepts, If thy Right Eye offend thee, pluck it out; if thy Right hand offend thee, cut it off; if thy Right Foot offend thee, cast it from thee; may very well admit of this Se∣rene Signification: That we must pluck out a Lust, thô as dear to us as a right Eye. And we must cut off an Avarice, thô as dear to us as a right Hand. And we must cast away an Ambition of greater things than are good for us, thô perhaps as dear to us as both our Feet.
§ 20. Thus we see this very Precept, which seems a very rough Part of our Savi∣our's Yoke, and a very heavy part of his Bur∣den too, does upon serious Consideration ap∣pear as Easy, and as Light, as any Servant can expect from so kind a Lord. For this Maxim being praemis'd as most unquestion∣able, and cogent, That without the pursuingHeb. 12. 14. of Peace and Holiness, no man living shall see the Lord; And that no unclean Thing can e∣ver enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but does inevitably belong to the Commonwealth of Hell, how could our Master have obli∣ged us with better expressions of his love, than by Commanding us to flee from the wrath to come? and to forbear the least evil which may possibly lead unto the greatest? rather to crucifie the Flesh, than permit it to defile and destroy the Spirit? even to pluck out our right Eye, rather than suffer it to pol∣lute us? to lose any thing, rather than Hea∣ven? to indure any thing, rather than Hell? And rather to smart for some Time, than to all Eternity? § 21. Say then again thou Habitual Sin∣ner, or who ever else thou art who hast a
Share in the Objection. Since 'tis thy Duty and thy Interest to bear the Yoke of Christ's Precepts and the Burden of his Cross with Faith and Patience, by whomsoever 'tis laid upon thee, whether spitefully by others, or pious∣ly by thy self; what pretense canst thou in∣vent for thy unkindness to those Command∣ments, which are not only not grievous, but very agreeable to thy Nature, if at least thou retainest and hast not rooted out that Nature, which the God of Good nature implanted in thee? or what Apologie canst thou make for thy starting aside from the Cross of Christ, which alone can exalt thee to wear a Crown? nor that a meer Earthly and Perishing Crown, but one which fadeth not away, eter∣nal in the Heavens. So that admitting the Cross of Christ were heavy or grievous in it self, yet in respect of thy Reward it should cease to be so. Shall any Thing be call'd grievous, which does evidently tend to thy greatest Good? All the Apologie Thou canst make, and all the Reason thou canst give, is, that thou art not yet arrived at a True Christian Faith, nor by consequence at a Love of the Lord Jesus in Sincerity. For do but ima∣gin
(honest Friend) thou wert just falling from a Praecipice, or from the Pinacle of a Temple; And a Neighbour standing by should thrust his hand to thy Rescue, and catching hold of thine Arm should snatch thee back with such a vehement and sudden Twinge, as either to dislocate or break a Bone; would'st thou be angry with thy Neighbour for so much rudeness? And in stead of be∣ing thankful for springing in to thy Deliver∣ance, would'st thou accuse him of being ha∣sty, and quarrel the roughness of his motion, asking why he did not use thee with greater softness, and would not deliberate before he acted? would'st thou not rather kneel down before him, and make an offer of obedience, as well as thanks, and look upon him thence∣forwards as dearer to thee than thy life? And in case thou art a rich man, as He a poor one, would'st thou not give him an yearly Pension for such an obliging act of Friendship, as that ransoming of Thy life with the utmost hazard of his own? Apply this now to the Case in hand. Imagin as strongly as thou art able, that thou art e∣ven now falling into the Bottomless Pit of
Hell, (a Lake eternally burning with Fire and Brimstone,) And suppose in this Case that God the Son shall spring forth from the Bosom of God the Father; ascend the Cross with set purpose, to fetch thee down; and descend into the Grave, for no other end than to raise thee up; And go purposely in∣to Hell, to fetch thee back from thence to Heaven. Wilt thou repine at That Deliver∣ance, in case the violence of the Twitch shall happen to cost thee a little pain? or be dis∣pleas'd with thy Deliverer, in case he should not set thee Free at a cheaper rate, than that of taking off the Weights that kept thee down, (that is) by mortifying the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts; by Commanding thee to be clean, and pure, and holy; And that for this obliging reason, because thy happiness does depend on thy being Such? Wilt thou grumble at thy Physician, for be∣ing severely Faithful to thee, in using the means of thy Recovery? Or wilt thou not rather bethink thy self, with the Royal Psal mist, Quid Retribuam? What shall I render unto the Lord for all his Benefits and Blessings bestow'd upon me? If this Redeemer of thine
is poor, (as in his Members indeed he is,) wilt thou not give him an yearly Pension, (devote a Part of thy Revenue to Pious uses,) as a small Token that thou resentest his Goodness to thee? or admit that He is Great, (as in Him∣self he is immensly and unspeakably such,) wilt thou not Sacrifice unto him the con∣stant Tribute of thy obedience, though he should rigidly command thee to fight with Anakims and Lyons, to fetch him Water from Bethleem, or Grapes from Canaan? Suppose he orders thee, (as he does,) to pluck out an Eye of Lust or Vanity; To cut off an Hand of Fraud or Violence; To cast away a Foot which is swift to shed blood; rather than keep them to thy undoing; wilt thou not execute those orders for the Love of thy Sa∣viour, and of thy self too, rather than thine Eye shall find the right Rode to Hell, Thine Hand work out thine own damnation, Thy Foot carry thee in the Broad way which lead∣eth to Destruction? Imagin strongly that thy Saviour does long as much for thy obedience as King David did to drink of the Well of Beth∣lem;2 Sam. 23. 15. Christ as Perfectly out of kindness, as David out of Curiosity. Wilt thou not do
as much for Christ, as David's Soldiers did for Him? what They did to please David, was at the Peril of their Lives. But what thou dost to please Christ, is for the Safety of thine own. And 'tis so natural for a man to pursue his own Interest, that there is no better way to make a Rebel become Obedi∣ent, than by convincing him of This, That 'tis his interest to be so, as well as Duty. Al∣though a man be such a passionate Idolizer of his Wealth, that he will part with his Blood, a great deal sooner than with his Mony, yet a desperate fit of Sickness will make him send for the Physician, And He conceiving it for his Interest, will give him very large Fees too. The tenderest Person and the most delicate, who values his Body above his Soul, if he e∣steems it for his Interest to have a Member saw'd off, being infested with a Gangraene, will (as I said a little before) even hire the Chirurgion to use his Tool. And (after the very same manner, as well as on the same ground,) He who is now the greatest Ene∣my, both to the Counsels, and Commandments, and Cross of Christ, If he be but once brought to an inviolable Belief, (without
all Scruples, or Peradventures,) That every man shall live eternally either in Heaven, or in Hell, And that 'tis clearly for his Interest to do or suffer as Christ commands him, be∣cause in order to his Escape from all the mi∣series of the one, and in order to his Attain∣ment of all the Beatitudes in the other; He will presently break off his Sins by Righteous∣ness, as Daniel charged Nebuchadnezzar. HeDan. 5. 27. will be ready for Restitution to every one whom he hath injur'd, as Zachee the Publican when He repented. He will bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, as the Jews were admo∣nished by Iohn the Baptist. He will be glad to be thought worthy to suffer shame for Christ's sake, as the Apostles at Ierusalem, Acts 5. 41. The Consideration of his Interest will give an high Relish to all his suffrings, making his Torments and his Tormentors to become his great Instruments and means of plea∣sure. § 22. Thus we see in all cases, both Tem∣poral, and Spiritual, every man is for him∣self, and intends his own Interest, in what∣soever it is which he undertakes; either the Interest of his Profit, or of his Pleasure, and
Reputation; The Interest of his Flesh, or of his Spirit; his present Interest, or his fu∣ture; still 'tis one Interest, or other, which leads him on unto the best, or the worst Performances in the World. Is any man Covetous and extremely close sisted? He thinks it is for his Interest, as being the way to be Rich in mony, which is the only Grand Pro∣ject that he is driving. Or is he Free, and open-handed? He thinks it for his Interest, be∣cause it is the ready way to make him Rich in good Works, which is the highest and no∣blest end at which he ayms in this World. Is there any man running headlong into a Cu∣stomary Contempt of his Saviour's Yoke? He thinks it is for his Interest, as being the way to live merrily, and in Prosperity here on Earth, which is the Soveraign Allective of his Desires. Or does any man take pleasure in supporting both the Burden and Yoke of Christ? He thinks it is for his Interest, as being the way to dye safely, and to live af∣ter Death a life of Bliss and Immortality; which is the utmost Atchievement his heart is set on. Lastly would ye know the Rea∣son, why I have meditated so much upon this
kind of Subject? why I have struck so ma∣ny Blows upon this great Anvil? made so many long Discourses (though on occasion of divers Texts) touching the Equity and the Law of our Saviour's Gospel? and in∣dispensable Necessity of our obedience unto the end? The Reason of it is truly This, Be∣cause I have thought it most mine own, and other men's Interest so to do. And till we are able to be so happy, as to convince our selves and others, that 'tis most for our In∣terest to bear the Yoke of Christ's Law, and the Burden of his Cross when 'tis laid upon us; 'Tis very sure that neither of us shall bear the one, or the other, as is requir'd. Where∣as 'tis as sure, on the other side, That as we never neglect our Interest in what is Secular, or Carnal, (as touching our Credits, or our Estates, or our Temporal Preservation;) so as little shall we indure, to start aside from the Burden or Yoke of Christ, if indeed we do believe it our greatest Interest to bear them as He requires. For can the very same man who is sollicitously careful to get a Trifle, be as perfectly careless to gain a Talent? or stand in very great Dread of a lesser Punish∣ment?
But of an infinitely greater, in none at all? If we are strict in our conforming to the Commandments of men, with whom the Penalties are but Temporal, and the Re∣compenses but finite.; we cannot sure be Non-Conformists to the Commandments of Christ, on a Supposal that we believe it as great a Truth as any is, That his Punish∣ments and Rewards, are both Immortal, and Immense. Nor can I think of a more ratio∣nal or a more satisfactory Accompt, why the Commandments of men should be so com∣monly heeded by us, with more circumspecti∣on than those of Christ, but that we fear Them more, and believe Him less; or va∣lue the Interest of our Bodies above the In∣terest of our Souls; or prefer the seeming certainty of what is Present, before the Hope and Expectance of what is future; And had rather become the owners of Earthly Contentments in Possession, than to be deal∣ing for Reversions in Heaven it self. § 23. And therefore to the end we may be able even to feel, and by consequence to arrive at the Conviction of Experience, That the Yoke of Christ's Law is really Easy in it
self; and the Burden of his Cross is in com∣parison very light; And that they have Both a secret vertue of giving Rest unto the Souls of Them that labour, and of Refreshing the hea∣vy laden; (for so our Saviour tells us ex∣presly in the two next Verses before the Text,) let us be Conversant incessantly in all the means of attaining to a True Christian Faith, That so by cordially believing, we may passionately love the Lord Jesus Christ. And that loving him as we ought, we may by consequence delight in doing that which he requires, and by consequence may attain to that Reward which he hath Promis'd. For as our Faith and our Love, do what we can, will beget obedience, (if the first is unfeigned, and the second without Dissimulation,) So 'tis sure that our obedience will end in bliss. Not in bliss whilst we are Passengers, but when we shall arrive at our Iourneys end. For here we are Dead (saith our Apostle,) andColoss. 3. 3, 4. our life is yet hid with Christ in God. But when the Lord Iesus Christ who is our life shall appear, Then shall We also appear with Him in Glory. Which God the Father of his mercy pre∣pare
us for, through the working of his Spirit, and for the worthiness of his Son; To whom be Glory for ever and ever.
THE INDISPENSABLE NECESSITY OF Strict Obedience Under the GOSPEL.
THE INDISPENSABLE NECESSITY OF Strict Obedience Under The GOSPEL. HEB. XII. 28, 29. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with Reverence and godly Fear. For our God is a Consuming Fire. THere is something Difficult in the Text, which will (I think) be best explain'd by way of Answer to an Objection. For why is it said here, Let us have Grace? It may seem at first hearing a strange expression, whether we have it, or have it not. For if we have
it, it seems superfluous; and if we have it not, it seems as vain. We need not say Let us have, what 'tis plain we have already be∣fore we say it: And we say to no purpose, Let us have this or that, which whilst we have not, it is not in our power to have. For, Is the Grace of God Almighty at our Disposal? Can we confer it upon our selves, that it should hear be said to us, , Let us have grace? we cannot have grace till we re∣ceive it, nor can we possibly receive it, till God most freely bestows it on us. What is this that he saith then, let us have grace? To answer this it must be known, that in many places of Scripture Grace doth signifie the Gospel. Whether as being the chief In∣strument or Means of Grace; or as contain∣ing and exhibiting the Covenant of Grace, which does often stand oppos'd unto the Co∣venant of Works; or else as being the great Message of Grace and Favour from Heaven to Earth. Whether for these, or for other Reasons, so it is that the word Grace doth of∣ten signifie the Gospel; especially then, when 'tis oppos'd unto the Law. A clear Exam∣ple of which we have, Iohn 1. 17. The Law
came by Moses, but Grace and Truth from Ie∣sus Christ: that is, The Gospel of Grace and Truth. For there was truth in the Law, as well as in the Gospel; and grace was given unto the Iews, as well as to the Gentiles, of whom we are. And therefore the meaning of it must be, That as the Law came by Moses, so the Gospel of grace came down from Heaven by Iesus Christ; and so it is called by St. Paul, Acts 20. 24. Another Instance of it we have Rom. 6. 14. We are not under the Law, but under Grace: that is, the Gospel of Christ which is the Word of his Grace; and so St. Paul calls it again, Acts 20. 32. For it cannot be meant concerning the grace of Sanctification; because even They were under that, who were under the Law that was gi∣ven by Moses; else would Caleb and Ioshua, and Moses himself have been void of Grace. Which being eminently Impossible, 'tis plain the Gospel must be the thing which is there opposed unto the Law. And as in other places of Scripture, so par∣ticularly in This which now is under consi∣deration, the Grace of God is so set, as to signifie nothing but the Gospel. And (the word
very often being put for ) to Have it in this place, is nothing else but to hold it fast. So that the Scope of the Exhortation, is, that we hold fast the Gospel or Law of Christ, described to be the Instrument, whereby we may perform a Service acceptable to God. But acceptable Service it cannot be, unless attend∣ed with Fear and Reverence. To wit with a reverence of his Mercy in the beginning of the Text, and with a fear of his Wrath in the later end. The Duty therefore is here in∣forced both before and behind; and that with such Reasons, as 'tis not easy to resist. For first the Reason going before is drawn from the richness of our Reward, in case we serve God as he here requires. And then the Reason coming behind is from the Grievousness of the Punishment, in case we serve him not at all, or not at all with due Reverence and godly Fear. Our reward, if we do, is no less than a Kingdom, and a Kingdom not to be moved. But our punishment (if we do not) is to pe∣rish by the hand that should make us whole; to feel the God of our life a consuming fire. The one affords us an Allective, whereby to draw us to the Duty; the other an Impellent,
to drive us on. It is the Wisdom and the Care of the holy Penman, to place our Duty in the midst of a double motive, that if the one cannot engage us, the other may. He be∣gins with a Promise, to feed our Hope; and concludes with a Threat, to excite our Fear. The first as a Spur does provoke to Vertue; the second, as a Bridle, withholds from Vice. And he is sure a dull Beast, whom such a Spur cannot excite, or at least a very wild one; whom such a Bridle cannot re∣strain. The whole circuit of the Text being thus explain'd, there are five things especially to be inferr'd. First that the Liberty of a Christian doth carry its Yoke along with it. It being a liberty from Moses, but not from Christ; the Condition of whose Gospel is our obedi∣ence unto the Law. I do not mean the Mo∣saical, whether Iudicial or Ceremonial, which were but positive Laws at best, but the Na∣tural, or Moral, which is withal the Aeternal Law; The Law, of which our Saviour saith, that he came not to abrogate, but to fulfil it: Not to evacuate, but fill it up. Rather
to strengthen, than to destroy it. , let us have Grace, that is, , let us hold fast the Gospel or Law of Christ. And let us hold it as an Instrument where∣by to serve him. And let us serve him , so as our Persons and our Service may be accepted. But yet Secondly, we cannot Serve him so, as to be accepted; (we cannot do it , so as to satisfy and please him in what we do,) unless we serve him with Reverence and godly Fear With a reverence of his Mercy, whereby we are capable of a Kingdom; and with a fear of his Wrath, whereby he becomes a consuming fire. So that the Reverence has a Retrospect on the beginning of the Text; and the fear has a Prospect upon the End. And there∣fore Thirdly, here is a reason for each of these Qualifications, by which our Service is to be such, as to be accepted. A reason why it must be with reverence, and a reason why it must be with fear. Let us serve God with reve∣rence, because thereby we receive a Kingdom, (a Kingdom of Grace and Glory too; the first being as 'twere an Inchoation of the second;
and Both as I conceive, alluded to in this Text;) Again let us Serve him with godly fear; Because he is else a consuming fire. And then Fourthly, it is obvious to infer even from hence, that the Fear of God, as a Destroyer, may nevertheless be a godly fear; because it is coupled here with Reverence, and by con∣sequence with love. For Reverence is a Compound, which hath love as well as fear for a chief Ingredient. And the Fear here ex∣pressed by godly Fear, is not only a fear of God's Power and Majesty, in respect of which he is a Severaign, who hath an absolute Do minion over the work of his hands; nor on∣ly a fear of his love and mercy, in respect of which he is a Father, who by his Children must be revered: but especially a Fear of his Wrath and Iustice, in respect of which he is a Iudge, and so an Executor of Vengeance. It is a fear indeed of God, but under the notion of a Consumer. A fear enforced with a Reason all arm'd with terrour; (for nothing strikes terror so much as Fire.) Lastly a fear whereof the Terror is ushered in with the Causal For, which shew's the Tendency of the
Terror towards the Godliness of the fear: for thus lyes the order and the coherence of the words. Let us serve him with Re∣verence and Godly fear, For our God is a Consuming Fire. Last of all we may infer from the Pro∣nounRom. 2. 6. to v. 11. our, That God is no such Accepter of Persons, as to connive at Sin in us, whilst he does punish it in others. No, the times of their ignorance God winked at, (saith the A∣postle,) But now commandeth all men every where to repent. To us indeed, if we repent, he is a God ready to pardon; swift to shew mer∣cy, and slow to wrath. But to us being Im∣penitent he is a Terrible, See Deut. 4. 24. where a consuming Fire is explained by a jealous God. Which com∣pare with Ex∣od. 24. 17. where the glory of the Lord was like de∣vouring fire upon the top of the Mount. a jealous, and an avenging God. From whence 'tis inferr'd by the holy Writer, That we, as well as the People Israel are bound to serve God with Fear and Reverence; Because Our God as well as Theirs is a consuming Fire. That is, the same God is such, as well to Us, as to Them. For here 'tis worthy to be observ'd, That as Moses exhorting his people Israel to take heed unto themselves, that they forget not the Covenant of the Lord their God, gave his rea∣son in these words, For the Lord Thy God is
a Consuming Fire; So our Apostle in this Chapter, having first of all compared the Law with the Gospel, Moses with Christ, and a Contemner of the one with a Despiser of the other; and having exhorted us to the Duty incumbent on us as we are Christians; gives the very same reason in the very same words, (with no more than the change of a Mono∣syllable,) for OUR God is a consuming Fire. Such he is, as the God of All; but above all, as he is OURS; because we sin, when we sin, against greater light; and against great∣er obligations to cease from sinning. Having now done with the explication and with the division of the Text, 'twill be most useful as well as natural to begin with the first of the five Illations, Because the greatest numbers of men do stand in need of a conviction, That Christianity is a Ser∣vice requiring our Industry and Care. A Service consisting of Obedience, as well as Faith; in as much as the Promises of the Gospel are clog'd with Precepts. Thô the Yoke of Christ is easy, yet 'tis a Yoke; and thô his Burden is light, yet 'tis a Burden To stand fast in that Liberty wherewith Christ
hath made us free, is to hold fast the Gospel or Law of Christ, and to hold it as an Instrument whereby to serve him: and to serve him , so as our Persons and our Service may be accepted. A Doctrin the rather to be Imprinted in all our memories and our minds, (as either a method for prevention, or means of cure,) because throughout the whole catalogue of damning Haeresies, whether as that Catalogue was begun by Irenaeus, or as continued by Epiphanius, or as perfected by St. Austin, (and other Writers of the Church,) none hath shed a more killing Influence upon the minds and manners of Christian People, (so far at least as I am able to conjecture,) than the mistaken, but pleasant notions, of Iustification, and Faith, the imputed Righte∣ousness of Christ, and Christian Liberty. Hard∣ly any four things are more needful to be believ'd; or more subject to be mistaken. Never was Poyson more pernicious, or more to be antidoted than that, to which I oppose the main drift of the well intended project I have in hand. There were Gnosticks, and Nicolaitans,
Carpocratians, and Valentinians, whilst yet the day of the Gospel began to dawn; whom the Tempter had betrayed into such a Lust, That Lust had blinded with such an Igno∣rance, That Ignorance was the Mother of so many and great Errors, and those Errors brake forth into such execrable Sins, that 'twere perhaps another Euseb. Hist. l. 2. c. 12. p. 57. Sin to make men acquainted with their nature, or but to tell them their very names. For there are Sins (saith St. Paul) which 'tis a shame even to speak of. So as Tertullian passed them by with a Referre eru∣bescimus, &c. Tertul. de prae∣scrip. advers. Haeret. cap. 46. profession of his Bashfulness; he wanted the confidence and the courage, to name those things which were done in se∣cret. To such as these we can award no fitter punishment, than that to which the Ephesians condemn'd Herostratus; when, ha∣ving burnt Diana's Temple (just as Pausanias kill'd King Philip,) for no other end than to be talk't of, He was decreed by that Se∣nate to be forgotten. (And forgotten he had been, if one single Theopompus had not put him into his Story.) And therefore there was need of Epiphanius his Epiphan. Hae∣ret. l. 1. Tom. 2. p. 11, 82. Apology, for having given us a Narrative of those
Tacenda, although he did it in detestation. Now as often as I consider within my self, how the oldest and the worst of all those Haeresies do walk about in new names through our English Streets; that though the Scenes are somewhat different, yet still the Actors do all agree; That the Irenae. p. 58. Gnosticks, and Clem. Alex. l. 1. Paedag. p. 107. Nicolaitans, and Carpocratians of the First times are repeated as 'twere by a Me∣tempsychosis, in the Antinomians, and Soli∣fidians, and sanguin Fiduciaries of Ours; that we have had, if not as false Christs as Euseb. l. 4. c. 6. quem locum confer cum l. 2. c. 10. Barchhebas, yet as false Prophets as Barje∣sus; who have so preached up the Gospel, and so cry'd down the Law, (I only mean the Evangelical or Christian Law,) And made obedience so cheap a thing by en∣hauncing the price of Faith, as to have turn'd Christian Liberty into Libertinism, and the Grace of God into wantonness; I am tempt∣ed to wish the Gospel were sometimes preach'd, as the Law of God was first publish'd, in thundring and lightning. That God were sometimes represented, as well by us un∣to the English, as by St Paul to the Hebrew Christians, not only, as in his nature, a
quickning light; but as he is also in his Ef∣fects, a consuming Fire. If not in hope to raise some who seem to be dead in their Secu∣rity, yet at least to awaken others, who (it is to be hoped) are yet but drowzy. For as 'tis the custom and the craft of some cunning Pleaders, by citing the Au∣thority of Laws and Statutes, to patronize the Breach of them; or as Ausonius could compile the most loathsom Fescenine, out of Virgil Himself, the Parthenian Poet; or as a Spider sucks poyson from the very same flower, from which a Bee doth extract the most soveraign hony; so I know not which hath drawn the more deadly Venom from the wholsom Omnia ad∣versus verita∣tem de ipsa ve∣ritate constru∣cta sunt: ope∣rantibus opera∣tionem spiriti∣bus erroris. Tertul. Apol. c. 41. p. 78. In veriver∣bium abiit apud Italos. Con l'Evangelio si diventa Haere∣tico. Letter of the Gospel, the Gnosticks heretofore, or the Libertines now; whether the former were worse corrupters of the Third Vid. Epiph. l. 1. Tom. 2. p. 89. Chapter of St. Iohn, or the later of the Fourth of St. Paul's Epistle to the Galatians. For as the Gnosticks in those times, so the Libertines in These, are wont to cocker up themselves (with the she Temp∣ter in Epiphanius) that they are all the cho∣sen Vessels; not vessels of a Respective, but of an absolute election. They think it much
below Them, to look upon God as a consuming Fire. It is for men of their Perfection, not to serve him with fear, but with Familiari∣ty. Thence they commonly do so startle at the legal obedience of the Iews, the mo ral honesty of the Gentiles, and the pretend∣edly meritorious good works of the Romanists, as to fortifie themselves against these, with the naked Faith of the Antinomians. And so like him in Spartianus, who poyson'd himself with too much antidote, (not considering that there is poyson, as well in the Quan∣tity of the best meats, as in the Quality of the worst,) they prevent a less Disease with a greater, and kill themselves with their Pre∣servative. For men to sweeten their malady, and make their sickness pleasant to them, they think it better than to cure it; and so the Humor be not painful, it is no matter how peccant 'tis. They think they have met with the great Purchace Timotheus brag'd of in Athenaeus, : All the Fortu∣nate I stands are caught forsooth in their Net. They dream they have found the new skill of the old Athletae, , to conquer the Devil without a Combat. And though
St. Paul (poor man) was fain to work out his Salvation with fear and trembling; to beat down his Body, and bring his Flesh into sub∣jection; to crucify the world unto himself, and himself unto the world, always bear∣ing about in his Body the dying of the Lord Jesus; lest whilst he preached unto o∣thers, He himself might become a Castaway; yet the Professors I allude to are so much happier than St. Paul in their own opinion, that their Victories cost Them neither Dust, nor Sweat. They imagin they have got a peculiar knack of being sav'd; and without any more ado can so believe themselves to Heaven, that it seems to Them as easy to Dye like the Thief on our Saviour's Cross, as it is to Live like him. For they have set up a New Faith upon Mount Sion, as Ma∣nasses and Sanballet did erect a New Tem∣ple upon Mount Ierezim; that the most Scandalous Malefactors, who have been any way obnoxious for breach of Law, may Fly for Refuge to That Asylum, and so be∣come of their Party. Their Vices many times do so border upon Vertue, (or appear at least in that Visard,) that conceiving they
are Sanctified with that Unclean Spirit, with which indeed they are possest; mistaking the corruptions of Common Nature, for the se∣cret suggestions of Special Grace; an hypo∣critical Sigh, for a sincere Repentance; a stur∣dy Presumption for an unshaken Faith; and a carnal Security, for an assurance of Salva∣tion; they make no doubt but to enter at the very striat Gate, meerly by walking in the very broad way; supposing that the chiefest reason why so very few do find it, is their seeking to acquire it with too much Pains. And therefore for their own parts, That they may not be in danger to put their Trust in good works, they live as if they took care to have them bad enough. Hence they swallow the greatest Camels, and never feel them going down; Sacriledge, and Schism, and the Sin that is as bad as the Sin of Witchcraft, Deposing of Kings, and Sub∣version of Kingdoms. For if (say They) they are once Regenerate, none of these things can ever hurt them. Humbly sup∣posing it the priviledge of Freeborn Christians, not to need the common honesty of Moral men.
These especially are the Persons who stand in need of a conviction, that to be such, as they would be thought, they must be some of God's Servants, as well as Sons. And withal, they must be shew'd wherein The Service is to consist. For most agree upon the word, but many differ about the thing. Our Saviour tells us of certain Jews, who took the killing of his Apostles to be doing God Service. And Saul did seek to serve God, by madly blaspheming against his Son. How many Professors of Christianity, with∣in our knowledge, and observation, have thought it a Service to the Bridegroom, to offer violence to the Bride? most inhuman∣ly to deprive her of all her Ornaments and Jewels? and to expose her stark naked, to the derision of her Enemies on every side? How many Refiners upon Religion have ve∣rily thought to serve God, by shedding the Blood of his Vicegerent? just as certain old Heathens did worship Hermes, by throwing Stones at the Image of him. It is not there∣fore so much my business, to prove that God is to be serv'd, As to shew what we must do whereby to serve him , so far
forth as to please him by it, and so as our Service may be accepted. The single word  is of Invaluable Importance; It seems to be one of the main Hinges, on which the Door of our Hope and Salvation turns. It concerns us more than the World is worth, to know exactly how much it means; And so to be able to demonstrate (at least to our selves, if not to others) what kind of Service it is to be, which God will reckon to be sufficient. For considering those words of our blessed Saviour, Seek to enter in at the strait Gate, for many shall seek and shall not enter; how can we quiet our Under∣standings, or safely set our Hearts at rest, before we know what it is, which will please our Master? and when our Service will be accepted? Now a Service only consisting of naked Orthodoxy and Faith, (as it is an Assent of the Understanding,) is not the acceptable Service commended to us in the Text. But (as appears by the Context) The chiefest re∣quisite is obedience to the Commandments of our Master, whereof our Faith is a special Instance. 'Tis an Employing of our selves in our Master's business; a careful observance
of his Will, in whatsoever he commands us to do, or suffer. Our Saviour tells us the way to life is Matth. 7. 14. , not only narrow, but craggy too; (for that's import∣ed by the Original, though not exprest in our English Bibles;) A way so incumber'd with Christian Precepts, and so block't up with strict Commands, that as nothing but Faith can open the Door, so nothing but Obedience can clear the way. So that Faith and Obedience are to a Chri∣stian, (as the two Comets to a Mariner, whereof the one is call'd Castor, the other Pollux,) never auspicious but in conjunction. By Faith indeed we may have the Gospel; but we hold it not fast, without Obedience. Without them both in conjunction, we cannot have Grace, as the Text injoyns. For naked faith without obedience (like either of those Comets without the other,) is apt to raise up a Tempest of God's displeasure, e∣nough to shipwrack the Soul of man. I can∣not set them both off with a better colour, than if I compare them to Iacob's Gen. 29. 17. &c. two Wives; whereof the One was very beauti∣ful, but barren too; the other was fruitful,
but yet deform'd. For as Faith (like Rachel) is wholly barren without obedience, so Obedi∣ence (like Leah) is but deform'd without Faith. Again, as that without this is void of Eyes, so this without that is utterly destitute of Feet. And though I take it to be impossible, for any follower of Christ to arrive at Heaven, until obedience take up Faith upon her shoul∣ders, that the one may traverse the way thi∣ther, and the other direct it; yet because I conceive it less impossible of the two, for an Honest blind Heathen to shew me his Faith by his vertuous works, than for a knavish and knowing Christian to shew me his works by his naked Faith, (a thing esteemed by St. Iames the greatest Absurdity in the World,) were Iacob's option mine, I should rather choose Leah with her blere Eyes, than Rachel with her barrenness, that is, obedience with∣out faith, rather than faith without obedience. And do think it by so much a safer thing, to be a very strict Moralist, than a very loose Christian, by how a likelier thing it is, for a Traveller to arrive at his Journey's End, by being a Baiard that can go, than a Cripple that can but see.
They who know not, must be instructed; and they who know, but are wilful, must be con∣vinc'd; and we who acknowledge as well as know, must be for ever put in mind, That when we are said in any Scripture to be sav'd, or justified by Faith, it can be meant of no other Faith, than what is the Mother of Obedience, and evermore attend∣ed with it. Which may appear as by other Arguments, so particularly by this; That as faith and disobedience are set as Terms of opposition, (I Pet. 2. 7, 8.) so faith and obedi∣ence are set as Terms aequipollent, (Rev. 14. 12.) From whence 'tis obvious to infer, that our Lord is not an absolute, but a condi∣tional Redeemer. How else can That God who is a comfortable Light, be said to be in This Text a consuming Fire? It is the pro∣perty of Satan, to be an Abaddon, or . And how can an Attribute of Hell, be in any sense apply'd to the God of Heaven, but that it is spoken by a Metonymie of the effect for the efficient, and imply's God Al∣mighty his deportment towards us, after the measure of ours to Him? A fire to puri∣fie and preserve, if we are Gold; but a fire to
consume, if we are stubble: A case to be easi∣ly illustrated by the waters of Iealousy; which if a woman were chast, would make her fruitful; but if adulterous, they made her thigh to rot, and her belly to swell. Just so said Simeon of the holy Child Iesus, that he is set for the fall, and for the rising again of ma∣ny in Israel. For the fall of the rebellious, and for the rising again of his loyal Subjects; for the fall of such Persons as will not serve him , but for the rising again of such, as will serve him with Reverence and Godly fear. Which proves by a consequence unavoida∣ble, That as he is not an absolute, but a conditional Saviour; so the Condition on which he saves us, is our being true Subjects and Servants to him. 'Tis our repentance from dead works, and our bringing forth fruits meet for Repentance. It is an heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and a conscience void of of∣fence towards God and towards men. It is our having no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, and the keeping of our Selves un∣spotted from the World. Lastly the condition on which he saves us, is the Denying of our selves, and the taking up of his Cross; not to
put it out of the way, but to follow Him with it whithersoever he shall lead us; nor to lay it upon other mens shoulders, but meekly to bear it upon our own. This is the acceptable Service pointed at in my Text. Less than this is too little, because it is less than will be accepted. And if we come short of the , the  in the Text will be nothing worth. Of this I must labour so much the rather to convince my self, and such as hear me, because the best of us all is apt to have something of the Fiduciarie, and (without a continual watch) will have a smack of the Antinomian. For let us examin our selves throughly, and sift our selves unto the Bran; and then speak freely as honest men unto our selves. Do we not flatter our selves often, that we are good enough to serve turn? and that we must not be Righteous overmuch? that 'tis improper for us to live as in the Common∣wealth of Plato, whilst we are in the Dregs of Romulus? and that we need not be bet∣ter than other men, of whose Salvation we suppose it is not Charity for us to doubt? Have we not often sinn'd the more, if not that
Grace may abound, yet because it hath al∣ready so much abounded? and the rather ad∣ventur'd to be evil, because of our know∣ledge that God is good? Do we not generally conceive, (like Him in Zosimus) that we may sin the more safely for being Christians? And have a priviledge to be wicked above the rest of mankind, because we are Worship∣pers of a God who is a God ready to pardon? Are we not much the more careless of fal∣ling headlong into Sin, and much the less careful of getting out, because we read, that if we sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, who is the propitiation for all our Sins? Compare the lives of most Christians, (I mean Professors of Christianity,) with what we read of Unbelievers, (whether ignorant Gentiles, or stubborn Iews,) And you will say they have need to be all instructed, or atleast to be put in mind, that Believers being the men with whom the best of God's Talents have been entrusted, are by consequence the men too, of whom the best Service will be requir'd. This I shall briefly make appear from two general Topicks, or Heads of Arguing.
From the principal end or final cause of our Saviour's coming hither, and from his Principal business which took him up when he was here. First for the end of his coming hither, it was rather to redeem us from Sin, than Hell. Rather to sanctifie our Nature, than meerly to justifie our Persons; rather to make us truly Righteous, than only to reckon or count us Iust. And this may appear, as by other Reasons, so more especially by These. First that Sin is by nature far worse than Hell, Be∣cause our sins can serve for nothing, but to Injure and Incense the Righteous Iudge of all the World; whereas Hell is good for some∣thing; even to satisfie the Iustice which Sin hath Injur'd, and to glorifie the Iudge whom it hath Incens'd. From whence it follows, that 'tis much more conformable to the Ho∣liness of God, and more advanceth his Glory too, To have sent his Son into the world, rather to purifie, than to forgive it. To for∣give it indeed by a secondary intention, but to purifie it by the first; (for purity by nature being better than Pardon, by a very good se∣quel was sooner meant,) To reduce us to our
obedience as the chief purpose of his coming, and to give us Heaven as the Accession. For real happiness consisting in being holy as God is holy, 'Tis plain that Heaven can be no more, than a good Appendix of our fe∣licity. For can we imagin, that God him∣self can be any whit the happier for being in Heaven? No; 'Tis Heaven which is the hap∣pier for being God's Throne: which should he fix upon the Earth, Heaven would pre∣sently be his Footstool. As it is not the Court which gives Majesty to the King; But where∣soever the King is, there's the Court. To be in Heaven without holiness, (like the lost Re∣giment of Angels) would be to make it a second Hell. And therefore They, at the Day of Judgment, who shall intreat the Hills to cover them, and the Mountains to fall upon them, will have no other reason for that In∣treaty, than to be hid from the face of him that sitteth upon the Throne. From whence it is obvious to infer, that to a man of impure Eyes, nothing smarts more than the Sight of Bliss. And therefore our Saviour's coming hither was first to fortifie our eyes, or to make them pure, and then to procure us the Blessed Vision.
Besides, Secondly, Had he been sent into the world, only to amplify our Charter, but not our Statutes; to free us as really from the Moral, as from the Ceremonial Law; or from the observance of the Law moral, as well as from the curse, and the rigour of it; And so to make us no whit holier, but on∣ly happier than before; (if yet a man can be happy who is not holy, which rather implys a contradiction,) he might have been buri∣ed before he was born; (buried, I mean, in his Mothers womb;) or he might have been born, only to be buried; He might have been murder'd as commodiously by Herod in the Cradle, as by Pilate upon the Cross; and with as great a convenience, have dyed a Saviour at a year old, as in living till three and thir∣ty. For what better reason can we imagin, why he should live so long a Saint, before he dyed a publick Sacrifice, but that as 'twere by the Aequator, or standing Rule of his life, we might reform and regulate all the obliquities of our own? that he might free us from Sin's Dominion, by his Precepts and Example, his Life and Doctrin, as well as from the wages of it by his Death and Resurrection?
For 3dly, let us expostulate and reason a little within our selves. Can there be any thing more irrational, more dishonourable to God, or more disgraceful to our Religion, than to think that our Saviour came down from Heaven, only to open, and so to shut up the Gates of Hell? To be a Friend of Publicans and Sin∣ners in the same ill Sense, in which his Matth. 11. 19. E∣nemies spake him to be so? 'Tis true indeed in one sense, there can be nothing more Or∣thodox, than was the malice of those Blas∣phemers. Christ indeed was the friend of Publicans and Sinners, the greatest Friend to be imagin'd. But 'twas by Saving them from their Sins, as he did Matthew, and Zachaeus, Mary Magdalen, and the like; not by Saving them for all their Sins however indulgent∣ly lived in. Not by making it safe for them to be Sinners without Amendment. Could he come for nothing else but to proclaim a Iubilee for Malefactors, and so to make them more voluptuous, not more vertuous than before? Can we imagin that the Law was so a Schoolmaster to Christ, as that the end of his coming should be to turn us from our Books? to beg us a kind of an endless
Playday, and so to send us out as Truants in∣to a Mahomet's Paradise? Can it be possibly consistent (I say not with Scripture only and Reason, but indeed) with common Sense, that he should purifie to himself a peculiar peo∣ple, not by bridling Sin, but by letting it ride? That the  in Zosimus should be (asZosim. l. 2. p. 61. the Spaniard there calls it) ; (that is to say in plain English) that the meer Christianity of our Opinions should abundantly expiate for all the Atheism of our Lives? and so that the Gospel should be intended, not for a Rule, but a Dispensati∣on? 'Tis true this Fallacy of the Tempter is too too commonly swallow'd down; al∣though not only the Stream of Reason, but all the Current of the Scripture runs quite against it. For in the third of the Acts, at the twen∣tieth Verse, God having raised up his Son Ie∣sus sent him to bless us, (saith St. Peter;) but how? even , &c. That bles∣sing altogether consisted in his turning us away every one from our Iniquities. So in the second to Titus, at the eleventh Verse, The Grace of God which bringeth Salvation hath
appeared indeed to all men. But to what end? 'Twas , &c. that de∣nying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we may live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Again in the fourteenth Verse of the same Chapter, Christ is said indeed to have given himself for us; But immediately it follows, , &c. The gist consisteth in his Redeeming us from all Ini∣quity. To which at least we may accom∣modate what is said of our Saviour, Matth. 8. 17. where the , which is in Beza's Translation he bare their Sicknesses (or their Sins,) is in Tertullian's he took them a∣way. And let the Translation be what it will, sure I am that the reason is very good. It being the noblest benefaction, and much most worthy of a Saviour who came from Heaven, rather to cure the lame, than to give them crutches; rather to rid us of our sins by reducing us to obedience, than by ac∣quitting us only of punishment, to make our sins the more supportable. And as the prime end of his coming hi∣ther, was to correct and reform our practice, so his prime business when he was here was
(as our Lord) to prescribe us Precepts, and to press for a due obedience to all the Pre∣cepts which he prescrib'd. Though 'tis the custom of the world, to look upon him as a Saviour, and nothing else, in his Priestly Of∣fice only, which is to bless us, and to in∣sist upon his being our Elder Brother; yet Rev. 19. 16 the name written upon his Garment, and on his Thigh, is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. His name is Christ as well as Iesus. Moses was his Type, as well as Ioshua. And ob∣serve in what order. He is our Moses in the first place, to make us fit for a blessed Canaan; and then our Ioshua to give us pos∣session. The general Title of the Gospel [] which we love to call the New Testament (and nothing else) would (by a more genuine Translation of the word) be expressed by The new Covenant, that is to say, the new Compare Rom. 3. 27. with Rom. 8. 2. Law. For so it is called by St. Paul, , the Law of Faith, (Rom. 3. 27.) And as the whole Moral Law was published by Christ, as well as Moses, (which any man may see who will not wink, in the fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of St. Matthew,) so Christ, as well as Moses,
thought fit to give it upon a Matth. 5. 1. Mountain. Nor is it unworthy our observation, That throughout the New Testament, though there is many times a Precept without a Pro∣mise annexed to it; yet there is not one Promise which is not clogg'd with some Pre∣cept. As if our Saviour had esteemed it an easier thing, to make us believing and ortho∣dox Christians, than obedient and sincere ones. According to which he elsewhere tells us, that they only shall enter into the Kingdom of his Father Matth. 7. 21., not that call upon his Name, but that do his Will. Nay (as there he goes on in the following Verses,) Though a man may have Faith to the working of Miracles, yet if it be built upon the Sand, (as most certainly it is, when 'tis not seconded with obedience,) he foretells what he will say unto men of that sort at the Day of Judgment, , I never knew you. (Not thatVers. 26. 23. Christ can be ignorant of their persons, or their works, to whom he will say, I never knew you. For even that very saying im∣ports he knew them well enough, that is, he knew them to be such, as did deserve that such words should be spoken to them. And
therefore the meaning must needs be this, I never knew you to be members of my Body, or to be sheep of my Fold; that is, I know you to be Persons I cannot own. For as to know in the holy Dialect does often signifie to ap∣prove; so not to know does very often import no more than to disown.) I must confess we might think it exceeding strange, but that our Oracle does assure us 'tis very true, That as Believers we may be able to cast out De∣vils, and yet as Disobedient may be our selves possess't with them▪ We may preach to save others, and yet be Castaways our selves. For be we never so zealous Preachers, or Profes∣sors of the Gospel; and at the very same time Indulgent Transgressors of the Law; our very Advocate will say, when he shall come to be our Iudge, , Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity. And therefore our blessed Saviour being about to leave the world, and to teach his Disciples (before he left them) how to serve him , in such a manner as he would like; did not speak in this stile, If ye love me, cast all your Care upon my Promises; or If you love me, stoutly rely upon my merits; (althô
there is a place for each of these too,) But, as preparatory to Both, If ye love me, keep my Commandments, John 14. 15. which was as if he should have said, shew me your Faith by your works, and your Love by your obe∣dience. Plainly implying to Them and Us, that our Sonship does not give us any Ex∣emption from our Service; our Service being the only thing by which we are able to prove our Sonship. As Christ hath a Priestly, and a Prophetical, so hath he also a Kingly Office. Nor may we kick at the Scepter and Throne of Christ, and think it sufficient to declare we are his Majesty's most humble and loyal Sub∣jects. Some Earthly Potentates have been thus mock'd, but the King of Kings will ne∣ver be so. We cannot honour our Lord by disobeying him; or shew our selves kind, by being undutiful; For we see that our obedi∣ence is both the Argument and the Badge of a True Affection. Our Saviour saith, Matth. 10. 38. He that follows me not, is unworthy of me. Where to follow him, is to be like him; To conform our selves to him more than a Parasite to his Patron; not to walk in his Path only, but to tread in his very Footsteps.
According to that of the Pythagoreans (which deserves for its worth to be Christi∣aniz'd, however writ by that Hierocles who writ a Book against Christ,) . Thou shalt honour God the better, the more thou studiest to be like him. For him we love most, whom we most imi∣tate; and he honours God best, who doth best resemble him; And what kind of Resem∣blance he most requires, St. Iohn hath told us twice together in his first Epistle and third Chapter; to wit, our being pure as he is pure, (v. 3.) and our being Righteous as he is Righ∣teous, (v. 7.) And our Saviour to the same purpose, having mustred up his Precepts with the several Promises annext, makes a kind of a Corollarie or rather Abridgment of the whole, not at all with a command, that we be happy as God is happy, but with an , be ye perfect as he is perfect.Matth. 5. ult. Thus as briefly, and yet as fully as I could possibly contrive, I have shew'd the chiefest end of our blessed Saviour's coming hither, and his principal Business when he was here. It was not only as a Saviour, to propose Promises to our Faith; nor only as a Teacher, to
fiill our heads with new knowledge, but as a So∣veraign, and a Prince, (as St. Peter calls him) to exact obedience to his Commands. And to place it without dispute, He made it part of his business, when he was here, to let us know, why he came hither. For as he tells us in one place (enough to keep us from de∣spair) that he came not to destroy mens lives,Luke 9. 56. but to save them; so he tells us in another, (enough to keep us from presumption,) thatMatth. 5. 17. he came not to destroy the Law, but to save and preserve That also: and that in each sense of the word , not by fulfilling it only, but by Ita Meletius Monachus, con∣cra Isphacanem Persam Musul∣manum. Et Tertullianus c. 3. de poenit. Christus, inquit, susterstruit Ad∣jectionem Legis. Idem de Pati∣ent. c. 6. p. 131. filling it up too. For thô nothing could be completer than the Law Moral in it self, yet did he fill up those vacuities which Moses left in his Delivery. From all which it follows (do what we can) that Unless our Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Iews, we shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. For can there be any thing more agree∣able to the judgment of common Sense, (I had almost said of Carnality it self) than that where God hath afforded a greater Stock, he should expect a greater Increase; that where
he hath strengthened the Shoulders, he should in proportion increase the Burden? And that as he hath shrunk up the Mosaical Law, so he should also extend the Moral? Of Moses we know, that he had a Vail upon his Promises, as well as upon his Face; and was as obscure upon Mount Nebo, as before he had been upon Mount Sinai. Whereas our Antitype of Moses hath been graciously pleas'd to Vetus dicitur Testamentum quia promissio∣nes terrenas habet. August. de Civ. Dei. l. 18. uncover Both. The Iews beheld Christ as in a Glass, but we (in comparison) face to face. They walk't by Twilight, but we by the Sun in his Meridian. They were us'd like little Children, but we like Men. They had a Sen∣sibleVid. Grot. Dis∣cus. Apol. Ri∣vet. p. 30, 31. good propos'd, but we an Intellectual. They as 'twere an Apple, but we an Inheri∣tance. They a transitory Kingdom, but we a Kingdom not to be moved. They were pro∣mis'd a Redemption indeed from Egypt, but we from Hell. They to be fed with milk and hony, but we never to hunger or thirst. They a long life, but we an Eternal one. They a Canaan, but we a Heaven. And that God will exact the Luke 10. 13, 14, 15. with which compare Matth. 10. 15. most strict accompt of our wanderings, to whom he hath held the great∣est light for the better clearing of our ways,
we may infer from our Saviour's words in the eleventh Chapter of St. Matthew, where Tyre and Sidon are more excusable than Co∣razin and Bethsaida, because the later had been obliged with greater Means of Convi∣ction, but all in vain. This affords a Lesson for our Humiliati∣on, That however our Reward is extremely Great, even a Kingdom which cannot be moved, (a Kingdom of Grace and of Glory too,) yet God hath placed it very high, and the way to it is very steep. We must not flatter our selves therefore, that we are able to fall upwards; that with a yawning Relyance we can ever climb up the Hill of Sion, and drop as 'twere into Heaven with a drowzy Confi∣dence. We have no incouragement from our Apostle, to believe we shall go thither, by meerly believing we are Regenerate, and cannot fail of our being there. He does not here press on his Hebrew Christians, to receive their Salvation with Faith; but to serve for it with Reverence. Not to expect it only with confidence, but strictly to endeavour it with godly Fear. For our God is a Consuming Fire. To Him be Glory for ever and ever.
HOW A Man is to work out HIS OWN SALVATION. PHILIP. II. 12. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling. THe words (in general) are a Command, delivered by St. Paul, in the Name of God the Great Master, to the Ser∣vants of God, in the Church at Philippi. In which there are chiefly four things to be con∣sider'd. First the quality of the Servants. Next the wages which they expected. Thirdly the work, with which the wages was to be earn'd. And lastly the manner, or qualification, with which the working was to be cloath'd.
First for the Quality of the Servants, They were such as had been diligent in the per∣formance of their Duty. They had not only been sometimes dutiful; they had not only been good by fits; but , they had always obeyed; They had evermore liv'd in the fear of God. Next for the Wages which they expected, That is expressed by [] to be Salvati∣on; both as it signifies a deliverance from the tremendous Pains of Hell, and as im∣porting an Advancement to the ravishing Ioys of Heaven Then Thirdly for the Work, with which the Wages was to be earn'd, That is evi∣dently obedience to the Lord Iesus Christ Very significantly implyed in the , as that looks back upon the . As ye have always obey'd, so now much more obey the Gospel. Continue the Course of your o∣bedience. Go on to finish the work which ye have begun; , work, and work out your own Salvation. Last of all, for the Manner or Qualification of the working, whereby to make it become effectual for the receiving of the Reward,
There must be , our Salvation is to be wrought for, with Fear and Tremb∣ling; And that according to the threefold Signification of this expression. First with Meekness and Humility. We must not put the least Trust in the greatest Performances of our own; nor must we be puff't or lifted up with the Gifts and Graces which God hath given us. Next with Diligence and Solicitude. That we may not for want of Perseverance, finally miss of the Prize that is set before us, and for which we have hitherto as it were contended by our obedience. Thirdly with Awefulness, and Horror, or ho∣ly Dread; Because as God is (in one Cafe) a quickning Light, so he is (in another) a con∣suming Fire. He who purposely created us to do him service, is He who will turn us to De∣struction, unless we serve him as he Requires. And now to anticipate an Inquiry, how Hu∣mility, and Solicitude, (as well as Awefulness and Dread, are comprehended under the notion of Fear, and Trembling, I think it is easy to make it clear from the consideration of the Con∣text; without recourse to those other Scrip∣tures,
wherein we meet with the same expres∣sion. For First in vain should we indeavour the working out of our Salvation, but that it is God who worketh in us both to will, and to do. And therefore we must do it with all Hu∣mility of Mind, because in our selves (as of our selves) there dwelleth no good thing; no not so much as Inclination to any thing that is good, no not so much as Aversation from any thing that is evil. But every good and perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights. If we can triumph over the Law, as the strength of Sin, by treading Sin under our Feet, as the sting of Death, All the Thanks must be to God, who hath given us the Victory through our Lord Iesus Christ. And yet Secondly; Although it is God that worketh in us both to will, and to do; yet the Apostle makes it a Reason, why we our selves are to work out our own Salvation. And therefore we must do it with Care and Diligence, lest whilst God by his Grace is not wanting unto us, we finally miss of his Glory, by having been wanting unto our selves.
Thus we see there is pregnant Reason, for the Double Importance of the Phrase as 'tis meerly rational. And of the literal Significa∣tion I suppose there cannot be any Doubt. For We must work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, (in as much as that sig∣nifies the greatest Awefulness and Dread,) be∣cause of the Dreadfulness of our Doom, in case we work not at all, or not at all to that purpose that God requires. And thus I hope I have so divided, as withal to have explain∣ed, and clear'd the Text. The first three Parts of the whole Divisi∣on may well be thrust up together into this Doctrinal Proposition. [That our Salvation is not attainable by a meer Orthodoxy of Iudgment in point of Faith, or a bare Re∣ctitude of Opinions concerning God; But by obedience to the Gospel or Law of Christ.] For what is expressed by obedience, in the for∣mer part of this Verse; is also expressed in the later, by the working out of our own Salva∣tion. And as Salvation is a Thing which re∣quires our working; So 'tis not any kind of working will serve our Turn. For
The last Particular of the four affords us a second Proposition, which is as apt to defend us from Carnal Security, as the First. To wit, [That however Unavoidable our State of Bliss may seem to us, by our having (with the Philippians) obeyed Always, yet our obedience unto the Gospel or Law of Christ, by which alone we are to work out our own Salva∣tion, is to be qualified and season'd with Fear and Trembling.] The first of these I have consider'd in a former Subject of Meditation, when I en∣larged upon the Matter of which our work∣ing is to consist. I now am come to that Part of my General Method and Design, which obligeth me strictly to the conside∣ration of the Second; as touching the Man∣ner or Qualification wherewith our working is to be cloath'd, whereby to make it be∣come effectual for the receiving of our Re∣ward. To wit, with Meekness and Humi∣lity, with Diligence and Solicitude, with Awefulness and Horror, or holy Dread; the threefold Importance of Fear and Trembling; which must first be considered in the Gross, and after that, in the Retail.
First consider'd in the Gross, it shews us a ready and easy way of reconciling and understanding those parts of Scripture, which being taken but in the letter, do seem to differ, and con∣tradict. For there is not any One Passion or Affection of the Mind, either more rigidly forbidden, or more earnestly commanded, than that of Fear. It is so rigidly forbidden, that the fearful and unbelieving have their part in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, (Rev. 21. 8.) where St. Iohn making a Muster of such as are listed under the Devil, and bound for Hell, sets the Fearful and Unbelieving (as it were) in the Front of the whole Battalia, with which the desperate Prince of Darkness is wont to wage War against the Father of Lights. As for The Murderers, and Whoremongers, The Sorcerers and Idolaters, They all march after in Rank and File; Implying the Fearful and Unbe∣lieving to be the Ringleaders in Hell, and as it were in the Van of the Devil's Army. Un∣belief is so commonly the Cause of Fear, and Fear is commonly such a Tempter to Unbe∣lief, that we find them often yok't toge∣ther, if not so as to signifie, one, the other.
Woe be to fearful Hearts, and faint Hands, and the Sinner that goeth two ways; woe be to him that is faint-hearted, for he believeth not, therefore shall he not be defended, (Ecclus. 2. 12, 13.) It seems that Fear is a Thing, of which we ought to be sore afraid; Be∣cause it is apt to make us sinners going two ways at once. One in our Principles, and quite another in our Practice. Very fit to be compar'd unto wandering Stars, which are carried towards the West by the Primum Mobile, whilst They are stealing towards the East by their proper motion. When Peter was frighted upon the Sea, and cryed [Lord save me] as he was just ready to sink; although it was a good Prayer, yet because it proceed∣ed from Carnal Fear, rather than Faith, our Saviour presently took him up with an , O Thou of little Faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? And so it was fitly said by Za∣chary in his Divine Benedictus, That God did Therefore deliver us out of the hands of our Enemies, that we might serve him without Fear, (Luke 1. 74.) With which agrees That of St. Paul to Timothy; He hath not given us the spirit of Fear, but of Love, (2 Tim. 1. 7.)
To which it is added by St. Iohn, That there is no Fear in Love, for perfect Love casteth out Fear, (1 John 4. 18.) Thus we see how this Passion is very ri∣gidly forbidden throughout the Scriptures. And yet for all that it is so earnestly command∣ed, that we cannot serve God acceptably, un∣less we serve him with Fear, as well as Reve∣rence, (Heb. 12. penult) Nor can there be any such thing as the working out of our Sal∣vation, unless we do it with Fear and Tremb∣ling. For the fear of the Lord is the Begin∣ning of Wisdom, (Prov. 1. 7.) Nay (as Solo∣mon goes on in the fourteenth Chapter, v. 27.) The fear of the Lord is a Fountain of Life; the attainment of which is the end of Wisdom. And thence 'tis set by our Apostle as the highest accomplishment of a Christian, To perfect holiness in the Fear of God, (2 Cor. 7. 1.) What then may be the meaning of these , these so seeming Contradictions, that we must serve God with Fear, and that we must serve him without Fear? that there is no fear in love, yet no true love without some fear?
The Reconcilement of These is extreme∣ly obvious. It is no more but to distinguish betwixt that which is Carnal, and that which is Spiritual; betwixt the spirit of Bondage, and the spirit of Adoption; betwixt a servile, and filial Fear. As 'tis true in one sense, that perfect Love doth cast out Fear, so 'tis true in another, that perfect Love doth carry fear a∣long with it. When I say with St. Iohn, It casteth out Fear; I mean that childish unmanlike Fear, which betrayeth those Succours that Reason of∣fereth; especially that heathenish and carnal fear, the fear of Poverty, and Pain, and o∣ther effects of Persecution; the fear that made so many Sinners going two ways at once. And so it casteth out one fear with another; the fear of them that can kill the Body, but are not able to hurt the Soul, with the fear of Him who is able to cast them both into Hell. In this sense 'tis said, we must serve God without Fear. But when I say the same Love doth carry fear along with it, I mean the fear of offending God, the fear of quenching or grieving his holy Spi∣rit; the fear of never doing enough whereby to
please him; the fear of falling into Tempta∣tion; the fear of a treacherous deceitful heart; that is, the fear of Unsincerity in the per∣formance of our Service; the fear of falling from our own steadfastness, and so of receiv∣ing the Grace of God in vain. In this sense2 Cor. 6. 1. 'tis said by the Royal Prophet, Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoyce unto him with Reverence. And thus 'tis said by the Royal Preacher, Hap∣py is the man that feareth always. As a meer carnal fear is a fear of that which is carnal, so a godly fear is the fear of God. First a fear of his Majesty, in respect of which he is a Soveraign; next a fear of his Mercy, in respect of which he is a Father; (for so 'tis said by the Prophet David, There is Mercy with thee, ô Lord, therefore shalt thou be Feared.) Lastly a fear of his Wrath and Iustice, in respect of which he is a Iudge, and also an Executor of Vengeance. This Fear of God is so necessary for the Qualification of our obedience, that all with∣out it is nothing worth; and even this, of it self, is wont to supply the place of all. For ; (that is) men fearing God, is an expression made use of by God himself, whereby to signifie conscientious and pious
men; men who live in obedience to all his Precepts. Iob was said to be an upright, andJob 1. 1. perfect man, because he was one that feared God. And the words of Moses to Israel have a remarkable Importance; What doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but only to fear the Lord thy God? (Deut. 10. 12.) And what is it to fear him, but (as it follows in the next words) to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve him, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? Without this Fear, we shall easily fall into presumption, or into carnal security. We shall not strive to enter in at the strait Gate; Nor give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. We shall not give an earnest heed unto the things which we have heard, (Heb. 2. 1.) If we do not fear, lest a promise being left of entring into his Rest, any of us should seem to come short of it, (Heb. 4. 1.) we shall not labour to enter into that Rest, (v. 11.) For who will labour to get a thing, which he verily thinks he hath as good as in possession? Or who will labour to keep a thing, which he verily thinks he can never lose? I will not here stand to shew the ma∣nifold danger of their Opinion, who say
they were justified from Eternity, and their Sins so forgiven, before committed, That they cannot fall totally, much less finally from Grace; although my Text would bear me out in such a profitable Severity. Nor dare I otherwise be severe to any difference in opi∣nion, than as I find it corruptive of Christian Practice. The case is clear, that our Apo∣stle having commended his Philippians, for having always obey'd the Gospel, does not there make a stop, as if they had done enough already, or needed no more of his Admoniti∣ons; but immediately adds, that they must work for their Salvation; and work so far, as to work it out; and work it out in such a manner, as to do it with Fear and Trembling; and that according to the threefold Importance of this Expression; which having thus con∣sidered in the Gross, I shall now consider in the Retail too. First we must work it out with meekness, and humility of mind, because it is God that worketh in us both to will and to do of his good pleasure. All we have is but little, and all that little is but receiv'd. All the good we have received, we have received as intrusted,
or lent unto us; And whatsoever God lends us, he lends us purposely to Employ. Of all that is lent us to be imploy'd, we are every one to render a strict Accompt. And this a∣lone may serve to keep us in all humility of mind, that the more we have, the more we owe, and for so much the more we are ac∣comptable. And for the more we are unable to render a satisfactory Accompt, by so much the more we shall be appal'd at the Day of Reck'ning. 'Tis true indeed (vvhat St. Iohn saith) that by keeping the Commandments we may come to have a Rev. 22. 14. right to the Tree of Life; And by suffering for God, may be counted wor∣thy of the Kingdom of God. Affliction suffer'd in such a Case is said to 2 Cor. 4. work for us a weight of Glory. 'Tis true indeed we may be profitable Servants in God's Accompt; be∣cause the unprofitable was commanded to be cast into utter Darkness, Matth. 25. 30. And the Joys of Heaven are express'd by aCol. 1. 10. 2 Thess. 1. 5. Rev. 3. 4. Crown of Righteousness; as if Eternity of Life were become our due. But all this only by the force of God's Promise who cannot lye; or by the Tenor of the Covenant which God
was pleas'd to make with us; Not by vertue of our Obedience, as that that is equal to our Reward. Which, when it is in its Apogaeo, at the utmost Top of its Exaltation, is not wor∣thy to be compar'd with the Glory which shall beRom. 8. 18. revealed in us. For however St. Paul had preach'd the Gospel, and preach'd it too with∣out1 Cor. 9. 16. Vers. 15. 18. charge, not living of the Gospel, (which yet by right he might have done,) but ma∣kingVers. 14. his own hands to serve and minister to his Necessities, that he might not be burdensom unto any; yet he professed he had nothing to glory of, for so gratuitous a preaching the Word of God; because a moral Necessity was laid upon him, and woe had been to him if he had not preach'd it, (1 Cor. 9. 16.) Our blessed Saviour so puts the Case, as to illu∣strate it with a Colour, Luke 17. 7, 8, 9, 10. Admit a Servant is very diligent in the per∣formance of his Duty; ever going when he is sent; ever coming when he is call'd; and ever doing as he is bid. Does the Master give Thanks to that diligent Servant, for do∣ing the things that were commanded him? I trow not (saith our Saviour.) Even so ye, (as our Lord goes on to Application,) when ye
shall have done all those things that are com∣manded you, say, we are unprofitable Servants, we have done but our Duty; and had been lyable to wrath, if we had not done it. Away then with those Philosophers St.August. Epist. 52. Austin speaks of, qui sibi vitam beatam fabri∣care vellent, who design'd themselves a Hea∣ven of their own skill and industry. And a∣way with those Pharisees, not only of our Saviour's, but of these our own Times; whose custom 'tis to thank God, for that they are not like other men. And confining Sanctity to the men of their Sect, do separate from the rest of the Christian World, as from Publi∣cans and Sinners; Sinners not to be approach∣ed by men of their Purity. Stand farther off (is their language) for we are holier than you, (Isa. 65. 5.) Conform we rather to St. Paul, the special Badge of whose Saintship was the profoundness of his Humility. For as the chief∣est of Sinners do call themselves (by an impi∣ous Antiphrasis and Hyperbole) the chief of Saints; so That Apostle on the contrary, al∣though Chieftain among the Saints, doth call Himself (by an holy Mosis) The chief of Sinners. When therefore our obedience hath
led us to Christ, and Christ is leading us to Heaven, Let us remember the New Ierusalem, though a vastly great City, yet (contrary to Myndus) hath a very low Gate. And seeing the lowness of the Gate, stoop we down to en∣ter in. Let us love Good works, but let us not lean too hard upon them. Let us love them as things, without which we cannot be saved; but let us not hope to be saved by them. Let us not labour with an ambition of being more meritorious, but less unworthy than heretofore. Claim we Heaven by a Right, not of Purchace, but of Donation. Having added Obedience to our Faith, add we Meekness to our Obedience. Having done Iustice, and lov'd Mercy, let us walk humbly with our God. And so expect our Salvation with Faith, and Hope, as withal to work it out, with Fear and Trembling. And that accord∣ing to the first Importance of this Expres∣sion. Again we must do it with fear and tremb∣ling, in as much as that signifies the greatest anxiety and solicitude, that we do not run in vain, nor labour in vain, (Philip. 2. 16.) that we do not faint as we are running, and possi∣bly
miss of the Prize within a stride of the Goal. For though we work for Salvation whole years together, and work for it never so hard, yet whilst we are in the Body, and compass'd about with a Tempting world, we cannot say we have work'd it out. So that That is a Thing to be still in doing, and to be done with Fear and Trembling. For as there are a sort of Labourers who do not come into the Vineyard, until the ninth or tenth hour; so there are that fall off in the very Evening, and lose the benefit of their Labour during the heat of the Day. (For when they cease from being Righteous, all their pass't Righteousness shall not be mention'd, (Ezek. 18.) Had not Iudas been worthy, Christ had not made him an Apostle; and had he not been a good Apostle, he had hardly been trusted with the Bag, much less had he been sent to dispense the Gospel. 'Tis very late e're we read the Devil enter'd into Iudas, hardly sooner than a day or two before his Death. And though our Saviour said, he chose twelve, whereof one was a Devil; yet did he not say, He chose a Devil. For Iu∣das was not a Devil, that is, a Traytor, 'till
some time after he had been chosen. Which fitly serves to put us in mind, that if we know what we are, we are not sure of what we shall be. What our last days will be, we cannot tell till we have liv'd them. We may speak out of Hope, but out of Certainty we cannot. I know who they are, who breath nothing but Assurance of Life eternal, as if That were the english of  And as if their Rebel∣lions were meritorious, mistake the sturdiness of their Presumption, for the stability of their Faith. So little or nothing are they con∣cern'd in St. Paul's Exhortation to Fear and Trembling, that supposing they are sure, they think it below them to be solicitous. I would to God that such Professors had but the patience to consider, that St. Peter doth not exhort us to make our selves sure of our Election; but to make our Election2 Pet. 1. 10. sure. The vvord is , not meant in an Active, but Passive sense; nor of the Person, but of the Thing. St. Paul had sure as much reason, not to doubt of his Election to life Eternal, as any meer mortal, before, or after. And yet vvith vvhat a deal of fear
and trembling, did he run the Race that was set before him? how did he strive for the1 Cor. 9. 4. Mastery? And in order thereunto, how ve∣ry temperate was he in all things? How did he keep under his body? how did he bring it into Subjection? and all for fear, left whilst he was preaching unto others, He himself might be a Vers. ult. Castaway? How did he Philip. 3. 8, 11, 12, 13, 14. suffer the loss of all things, and count them but Dung for the winning of Christ, who was at once his , and his , at once his Re∣warder, and his Reward; the setter out of the Prize, and the Goal it self? 'Tis true indeed, He wins that loses, who loses All to win Christ. But, in order unto this end, with what fear and trembling did he press towards the Mark, and reach forth to those things that were before him, embracing a fellowship with the Sufferings of Christ, and being con∣formable unto his Death; if by any means he might attain to the Resurrection of the Dead; if by any means he might apprehend That, for which he was also apprehended of Christ Ie∣sus? And here to anticipate an Objection which very easily may be made by a sort of men,
I think it of use to be observ'd, That He first had fought the good Fight, and finished his Course, before he durst presume to say (in the following words,) Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. It was not till after his Perseverance with Faith and Patience unto the end, that is, but a little be∣fore his Death, when the Axe and the Heads∣man stood ready for him, (at least when both were within his Prospect,) that he was able to speak with so great Assurance. For before that Season, whilst he was yet but in his Course, and had not fought to a perfect Vi∣ctory; he flatly told his Philippians, He did not speak of his Proficiency in the School of Christ, as if he counted himself to have ap∣prehended, or as if he thought he were al∣ready made perfect; But on the contrary, He did so work out his Salvation with Fear and Trembling, as that he macerated himself, and (what with fasting, and watching, and other Austerities of Life,) he did bear in his body the Dying of the Lord Iesus; lest whilst he preach'd to save others, he himself might not be sav'd. He had not yet endured unto the end, and so he was not yet free from Fear.
For he that endureth unto the end, the same is he (saith our Saviour) who shall be sav'd; (Matth. 24. 13.) It was the voice of God him∣self, (reveal'd from Heaven five several Times) He that overcometh shall inherit all things, Rev. 21. 7. He that overcometh is He that shall eat of the Tree of Life, (Rev. 2. 7.) He that overcometh is He that shall not be hurt with the second Death, (v. 11.) He that overcometh is He that shall eat of the hidden Manna, (v. 17.) And who is he that over∣cometh, but he that keepeth God's works unto the end, (v. 26.) To Apply this now unto our selves; If we can say with St. Paul, that our Battle is quite fought, (against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,) And that our Course is quite fi∣nished, (in so much that we are able to lay our hands upon the Goal,) we then may say with him too, Henceforth is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness. We may say, we have a Right to the Tree of Life; That God is , a righteous Iudge, who will not be so Unfaithful (having given us a Pro∣mise,) as to forget our work and labour of love, (Heb. 6. 10.) And so being sure to be with
Christ, we may desire to be dissolv'd too. But whilst we are upon the way, and we cannot tell how far from our Iourneys end; Nor what may happen 'twixt This and That; sure the use we are to make of our present standing, is to take great heed that we do not fall. We must beware, if we are righteous, that we do not return from righteousness to sin. The higher we stand in God's Favour, we must beware so much the more, that we be not high-minded, but rather fear; lest for having (like Capernaum) been lifted up to Heaven, we be the rather (like Capernaum) cast down to Hell. There was a Proverb among the Iews, The Sow is turned being wash't to her wallowing in the Mire. And St. Peter applys it to cer∣tain Christians, who have made it good in the Application; even by growing Unrighte∣ous after Regeneration, (2 Pet. 2. ult.) For having been wash'd from the Mire of Sin Original by the Laver of Baptism, and from the Mire of Sins Actual by the blood of Iesus Christ, in the other Sacrament of Eucharist, they have committed the very Sins, of which they had solemnly repented, and so their
latter end hath been worse than their beginning. Now▪ putting the Case unto our selves, we know not what may arrive betwixt the Cup and the Lip, much less betwixt This and the Day of Iudgment; especially if we meet with a Time of Trial. We cannot be confident of our strength upon any better Ground than St. Peter stood on. And having not Grace at our own Disposal, we must not boast (as he did) what we will do above others, when Christ is under a Condemnation. If we have fol∣low'd him to Golgotha, we must religiously fear to forsake him there. For let our En∣during be what it will, it will be found to no purpose, unless we endure unto the end. And thence it follows, that 'till we have Happi∣ness in Possession, we are to live by such a Faith, as doth admit an holy mixture of fear and trembling. This Mode or Manner of our obedience being as rigidly requir'd by God Almighty, as the Matter, and Mea∣sure, and Method of it. Not only Faith, and Repentance, and Amendment of Life, but also Perseverance in each of These, is the Condition of the Promises which God in Christ hath made to us. Whose House we are (saith the Epistle
to the Hebrews) if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoycing of the hope firm unto the end, (Heb. 3. 6.) Take heed therefore Brethren (as it follows a little after) lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, (v. 12.) But exhort one ano∣ther daily, whilst it is call'd, To Day, lest any of you be harden'd through the deceitfulness of Sin, (v. 13.) For we are made partakers of Christ, (not absolutely, but with an If,) If we hold the beginning of our Confidence steadfast un∣to the end, (v. 14.) Now what needed the holy Penman to have crowded and throng'd so many Caveats so thick together in that one Chapter, (and in other Chapters of that Epistle,) if the Peo∣ple of God are so sure of Heaven, that there is not place left for a fear of Hell? If some at least who were enlightned, and by true Grace sanctified, do turn Mammelucks and Apostates, as Lycerus hath observ'd, and asLycerus in Harm. Evang. p. 1562. the Apostle doth take for granted, (Heb. 6. 6.) we ought to fear, and take heed, that We be none of their Number. For God's promises to us of a Spiritual Canaan, are no more ab∣solute than those of a Temporal Canaan,
which he made heretofore to his People Is∣rael. And since he swore to the Heb. 3. 15, 16. Provokers which came with Moses out of Aegypt, that notwithstanding his promise, (which appears by that to have been conditional,) they should not enter into his Rest, (Heb. 3. 18.) the Apo∣stle tells us we ought to fear, lest (if we do as they did) we come short (as they did) of the conditional promise proposed to us, (Heb 4. 1.) And conformably to this, St. Iohn doth ear∣nestly exhort us, to look to our selves, that we lose not the things which we have wrought, but that we may receive a full Reward, (2 Joh. 8.) And he that saith here for our Consolation, [It is God that worketh in us to will and to do of his good pleasure,] doth also say for our greater Caution, that we our selves are to work out our own Salvation. Plainly intima∣ting unto us, (for he is not guilty of Con∣tradictions,) That God's working in us to will and to do, is not after an irresistible, but con∣gruous manner; not as with natural, but as with voluntary Agents; not by physically inforcing, but by morally persuading our pee∣vish Wills. He doth so work with us, as to require that we also do work with Him. It
is evinced even from hence, that as God hath his part, so we have ours, in the great Busi∣ness of our Salvation, Because we are many times threatned with falling short of the pro∣mise, in Case we depart from the living God. For God cannot threaten to be reveng'd up∣on his Creatures, for what Himself doth ei∣ther do, or not do, but for what is either performed, or not performed, by his Creatures. It being not possibly imputable to the Crea∣ture, that God hath made it Thus, or Thus; any more than God himself can be accompta∣ble to his Creature, why he made it Thus, or Thus. God indeed doth , most divinely work in us both to will, and to do, the work required to our Salvation. But 'tis that we may , work out that work which he is pleas'd to work in us. And by consequence we must do it with fear and trembling, lest when God hath done his part, we finally miss of Salvation, for having been wanting in doing ours. And this doth lead us to consider the third Importance of the expression, the very great Awefulness or Dread, with which we are to work out our own Salvation. The two
first were rational, this third is Literal. And indeed the third may be deduced out of the second. For if we may fall as well as o∣thers, we may be lyable to vengeance, as well as others. That which calls for our solicitude, deserves our Fear. And that which was St. Paul's reason, may well be ours, even because our God is a Consuming Fire. I may say in some sense, that God made Hell for the use of all; as well of the best, as the worst of men. For a Torment only to These, who have hated knowledge, and willProv. 1. not choose the fear of the Lord; But for a Ter∣ror also to Them, whom he would therefore have to fear, that they may not feel it. That working out their Salvation with fear and trembling, they never may come to the place of Torment. The same Spirit that saith, Fear not them that can kill the Body only, (which is a fear proceeding from the spirit of Bondage,) doth also say at the same Time, But rather fear Him who can cast both Body and Soul into Hell. Implying This to be such a Fear, as doth very well consist with the spirit of Adoption. It's true indeed, we may be brutishly valiant, and over-daringly en∣counter
the wrath of Heaven, without the least fear of the pains of Hell. But this (I say) is a beastly courage; an arrant  that is to say, A fool-hardiness rather than va∣lour. True Valour being That, that is built on Reason. Nor can we Reasonably be free from the fear of Hell, until we come to be sure of Heaven. And sure of Heaven we cannot be, until we have fought the good fight to a final victory, and perfectly finish'd our Christian Course. We must not suffer the novel Fancy of unconditional Election to flatter us out of all fear of the wrath of God, and make us sure to miss of Heaven, by making us dream it is unavoidable. For as God in his Iudg∣ment is no Respecter of Persons, so neither wasRom. 2. he in his Decrees. As his Rule is in Time, to judge us according to our works; so he de∣creed from all Aeternity, to proceed in Time by that Rule. He did determin the end of men, with a special respect to their Qualifica∣tions, (from whence his Decree is call'd re∣spective,) But he did absolutely determin that men who are thus or thus qualified, should come to this or that end. And I
could wish that this Distinction (since 'tis suf∣ficient of it self) might find so much fa∣vour in all mens Eyes, as to appease and re∣concile dissenting Brethren. That as the Decrees of the Almighty are said to be Abso∣lute in one sense, so they may candidly be granted to be Respective in Another. This methinks should be the Judgment of all Mankind, (being so visible in it self, and of so necessary Importance to the well-ordering of our Lives,) That God did absolutely decree a most indissoluble Connexion betwixt Repentance and Salvation, as betwixt Impenitence and Condemnation. Which proves the end to have been decreed with a special respect unto the means. Let this one thing be granted, (as well for the Comfort of the good, as for a Terror to evil Doers,) And I, for my part, shall ask no more. For the Decree which is respective in sensu diviso, may so be proved to be Absolute in sensu composito, as to afford a Demon∣stration, That God's Decree of the several Ends was in respect to the several Means. For if in sensu composito, He did absolutely decree, that all who are faithful and repent should belong to Heaven, and that all who
are faithless and impenitent should in like manner belong to Hell; Then his Decree was respective (in sensu diviso) of that Repen∣tance, or Impenitence, by which Professors do belong to Heaven, or Hell. From whence it follows unavoidably, that if we are faithless and impenitent, (be it in a greater, or lesser measure,) we ought to be affected with fear and trembling, (in the lite∣ral sense of this expression,) and never to give our selves Rest, until we be faithful, and do repent. But faithful and penitent we cannot be, till by the power of God's Grace, (after our Prayers and Tears shall have given him no Rest) he shall be pleas'd to work in us, and with us too, not only to will, but to do his work. That by the pow∣er of his Grace we may all endeavour, and by the power of his Grace on our Endea∣vours, we our selves may have a Power too, whereby to work out our own Salvation. And work for it we must with a sacred horror, because of the Dreadfulness of our Doom, if we work remissly. For as (on one side) God himself cannot condemn us, (al∣though our sins past have been very great,)
if we immediately repent and amend our lives, because he is faithful who hath promi∣sed, and he hath promised forgiveness to all that repent and turn unto him; so withal (on the other side) Let our Righteousness past have been what it will, yet if we return from Righteousness to Sin, God himself can∣not save us, without our Repentance and Reformation, because he hath sworn that the Impenitent shall not enter into his Rest. Not that God can be overpower'd by any Quality in the Creature, whether Repentance in the first Case, or Impenitence in the second; But because his Power (in the first) is suspended by his Mercy, as it stands in conjunction with his Truth. For in his Mer∣cy he made a Promise to give us pardon if we repent, and in his Truth he must perform it. Just so his Power (in the second) is suspended by his Iustice, as it stands in conjunction with his Truth too. For in his Iustice he made an Oath to be revenged on the Impeni∣tent, and in his Truth he must make it good. Now since each of these Cases concerns us All, (be we never so good, or be we ne∣ver so evil,) I need not shew by another
Medium how the love of God's Mercy doth consist with a fear of his Indignation, and how whilst we love him as a Father, we ought to fear him as a Judge. But (to conclude with such a Caveat, as may best of all become an Ingenuous People) Take we heed that our Fear do not swallow up our Love; for fear it swallow up us too in the Bottomless Pit of Desperation. We must serve God with Fear, but so as to fear him also for Love. Ever saying with the Psalmist, There is mercy with thee ô Lord, therefore▪ shalt thou be feared. The Psalmist did not thus argue, There is Mercy with Thee ô Lord, Therefore shalt thou be rely'd upon, Therefore we shall make the bolder with thee; we shall break thy Command∣ments without the fear of being damn'd, be∣cause we know thou art slow to anger, and being angry art quickly pleas'd; But because of thy mercy thou shalt be feared. And there is good reason for it. For by how much the kinder a Father is, a well-natur'd Son will fear to offend him so much the more. And the more our Father which is in Heaven does even delight to please us, (by heaping his
Mercies and Favours on us,) by so much the more shall we be afraid, (if we are well-natur'd Children) to exasperate our Father which is in Heaven. What then remains, but that we ponder these things, and lay them up in our hearts, and draw them forth into our Actions, and daily repeat them in our Lives, And reap the comfort of so doing, in the hour of Death, and the Day of Iudgment. Which God of his Mercy prepare us for, even for the glory of his Name, and for the worthiness of his Son; To whom, with the Father, in the Unity of the Spirit, be ascri∣bed by us, and by all the World, Blessing, and Glory, and Honour, and Power, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, from this time forward for evermore.
THE GRAND INQUIRY To be made In these Inquisitive Times, Taken from the Mouth of The Frighted Iailour OF PHILIPPI.
THE GRAND INQUIRY To be made in These Inquisitive Times. ACTS XVI. 30. What must I do, that I may be saved? THus the Iailour at Philippi sought to his Pris'ners for a Deliverance. Not his ordinary Pris'ners, who at once were in Bondage to Him and Satan; And were bound up in Misery as well as Iron; who had , spirits so gross, and so incrassat, and so manacl'd to the Flesh, that together with their Bodies, their Souls were put into the Stocks, as knowing no better Liberty than what con∣sisted in the Freedom of Hands and Feet. But the Pris'ners in the Text were Pris'ners
only . Men whose Liberty did con∣sist in the ubiquity of their Thoughts, and in being made free of the New Ierusalem. Men, who by living the Life of Faith, maintain'd an Intercourse with God and his glorious An∣gels. And though their Carkasses or Outsides were contiguous to the Earth, yet their Commerce and Conversation was still in Heaven. They were at once such a Free and such a Dreadful sort of Pris'ners, as by their Liber∣ty to pray, and to sing praises unto God, (v. 25.) may be said to have taken their Prison Cap∣tive. For their Midnight Devotions were sud∣dainly follow'd with an Earthquake; in so much that the Foundations of the Prison were shaken, the Doors flew open of themselves, and the Bands of the Pris'ners were all unloos'd, (v. 26.) Nor indeed is it a wonder, that such a Miracle should be seen in so blind a Dunge∣on, whilst the Pris'ners that were in it were Paul and Silas. For These were two of that little number, by whom the world had been turned upside down, Acts 17. 6. not in that malitious sense, in which the words were there us'd, by the certain leud fellows of the baser sort, who had assaulted the House
of Jason, and set the City in an uproar, (v. 5.) They having turn'd it upside down, not for the worse, but for the better. The Confu∣sion which they made did tend to Harmony, and Order. They made men Antipodes to themselves, by their contrary walking to what they hitherto had done. And so in effect, They turn'd a Chaos upside down, more properly than a World. Or if it must needs be call'd a world, it was the world lying in wickedness, 1 Joh. 5. 19. The world compos'd of three Ingredients, which made it fit to be cleans'd by another Deluge. For all that is in the world (as the same St. Iohn saith) is the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. And this alone was That world, which by Precept, and Example, by Life, and Doctrin, these first Preachers of Christ were to turn upside down. And this accordingly they did in a great many re∣spects. As in opening the Eyes of the Ig∣norant Gentiles, and in mollifying the Hearts of the stubborn Iews, and in breaking down the Partition-wall, which God himself had built up betwixt the Iew and the Gentile. They turn'd the world upside down, by beat∣ing
Swords into Plough-shares, and warlike Spears into peaceful Pruning-hooks. By ma∣king the Lamb to lye down with the Wolf, and the Kid with the Hyaena. By making Friend∣ship and Peace between the Greek and the Iew, as between the Iew and the Samaritan. By turning Infidels into Believers; Idolaters into Christians; and the rebellious Sons of Darkness into Children of the Light. Thus without Archimedes his Postulatum or Hypo∣thesis, , or (as it is in the Dorick Dialect) , an easy way was found out, to turn the world up∣side down. Sure I am that in my Text there was some∣what like it. For Paul and Silas who were yesterday as the off-scowring of the Earth, are now on a suddain entertain'd as two Inhabi∣tants of Heaven. They who yesterday had been drag'd, both in their Persons, and in their Names, through the publick Market∣place of Philippi, (v. 19.) who had had their Cloaths rent, and been beaten with Rods, (v. 22.) who had been thrown into a Dungeon as a Couple of pernicious and insufferable men, (v. 24.) are now revered and sought unto, as
the very Oracles of God. That very Iailour who was yesterday putting their Feet into the Stocks, and thrusting them into the inner Prison, (v. 24.) is now awak'd by their Mu∣sick, and stands affrighted at their Liberty, and is ready to kill himself with his Sword, for fear of dying by their Escape; when, be∣ing hinder'd by his Pris'ners from offering violence to Himself, he even springs into their Presence with fear and trembling, and (by Faith coupl'd with Fear) falls down pro∣strate at their Feet with this short Inquiry, (an Inquiry very plain, but yet sufficiently mysterious, and as copious in the sense, as it is short in the letter,) What must I do, that I may be saved? Which is as if he should have said, (that I may paraphrase his words,) See∣ing I cannot but acknowledge, that the Doctrin you Teach is the Truth of God, and the Truth of That God who now hath testifi∣ed it by Miracle, in shaking my Prison by its Foundations, in compelling its Doors to do you Reverence, and in making your Fetters afraid to hold you; And seeing I cannot but acknowledge, That such a God is to be served by every one who will be sav'd; I be∣seech
you Sirs inform me wherein his Ser∣vice is to consist, and how I may attain to so great Salvation. It is not Silver, or Gold, or Security for your Persons, that I demand▪ I do not earnestly intreat you to confine your Heads within the Dungeon, or to return your Feet into the Stocks, (though That is as much as my Life is worth;) But if there is any Thing in the World which you will do for my sake, Tell me what I must do, that I may be saved. And here I am sorry that I must say, (what yet I must, if I deal uprightly,) That we who pass for very prudent and sober Chri∣stians, may very well be sent to School to this frighted Heathen. We may learn from this Iailour in his time of exigence and distress, how our Souls should be employ'd at our Times of leisure. Not in progging for Ri∣ches, or worldly Greatness, asking what we must do to get a fortune when we have none, or to increase it when it is gotten, or to keep it when 'tis increas't, or to recover it when it is lost, or to secure it if recover'd from running the risque of a Relapse; Nor yet in progging (with Eudoxus) for Ease and Plea∣sure,
without either End, or Interruption, asking what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or wherewithal we shall be cloath'd. We must not be carefully contriving with the unjust Steward, (Luke 16. 3.) in his What shall I do to put a cheat upon my Lord, and to oblige his Debtors to me, that when I am put out of my Stewardship, they may receive me into their Houses. Nor may we ask with the wealthy Miser, (Luke 12. 17.) What shall I do for sufficient Treasuries and Barns, wherein to bestow all my Fruit and my Goods; (as if his Life had consisted in the Abundance of the Things which he possessed, v. 15.) But our Inquiry must be rather like that of the Multitude to our Saviour, What shall we do that we may work the work of God? (that is to say in plainer Terms,) what course shall we take, that we may do what thou bidst us? thatJohn 6. 27. we may labour for the meat which will never perish, but indure unto Life everlasting? or as the Publicans and Souldiers, and other Pro∣selytes to the Baptist, who had warn'd them to flee from the wrath to come, (Luke 3. 7, 10.) What shall we do whereby to anticipate our Destruction, and to avert the sad effects of the
fatal Axe, which now is laid to the Root of the Tree? what shall we do, as to the bearing good fruit, to prevent hewing down, and be∣ing cast into the Fire? or as the Iailour of Phi∣lippiVers. 9. to Paul and Silas, (in the words which are now before us,) what must we do that we may be sav'd? In which Inquiry of the Iailour there are Four Things observable. First the End of the Inquiry; Next the Means conducing to it; Then the necessary Connexion between the one and the other; And lastly the Person here In∣quiring, together with the Persons inquired of. First the End of the Inquiry is here ex∣pressed to be Salvation. 'Tis , That I may be sav'd. Next the Means of its Attainment (which make the Object of his Inquiry) are here im∣ply'd to consist in Practice. For it is not thus ask't, what must I outwardly Profess? or what must I inwardly believe? But ; what must I Do, that I may be sav'd? Thirdly the necessary Connexion between the Means and the End, is very significant∣ly
imply'd in the little word Must. For 'tis not only ; what shall I do? (though That is also comprehended,) but ; what Must I do that I may be sav'd? Lastly The Person here Inquiring, toge∣ther with the Persons inquired of, are The Iai∣lour and his two Pris'ners, Paul and Silas. These He earnestly consulted about the Bu∣siness of his Salvation. Yet not as Pris'ners, or Private men, but as attested by the Mira∣cle to be Embassadors from God. For as God the Son had His mission from God the Father, so had They Theirs from God the Son. As my Father sent me, so send I you, was the saying of Christ to his Twelve Apostles. And He that receiveth you, receiveth me, As he that receiveth me, receiveth also him that sent me. They were not only The Nuntio's, but Re∣presentatives of Christ. He alone was the Oracle, at which Salvation was to be ask't; But Paul and Silas were two of those sa∣cred Mystae, by whom the Responses were to be given. And so of Them in That Notion our Neophyte Iailour did fitly ask, What must I do, that I may be saved? This indeed is the Division, But it is not
nice enough to be the measure of my In∣tent in the Tractation of the Text. Where∣in I purpose to consider, not so much the Matter, as the Condition of the Question. No nor That, in a Dogmatical, but in an Applicatory way. Nor so, in general, or at large, but as particularly relating unto the Terrors in the Context, whereby the Iailour of Philippi was happily frighted into Devo∣tion. It being chiefly my present Aim, (not to touch on those Notions which I have used on a Text of some Affinity with This in another Place, but) to fill up the Vacuities of my former Design, by supply∣ing That Here, which was there omitted. For the accomplishing of which, As in all Moral Subjects of Meditation and Discourse, The Method is still to be Analytical; so in This (above All) which now does call for our Attention, I must begin with the End of the Iailor's Quaere. For He who is so great a Sluggard, as not to open his Lips for the way to Heaven, will hardly be so industrious, as to labour with his Hands, or so much as pluck them out of his
Bosom, whereby to lay 1 Tim. 6. 12, 19. hold on Eternal Life. How very far are They from striving to enter in at the strait Gate, who are not anxious enough to ask, whereabout the Gate lyes, or which is the way to get it open? How little can we expect they should give all di∣ligence, to make their Calling and Election sure, who have not the Courage or Curiosity to learn of what sort it is? who are too Lazy to contemplate, or too delicate to inquire, either into the End, or the Nature of it? Can they be heartily employ'd in working out their Salvation with fear and trembling, who will not trouble themselves to ask, (no not so much as this Heathen-Iailour) what it is they must do that they may be sav'd? 'Tis very strange that so it should be, but very clear that so it is: That of the All which concerns us as Men or Christians, though nothing makes a greater Noyse than the Salvation of the Soul, yet there is nothing in the World of any considerable accompt, (whether for Profit, or Pleasure, or Reputation,) which is so little look't after, or labour'd for. For This is sure the sole reason, (or at least
one of the chief) why a far Matth. 7. 13, 14. lesser number of men belongs to Heaven than to Hell; And why the Harvest of Satan will be veryMatth. 3. 12. much greater than That of Christ; because Men commonly are industriously and expen∣sively wicked, They sin as with a Cart-rope, and drink iniquity like water, they think they can never bid enough, whilst they are pur∣chasing a Mansion in the Territories of Dark∣ness; And therefore in the words of the Prophet Isaiah, (though spoken by Him in Mortem vo∣cat Hostem mortiferum. Ut sensus sit, sperabant se, blandiendo, sa∣lutem repertu∣ros apud Sen∣nacharibum. Grot. in locum. Micah 7. 3. Wisd. 1. 12, 16. another sense,) They make a Covenant with Death, and with Hell are at Agreement, (Isa. 28. 15.) or, (as the excellent Book of Wisdom does more designedly express it,) They even call Death to them, and pull Destruction upon themselves with the works of their Hands. They are as studious of variety, and as wit∣tily inventive of evil things, as if the Bur∣den of their Inquiry were none but. This, What must we do that we may be damn'd? But now so far are most men from being either as expencefully or as elaborately vertuous, that they rather are afraid of being righteous o∣vermuch; (as they love to misinterpret the words of Solomon;) Their strictest Care is,
not be taken for Praecisians; And they are really asham'd to be holy indeed, for fear it should make them look like Hypocrites. They are so far from taking pains, and making a Business of Religion, that they do not so much as say, with the . Pythag. . Pythagoreans, (who summon'd the Actions of every Day before the Tribunal of every Night,) ; What evil have I done since I rose this morning? or what Good Deed have I omitted? whither goes the way that I am now walking in? goes it to Egypt? or to Canaan? leads it to Heaven? or to Hell? Much less do they ask with this fright∣ed Iailour in the Text; What must we do that we may be sav'd? Now the reason of this Reason doth seem to be chiefly A want of That, which was re∣quired of the Iailour as a chief means of his being sav'd; even a cordial Beliving in the Lord Iesus Christ, and a Belief of That Sal∣vation which in the Text is inquired after. Of which I doubt there are but few that are True Believers, even of Them who do not doubt of their own Belief. So that there is not a greater Instance of the Deceitfulness of
a man's Heart, than his Treacherous Belief that he does Believe; when yet he proves by all his Practice that he is either no Believer, or else no better than a Gamester when he believes that he shall win. How many Pro∣fessors of Christianity who daily assent unto the Creed, do still confute their own Belief of the two last Articles, The Resurrection of the Body, and the Life Everlasting? For is it possible that a man should very seri∣ously believe he shall last for ever, and not be vehemently solicitous, whether in Hea∣ven, or in Hell? or that he really should believe there is a Heaven, and a Hell, with∣out a minutely concernment, to which of the two he must needs belong? If a man's Neck be but obnoxious to the Gallows or the Block, or his Goods but in danger of Con∣fiscation, sleep it self will not be strong e∣nough to give him rest, until he has us'd his whole strength to purchase a Pardon, or a Reprieve. And did he as really believe, that he shall rise after Death to a Day of Iudgment, when evil Doers shall be cast in∣to a Bottomless Asphaltites, a Lake which e∣vermore is burning with Fire and Brimstone, ô
with what Horror and Indignation would he look back upon his Sins? with what Remorse and Self-Revenge would he afflict him∣self for them in Soul and Body? with what a vehement desire would he demon∣strate his Repentance by Change of Life? ô with what Carefulness and Concernment would he endeavour to make his Peace with abused Iustice? with what strong crying and Tears would he sue for Mercy? Not in the lan∣guage of St. Peter, when transported out of his wits by his great Amazement, DepartLuke 5. 8. from me ô Lord, for I am a sinful man; But rather with Christ upon the Cross where he recited in Syriac those words of David, MyMatth. 27. 46. Psal. 22. 1. God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me! How much rather would he choose, to do it now to some purpose, and that but once, than at last to no purpose, and that for ever? Say then, good Reader, and say without Parti∣ality; Can a man in good earnest believe his own Immortality, whilst he so seldom or never mindes the future condition of his Soul? and is not solicitous what to do, that he may be sav'd? There can be nothing more incredi∣ble, than that a man of such a Faith should
be so destitute of Fear. For what accompt can be given, why a man should shrink at Death, a great deal more than at Damnation, and more provide against the pains of a dy∣ing Life, than the Torments of a Death which will live for ever, (that is, more against the first, than the second Death,) but that he steadily believes the first may easily come to pass, whilst he hopes that the second is but a Fable? They who hitherto have thought they were True Believers, whilst yet their Infidel Lives have strongly prov'd that they were none, will confess what I say, if they e∣ver shall have Patience enough to meditate; and shall meditate long enough, to comprehend the whole force of my present reason. Now in order to my purpose, which is to rouze up some or other out of the Lethar∣gie they are in, and to set them on work in this Grand Inquiry, I shall reason a little far∣ther with the Paganish Professors of Christiani∣ty. And first of all let it be granted, (what ought not yet to be suppos'd,) That what they have not in Themselves an active Power to demonstrate, cannot have a passive Power of being demonstrated by others; that so they
may not be offended at the uncivil possibi∣lity, of other mens being deeper or quicker sighted than Themselves. For some are so strongly of opinion, that their particular Comprehension is the Adaequate measure of all Existence, that they are apter to deny, and to disbelieve, that there is any thing in the World beyond the Horizon of their Conceipt, than to suspect, or confess, that their Souls are short-sighted. Not vouchsafing to consi∣der, how great a number of Things there are about the Body of a Flea, which are invisible to their Eyes, whilst unassisted, and yet are evident unto any, who shall behold them through a Microscope. And if to the natural Eye of Reason, we add the Telescope of Faith, which is the Evidence of Things not seen, we shall have an easy Prospect of that Salvation, which the Iailour of Philippi en∣quired after. And discern the true reason, why the Sciolists of the Age (who are call'd the Wits) do first contend there are no Spi∣rits, and thence infer there is no Hell, and so conclude they need not ask, what it is they must do that they may be saved; even be∣cause they have too much, and too little
wit. For if they had less, they would not raise their Objections; and if they had more, they would be able to refute them. But be it so that they themselves are not able to demonstrate, there is a Hell to be saved from; Dare they say they are better able to demon∣strate that there is none? Can they say that they have dyed, to make a Decision of the Question? And been restored again to life, to declare the Negative by Experience? Do they suspect the Galilaean whom we com∣monly call Iesus, in what he saith of an outer Darkness, and therein of a Worm which never dyes, and of a Fire which is not quenched? And do they so far suspect him, that they resolve to make an Essay of his Veracity, and therefore trust not his Doctrin, till they have try'd it? will they admit of no Philoso∣phy, but what they call Experimental? and therefore stay till they are dead for a Deter∣mination of their Doubt, because (for∣sooth) until the time that they have tasted the first Death, they know not if they can feel a second? I say admit they do not know, that there are Torments after Death to in∣dure for ever. Should not this suffice to
Awe them, that such there are for ought they know? Or are their Souls so wholly drown'd and swallow'd up in Sensualities, as that they have not any leisure wherein to consider their latter End? Have they not Melancholy e∣nough in their Constitutions, to fix their volatil spirits (no not so much as for an hour) upon that which concerns them the most that may be, even the Subject of a joyful or sad Eternity? Or have they the leisure to consider their latter end, but only want suf∣ficient Courage and Resolution to indure it▪ as being a pungent, and a dismal, and not only a sad, but an insupportable Consideration? This methinks is as absurd, as whatsoever it is that hath been alledg'd. For if they have not the patience to think or meditate upon Hell for a little season; How much less will they be able to undergo it with Patience to all Eternity? If the wages of Sin is such, whilst it is yet but in the earning; Lord! how terrible will it be at the Time of Pay∣ment? And what a strange Contradiction does this imply in some mens humours, That they should dare incur the danger of indu∣ring those Torments of Hell it self, whereof
they dare not indure so much as a deep conside∣ration? no not long enough to inquire, what they must do to be saved from them? But all this is no more than an empty Mormo, to Them whose Faculties are pos∣sess't with a spirit of slumber, being benumn'dRom. 11. 8. by those foolish and hurtful Lusts, which1 Tim. 6. 9. drown the Soul in Misery and Perdition. Some are either so intangled with worldly Cares, or else so transported with carnal Pleasures, they do so hunger after some sins, and so thirst af∣ter others, and are so satisfied in the misery of injoying God's Anger, (by being at a full a∣greement with Sin and Hell,) that they areIsa. 28. 15. still too much diverted by offering Sacrifice to their Senses, to be able to reflect, or to look before them. Either they do not at all remember, in the midst of their Injoyments, that for all these things God will bring them toEccles. 11. 9. Iudgment; or if some times they do, they straight contrive how to forget it. And if no∣thing else will, either Wine, or Women, or Sleep, or Musick, or all these together, will put it out of their Remembrance. Prospe∣rity is a weapon, which hardly one in Ten Thousand hath ever known how to wield.
No not Solomon the wise, in a state of Grace; no nor Adam the uncorrupt, in a state of In∣nocence; no nor Lucifer the Beatified, in a state of Glory. They that have so much Peace without, as to beget a stupefaction, call'd Peace within, who live at ease in their Posses∣sions, and have a great Friendship with the World, will be rather lifted up, like the menHos. 13. 6. of Ephraim, or fall a kicking, like Iesurun, orDeut. 23. 15. stretch themselves upon their Couches and drink Wine in Bowls, like the wantons in Zion ofAmos 6. 4, 6. whom we read in the Prophet Amos, than let it enter into their Thoughts, That the Feet of those Darlings do lead to Death, and that their Hands take hold of Hell. They will be otherways employ'd, than in con∣triving how to stand in the Day of wrath, or in studying what to do, that they may be sav'd? It concerns us therefore to pray, with the Poenitent Emperour Mauritius, That God will use us as he did here the frighted Iai∣lour of Philippi, even terrifie and scare us out of our carnal Security, (into which our successes are apt to cast us,) and awaken us into a sense of the great Concernment of our Souls. That he will fetch us unto Himself,
although it be by the sharpest and dreadful'st Methods. That he will use us as severely, as once he did Nebuchadnezzar; even driveDan. 4. 25, 32, 33. us from the Comforts of Human Society and Converse, And give us our Dwelling with the Beasts of the Field: That he will make us eat Grass as an Herd of Oxen, and let our Bodies be wet with the Dew of Heaven; until we come to consider, as well as know, That the most high God ruleth in the Kingdoms of men, And that the great year of Recompence will shortly come, when he will put a vast difference between the Wheat and the Chaff, taking the one into his Garner, and burning up the other with Fire unquenchable. If af∣ter all his fair warnings both by his Prophets and by his Rod, after his shaking the very Foundations both of a Kingdom and of a Church, (as here he shook Those of the Jai∣lour's Prison,) And now if after his shooting at us, not only with his venom'd, but invi∣sible Arrow, the Plague of Pestilence, we are not quicken'd into a sense of our Sin and Misery, It is but high time to pray for what we most of all deprecate; That to the end we our selves may be some way better'd, He
will make a much worse thing happen to us. That He will make us as the , the Dung, and Refuse of the Earth. That he will load us at once with Disgrace and Torment, whilst from the Pleasures, and the Plenty, he reduces us to the Beggary and Byles of Iob. That he will do to us in Mercy, what St. Paul decreed in Iustice to his Incestuous Corinthi∣an;1 Cor. 4. 5. even deliver us up to Satan for the Destru∣ction of the Flesh, that our Spirits may be saved in the Day of the Lord Iesus. That finding This to be a cruel, and an inhospitable World, we may live in it as Pilgrims and Sojourners on the Earth. That our weariness of This, may make us long and look out for a better Country. That being brought to the Extremity of lying with Lazarus and the Dogs at the Rich man's Door, we may be thereby instructed, if not compell'd to cast a∣bout, how we may lodge also with Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom. This, I say, is our In∣terest, and so it should be our option, There∣fore our wish and our Contrivance, and by Consequence our Prayer, That if we can∣not be brought to God but by the Buffet∣tings of Satan, nor be made in love with
Heaven without a Foretast of Hell, (which hath been to most Patients the wholsom'st Med'cin,) that then he will make our very Torments a means of Bliss; that he will make our very Destroyer become an Instru∣ment of our Safety, and even give us up to Satan, to deliver us from him. That he will bless us with the Miseries of a sinful World; and wean us utterly from the Flesh, by ma∣king it loathsom to our Remembrance. For That God who at the first commanded Light out of Darkness, and an Harmony of Creatures out of an indigested Chaos, can by the same creative Power, so over-rule and dispose of our three Grand Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, as to make them three Antidotes against the Venom of Themselves. To give an Instance in each of These; The terrible Buffettings and Roarings of the Lyon or the Dragon, (that is the Devil,) are made an excellent kind of Antidote against the ser∣pentine Wiles and Allurements of him. The many Deceiptfulnesses and Frauds and cruel Usages of the World, do make the fittest Prophylactick against its Vanities and its Pomps. The natural rottenness and stench, and noysom
Diseases of the Flesh, become the best  against its Lusts. Just as the Bitings of the Scorpion are said to be cured by the skin; or as the Fire of the Chymist in Spi∣rits of Wine, is most anodynous, and asswaging, to whosoever hath been burned, or scalded with it. Or as the Root Piso in medi∣cinâ Brasilien∣si, l. 3. Mandihoca, though of it self a rank Poyson, does (with no greater praeparation than that of its be∣ing well press't,) afford a Meal to make Bread for many great Nations in America. And shall we not pray that by any means, (be they never so pungent) by any Method, (be it never so sharp) we may be made to per∣form our Vow in Baptism, by forsaking the Devil and all his works, the Pomps and Va∣nities of the World, with the sinful Lusts of the Flesh? If hardly any thing but Ship∣wracks will make us pray, we are deeply con∣cern'd to pray for Shipwracks. If we are grown so Atheistical, as not to cry out to God and the Lord Iesus Christ, but in a Fit of the Strangury, or the Stone; well may we pray for such Fits, as St. Basil once did for a Relapse into his Feaver, as soon as he found his Soul the worse for the Recovery of
his Body. If nothing but Dangers can keep us safe, (as indeed all Dangers contribute to it, unless the Danger of Security be of the number) we have most reason to fear, what we commonly most affect, such a full flow∣ing Tide of Good Things here, as made our Saviour's Description of Dives his Heaven up∣onLuke 16. 25. Earth. If we find in our selves that Heb. 11. 8. Scrip∣tural Character of a Bastard, a being suffer'd to live in Sin without the chastisement of Vers. 7. Sons, we well may wish for those Terrors which take so much from our Felicities, as to give us good hope that we may be Sons. We can never better discern the great Advantages coming to us by Frights and Ter∣rors, (such as These in my Text,) than by reflecting upon them in some Examples. When God himself would gain Reverence both to his Majesty and his Law, and beget in his People a fear to break it, it pleas'd his Wisdom to deliver it with many Circum∣stances of Terror; even with Thundring and Lightning, with Fire and Tempest, with the sound of a Trumpet, and the voice of words,Heb. 12. which voice was so terrible, that they who
heard it intreated they might not hear it any more. And so terrible was the sight, that Mo∣ses said, I exceedingly fear and quake, (Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20.) And St. Paul having pre∣mis'd a , we must all appear before the Iudgment-seat of God, does pre∣sently2 Cor. 4. 10. add thereupon an , Knowing therefore the Terrors of the Lord we persuade men. Which is as if he should have said, That the Due Consideration of a Iudg∣ment to come should be the strongest of all Incitements to the Amendment of our Lives. This in reason should prevail, when all things else are ineffectual. Nor does any thing more dispose us for such a sad consideration, than the happy Interruptions of our Prosperi∣ty. David boasted in his Prosperity, He shouldPsal. 30. never be removed, Psal. 30. 6. But when God hid his Face, it presently follows, that he was troubled, v. 7. Then he cried unto the Lord, and piously made his Supplication, v. 8. Just so it was with the whole People Israel. The more they were compass'd about with Blessings, they presently sinn'd so much the more, (Psal. 78. 17.) But when he slew them,Psal. 78. they sought him, and inquired early after God,
(v. 34.) Nor was it otherwise in the Times of the Prophet Ieremy, and Amos; Wo be to them that are at ease in Zion, (Amos 6. 1.) For they put far off the evil Day, (v. 3.) But in the Time of their Trouble, men are ready to say, Arise, and save us, Jer. 2. 27. Exactly thus it was with the very Disciples of our Lord. For whilst all was well with them, and that their Ship injoy'd a Calm, Their Blessed Master was asleep, and They as per∣fectly secure, as if his Eye had been watching over them. But behold a great Tempest, which made the Sea cover the Ship, made them also cry out, and awake their Master out of his sleep, with a , Lord save us,Matth. 8. 25. we perish. 'Tis true indeed they so spake of a meer Temporal Destruction; And of That they spake too from a Panick Fear. But how many in the World do hardly come to [Lord save us, or what must we do that we may be sav'd,] until they are like the poor Sy∣rian, just ready to perish? Yet even This be∣comes an Argument to prove the Danger of our Felicities, and the benefit growing to us from seeing the Terrors of the Lord, That They who are Scoffers at Religion during the
Time of their Health and Plenty, are uni∣versally on their Death-Beds of the Religion of the Clinicks; and being brought down to the Brink of Hell, will commonly lift up their Hands and their Eyes to Heaven; crying out in the language, though not in the Spirit of Christ's Disciples, Lord save us we perish. And sometimes too, (although very seldom) not only in the language, but in the sense and syncerity of the poor Seeker in my Text, what must we do that we may be sav'd? Belshazzar had not in all his Life so much as a Fit of true Devotion, until the fingers of a man's Hand coming forth out of aDan. 5. 5▪ 6. 25. 29. wall of their own accord, (or invisibly helpt by an hand from Heaven,) and setting his Judgment before his Eyes in Mene Tekel upharsin, had even loosed the Ioynts of his Loins and Knees, and together with his Countenance had chang'd his Heart too. And (to conclude with That Instance which is afforded out of the Text, as being That that gave Occasion to all the rest) we see the Iailour of Philippi was never truly in his wits, until thus frighted. Until the Miracle of the Earthquake had struck his Prison into
a Palsie, and Himself into a Trembling, it never entred into his Thoughts, what should become of him hereafter. But when he saw by signs and wonders which fill'd him with Ecstasie and Astonishment, That there was Punishment for the Wicked, Reward for the Righteous, and a God that judgeth the Earth, and Quite another kind of God than what He had hitherto adored; A God that could bow down the Heavens, and make the Earth be∣come Quaker; A God that gave Light to the blackest Dungeon, shook the Prison by its Foundations, conveighed Liberty to the Cap∣tives, and fill'd the Hearts of the Despised with unspeakable Ioy in the Holy Ghost; He very easily inferr'd, that they had hitherto been but Idols, which he had paid Devotion to; and That in requital of his Idolatries, he was lyable to the wrath of the only True God: That Paul and Silas were apparently two of his Emissaries or Heraulds, as might be gather'd from the Miracles which had been wrought for their sakes: That They by consequence could inform him, touching the means of his Escape: And therefore in∣stantly he resolv'd to lay himself at their Feet,
(though They were Pris'ners of the Dungeon, and He the Master of the House,) saying, , Sirs, (so the English) or rather Masters and Lords, (so the Greek,) What must I do that I may be sav'd? And this does lead me from the End, to the proper Object of his Inquiry, or the Means inquired after for its Attainment. The second Part of my Division, and now in order to be consider'd. The End of the Inquiry being Future, and Invisible, is only the object of our Thoughts, or at the most of our Desires. But the Means of its Attainment, are (as I noted) here imply'd to consist in Practice. And therefore This is That part, whereof the most of Mankind can least indure the Con∣sideration. Of the few who are concern'd to wish and supplicate for the End, fewer yet are contented to trouble themselves about the Means. They will readily ask, that they may be sav'd; But not so readily inquire, what they must do that they may be sav'd. For should they ask what they must do, they are afraid it would be answer'd, That they must cease to do evil, and learn to do good; That they must seek Iudgment, relieve the Oppressed,Isa. 1. 16, 17.
help the Fatherless, and plead for the Widow. That they must mortifie the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts. That they must crucifie the world unto themselves, and themselves un∣to the world. That if an Eye, or a Hand, or a Foot offend them, they must pluck out the one, and cut off the other. That they must not take any thought for the morrow, but sell all they have, and give it to the Poor; deny them∣selves, take up Christ's Cross, and follow him. They will be sav'd with all their hearts, pro∣vided it may be gratis, either upon none, or on easy Terms: But dare not ask what they must do, with a serious purpose to be doing whatsoever shall be answer'd to be a Requi∣site to Salvation, for fear the answer should be harder, than they are able to indure. As That they must hate their own Lives, and Love their Enemies. That they must fast as well as pray, but feed their Enemies when they hunger. That they must turn the right Cheek to him that strikes them on the left. That when they are persecuted and rail'd at, they must not only rejoyce, but  Matth. 5. 12. leap for Ioy. 1 Thess. 5. 16, 17, 18.That they must pray without ceasing, re∣joyce evermore, and in every thing give Thanks.
Make a Job. Covenant with their Eyes, not to look upon a Maid; and 1 Thess. 5. 22. abstain from all ap∣pearance of Evil. But now the Iailour in my Text, al∣though he had hardly yet the knowledge, had the true Courage of a Christian. Upon Condition he might be sav'd, he did not care on what Terms. 'Tis true Salvation was the End, but the Means of its Attainment did make the Object of his Inquiry. For he did not simply beg that he might be sav'd, as if he thought he might be sav'd▪ without the least cooperation or any endeavour of his own; But as if he had concluded within himself, (as St. Augustin did some Ages after,)Qui creavit te sine te, non sal∣vabit▪te sine te. That God who made us without our selves, will never save us without our selves, He ask't how much he was to contribute towards the Means of his Salvation. And This he ask'd in such a manner, as to imply his being ready, to contribute whatsoever could be exacted. For he did not thus ask, What must I say? or what must I believe? what Opinions must I hold? or what Sect must I be of? what must I give? or whither must I go? but (in a man∣ner which implyed all This, and more,)
, what must I Do, that I may be sav'd? But though this is praise-worthy, 'tis ve∣ry far from being enough. For 'tis one thing to ask, what things are to be done that we may be sav'd; and effectually to do them, is quite another. The wealthy Quaerist in the Gospel could easily ask what he should do, that he might inherit eternal Life; and as easily learn the Things ask't after: But when he was answer'd, that he must sell all he had, and give it to the poor, he could not so ea∣sily fall to practise what he had learnt, by putting the Precept in execution. So the Multitude of Jews could easily ask our Bles∣sed Saviour, what they must do that they might work the work of God, Joh. 6. 28. But being told they must believe, that He was the Bread that came down from Heaven, Then  they murmur'd, v. 41. nay they despised him for his Parentage, v. 42. It was an hard say∣ing, v. 60. Nay so far they were from doing the work of God, who had so lately and so readily ask't him what they must do that they might work it; that from thence they drew back, and would no longer walk with him, v. 66. Such a peevishness there is in the minds of
men, that though they love to be asking the Will of God, they cannot indure to be told it, much less to be employ'd in the Doing of it; no not though they are also told, that This alone is the Price at which Salvation is to be had. Men may come to be baptiz'd, as the Multitude did to Iohn the Baptist, And yet may be at That Instant a generation of Vipers, Luke 3. 7. A Generation of Vipers, and yet have Abraham for their Father, v. 8. that is, their Father after the Flesh; In which respect God is able out of arrant Stocks and Stones to raise up Children unto Abraham. But when 'tis ask't what we must do, to be his Children after the Spirit; The Answer is, we must inherit at once the Faith and the Works of Abraham. And accordingly the Baptist did proportion his Directions to such as ask't them. He did not tell them what they must Teach, whereby to be Orthodox Professors; or what they must hold, whereby to be Orthodox Believers; But as they ask'd what they must do, so he told them those Things that were of necessity to be done. Begin not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father, (for so have They
who are Sons of Belial,) But bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance, v. 8. If ye are Publicans, exact no more than is appointed you, v. 13. If ye are Soldiers, do violence to no man, neither accuse any one falsly, and be content with your wages, v. 14. If ye are Christians of any Cal∣ling, Let him that hath two Coats impart to Him that hath none; And He that hath Meat, let Him do likewise, v. 11. Still 'tis our Doing the things ask'd after, not our Asking what we must do, which is effectually the way to our being sav'd. And accordingly when 'tis said by the Apostle St. Iames, That Faith with∣out Works is dead, and nothing worth, It is in∣timated to us by that expression, That a Rectitude of Iudgment is nothing worth, but as it stands in conjunction with a like Recti∣tude of Life. As if our Faith, and our Knowledge, and good Professions, could a∣mount unto no more than the meer Body of Religion, whilst the Soul that enlivens it is still the sanctity of our Actions. Thence a Good man is called, not an Hearer, or a Believer, But , a Doer of the Word, Jam. 1. 22, 23. And when it pleas'd our blessed Saviour to give a general Descrip∣tion
(in the fifth Chapter of St. Iohn,) as well of the Few that belong to Heaven, as of the Many that go to Hell, He did not give them their Characters from their being of this or that Country, of this or that Calling, of this or that Church, or Congregation, of this or that Faith (not to say Faction) in Re∣ligion; But only from their being qualified with such and such Practice, with such and such Works, with such and such Habits of Conversation. Our Saviours words are very plain, but (in my apprehension) of great Remarque, And such as being well consi∣der'd would teach us how to pass a Iudg∣ment (without any prejudice to our Charity) touching the Safety, or the Danger, the un∣worthiness, or the worth, of our selves, or others. For when All that are in the Graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and shall come forth, our Saviour adds both their Qualities, and the Ends of their coming forth, They that have done good shall infallibly come forth unto the Resurrection of Life, And They that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5. 29. Now certainly He who is the Saviour, can best of all tell
us what belongs to Salvation, and to whom it does belong; who they are that must be saved, and what we must do that we may be sav'd. It is not meerly the priviledge of being received into the Church, and of be∣ing admitted to all her Publick Dispensations, but especially the Abstaining from so much evil, as would denominate Evil-Doers, and the Doing so much Good, as does denominate a Good and a Faithful Servant, by which a man hath just Ground to think himself in God's Favour, and that he is doing what he must do, that he may be sav'd. And if this is the Exegesis of what is said by Paul and Silas, (and that by way of An∣swer to the Inquiry of the Iailour) Believe in the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shalt be sav'd, so as it cannot be understood concerning Faith without Works, but of such a Faith on∣ly as worketh by Love, and so fulfilleth the Law of Christ, (The proof and evidence of which we have in part seen already, and shall see more at large upon the next op∣portunity,) Then let us not so mistake the words in the next Verse after my Text, or take them so by the wrong handle, as to
imply that Paul and Silas were but a Cou∣ple of Antinomians; Or that nothing is to be done as of necessity to Salvation, but barely to believe in the Lord Iesus Christ, (which being abstracted from obedience, is nothing better than Presumption; But rather let us work out our own Salvation, and let us do it with fear and trembling. Let us give all dili∣gence, by adding to Faith Vertue, and one Ver∣tue unto another, to make our Calling and Ele∣ction sure. Let us not look upon our selves as having already apprehended, or as being already made perfect, but forgetting those things that are behind, let us reach forth to those things that are before; ever pressing towards the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Iesus. And leading a life of Self-denials, by frequent watchings, and fa∣stings, and other warrantable Austerities, which are found in holy Scripture to be fit Instances of Attrition, let us beat down our Bodies, and bring our Flesh into Subjecti∣on; if by any means we may attain to the Re∣surrection of the Dead, if by any means we may apprehend That, for which we are also appre∣hended of Christ Iesus. That so when Time
it self shall be lost into Eternity, and all days shall be ended in that one great Sabbath which never Ends, we may also lose our hopes, and our endeavours of being sav'd, in∣to the ravishing experience and presence of it: There with Angels and Arch-Angels, and with all the Company of Heaven, singing Hosannahs, and Halleluiahs, to Him that sit∣teth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever more.
A SHORT and EASY RESOLUTION Of the fore-mentioned ENQUIRY Borrowed from the Mouths of the Two Free-Pris'ners, Paul and Silas.
A RESOLUTION OF THE INQUIRY FROM A Practical Belief. &c. ACTS XVI. 31. Believe in the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved. § 1. THere are such shallownesses and depths too in this little short passage of the Isa. 55. 1. Heb. 2. 1. Rev. 21. 6. Rev. 22. 1, 17. Waters of Life, (as I am prompted out of Scripture to call the Gospel,) that I may say of this Rivulet, what St. Austin once spake of the whole Ocean of holy Writ, The tenderest Lamb may here wade, and the tallest
Elephant may swim. It is a small Current of words, But such as opens and will ingage us in a full Sea of matter. A Sea as hospitable and easy, as That which is now call'd The Euxine, But yet as hazardous, and as diffi∣cult, if not as proverbial as The Aegaean; and so as famous for danger, as 'tis for safety. A Sea we all are to sail in, if bound for Hea∣ven; And yet for want of good steerage, How many Adventurers unaware have been imbark'd in it for Hell? and been even split upon the Rock of their own Salvation? The Antinomians, Fiduciaries, and Solifidians, (be∣twixt whom there is a nice, but a real Dif∣ference,) do not more differ in the ground, and the occasion of their Error, than they a∣gree in the danger, and issue of it. For ma∣king use of the literal against the rational Importance of many Scriptures, and blend∣ing many great Truths with the greatest Falshoods, (so as the latter do pass for cur∣rant by their vicinity with the former,) they commonly reason within themselves in this following manner. § 2. Sure we need not live so rigidly byThe Objection of several Hae∣reticks. Rules and Praecepts, as some Arminian and
Legal Divines would have us. For Rom. 6. 14. we are not under the Law, but under Grace. And Rom. 3. 28. we are justified by Faith) without the Deeds of the Law. Nor are we justified from some things, whilst we are answerable for others; but (as St. Paul taught at Antioch, where he is written to have preached Forgiveness of Sins,) Acts 13. 39. All that believe are justified from all Things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Then why should we busie our selves with Martha about many Things of little moment, when 'tis so easy for us with Mary to choose the One that is needful? for can any Thing be easier, than to believe without doubting that Iesus is the Christ? yet 1 John 5. 1. whosoever so believeth is born of God. And Verse 4. whosoever is born of God, over∣cometh the world. Nor indeed is it a won∣der, considering the Vertue of such Belief▪ For our Saviour tells us expresly, Mark 9. 23. That all Things are possible to Him that believeth. From whence it follows that to believe, is The unum Necessarium, which a Christian is to provide in his way to Heaven. And ac∣cordingly said our Saviour unto the Ruler of the Synagogue, not only , believe, but
, Mark 5. 36. Luke 8. 50. Only believe. Nor can this be thought the Priviledge of but here and there one; for 'tis indefinitely extended to all in general; John 6. 47. He that believeth in me hath eternal life. Where the word He, being indefinite, is tantamount to whosoever, and every one. And so indeed it is express't in other passages of Scripture; As when 'tis said to Cornelius, and others with him, Acts 10. 43. whosoever believeth in Him, shall receive remission of sins. And in the Epistle to the Romans we find it said of the Gospel, Rom. 1. 16. That 'tis the Power of God unto Salvation to every One that believeth. Where the Gospel cannot be meant as being inclusive of the Law, because 'tis said of our Lord in the same Epistle, Rom. 10. 4. He is the End of the Law to every one that believeth. Besides, need we care to be Better, or better advised than St. Paul, That great Apostle of the Gentiles, and pretious Vessel of Election? Do we not find him confessing, and that in the time of his Apostleship, That Rom. 7. 14, 18, 19. He was carnal, and sold un∣der sin? That the Good he would, he did not; But the evil which he would not, That he did, whereby he sinn'd against God and his Consci∣ence too? That no good Thing did inhabit in
him, and that he was brought into Captivity to theVers. 23. Law of Sin which was in his Members? Well therefore did he desire, in his Epistle to the Philippians, Philip. 3. 9. to be found only in Christ, not having his own righteousness which is of the Law, but That which is through the Faith of Christ, The righteousness which is of God by Faith. Why then should we be going such a long way about, whilst behold in the Scriptures so much a neerer way home? what need we shut up our selves from a thousand Pleasures and Contentments, by our endeavour of li∣ving up to the Moral Law, by a Contempt of this World, by mortifications of the Flesh, by daily contendings against the Devil, by bear∣ing both the Yoke and the Cross of Christ, by frequent watchings and fastings, and other Denials of our selves, by making Prayers, and hearing Sermons, and by a world of good works, (which are commonly very chargeable, or at least troublesom in the per∣formance,) I say what need of all This, whilst Salvation may be had upon easier Terms? We cannot certainly be wiser, nor need we probably be warier, than Paul and Silas in the Text. Who being ask'd as Ghostly Fa∣thers,
and that by a newly-converted Hea∣then, what he was to do that he might be sav'd, gave him no other Answer of Direction or Advice, than That He must believe in the Lord Iesus Christ. § 3. Which, in the sense of the Solifidi∣ans,The Objection laid open as to the Venom contained in it. Antinomians, and Fiduciaries, (for whom I have hitherto been objecting, if not as well as they can wish, at least as strongly as I am able,) is just as if they had answer'd Thus. Jailour, be of good Comfort. For we were lately in as much jeopardy, as Thou canst possibly be in. And though thy Dan∣ger is great, thy Escape is easy. For do not think that Christianity is such a Difficult Reli∣gion as some would make it. It is rather the easiest and most indulgent, as well as the safest in all the World. It hath indeed many Prae∣cepts, but by vertue of One alone (which we shall presently tell thee of) all the rest will be wav'd, or dispensed with. So that although it is a Law, 'tis a Law of Liberty. A Law of Liberty from the Rigors and Austerities of the Law. A special part of Christ's Purchase, and the great Priviledge of a Christian. Nor
is it only his Priviledge, but Duty too: He being commanded, and so oblig'd, (not only suffer'd, or allow'd,) to stand fast in that Liberty wherewith Christ hath made him free. What Sins soever thou hast committed which can∣not be expiated for amongst Iews or Gen∣tiles, by thy Conversion unto Christ will be blotted out. Be it so that thou hast liv'd in perfect Enmity to God; yet to Us hath He com∣mitted the word of Reconciliation. We are Em∣bassadours for Christ, in whom alone we preach pardon, and forgiveness of Sins; not an absolute necessity of moral obedience and good works, which assist not our Faith, but declare it on∣ly. He hath satisfied by his Death for all the Debt we ow'd to it, and is the Propitiation for all our Sins. He is our Wisdom, and our Redemption, and all besides that, which we are able to want or pray for. Nor stand we in need of an Inhaerent, as being safe by a transferr'd and imputed Righteousness. For as Abraham believed and 'twas imputed to him for Righteousness, (Rom. 4. 22.) So also to Us shall it be imputed, if we Believe on him that raised up Iesus from the dead, (v. 24.) We have been scourg'd on his Back, and born
a Cross on his Shoulders; we have been cleans'd by His blood, and still are heal'd by His stripes; we are beheld in His Face, and shall be judg'd in His Person, Just we are by His Righteousness, and for ever repriev'd by His Condemnation. It is for Christians to distinguish betwixt external and internal Grace, and so betwixt an outward and in∣ward Holiness. For our Holiness without us (that is, in Christ) does supersede the necessi∣ty of one within us. And is extremely more effectual to the saving of the Soul than any Holiness within us could ever possibly have been. We shall not therefore need to load thee with heavy Burdens, which neither we nor our Fathers have been able to bear. Nor shall we trouble thee at once about many Things. For though thy Quaestion is very Copious, and of ineffable Importance, as to the End inquired after, Thy being sav'd; yet 'tis so easy to be resolv'd, as to the means of its Attainment, that all The Answer we shall give thee is only This,  Believe in the Lord Iesus Christ, and thou shalt be sa∣ved.
§ 4. And now it would be high time toThe Objection objected against from the Ab∣surdities couch∣ed in it. divide the Text, (after such a pleasant and easy Paraphrase, as the wit of Flesh and Blood is too too▪ apt to make of it, especially when assisted by learned Patrons,) but that I think the way to it is not sufficiently praepar'd. For should so weighty a Quaestion be so very lightly answer'd, as with a bare  Believe, and be sav'd? This is short work in∣deed, and such as would make Paul and Si∣las to be the comfortablest Preachers in all the World. I mean the pleasantest, and the most popular, I say not the faithful'st, and most sin∣cere. For if This Answer is sound and Or∣thodox, That nothing more needs be done towards any man's being sav'd, than to be∣lieve in the Lord Iesus Christ; Why then saith our Saviour, Narrow is the way, and strait is the Gate that enters into Life, And few there be that go in thereat? or to what purpose are we commanded, That we strive to enter in, and also told at the same time, That many shall seek who shall not enter? Or why does St. Paul in other places press so earnestly for Obedience to the Command∣ments of Christ, which are at least compre∣hensive
of the whole Moral Law? or why do we read in the New Testament, That eve∣ry man is to work out his own Salvation, to fight, and to labour, and to use all diligence for the making of his Calling and Election sure? Are These things necessary for others▪ but not for the Iailour of Philippi? was He alone to be sav'd at so cheap a Rate, as a single Belief on the Lord Iesus Christ? or was he not one of those Philippians of whom St. Paul required more? Or did he require at other men a great deal more than there was need? Or does He now joyn with Silas in soothing up the poor Iailour, and sowing Pil∣lows under his Elbowes, which is no better than to dawb with untemper'd Morter, to lead their Convert into a Paradise, wherein there lurks both an old and a cunning Serpent? A Serpent apt to persuade him (and by the help of this Text) That though there are in the Gospel, which is the Garden of God, a great many sorts of forbidden fruit, yet 'tis so far from being deadly, that 'tis not danger∣ous to taste it, (as the best of God's Children have ever done,) so long as he can eat of the Tree of Faith too; which is not only bet∣ter
tasted, but also wholsomer by far than the Tree of Knowledge, by being grafted on the stock of the Tree of Life. What (I say) might be the Motive which induced Paul and Silas to give this Answer, , Believe and be sav'd? Is there more than This needful, or is there not? If any thing more than this is needful for the attainment of Salvation, why then did They conceal it, and that from one who even thirsted after a full Draught of Knowledge, What was the All he was to do, that he might be sav'd? Or if This is so sufficient, that nothing more than this is needful, what Necessity is there of preaching, or of learning any thing else? For, as when it was said by our Blessed Saviour, [It is ea∣sier for a Camel to pass the Eye of a Needle, than for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Hea∣ven,] his Disciples ask't presently, [Who then can be sav'd;] so when to One that had in∣quired, [what he must do that he might be sav'd,] no other Answer was given by Paul and Silas, than that he must believe in the Lord Iesus Christ; It may be ask't with as good reason, who then can be damn'd? For thus (we see) the way to Heaven is not on∣ly
made Broader, but less incumber'd than That to Hell. The Flock of Christ is made a great and a numerous Flock. So as The Kingdom of Heaven is but improperly com∣par'd unto a Pearl of great Price, which a Mer∣chant sold all that he had to purchase, since one may have it for a Believing in the Lord Iesus Christ. All which being Absurdities, and ve∣ry profanely inconsistent with the Veracity of our Saviour, may seem to speak Paul and Silas to be a Couple of gross Casuists, for ha∣ving given the Jailour's Quaere so lame and partial a Resolution. But This again is an Absurdity as little allowable as the former. For besides that 2 Tim. 3. 16. All Scripture is of Divine Inspiration, and Paul and Silas in particular had been acknowledged by The Daemoniack (in the 17th Verse of this Chapter) to be The Servants of the most high God, who shew unto us the way of Salvation; The Text which now lyes before us may be justified by a Pa∣rallel out of our Saviour's own Mouth. For having been asked by the People who flock't about him at Capernaum, what they should do that they might work the work of God, (John 6. 28.) This (reply'd our blessed Lord) is
the work of God, That ye BELIEVE on Him whom He hath sent, (v. 29.) In so much that to obviate, and to satisfie all Objections, we must not quarrel, or suspect, but meekly stu∣dy to understand, and explain the Text. Which I shall first attempt to do by a full Division, and after That (not by a curious, but) by a pertinent, and useful Tractation of it. § 5. First to Divide the Text aright, (and so as that it may contain an Explication of its Importance,) we must view and review it in its double relation to the Context. I mean in its Dependance on the words going before, and its Cohaerence with the two Verses which do immediately follow after. The words before are an Inquiry, touchingThe Objection more directly and fully an∣swer'd. the Thing of all the World which is to eve∣ry man living of greatest moment, even the Necessary Means of his being sav'd. This is the Ground, and the Occasion, and Introdu∣ction to the Text. The Text it self is an ob∣scure, because a short Resolution of That In∣quiry. And the two Verses coming after, do very happily, though briefly, (and so in∣deed the less plainly) expound it to us.
The Inquiry was made by the frighted Iailour of Philippi. The Resolution is given by Paul and Silas. The Exposition is St. Luke's, to whom we also owe the Narrative and the Contexture of the whole. The Text abstractively consider'd, does afford at first view, but a single Act, and a single Object. Yet in relation to the Context, each of these is twofold; one whereof is ex∣press'd, and the other imply'd. First the Object here express'd is (in sensu com∣posito) The Lord Iesus Christ. And this is Objectum formale Quod. It is not Christ with∣out Iesus, nor is it Iesus without The Lord. For That were the gross and common Fal∣lacy, A benè conjunctis ad malè divisa, which yet the Flesh of most Professors is apt to impose upon their spirits. He is in all his Three Offices to be the Object of our Belief. And in his Three v. Acts 2. 36. special Titles his Threefold Of∣fice is here included. His Prophetical in the first, his Priestly in the second, and his Kingly in the third. If Salvation is the end, and if we aspire to have it also the event of our Belief, we must impartially believe in the whole Messias. Not as Iesus only, a Savi∣our;
no nor only as Christ, a King; but un∣dividedly, and at once, as the Lord Iesus Christ. This is the Object of our Faith which is here express'd. Next the Word of God preach'd is the object of our Faith, which is here imply'd. And (as the men of the Schools do love to word it) This is Fidei objectum formale Quo. For as Faith cometh by Hearing, and Hearing by theRom. 10. 17. Word of God, which Word cannot be heard without a Preacher; so no sooner was it said by Paul and Silas, that the Jailour must believe in the Lord Iesus Christ, but in the next breath it follows, They spake unto him the WORD of God, (v. 32.) They had in vain told him he must, had they not taught him how he might. And therefore they did not only possess him with the necessity of his believing, But in tenderness to his Soul they straight afforded him the means too. They did not train up their Convert (like the Catechists of Rome) only to believe as the Church believes, that is to say, by a blind and implicit Faith, making Ignorance and Credulity the only Parents of Devotion; But they built up his Faith on the Foundation of
the Scriptures; That by the knowledge of some Praemisses which he might easily com∣prehend, he might attain to a Belief of what was yet Incomprehensible. To beget in him a solid and a well-grounded Faith, such as whereof he might be able to give a rational Accompt, they both exhorted him to believe in, and also preached to him the WORD of the Lord Jesus Christ; the object of our Faith which is here imply'd. Come we now, from the double Object, to observe in the Text a double Act too. Whereof the first is Internal, and that express'd; the second External, and that imply'd. The Act Internal, which is express'd, is , to believe. The Act External, which is imply'd, is to confess what is believ'd in spite of Temptations to conceal it. (And this did the Iailour of Philippi in the next Verses after my Text.) For as inwardly with the Heart a man believeth unto righteousness, so outwardly with the Mouth Rom. 10. 10. Confession is made unto Salvation. Indeed the Gnosticks were all for the Inward Act only, for the better avoiding of Persecution. But the Outward is by God as indispensably requir'd; And the
Inward Act without it is not sincere. Thence it is that they are coupl'd as the condition of Salvation, Rom. 10. 9. If thou shalt confess with thy Mouth the Lord Iesus, and believe in thine Heart that God hath raised him from the Dead, thou shalt be sav'd. Believing and speaking are from the same spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13. It is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken. We also believe, and therefore speak. A double Act then there must be, if the end be to be sav'd. A True Believer must be a Confessor in time of Trial, And when duly call'd to it, a Martyr too. Again, As the Object, and the Act, so too the Subject of it is double. For though begun in the Intellect, yet 'tis consummated in the Will, (as Aq. 22. q. 4. art. 2. Aquinas and his Followers do right∣ly state it,) or else it would be meerly an human Faith, Fides cui potest subesse Dubium, a Faith whose very formal Reason is a radical Fear, (I do not mean an ingenuous, but carnal Fear,) a Faith without Love, and without Activity, and so without the effect of Obedi∣ence too. And therefore Cajetan argues well, That an habit of Salvifick or saving Faith must be at once both a Speculative, and a
Practical habit. And truly such is That Faith which is required in the Text, as may ap∣pear by the Effects and Products of it in the Context. For first the Iailour did assent unto the Things that were preached by Paul and Silas; which infer's the Christian Faith to have got already into his Head. And then immediately after, we find it sunk into his Heart too; witness the Sacrament of his Baptism which he received from Paul and Silas; witness also his tender Charity in his washing of their stripes, his entertaining them at his Table, and his rejoycing even in That that might be temporally his Ruin, (v. 34) which are a proof of his abounding in those fruits of the Spirit, Acts of Iustice, and Gratitude, and works of Mercy, and spiritual Ioy in the Holy Ghost; All Effects and Dia∣gnosticks of saving Faith; The overflowings of That Love, which (to use St. Paul's phrase) is shed abroad in the Heart of a true Believer. And thus we have the twofold Credere est actus Intellectus secundum quod movetur à vo∣luntate ad as∣sentientium; pro∣cedit autem hu∣jusmodi Actus à voluntate & ab Intellectu, quo∣rum utrumque natum est perfi∣ci secundum praedicta. Et ideo oportet ut tam in volun∣tate sit aliquis Habitus quàm in Intellectu, si debeat Actus fi∣dei esse perfec∣tus. Sicut etiam ad hoc quod ac∣tus concupiscibi∣lis sit perfectus, oportet ut sit habitus pruden∣tiae in ratione, & habitus Tem∣perantiae in Concupiscibili. Ibid. in resp. ad obj. p. 11. Subject, of Believing (as we ought) in the Lord Iesus Christ: to wit the Intellect, and the Will too. Our full Assent must be seconded by our Love of the Truth, and Obedience to it; and
that by a natural Production of the one out of the other. For what at first is no more than The light of Knowledge in the Brain, does, by enkindling in the Bowels the Fire of Love, (of Love to God in the first place, and to our Neighbour in the second,) produce O∣bedience to the first and the second Table of the Law. After the Object, and the Act, and the Sub∣ject of this Belief, (each of which is two∣fold,) we are in order to reflect on the Na∣ture of it. Which is indeed very closely, but significantly couch'd in the Praeposition. For 'tis not , believe the Essence or Existence of Jesus Christ; nor is it , believe his Truth or Veracity; But 'tis , believe and trust IN, or UPON the Lord Jesus. Believe at once his Propensity and Power to save thee. Believe his Power, for he is Dominus, The Lord. And believe his Propensity, for he is Iesus, the Sa∣viour. Well therefore said the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Whosoever comethHeb. 11. 6. to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Now what is thus said of God, is exactly true of
the Lord Iesus Christ. For God was in Christ2 Cor. 5. 19. reconciling the World unto himself. And who∣soever cometh to Christ, must believe, as that he is, so withal that he is a Rewarder too. A Rewarder, but of whom? and on what Condition? for he is not a Rewarder of all in general, no nor of All that do believe him to have the Office of a Rewarder, But of all such as seek him, and that with dili∣gence, And of all who thus believe in Him as in the Lord Jesus Christ. Such an im∣portant monosyllable is the Praeposition in, (as 'tis the English of the Greek , and in conjunction with an Accusative,) that the Life of the Text would be lost without it. For standing here, as it does, betwixt the Act, and the Object, it does imply the true nature of saving Faith. Pass we on from the Nature to the Ne∣cessity of Believing. Which here is visibly imply'd by the Retrospect of the Text, as 'tis an Answer to the Question, [, what must I do that I may be sav'd?] for sure the sense of the Answer, if it be adaequate to the Question, must needs be This, Thou must be∣lieve in the Lord Jesus Christ. It is of abso∣lute
Necessity, and indispensably requir'd. For, as without our pleasing God, it is impossible to be sav'd, so (we know) without Faith, it is impossible to please him, Heb. 11. 6. Last of all we have here the Issue, or the Conclusion of the whole Matter, at once im∣plyed in the Reflexion of the Answer upon the Question, and expressed in the words of the Answer too. Salvation is not the Effect, but yet the necessary event of our Faith in Christ. Nor is it properly the wages, but most certainly the Reward of a true Belie∣ver. It comes to pass as unavoidably upon the Praemisses suppos'd, as an Effect on a sup∣posal of all things requisite to its Production. For the Question having been This, [What must I do that I may be sav'd,] to which the Answer is, Believe, and thou shalt be sav'd, (An Answer given by Paul and Silas who spake as the Spirit gave them utterance,) here does arise a mutual Inference, as of the Prae∣cept and the Promise, so of the Duty and the Reward. Here is a necessary Tendency of the first towards the second, and a necessary De∣pendence of the second upon the first. For as Salvation cannot be had (by such as live un∣der
the Gospel, without a praevious Belief in the Lord Iesus Christ, so wheresoever such Believing does go before, 'tis very plain that Salvation must follow after. Both af∣ford us matter of Caution, and Comfort too. The former serving to humble, and the latter to support us. That defends us from Prae∣sumption, and This secures us from De∣spair. Thus have I done with the Division, and (in the ordering of That) with the Explica∣tion of the Text. Wherein if I have tres∣pass't by too much length, it will in justice be imputed to my Desire of Perspicuity, and of making it one Arrest unto the Plausible Objection that lyes against it. § 6. In the ensuing Tractation of it, IA further and final Amulet a∣gainst the An∣tinomian Poy∣son. must begin with the Act which is here ex∣press'd, and consider it as relating to the first and chief Object. And this I must do in such a manner, as to make it a farther Antidote a∣gainst the venom of the Objection. Which to the end that I may do with the more success, I must explore by such ways as are not able to mislead us, what of necessity must be meant by such an Act of Believing, as
does arise from an Habit of saving Faith. For as every one that paints is not presently a Painter, nor every Painter an Apelles; so 'tis not every Belief which can denominate a Believer, nor is it every Believer who can be sav'd. It will not therefore be sufficient to preach up the Faith of Christ in general, (which yet too many are wont to do, because 'tis easiest to be done,) nor to depredicate in particular the several rare Fruits and Effects of Faith, without distinguishing all along betwixt the Roots and the Causes from whence they grow; But we must first have the Patience to learn our selves, and then the Care as well as Skill to make it visible un∣to others, how much The Habit of salvifick or saving Faith is meant to grasp and compre∣hend in its whole Importance; and so (by a consequence unavoidable) how much short of Salvation, every Faith, without This, will be sure to land us. Now in the bringing of this about (wherein 'tis certainly as needful, as it is difficult to be Orthodox, and yet wherein Learned men have seldom hitherto agreed,) we are all apt to err with the greater ease, the less we are
able to determin, how many Acceptions of the word Faith may be found in Scripture. For (not to speak of its Import in human Authors) we may observe it in holy Writ to have been used in so Many and Different sen∣ses, that School-Divines have strangely va∣ried touching its various significations. For first Michael Medina De re∣ctâ in Deum fide lib. 1. cap. 1. Medina will acknowledge but two Acceptions of the word Faith. Albertus Magnus in 3. d. 23. art. ad 3. Albertus Magnus allows of five. Alfonsus à Castro in sum∣mâ de haeresi∣bus, verbo Fi∣des, Haeresi 2. Alphonsus à Ca∣stro admits of seven. Vega in Tractatu de Justificatione, q. 1. Vega goes higher, as far as Nine. Bonaventu∣ra in 3. d. 23. in explicatione Textûs, literâ B. Bonaventure and Greg. de Valent. in 2. 2ae. Disp. 1. Q. 1. Punct. 1. Va∣lentia arise to ten. Alexander Hallensis p. 3. qu. 77. mem∣bro 1. Alexander Hallensis will have eleven. Nay Sotus de Naturâ & Gratiâ l. 2. c. 6. Sotus tells us of some who are for fifteen significations, whereas Himself (with Medina) will own but two. I will not presume to be an Umpire be∣tween so many and subtil School-men, though I confess I am not able to give an absolute Assent unto either of them. I can evince that the word Faith hath very various signi∣fications, and easily instance in the chief, whereof 'tis dangerous to be ignorant, or which at least it will be useful very particularly to know. But when I shall have given preg∣nant
Instances of Many, and those the Most that at present I can discern, I shall not be so Dogmatical as to deny that there are more. First 'tis clear that the word Faith doesEight Accepti∣ons of Faith, whereof the Last only is Saving. signify Faithfulness and Truth. As Rom. 3. 3, 4. What if some did not believe? shall their Un∣belief make the Faith of God of none effect? no,(1) let God be true, and every man a lyar. Next it signify's The Promise, which is in faithful∣ness(2) and Truth to be performed. And of this we have an instance 1 Tim. 5. 12. where the wanton young Widows are said to be lyable to Damnation, because they have cast off their first Faith. That is, their Promise of constant widowhood which they had made unto the Church, whose single Interest and Service they had thereby wedded and espous'd. Thence it(3) signify's a Confidence, as that is opposed to Distrust; A full Dependance on the Power, and a firm adhaerence unto the Promises of our Lord. Thus it was used by our Saviour, when Peter cryed as he was sinking, [Lord save me,] O thou of little Faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? Matth. 14. 31. In the same sense he said to the two blind men, Do ye believe that
I can do this? according to your Faith be it unto you, Matth. 9. 29. And thus 'tis used by St. Iames, by whom we are exhorted to ask in Faith, nothing wavering, James 1. 6.(4) Again we find the word Faith set to signifie Conscience, or knowledge compar'd with the Rule of Action, as 'tis observ'd by Theophylact, and the Interlineary Gloss upon Rom. 14. 23. whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. Nay Faith,(5) by a Synecdoche, is made to signifie the Gos∣pel. Whereof we meet with an Example Gal. 3. 25. where when 'tis said, After Faith is come, we are no longer under a School-Master: The plain meaning of it is only This, That after the coming of the Gospel we are no longer under the Law. It is sometimes us'd to signi∣fie a bare Assent; And such is that Faith which(6) is call'd historical, and is common to men with believing Devils, James 2. 19. But as sometimes an Assent, so at other times the(7) Object assented to. And of this we have an Instance in the Epistle of St. Iude, where to contend for the Faith which was once deliver'd unto the Saints, is nothing else but to contend for the Creed it self, the Christian Doctrin, which is the Ground, and the Rule of Faith.
§ 7. Thus we find the word Faith in se∣ven distinct significations; But none of These will amount to a saving Faith, however some of These are Ingredients in it. For saving Faith is not only an Habitus seu facultas quae∣dam Intellectus, quâ ineviden∣tèr quidem, sed firmitèr assen∣timur iis omni∣bus quae tan∣quam à Deo re∣velata propo∣nuntur creden∣da in Ecclesiâ. Greg. de Va∣lent. Tom. 3. Q. 1. Punct. 1. p. 6. Habit or Faculty of the Intellect, whereby we firmly and without fear, but yet withal without evidence, assent to all things propos'd to be believed in the Church as reveal'd by God, (which is the Schoolmen's Definition of a justifying Faith, or (as they rather love to speak) of the Faith which is infused in Iustification,) For This is but part of that Description, which the same men af∣ford to the Haec ipsa est Fides quae dici∣tur Fides Mira∣culorum, ad∣junctâ firmâ quâdam fiduciâ circa eventum miraculosum. Id. ib. p. 7. Faith of Miracles, whereby a man may move Mountains, and yet be damn'd; may cast out Devils, and be himself possess'd with them; as is evident from the preaching both of our Saviour and St. Paul, Matth. 7. 22, 23. 1 Cor. 13. 2. Nor is it only such a Relyance on the mercy of God, and the merits of a Saviour, as carrys with it a full Persua∣sion of the Remission of our Sins; (as some who are Enemies to the Schoolmen are wont to teach;) for This may possibly be alone, unattended with Repentance and change of Life; And being not the Mother of such an
off-spring, it must by consequence be inferr'd to be but the Daughter of Praesumption. § 8. No, the saving Faith is That, which comprehends Both the former, and more than Both. It is indeed the very Pandect of all that is requisite to Salvation, by being the Substance and the Epitome even of all other Duties required of us. In so much that we must learn how to expound it when alone, by what we find spoken of it when it stands in conjunction with other Duties. For when our Saviour gave Commission for the preaching of the Gospel to every Creature, he did not on∣ly say, He that believeth shall be sav'd; But he that believeth and is Baptèzed, He's the man that shall be sav'd, Mark 16. 16. And so when He preached first in Galilee, He did not only say, Believe; But, Repent, and Be∣lieve the Gospel, (Mark 1. 15.) And still by Repentance is meant amendment, as St. Peter hath explain'd it by his Preaching at Ierusa∣lem in Solomon's Porch. Where he did not only say, Repent and Believe; Nor only Re∣pent, and be Baptized, (as he had said a while Acts 2. 38. before,) but Repent and be Converted, that your sins may be blotted out, (Acts 3. 19.) A∣gain
in other places of Scripture we find it coupl'd with Confession, without the com∣pany of which it is Matth. 10. 32, 33. Luke 12. 8, 9. nothing worth. And of this I gave examples in the Division of the Text. Nay we read in other Scriptures, touching the 1 Thess. 1. 3. work, and the Rom. 3. 27. Law, and the Rom. 16. 26. Obedience of Faith. Nay in one place especially, I observe the two phrases [To Be∣lieve, and To Obey,] are clearly us'd as , in the very same breath importing both the same Thing, and promiscuously expres∣sing the one the other. The Place I speak of is Rom. 10. 16. But they have not obey'd the Gospel: For Esaias saith, who hath Believed our Report? now if obeying in the first clause did not signify Believing, it must have been in the second, [who hath obeyed our report?] because it is in the first, [But they have not obeyed the Gospel] And if Believing in the second clause did not signify obeying, it must have been in the first, [But they have not Believ'd the Gospel,] because it is in the se∣cond, [who hath Believed our report?] else what means the Causal For, by which the second Clause is proved to give a reason of the first? for this is evidently the Logick
which our Apostle there useth. To Believe the report of the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, is to Obey the holy Gospel which he prophetically preached. But they have not Believ'd the former; Therefore they have not obey'd the latter. But neither have we yet the utmost of saving Faith. For as it signifies an obe∣dience to all the Commandments of the Law, in that it Gal. 5. 6. worketh by Love, which is indeed the Rom. 13. 10. fulfilling of it, so it does many times imply a Perseverance (in Love, and in Obedience,) unto the end. As when 'tis said by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, We are not of Them that draw back unto Perdi∣tion,Heb. 10. 39. But of Them that Believe to the saving of the Soul. We read of some who had a Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, but such as was ut∣terly overthrown by Hymenaeus and Philetus,2 Tim. 2. 17, 18. (whose words did eat into their Faith as doth a Canker,) and so however for a time it might have justified, yet for want of perse∣verance it could not save them. For let the Nature of our Faith be what it can, still 'tis a Requisite to Salvation, That we indure unto the End, Matth. 24. 13. § 9. Now when the Faith of a Believer
is arriv'd at such a pitch as hath been de∣scrib'd, by Repentance, and Conversion, and Perseverance unto the end, or (to use St. Paul's words, 1. Thess. 1. 3.) by his work of Faith, his labour of Love, and his Patience of Hope, (that is to say in terms yet plainer,) by the obedience which his Faith, and by the Industry which his Love, and by the Constan∣cy which his Hope in the Lord Jesus Christ hath effected in him, so that the Righteous∣ness of God hath been successfully revealed from Faith to Faith, (as St. Paul expresseth a Per∣severance in Faith, Rom. 1. 17.) It is then in∣deedHeb. 11. 1. the Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not seen, and virtually the Praesence of things yet future. A steady De∣pendance upon God for the Performance of his Promise, and a confident expectation of the Glory to be reveal'd. A being convinc'd that That is true by a mental Demonstration, which does not fall under an ocular. And as, in other respects, Faith is said to be the Hand, so in This is it the Eye of a pious Soul, wherewith looking up to Iesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, we may easily see our way through any Night of Tribulation that
can befall us. Thus we see how saving Faith does carry Hope in its Importance, as well as Charity; as may appear by the Duplicity of the Apostle's Definition, which seems to have a twofold Genus, and a twofold Differentia. For first he saith it is the Substance, and then the Evidence. In as much as 'tis an evidence, it is objected on Things invisible; But in as much as 'tis a Substance, so it is of Things which are hoped for. A De∣finition very fitly against the Method and the Rules of Art and Nature, because it is of such a Quality as is exceedingly above them. And yet it is a Definition, whereof I think it will be easy to give a rational Accompt. For this Faith being (an Act, or rather) an Habit of the Intellect, And yet determin'd to its object by the Empire of the Will which is at last its Subject too, (That as expressed by the word Fides, and This as well by the word Fiducia,) 'tis plain its object must be consi∣der'd both as True, and as Good. As the object of the Intellect, the Injoyments of Hea∣ven are still consider'd by us as True, and so are properly contemplated as Things not seen whereof there is yet no other Evidence, than
that of Faith. But as the object of the Will, they are consider'd by us as Good, and so are properly here expressed by Things hoped for, and Faith of such may be call'd the Substantia so∣let dici Prima Inchoatio cujus∣cunque rei, & maximè quan∣do tota res se∣quens contine∣tur virtute in primo principio. Aquinas 22 ae. q. 4. Art. 1. p. 27. col. 2. Sub∣stance. Though not in a logical, or physical, or metaphysical Sense, yet in a moral, and me∣taphorical; as that which is first in every kind, and either radically or vertually contains the rest in it, is said to be the Substance of all the rest; as the Contents are the substance of the following Chapter; or as Adam was the Substance of all Mankind; or as there is said to be a Substance and Body of Sin, which ve∣ry Body is also said to have a strength, and a sting. And then with a greater force of rea∣son may Faith be said to be the Substance of things hoped for, because it hath an amazing power of presentiating the things which are wrapt up in Futurity, and represents them all at once, as well to the Will, as the Under∣standing. It gives us (as I may say) a kind of Livery and Seisin of all we hope and pray for, and even long to be united to, though by the Help of a Dissolution. In so much that the Plenitude of this One Grace in the sense I mention'd (which Plenitude is ex∣pressed
by a  Heb. 10. 22. , Heb. 6. 11. , Coloss. 2. 2. threefold , and bold∣ly rendred a full Assurance,) I say the Pleni∣tude or fulness of this one Grace, which is at∣tainable by Christians whilst here below, is worthily reckon'd by St. Paul, The Inchoati∣on of our Glory. This very Grace is once af∣firm'd to be a kind of beatifick (although an antedated) Vision of the Glory of God. And for a man to leave This for a better world, with such a cordial Believing in the Lord Ie∣sus Christ as was here recommended by Paul and Silas, (which I have hitherto explain'd by several passages of Scripture,) is nothing else but to pass from a Paradise to a Hea∣ven, or (to use St. Paul's ) from one Glo∣ry to another. For we all with open Face be∣holding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glo∣ry, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. § 10. But some may tacitly now objectAn Objection. against Paul and Silas in the Text, (or at least against St. Luke, the Relator of it, That if by Faith we must be justified, and also sanctified in part, before we can expect it should ever save us, they should have told
the Jailour of it in Terms at large, and have shew'd in the Retail, how many Duties of a Christian are succinctly comprehended in that expression; not have told him only in Gross, (as Dutchmen make their dishonest Reckonings,) He must believe in the Lord Iesus Christ. For how knew the Jailour he was to do any thing but to Believe? or to believe in any other, than the second Person in the Trinity, God ma∣nifest in the Flesh? for they seem to have made no mention to him of his being to believe in God the Father, or in God the Holy Ghost, much less did they add the other Ar∣ticles of the Creed, which are Ingredients in the object of Saving Faith. § 11. To which I answer by two De∣grees.Answered two ways. And first of all by a concession, That if indeed Paul and Silas had said no more to their Catechumenist, than that He must believe in the Lord Iesus Christ, not explaining what was meant by that Habit of Faith from which the Act of his Believing was to pro∣ceed, nor yet explaining what was meant by the Lord Iesus Christ, who is often put by a Synecdoche for the whole object of our Belief, (Faith in Christ being the Pandect of
Christian Duties, which are all shut up in Faith, as Homer's Iliads in a Nutshell,) Then indeed they might have made him a Solifidian, or a Fiduciary, which had not been the way to his being sav'd. But se∣condly I answer, That the objection is made of a false Hypothesis; For Paul and Silas dealt honestly and discreetly with the Jailour; when having told him he must believe in the Lord Iesus Christ for his being sav'd, (it pre∣sently follows after the Text,) they spake un∣to him the Word of God; that is, they expound∣ed the Scriptures to him. And in the doing of That, they prov'd the object of his Faith to be the Trinity in Unity; not solely and ex∣clusively the Lord Jesus Christ, but in con∣junction with God the Father, and with God the Holy Ghost too. Again in expounding the Scriptures to him, they could not but tell him what was meant, by an effectual Belief in the Lord Jesus Christ; importing such a kind of Faith, as is ever working; and such a kind of working, as is by Love; and by such a kind of Love, as is the fulfilling of the Law; and of such a Law too, as does con∣sist of somewhat higher and more illustrious
Injunctions than those of Moses; and of such an obedience to those Injunctions, as is at∣tended and waited on by Perseverance unto the End. There is no doubt but they ac∣quainted him, (in their expounding of the Scriptures, and speaking to him the Word of God,) how very highly it did concern him, not only to escape the Corruption that is in the world through lust, and also to believe in the2 Pet. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7. Lord Iesus Christ, but besides This, (as St. Pe∣ter speaks,) to give all diligence, for the adding to his Faith, Vertue; to Vertue, Knowledge; to Knowledge, Temperance; to Temperance, Pati∣ence; to Patience, Godliness; to Godliness, Bro∣therly kindness; to Brotherly kindness, Charity. For that these were all needful, and no redun∣dant superadditions, is very clear from St.Verse 9. Peter in the next verse but one. He that lacketh these things is blind, and cannot see a far off, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. But if these Things be in you, and abound, Then indeed (as St. PeterVerse 8. adds) ye shall not be barren in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ. If ye do these things, ye shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Now can we think that St. Peter did not teach the same
Doctrin with Paul and Silas? or can we think that Paul and Silas would withhold from the Jailour that Train of Duties, for want of which he had been Blind, and not in Case to see God? no, whatever might have been wanting in their succinct and pithy Answer, whereby to give him a right Under∣standing of it, was abundantly supply'd by their following Sermon. And though the Heads of their Sermon are not put upon Re∣cord, (but only the Text upon which they made it;) yet St. Luke records This, That such a Sermon there was preach'd, in that he saith, They spake to him the Word of God. § 12. And truly This is such a Method, as I could wish were well observ'd by all that are of their Function. I mean the Stewards of the Mysteries of the Living God, Unto whom is committed the Word of Reconciliation, whose lips are made to be the Treasuries and Conservatories of Knowledge, and which the People are appointed to seek at their Mouths. For the Text we have in hand is often turned to advance either Truth, or Falshood, even according to the handle by which 'tis held forth to the giddy People; And is made to
be eventually either venomous, or wholsom, just in proportion to the sense in which 'tis taken and digested by them that hear it. If to Believe is only taken for an Assent unto the Truth, or a Relyance on the Merits of Jesus Christ, or a confident Application of all his Promises to our selves, And this in a kind of opposition to the Necessity of Good works, (which ought to be in conjunction with it;) Then 'tis apt to cause a wreck in the waters of Life; and through the Malignity of a Di∣gestion, a man may be kill'd by the Bread of Heaven. But if 'tis taken for obedience to the Commandments of Christ, with Perseverance unto the End in conjunction with it; Then the Answer of Paul and Silas is the short Summary of the Gospel, and they might well promise Salvation to whosoever should ac∣complish the purpose of it. That this in∣deed is the Importance, may appear by the words of our blessed Saviour; who ha∣ving been asked by a Iew, as Paul and Silas by a Gentile, [what Course was to be taken whereby to inherit Eternal Life,] gave him an Answer which some may censure, as too much savouring of the Law, but yet it
seems not unsuitable to the oeconomy of the Gospel, [If thou wilt enter into life, keep the Commandments.] Now in as much as Paul and Silas did not teach another Doctrin, but the same in other words with their Master Christ, they must needs be understood to have given This Answer, That if the Jailour should so believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, as to imitate his Example, and yield obedience to his Commands, and continue so to do all the days of his life, he should not fail (in that Case) of his being sav'd. And though the Rule is very true, That nothing is wanting inNihil deest quod necessariò subintelligitur. any Sentence which is of necessity understood, which well might justifie Paul and Silas in the conciseness of their expression: Yet not contented with this excuse, they rather chose not to want it, by speaking largely to the Jai∣lour the Word of God. After the very same manner, § 13. That the People may not wrest the outward Letter of the Scripture to their Dam∣nation, we must carefully explain and disen∣tangle it to their Safety. If any of Us shall be consulted by either Believers or Unbelie∣vers, about the means of their being sav'd, we
have two ways of Answer, and both exact; but both are to be taken cum grano salis, and with a due Interpretation. We may answer with our Saviour, They are to keep the Com∣mandments; or else with Paul and Silas, that they are to believe in the Lord Iesus Christ. But if the former, we must add, This is the chief of the Commandments, that we believe on the Name of the Lord Iesus Christ, 1 Joh. 3. 23. And although we must have an inhe∣rent righteousness in part, yet there is need that That of Christ be imputed to us, if but to make up all the wants and the vacuities of our own. For our own is no better than filthy Rags, if impartially compar'd with our double Rule, to wit The Doctrin, and Life of Christ. We must negotiate indeed with the Talents of Grace, that we may not be cast into outer Darkness; yet so as to judge our selves at best to be unprofitable Servants, weigh'd with the Greatness of our Redeemer, and with the Richness of our Reward. Or if we give them the second Answer, we must also speak to them the Word of God. We must explain what it is, to believe in Christ; and by the help of some Distinctions (duly
consider'd, and apply'd,) teach them to see through all the Fallacies, and flatten the edge of all objections, which are oppos'd to the Necessity of strict obedience and good works. When any Iustifying Vertue is given to Faith, we must tell them it is meant of Faith 1 Tim. 1. 5. unfeigned. When we speak of the Suffi∣ciency of Faith unfeigned, we must shew them how Gal. 5. 6.  passive so∣nat Syro, & Tertulliano ad∣versus Mercion. l. 5. Et eò re∣dit, quò.  Jac. 2. 22. Love is the Spirit of Faith. Whe∣ther because (in the Active) it works by Love, or else because (in the Passive, in which the Syriac and Tertullian translate the word) by works of Charity and Obedience Faith is wrought and made perfect. When we celebrate the force of a 1 Pet. 1. 3. lively Faith, we must season it with a Note, that Faith is Jam. 2. 17. dead being a∣lone. When 'tis said out of St. Paul, that we are justified by Rom. 3. 28. Faith, without the Deeds of the Law, 'tis fit we add out of St Iames, that we are justified by Jam. 2. 24. Works, and not by Faith only. For (to shew that St. Iames does not either contradict or confute St. Paul,) The Works excluded by St. Paul, are no other than the Deeds of the Ceremonial Law; And those included by St. Iames, are no other than the Works of the Moral Law. So we are
justified by Faith as the Root of Works; and we are justified by Works, as the Fruit of Faith. Not by Faith without Works, for then St. Iames would not be Orthodox; nor yet by Works without Faith, for then we could not defend St. Paul; but by such a Faith as worketh, and by such Works as are of Faith. By Both indeed improperly, as being but ne∣cessary Conditions; But very properly by Christ, as being the sole meritorious Cause. Again because 'tis very natural for Carnal Profes∣sors of Christianity, so to enhaunce the Price of Faith, as to depretiate good Works, and make obedience to pass at the cheaper Rate, They must be told that when our Saviour ascribes the moving of Mountains, and other Miracles to Faith, He does not speak of That Faith, which is a Sanctifying Grace, Gal. 5. 22. but of that Faith alone which is an Edifying Gift, 1 Cor. 12. 9. by which a man may do wonders, and yet be damn'd, Matth . 22, 23. So when he said unto the Ruler, who had besought him to heal his bed-rid Daughter, , Only Believe, He only meant it was sufficient for the healing of her ody, without alluding in any measure un∣to
the saving of her Soul. So far he was, in that place, from giving any ground of hope to a Solifidian. And therefore briefly let it suffice me to say once for all; That when we find men Believers without good Life, we must shew them how many ways a man may be a Believer without true Faith, may be justified in the Praemisses, yet not sav'd in the Conclusion; may get no more by his Knowledge, than to be beaten with many stripes; and have no more of a Saviour, than to be damn'd by. We must instruct them to di∣stinguish betwixt the Act, and the Habit of their Believing. But above all, betwixt a Speculative, and a Practical Belief. A Belief in the Heads, and the Hearts of men. A Belief which does consist with a drawing back unto Perdition, and That by which a man believes unto the saving of the Soul. § 14. Stand forth therefore Thou Antino∣mian, or Thou Fiduciary, or whosoever else Thou art who art a sturdy Believer without true Faith, and ever namest the Name of Christ without departing from Iniquity; Try thy self by this Touchstone which lyes before thee; and examin whether thy Heart be not as apt
to be deceiptful, as 'twas once said to be by the Prophet Ieremy. Let the Tempter that is without, make thee as credulous as he can; And let the Traytor that is within, make thee as confident as he will of thy Faith in Christ; yet Thou wilt find, when all is done, there is exceeding great Truth in the Spanish Pro∣verb, That 'tis a very hard Thing to believe in God. And so very few there are who attain unto it, that it may rationally be doubted, whether when the Son of Man shall come a se∣cond time from Heaven, he will come with such success, as to find Faith upon the Earth. Examin therefore whether Thy self may'st well be reckon'd to be one of that little Num∣ber. Examin whether thy Belief is really such as Thou believ'st it; and try whether thy Confidence is not the Thing to be distrusted the most of any. For § 15. Of this I can convince thee by a mental Demonstration, which is more cogent than an ocular, That if thou hast not such respect unto the Recompence of Reward, as to choose rather (with Moses) to spend thy short and dying life in Mortisications and Self∣denials, and to suffer Tribulation with the Peo∣pleHeb. 11. 25, 26.
of God, than with the brutish Sons of Be∣lial, to injoy the Pleasures of Sin for a season; If thou dost not esteem the Reproach of Christ to be much greater Riches than all the Treasures of Egypt; Or if thou canst basely fear Them that can kill the Body only, (but are not able to hurt the Soul,) more than Him that can cast both Soul and Body into Hell; And hast often done more to escape the former, than ever thou wilt do to eschew the latter; Thou hast not yet the first Degree of a Saving Faith. Thou dost not , not so much as believe the Lord Jesus Christ. Thou dost not assent to his veracity, or look upon him as a True Speaker. Thou dost not so far confide in the Truth of his Promises and his Threats, as to adventure any great matter upon the meer Reputation and Credit of them. For most undoubtedly, if thou didst, Thou wouldst prefer that which leads to all the Pleasures that he hath promis'd, before the Things that will betray thee to all the pains that he hath Threaten'd. Thou wouldst pursue with more vehemence what will end in an eternal and exceeding weight of Glory, than what will terminate in a worm which
never dyes, and in a Fire which is not quench∣ed. That thou dost now affect to walk, ra∣ther in the broad than the narrow way, is not so much that thou espousest a way which leads thee to Destruction, or hast Averseness unto That by which thou mayst enter into Life; as that thou dost not quite believe the Lord Jesus Christ, when he would fright thee from the one, and allure thee to the other. That thou dost now take the Course to dwell with everlasting Burnings, rather than That which hath a tending to Ioys unspeakable, cannot possibly be from hence, that thou preferr'st a very short to an endless Pleasure, but ra∣ther from hence that thou preferr'st thy pre∣sent experience of the first, to the uncertainty and the doubtfulness which thou retainest of the second. Not at all that thou preferrest the Miseries of Hell to the Ioys of Heaven, But that thou dost not believe what is said of either. § 16. Again admit thou dost , believe the Truth and the Veracity of the Lord Jesus Christ; Yet if thou are destitute of the Faith which is consummated by Love, and by such a Love too as doth cast out Fear;
nor only the fear of all that may be inflict∣ed, but so far also the Feeling of all that is, as to be able to rejoyce, and to leap for joy,Matth. 5. 12. when thou art persecuted and rail'd at for righ∣teousness sake; If thou canst not say heartily, in the language of St. Paul, I take pleasure1 Cor. 12. 10. in Insirmities, in Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions, and in Distresses for Christ his sake; If (in a word) Thou art not able to conquer all thine own weakness by Ghostly strength, so as to hold fast thy Union and good Intelligence with Christ, in spight of Nakedness,Rom. 8. 35, 37, 38, 39. or Famin, or Peril, or Sword, or Life, or Death, or Angels, or Devils, or Principali∣ties, or Powers, or things present, or things to come, And all by vertue of that Faith which overcometh the World; (which is not only the1 Joh. 5. 4, 5. means of Conquest, but the Victory it self;) Thou dost not heartily believe , (that is) In, or Upon the Lord Jesus Christ. 'Tis very evident that thou doubt∣est either his Power, or his Propensity. Thou dost not so depend, and rely upon him, as that I can assure thee thou shalt be sav'd. § 17. Again if thou hast not such a Faith, as does denominate thee a good and a faithful
servant, such a justifying Faith, as in the lite∣ral sense of it does make thee Iust, (Iust I mean in that notion, in which 'twas said of holy Iob, that he was a just and anJob 1. upright Man,) If thou hast not such a Faith as by which thou art qualified in part, both with Holiness and Righteousness, with Godli∣ness and Honesty, with the Duties of the first and the second Table, whereby the Righte∣ousness of Christ may be so wholly imputed to thee, as to instate thee in the Pardon of all thy Sins; (it being impossible that thy Sa∣viour should ever justifie thy Person, and not sanctifie thy Nature in some proportionable degree;) If besides thy Assent to the veracity of his Doctrin, and besides thy Dependance on the Almightiness of his Power, Thou dost not pay so great a Reverence unto the Iu∣stice of his Will too, as to serve and obey him with godly fear; Thou dost not practically believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. Thou dost not own him in his Authority, dost not re∣ceive him in his Commands, dost not embrace and entertain him as he comes to thee a Le∣gislator, as one who hath a Name written both on his Vesture and on his Thigh, King ofRev. 19. 16.
Kings, and Lord of Lords. And by conse∣quence though thy Head may be as full as it can hold of the Christian Science, or how∣ever thou mayst have Faith whereby thou1 Cor. 13. 2. canst remove Mountains; Yet thou dost not so Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, as that I can assure thee thou shalt be sav'd. § 18. Again if thou hast not such a Te∣lescope, as by which thou art inabled to look on the other side the Veil, such a Faith as, is the Evidence of things not seen, and the sub∣stance of things that are hoped for; hast not any praepossession of things invisible, and fu∣ture, nor any glimmerings and foretasts of the Glory to be reveal'd; hast no ground for an Assurance, (whether of Faith, Hope, or Un∣derstanding,) that thy Pardon is seal'd, and thy Peace ratified; Art not inwardly sustain∣ed, in all thy Agonies and Conflicts, with spiritual Ioy in the Holy Ghost; hast not any the least Intelligence, (through the secret whispers of the Spirit) of a Ravishing Man∣sion praepared for thee in the Land of the Li∣ving. And art not placed by that Intelligence above the Level of Temptations, exempted from the Fear of what Men or Devils can do
unto thee; If thou canst not reflect with comfort upon the Day of Discrimination, when the Lord Iesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming2 Thess. 1. 7. Fire, taking Vengeance on Them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of Iesus Christ; Or if thou canst not think undaunt∣edlyRev. 20. 12. upon the opening of the Books out of which thou must be judged, and that from this con∣sideration, that the Father judgeth no Man, but hath committed all Iudgment unto the Son; IJohn 5. 22. say, if thou hast not attained to This, Thou dost not perfectly believe in the Lord Iesus Christ: Dost not fully lay hold on his golden Scepter: Dost not receive him as a Saviour, by whose Blood thou art cleansed from all thy sins: Dost not look upon Christ as an Elder Brother, or behave thy self as one having the spirit of Adoption: Dost not behold him in his High-Priesthood after the Order of Melchi∣sedech; and all for want of that Eye of Faith, by help of which (with St. Stephen) ThouActs 7. 55. Rom. 8. 31. mightst see the Heavens opened, and Iesus sit∣ting at the right hand of God, ever making Intercession with groanings not to be uttered, andRom. 8. 26. rendring his Father propitious to thee.
§ 19. I will not say, Thou shalt be damn'd, if thou arrivest not exactly at this Perfection, because I know there are Degrees of Salvi∣sick Grace, in proportion to the Degrees of the Beatisick Glory. And though thou art not of Their Magnitude, who shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, (Matth. 13. 43.) yet Thou mayst possibly be of Theirs, who are to shine as the stars for ever and ever; (Dan. 12. 3.) But when I consider how great a stress is laid by God in the New Testament, upon the Ha∣bit of Believing in the Lord Iesus Christ, And weigh the stress of those things that are laid upon it, with all the Requisites in Scripture that hold it up; I cannot in faithfulness to my Text, or in Iustice and Charity to my Readers, say less than This, That whoso∣ever they are amongst us, who are solicitous (with the Iailour) to know the Minimum quod sic of a Christian's Duty, and how much they must do that they may be sav'd; If they do not so assent to the veracity of a Saviour, so de∣pend upon his Power and his Propensity to save them, so submit unto his Pleasure, and so conform unto his Praecepts, and (on the
Grounds before mention'd) so apply unto Themselves their Saviour's Merits and Medi∣ation, as that in lieu of forsaking Christ to serve The Flesh, and the Devil, They do forsake them both at once, for the Service of Christ, And reckon their Happiness even on Earth to consist in those Pleasures, which Minds the most uncorrupted do most approve of, (such as are The Love of Christ, The Satisfa∣ction of an unblameable and a well-ordered life, The Testimonial of a Pure and so a Peaceable Conscience, The finding out of God's Will re∣vealed to them in his Word, The generous Plea∣sure of abstaining from all sorts of false and forbidden Pleasures, A real Carelesness and Contempt of all the Vanities of this World, and A well-grounded Expectation of all the Glories in the next, so as no kind of outward or temporal Sufferings can deprive them of their inward and spiritual Ioys; but still they hold fast their Confidence and the Rejoycing of theHeb. 3. 6. hope firm unto the End,) I say, if Christians rest satisfied with less than This, I cannot say that their Election is yet so sure in it self, as the Apostle St. Peter shews how to make it. Nor2 Pet. 1. 5▪ 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. can I say They do believe in the Lord Iesus
Christ, so as to answer the whole Design of Paul and Silas in the Text, or so as that I can assure them they shall be sav'd. § 20. Why then should we suffer our EyesPsal. 132. 4. to sleep, or the Temples of our Heads to take a∣ny rest, 'till we are owners of such a Faith, as will infallibly serve our turn? That is, such a Faith as a man may Habak. 2. 4. Rom. 1. 17. Gal. 3. 11. Heb. 10. 38. live by? such a Faith as by which we may be sure to please God, or at least without which it is Heb. 11. 6. impossible to please him? For however it is the free and the sole Gift of God, yet 'tis for us not to re∣sist it, but rather to give it a good Reception, and to retain it when it is given, not to squan∣der it away, or to keep it useless, which is ex∣pressed by our receiving the Grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Nay farther yet it is for us, (by diligent search into the Scriptures, and constant practice of Self-denials, and Impor∣tunity added to Prayer, and by watching there∣unto with all Perseverance,) not only to receive, and to retain the Grace of God; but over and above to abound more and more, (1 Thess 4. 1.) That is to say, we must employ, and im∣prove our Talent, not hide it under a Bushel of worldly Cares, or smother it in a Bed of un∣lawful
Pleasures. And seeing 'tis God that worketh in us both to will and to do of his good Pleasure, we (as  1 Cor. 3. 9.  2 Cor. 6. 1.  Mark 16. 20.  3 John 8. Labourers with God) are bound to work out our Faith, in the very same sense, in which we are to work out our own Salvation, (Philip. 2. 12.) never ceasing to make a Progress from Faith to Faith, 'till we attain unto The Evidence of Things not seen, and the Substance of Things hoped for, even a Practical, and a Cordial, and an Habitual Be∣lief in the Lord Jesus Christ: Not as a Pro∣phet only, to teach us; Nor as a Prince only, to rule us; But as an Advocate and a Priest too, who is incessantly procuring, and pouring his Benefits upon us. To whom accordingly, with the Father, in the Unity of the Spirit, let us evermore ascribe, as is ever due, Bles∣sing, Glory, Honour, and Power, from this Time forwards for evermore.
AN IMPROVEMENT OF THE INQUIRY Taken from the Mouth of A Iewish Convert. AND Containing, in its Parts, A Reso∣lution unto it self.
AN IMPROVEMENT OF THE INQUIRY, &c. MARK X. 17. And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do, that I may in∣herit Eternal Life? BEHOLD the only great Scruple to be discussed and resolv'd; the on∣ly Necessary Quaestion to be proposed and laid to heart, by all that live in these Sceptical and Disputative Times. Wherein there is hardly perhaps a Family, much less a Parish, much less a City, or a Town, in which the shape of mens Iudg∣ments
(and by consequence of their Souls) is not almost as various as that of Faces. For though the most of men are travelling to the same Iourneys End, yet it is (saith Boê∣thius) diverso tramite, they love to walk to∣wards it in several Paths. Happiness is a Thing which the worst men aym at; But they discover by their Inquiries, what variety of ways they take to miss it; with how much Industry, and Expence, with how much Care∣lesness, and Care too, they do not only ar∣rive at this, to have their Labour for their Pains; but also purchase to themselves a most costly Ruin; at once a most pudendous, and most Unprofitable Repentance. Were we at leisure to survey the several Orders and Ranks of men, from Him that whistles at the Plough, to Him that treads upon Crowns and Scepters, we should find them all Byass't by Secular Interesses and Aims; most incessantly pursuing their Carnal Pro∣jects and Designs. Poor Boôtes will needs be asking, (so low and humble is his Ambition,) what He shall do to maintain a Teem? The same Boôtes growing Rich, will as willingly be able to keep a Coach. Here a man is
ambitious of some great Office in the Court; whilst perhaps the great Courtier is at least as ambitious of being Greatest. The only Sub∣ject of His Inquiry, is what he shall do to wear a Crown. But having waded as far as That, (through Blood and Rapine,) he thinks his Crown is too light, and his Territory too narrow; and therefore makes it his next In∣quiry, what he shall do for the inlarging the straitned Borders of his Dominion. His next Project is, how to be Monarch of the West. And if perhaps he climbs thither, his inlarged Ambition does want more Room; from whence ariseth another Quaestion, What he shall do to Subdue the World, that Kings and Princes may bow down to him, and that whole Nations may do him service. Nay if he arrives at That too, his Unlimited De∣sires are more imprison'd than before; And so his last▪ Quaestion is (like That of the Great Unus Pellaeo Iuveni non sufficit Orbis. Juven. Sat. 13. Macedonian Robber,) what he shall do for more Worlds wherewith to satisfie his Hunger, and (not to quench, but) to exercise his cruel Thirst. Thus is every man a scambler for some kind of Happiness here on Earth, (at least for the
shadow and picture of it;) But there is not the like solicitude for the getting of a King∣dom and Crown in Heaven. Where shall we meet with a man of Youth, who joyns his Heart unto his Head; and asks about the great Business for which he came into the World? where shall we meet with a man of Riches, who makes it the great Contrivance and Design of his Life, to be advis'd in what manner he ought to live? where shall we meet with a man of Power, who will in∣dure to be looking so far before him, as to consider and contemplate his latter end? or who will look so far within him, as to examin the state of things, betwixt his Saviour and his Soul? as whether he hath made his Election sure? or whether he hath not rather received the Grace of God in vain? where is He that crys out with the frighted Iailour at Philippi,Acts 16. 30. What must I do that I may be saved? that makes a strict and impartial search after the Requisites of his Salvation? that sends as 'twere an Huy and Cry after things future and invisi∣ble? and makes it the Burden of his Inquiry, (with this young man, this Rich man, this Ruler in the Text,) Good Master, what shall I
do, that I may Inherit Eternal Life? A Text as worthy to be consider'd, by every one who does believe an Immortality of his Soul, and prepares for an Arrest at the hour of Death, and expects to be try'd at a Day of Iudgment, perhaps as any one Text in all the Scriptures. A Text so fruitful of Particulars, and of Particulars so pregnant for Meditation, that 'tis not easy to resolve, with which of the many we should begin. They do not come in such order, as the Creatures once did into Noah's Ark, two by two; but they press in upon us all together in a Crowd, as it were striving with one another, which shall have the first Place in our consi∣deration. Here is a Servant, a Master, work, and wages; Here is an excellent Inquiry made by the Servant to the Master. And here are both their Qualifications to make them plea∣sing to one another. For the Servant is dili∣gent, the Master good. Here is the manner also, and matter, and final cause of the En∣quiry. And here are divers other parti∣culars growing out of the Body of these particulars, as the lesser Branches of a Tree are wont to grow out of the greater. But
dismissing all the rest until we meet them in the Division, I here shall fasten upon the Servant as fit to direct and assist us in it. There being nothing more proper to enter∣tain us till we come thither, than the several looser Circumstances both of his Person, and his Approach. As for his Person; we may observe him so qualified in three respects, as one would think should ill dispose him for such an In∣quiryMatth. 19. 20. as here he makes. For in St. Matthew He is a Young man; A Rich man in St. Mark;Mark 10. 22. Luke 18. 18. In St. Luke, a Ruler. And it may seem a thing strange (as the World now goes) that being a young man, he should inquire after life; or that being a Rich man, he should inquire after Heaven; that being also a Ru∣ler, he should inquire after Subjection. It is not easy to be believ'd, (so far it is from be∣ing usual,) that he who lately began to live, should be solicitous for Aeternity; that he who had purchased the present world, should pur∣sue an Inheritance in the next too; And that a Person of Command, should readily set himself to Service. Yet thus he did, and did with vehemence. For whether we look
upon his motion, whilst he was hastening towards Christ; or on his Posture, when he was at him; his Salutation, in the Entrance; or his Inquiry, in the end; we may by his Running, guess his Readiness; by his Kneel∣ing, his Humility; by his Compellation, his Zeal; and by the manner of his asking, the great Resignedness of Spirit wherewith he asked. For when Iesus (saith the Text) was gone forth into the way, there came one run∣ning, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do, that I may in∣herit Eternal Life? Words which are partly The Evangelists, and partly The Quaerist's of whom He speaks. The Evangelist's own words have three Par∣ticulars of Remarque; First, The Person who here inquires, Next, The Nature of his In∣quiry, Thirdly, The Oracle inquired of. The Quaerist's words at first View consist of Three general Parts, which again at the se∣cond View do afford us Six more. Here is first a Compellation, Secondly a Question, Thirdly the End, or the Motive, or Cause of Both.
In the first we have to con∣sider Not only the Subject of the Quaerist's Compellation, [, Master,] But also the Adjunct or Qua∣lification, [, Good.] Again in the second, we have two Things ob∣servable; to wit, The Matter of the Inqui∣ry, in the , And the Manner, in the ; 'Tis [what] and [what shall I do?] In the third, we have also two; First the Object to be ob∣tained; [, Eternal Life;] And then the Manner of ob∣taining it; [ 'tis by Inheriting] But this is not all. For I observe the Compellation hath a twofold Aspect upon the Question; and seems to give us a pregnant Reason at once for the Matter and Manner of it.
First here is something to be done by eve∣ry Follower of Christ, and that because He is a Master. It is not, Master, what shall I say, or Master, what shall I believe, but ; Master, what shall I Do? Here is Secondly observable in this Can∣didate of Heaven, a meek Resignedness of mind to any Command of Christ imaginable, and that because he is a Good, or a Gracious Master. The Servant presumes not to choose his work, He does not bargain for Life Ae∣ternal at such a Rate as he thinks fit, with a [Master, I will do this, or that,] but inde∣finitely asks (with an humble kind of In∣difference,) ; what shall I do? These are Particulars more than enough, not only to exercise and entertain our Atten∣tions, but (perhaps) to distract them too. And therefore it cannot be taken ill, if I shall gather their whole Result into Four Doctrinal Propositions. First that the Son of God Incarnate, who at present is our Advocate, and will hereaf∣ter be our Iudge, and who purposely came to save us from the Tyranny of our Sins, is not only A Saviour, to propose Promises to our
Faith; But also A Master, to challenge obe∣dience to his Commands. We must not only believe him, which is but to have him in our Brains; nor must we only confess him, which is but to have him in our Mouths; no nor must we only love him, though That is to have him in our Hearts; but farther yet we must obey him, and do him Service, which is to have him in our Hands and our Actions too. ; Master, what shall I do? And yet Secondly; Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is not any way a Severe or Aegyptian∣like Master, who looks to reap where he never sow'd, and exacts store of work with∣out allowing any Materials; but a Master full of Mercy and Lovingkindness. And this he is in two respects. To wit of the work which he requires, which is not foesible only, but pleasant; and of the wages which he pro∣miseth, Aeternal Life. For each of these rea∣sons, which do arise out of the Text, he is , A good Master. And therefore Thirdly, We must in gratitude unto so Good a Master as This, behold our selves as
obliged to two Returns; to wit a Readiness of Obedience, and a Resignedness of Wills. First a Readiness of obedience, even because he is our Master; next a Resignedness of wills, because he is our Good Master. Our Christian Tribute to both together, [to wit his Authori∣ty, and his Goodness,] must not only be Uni∣versal, but Unconstrain'd. ; what shall I do? that is to say, I will do any thing. I am ready to perform whatever Service thou shalt appoint, be it never so harsh, or be it never so difficult. Eternal Life is such a Prize, as for which I can never do enough. I say not therefore what I will do, but humbly ask what I shall. Yet Fourthly and lastly; When we have done the most we can we are , Luk. 17. 10. Unprofitable Ser∣vants. Our Obedience is not the Cause, but the aequitable Condition of our Reward. And we finally arrive at Eternal Life, not by way of Purchase, as we are Servants; but ofVide Melanch. loc. com. p. 173. Inheritance, as we are Sons. It is not here , but only  wee seek not to merit or to deserve, (as some gross Chri∣stians pretend to do,) but meerly to Inherit Eternal Life.
I now have done with the Introduction, wherein is included the Explication and Divi∣sion of the Text. But as 'tis easy for an Ar∣tist to design more work in a little Time, than he is able to accomplish a long time after; so however I have already drawn the Mono∣gram or Scheme of my well-meant Project, yet to fill it with the Zographesis, by making it practical, and easy, not only useful to the most knowing, but also familiar to the most Ignorant of those that read me, will be the Business not of one, but of several Essays. And this the rather, because Before I find Access to the four Doctrinal Propositions, I must direct to several Lessons from Those three Preliminary Subjects the Text affords us. To wit the Quality of the Person who here inquires, The excellent Na∣ture of his Inquiry, and The Condition of the Oracle inquired of. First the Person here inquiring had three remarkable Qualifications; Youth, Wealth, and Honour. And yet for all that, he did not ask as a young man, How shall I purchase the sweetest Pleasures? nor yet as a Rich man, How shall I compass the greatest wealth? no
nor yet as a Ruler, How shall I climb to the highest Pinacle of Preferment: But notwith∣standing his three Impediments pulling him down towards the Earth, he seemed wholly to be solicitous, How he might come by a place in Heaven. And therefore hence we are to take out a threefold Lesson; one for Young men, ano∣ther for Rich men, a third for Rulers. (And I suppose of these three, this particular Con∣gregation does now consist). First our Young men must learn, from the example of this Inquirer, to remember their Creator in the days of their youth, whilst the e∣vil days come not, nor the years draw nigh when they shall say, We have no pleasure in them, (Prov. 12. 1.) And that especially for these three Reasons. First the younger any one is, he came the more lately out of the Hands of his Creator; and has had the less time, to grow forgetful of the Rock out of which he was hewn. It is with mens Souls as with their Bodies, and with their Bodies as with their Cloaths; The newer, commonly the better; and the older, so much the worse. A little evil Communica∣tion is enough to ferment the greatest Mass
of good manners. And if the whole World does lye in wickedness, (as St. Iohn affirms it does,) how can we look to be the purer, by growing old and decrepit in so much Dirt? no, the longer we converse with Pitch or Birdlime, (to which the wickedness of the World may very happily be compar'd) It is by so much the harder to make us clean. Be∣sides, we ought to run after Christ, (like this Inquirer in the Text,) not go to him like a Torpedo, as if we did not affect, but fear him; or tanquam Bos ad Cerma, as if we were afraid to be baited by him. But now the younger any man is, he can run so much the faster; whereas grown old he will hard∣ly go. It was therefore the Blessing of God to Enoch, that he took him away speedily, and e∣ven hasten'd to cut him off, to the end that wickedness might not alter his Understanding, nor deceipt beguile his Soul, (Wisd. 4. 11, 14.) This was That that gave occasion to the young mans Inquiry which lyes before us. For ha∣ving heard our Saviour say, Suffer little Chil∣dren to come unto me, for of such is the King∣dom of God, (v. 14.) And that no man shall enter into the Kingdom of God, unless he receive
it as a little Child, (v. 15.) He immediately consider'd within himself, That notwith∣standing he was hitherto a young man, he had yet outliv'd his harmless Childhood; and that the longer he should live, the farther off he should grow from a little Child; and so it concern'd him very nearly (even before he grew older, and heap't up sins as well as years,) to address himself to Christ with this Petition. For God's sake, Master, re∣solve me one Question. If 'tis true, what thou say'st, That little Children are the Inha∣bitants of which the Kingdom of God is more especially made up; what then shall I do, who am no little Child, that I also may inherit Eternal Life? The consideration of which Example ought to provoke us to ae∣mulation, and to be prevalent also with Us, to remember our Redeemer in the days of our youth, whilst we have had but a little Time, to be infected with a sick and contagious World. Again the younger any one is, the more capable he is of a deep Impression. As when a new Vessel is season'd with this or that Li∣quor, it will savour of it the longer for be∣ing
New. And a very young Tree, be it never so crooked, will yet be made to grow straight; but if an old Tree is crooked, it is incorrigible; neither Industry nor Artifice can then reform it. So if a man is well principl'd and well disposed from his youth, or suck in good man∣ners almost as soon as he does his Milk, Ver∣tue will cleave to him as close, as his two Essentials; 'twill be his , (as Ga∣len elegantly) that is, a kind of acquired Na∣ture. But he who is an old Sinner, or a Sin∣ner in Grain, will find it as difficult not to be so, as for a Leopard to change his spots, or a Blackmore his skin, Jer. 13. 23. Aegrius eji∣citur▪ And it is by much an easier thing, at first to put on the Armour of Light, than at last to cast off the Works of Darkness. As to preserve ones health is easier, than to recover it when it is lost. Remember therefore thy Redeemer in the days of thy youth, whilst yet thou hast a Remembrance to hold him in; lest if thou wickedly put it off to thy days of Dotage, thou forget (like fat Iesurun) the God that made thee. Lastly the younger any one is, he is a Sa∣crifie the fitter for God's Acceptance. Of all
the fruits of the Earth, before the Times of the Law, He did require for his Portion, the first and choicest. Nor would he have any thing under the Law, but what was clean and without Blemish. So he expects under the Gospel, that we should give him still the best, of whatsoever we have, or are. And to answer his expectation, of all the days in the week, we give him Sunday, which is the First. Of all the Hours in the Day, we ought to give him the very Morning; to con∣verse with him betimes, before our spirits are taken up with his two Grand Rivals, The choaking Cares, and bewitching Pleasures of the World. Thus we must consecrate our Youth and our Childhood to him; which we may call the very Morning and Dawning of our Days. That is to say, we must serve him with the Excellence of our strength; whilst we are fresh and florid, and so an Oblation the worthier of him. What! spend the Flower of our Age on that base Triumvirate, The World, the Flesh, and the Devil? and at last when we are Wither'd, obtrude our selves upon our Maker? Shall we spend on God's Enemies the Spring and April of our Lives,
when our Memories and our Wits are fresh as Rose-buds? And put off God with our De∣cember, when we have nothing to entertain him, but Frost, and Snow? Nothing but Doatage and Forgetfulness, wherewith to make an Oblation to him? will God accept of That putrid Carkass, whose Life and Beauty hath been bestow'd upon the Devil? or when the World and the Flesh have injoy'd our Kernel, How can we think that our Creator will be contented with the Shell? Admit the Case were our own, and that the wife of a man's Bosom should spend her youth and her verdure in the Love of strange men; would he be willing to receive her when at last she comes to him both halt and blind? or what would we think of that man, who having invited us to his Table, should take the Marrow to himself, and humbly present us with the Bone? or give the Victuals to his Dogs, and leave us to dine upon the Platters? If ye of∣fer the blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil (saith God to Israel?) Or if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy Go∣vernour, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person, saith the Lord of Hosts? 'Tis an
important expostulation, in the First of Ma∣lachi, at the Eighth Verse. Now if one man refuseth such an offering from another, as the Offerer knows not what to do with; why should not God refuse Us, when we refuse coming to him 'till old and ugly? that is to say, 'till we our selves are grown such Bur∣dens unto our selves, as we know not what to do with? It is not likely He will have Us, if we will not have Him, until we are not worth having. If we will not both love him, and obey him whilst we are young, He has certain∣ly no inducement to be Amorous of us when we are old; when we are worm-eaten with years, and have nothing to treat him with, but Catarrhs, and Tissicks; nothing but Rottenness and Stench for his Entertainment. O let it never once depart out of our Memo∣ries and our Minds, that Consule Epi∣stolam Mariae Cassobelitae ad Ignatium, ex e∣dit. Usserianâ, p. 76. post Append. Ignatianam. Samuel was but a little Child, when yet he wore a Linnen E∣phod, and spent his Time in the Temple; as being to his God such a perfect Votary, that e∣ven his actual Living in, was a real forsaking of the World. Remember that Vide Basili∣um , ubi pro∣ponit Danielem . Daniel was but a Youth, and yet a Prophet of the most High. That David was but a Stripling,
when yet he had a mighty Zeal for the Lord of Hosts. That Iohn the Baptist, from his Cradle, was a most absolute Recluse. That Iohn the Evangelist and Divine was but a very young man, when Grave enough for an Apo∣stleship, and for the privilege to lean on his Saviour's Bosom. That King Iosias was but a Child, (, saith the Cassobelite in her E∣pistle to Ignatius,) when yet he sought after the God of his Father David, 2 Chron. 34. 3. That Timothy was but a Youth, and yet a Bishop; of whom St. Paul (his Ghostly Father) gave this witness to the World, That he had known2 Tim. 3. 15. the Scriptures even from a Child. Inquire we therefore with the Psalmist, Wherewithal shallPsal. 119▪ 11. a young man cleanse his way. And as the Votary in my Text went running to Christ whilst he was young, so let us also go running to him, whilst we are able to run apace. And let us kneel (as He did) before our Knees are grown stiff. And having kneeled down to Christ, let us call him Good Master, with our Inquirer. And let the Subject of our In∣quiry be only This; What shall we do that we may be sav'd? If no man can enter into the King∣dom of Heaven, unless it be as a little Child;
what then shall We do, who are stricken in years, and have long since outliv'd our little∣childhood, that We also may Inherit Aeternal Life? This is the use we are to make of the first Qualification of our Inquirer, and These are the Reasons on which it stands. Next our Rich men must learn, from the example of this Inquirer, that the greater their Riches are, the greater Necessity lyes upon them to fly for Sanctuary to Christ. It being as difficult for a Rich man to enter Heaven, as for a Camel to find a passage through the Eye of a Needle. And so there is need that they run to Christ, that Christ may shew them the Danger of being Rich, and by his Coun∣sel defend them from it. That he may teach them the Christian Method, whereby they may safely attain to Riches, or how they may honestly possess them, or how they may usefully put them away. How they may profitably be rid of those pleasant Ene∣mies; unlade themselves of such heavy thick Clay, (as the Prophet calls it;) and run to Christ so much the nimbler, for being light;
for being emptied and disburden'd of so much white and red Earth. How they may reap the greater Harvest, by Eccles. 11. 1. casting their Bread upon the waters; How they may make them∣selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteous∣ness, and help to save themselves by That, which helps to damn so many others. How they may lay up a Treasure in Heaven, and provide themselves Bags which wax not old, where the Worm of Time doth not corrupt, nor the Thief of Sequestration break through and steal. If there are any amongst our selves, who have Riches in possession, either dishonestly acquir'd, or uncharitably kept; we ought to start away from them, like a man who unaware hath chanced to tread upon a Serpent; and to fling them far enough from us, like the Emperour Sigismund; and to go running after Christ (like the Rich Votary in my Text,) saying, What shall we do who are men of great Plenty, and so are tempted more strongly than others are, and therefore every day walk in greater Ieopardy of our Lives); We for whom it is so hard to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, even as hard as for a Camel to enter through a Needle's
Eye,) what shall such as We do, that We also may Inherit Aeternal Life? This is the use we are to make of the se∣cond Qualification of our Inquirer, and This is chiefly the reason on which 'tis built. Lastly our Great men must learn, from the Example of This Inquirer, to lay their Great∣ness at Christ's Feet, and to tread it under their own. Or (to express it in the words of the Son of Sirach) the greater he is, to humble himself so much the more, Ecclus. 3. 18. And the Reason There is, (though other reasons are to be given,) because the Mysteries of God are only revealed unto the Meek, (v. 19.) The humble Soul is God's Temple, if not his Hea∣ven too. For what was said heretofore by the Heathen Oracle in Hierocles, , [that God delights himself as much in a pious Soul, as to dwell between The Cherubim in Heaven it self,] may be evinced to be True from out the Oracles of Iehovah; who saith by the Mouth of his Prophet Esa, that
the man upon whom he delights to look, and in whom he is pleas'd to dwell, is the man of a poor and a contrite Spirit, who even tremblesIsa. 66. 1, 2. at his word. And what said St. Paul to his Corinthians? Ye see your Calling, Brethren, how that not many Wise men after the Flesh, not many Mighty, not many Noble men are called; But the foolish, and base, and despised1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 29. things of the World, and the things which are not, are made choice of by God, to bring to naught things that are: and that as for o∣ther, so for This reason also, that no flesh may glory in His presence. This is That Noble∣ness indeed, wherewith the Nobleness of the World cannot be worthy to be compar'd, unless as the Child, or the Parent of it. For Secular Nobleness or Nobility, (consider'd simply, and in it self,) has ever been reckon'd to arise, from one or more of These Three Grounds. 'Tis either merited by Prudence, (Secular Wisdom, and Erudition,) or pur∣chased by Wealth, or earn'd by Courage. I mean the Courage which is exerted in a ge∣nerous defense of ones King and Country▪ But He is a man of the Noblest Courage, who is afraid of the fewest Things. Only afraid
of an impious Act; or indeed afraid of No∣thing, unless of not fearing God. The vitious Warrier or Dueller, who seems to breath nothing but Courage, (such Courage as is common to the stout Horsman with his Horse, when carrying Thunder in his Throat, he madly rusheth into the Battel,) I say a man of such an Animal, or Brutal Courage, who will rather be Damn'd than be thought a Cow∣ard, is yet, for all his brave Pretences, most cowardly afraid of Reproach, and Obloquie, and of Twenty other objects of carnal Fear. Whereas a man that fears God, fears nothing else: fears not what man can do unto him, (Psal. 56. 11.) And He who does not fear God, is not a Valiant, but stupid Sinner. To meet with Nobleness indeed, we must not consult the Herald's Book, unless we take along with it the Book of The Acts of the A∣postles, (Chap. 17. vers. 11.) where the Peo∣ple of Beroea are said to be Nobler than those of Thessalonica, Not because they were de∣scended from greater Parents, nor because they were advanced to greater Places, But be∣cause with greater readiness they heard the Word of God preach't; that is, because they were meek∣er,
and of more Teachable Dispositions. That alone is true Nobleness, which is sometimes The Daughter, and still the Mother of Hu∣mility. That 'tis sometimes the Daughter, is very evident: for 'Twas the Lowliness of Mary which made her the Mother of our Lord. And so when Abigail made David That win∣ning Complement from the heart, of her being The humble Handmaid to wash the feet of the Servants of her Lord, Her Humility did so advance her in David's Mind, that he made her his Queen, if not his Mistress. The King was so captivated and charm'd by the power∣ful Magick of so much meekness, as he could not have been more by any Philtrum to be imagin'd. Thence St. Peter thought fit to call it, The Ornament of a meek and a quiet spirit; as being That that does dress and set off a Beauty, more than any Recommenda∣tions of Art, or Nature. Nor is True Nobleness more the Daugh∣ter, than 'tis the Mother of Humility. For as the Lowliness of Mary made her the Mother of our Lord, so she was much the more lowly for That Advancement. And so The Ruler in the Gospel, (who is ennobl'd by Three E∣vangelists,
thô nam'd by neither,) the fuller he was of worldly Greatness, the more he saw it did concern him to make himself little be∣fore The Majesty of Christ, from whom he was to seek for an higher Birth and Extraction; such as by which he might have claim to an Inheritance of Aeternity, which is not com∣petent to any who is not of an immortal Race; nor can he be of such a Race, unless by being first Regenerate, and Born of God: and to be qualified for That, he must hum∣ble himself as a little Child, apt to learn, and to obey, meekly submitting unto the Rod, and even kissing the Hand that holds it. Look of what temper an earthly Father is wont to find his little Child, a Child that trembles at every Threat, and is easily kept in awe by an angry Look, of the very same Temper ought Himself also to be, in respect of His Father who is in Heaven. But now, besides the single Reason which has been given by Siracides; There are other Reasons assignable, why the greater any man is, he is to humble himself the more. He must be humbler, being a Master, than whilst he was yet but his Master's Man. Still the low∣er,
for being High. And because to some Persons This may seem an harsh Paradox, or at least an hard Saying; I shall attempt to make it easy by Three Degrees. First 'tis observable in Historians and Moral Writers, that such as are rais'd out of the Dust are apt to prove the most ingrate∣ful and cruel Tyrants. They commonly take down the stairs by which Themselves were taken up; and, like a man climbing up∣on a Ladder, love to be treading under their feet the chiefest means of their Advancement▪ Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit ad altum. The Fire out of the Bramble affects to de∣vour the lofty Cedar. Thence it was that Pausanias murder'd King Philip, to be talk't of. And 'twas Phocas his Sensuality, of a pitiful common Souldier, to set his foot upon the Neck of the Great Emperour Mauritius. So Charles the First of These Realms (of whom the World was not worthy) was not only sent to Heaven by some of the vilest of all his Subjects, But particularly by some Himself had rais'd out of the Mire. And if these things are so, that They are aptest to be debauch't by their worldly Greatness,
whose Greatness steams out of a Dunghill; (as every man's does if he be traced far e∣nough back,) it follows then that they have need of the greater Care, and must be ply'd with the stricter Caveats, the Greater they are, to humble themselves so much the more, because they are Then in the greatest Danger. For the greater any one is, by so much the great∣er are his Temptations: and to be safe from That Artillery, he stands in need of being armed with greater Meekness. The more St. Paul was advanced by his Abundance of Reve∣lations, the more he was buffeted by Satan, and by Himself too. For he did Therefore , beat his Body black and blue, (as the word imports,) that, by Those profitable Se∣verities,1 Cor. 9. 27. He might bring it into Subjection. Again, the Greater any man is, the more Humility does become him. It sits upon him so much the better, with the more loveliness, and congruity. It is not only the more his Duty, but Honour and Ornament to be hum∣ble. 'Tis a Vertue which should flow from a Man of Grandeur, with such a kind of Pe∣culiarity, as Munificence ought to do from a man of Wealth. For He who is flat upon the
Ground can no more prove that he is humble, than He who lives upon Almes, that he is libe∣rally-minded. We know the Taller any man is, by so much the lower he has to stoop: whereas the Lowliness of a Dwarf, is not his Vertue, but Stature only. We need not go far to find an Instance; for go we whither we will, it will find out us. How many are there who do not scorn to beg their Bread from door to door, not because they are humble, but shameless Creatures? who, were they honourable, and potent, would quick∣ly shew themselves proud, and oppressive too. Vices made almost invisible in the necessitous sort of men, not for want of a Being, but of competent Materials, to set them forth. The weaponless Serpent Epidaurus, though much more harmless, may yet be as maliti∣ous as any other; nor is't a commendable In∣nocence, which only proceeds from a want of Teeth. How many are there within our knowledge whose Backs are cloath'd in course Russet, whilst yet their Bloody-minded Insides are lin'd with Scarlet? And when a person of such a Frame shall be reduced by some Extremity, to beg an Halfpenny
through a Grate, (which is wont to be said of the Great General Bellizarius,) That is only his , not his , his lowness of Fortune, not his lowliness of Mind. It's true indeed, an humiliation may help dis∣pose him for an Humility, (just as any Sin∣ners Attrition may lead the way to Contriti∣on;) but sure I am that the Gymnosophists, who were tormented by Antiochus, were no whit the meeker for being humbled. They who think themselves humble, because they see themselves low, (and not for any other more solid reason,) do not know their own Hearts; which are commonly so hidden from human Eyes, as hardly ever to be dis∣cern'd, till they are placed upon a Mountain: Let that Mountain be what it will, whe∣ther of Riches, or Renown, or of worldly Greatness. Almost all that were sick came to Christ for a Cure; And (as They at least thought) with good devotion. But in that they did not all return to thank him, they shew'd the Principle of their coming to have been nothing but their Convenience. Had the Votary in my Text been very poor and contemptible, had he been every body's Ser∣vant
by being in every body's Debt, or mi∣serably haunted with some Disease, he had not done a strange Thing in seeking Christ upon his Knees; But that being extremely Rich, and a Ruler too, and in the Bravery of his Youth, he should consider Christ so much, and himself so little, This was an evidence of his generous and noble Meekness. And Therefore the greater thou art, my son, lessen thy self so much the more. And do it for a Third Reason, which ought at least to be as prevalent as Both the former. For the Greater any man is, the greater Accompt he is to give to his one Great Master which is in Heaven; that is, to a Master, with whom there is not Respect of Persons. In the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of men by Iesus Christ, He who now sits in State and Jurisdiction upon the Bench, shall stand at God's just and impar∣tial Bar. He shall be called to a Reck'ning, a dreadful Reck'ning, how his Talent of Authority has been employ'd, and what Good he has done with his Jurisdiction. What poor Orphans he has righted; what Widows Causes he has pleaded; what in∣jur'd
Innocence he has protected; what Ver∣tuous Persons he has incouraged with Re∣wards; what vile Offenders he has discoun∣tenanced and punish't; what Great mens oppressions he has resisted; what Rising Mutinies and Rebellions He has indea∣voured to repress. For a man's Honour, and Authority, his Power, and Greatness, as well as Wealth, are things of which he must give Accompt. Thô for a King to be accomptable to any Tribunal upon Earth, im∣plies indeed a Contradiction, yet Kings Them∣selves do stand accomptable to God, even for their high Privilege of unaccomptable∣ness to Men. And therefore the Greater any man is, he is to humble himself the more, and then (as it follows in the Text) he will find favour of the Lord. This is the use we are to make of the Third Qualification of our Inquirer; and These especially are the Reasons inducing to it. But now the Case in my Text is one of the strangest we ever heard of. For would we not think it exceeding strange, if the chief Magistrate of a City (forgetting the Mace
that is born before him) should run to meet the poorest Cottager, and throw him∣self down upon his Knees too, and lifting up his trembling Hands, should intreat him so humbly as to call him Master, and so ear∣nestly intreat him as to call him Good Master? 'Tis true that Christ was no Cottager, because according to his Manhood He was very much poorer, as having not where to lay his Head.Matth. 8. 20. Yet the Man in my Text who had Great Pos∣sessions, and was a Ruler, in the pride and glory of his Youth too, did thus come run∣ning after Christ; and kneeled down to him, thô in the Form of a Servant; and call'd him Master, thô born of Mary, Spouse to Ioseph the Carpenter. As if through That Veil of the Carpenter's Son, he had had an Eye of Faith to see The Wisdom of the Father, The Son of That Almighty Architect, who in∣deed was The Builder of All the World, Heb. 11. 10. This Jewish Convert without a Name hath somewhat more strange and more remarkable in his Conversion, than The Iailour of Philippi who was but frighted into his wits, and sought for Salvation in that Fright only; and rather in the negative,
than positive sense of that word. For That which He sought directly, was a Deliverance out of his Dangers; Not an Inheritance of Aeternity, but only an Escape from the Wrath to come. So that the Quaerist we are upon, is more Didactical than the former; as afford∣ing us many more, and more Noble Lessons. Three whereof we have had already. And Three, if well minded, are enough for One Lecture; as, if slighted, they are too many. And therefore the Prospect of Life Aeternal, which is a very great Deep, (enough to ex∣ercise the freshest and the most vigorous of our Thoughts,) is the fitter to be reserved for another Opportunity.
THE Excellent Nature OF THE INQUIRY. MARK X. 17. And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one Running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do, that I may Inhe∣rit Aeternal Life? § 1. HAving done with the Person who here Inquires, and dismiss't the Three Lessons arising thence, together with the Reasons on which those Lessons were chiefly Grounded; I am in order to proceed to the second General observation, The ex∣cellent Nature of his Inquiry; which was not
carnal and temporal, but wholly spiritual and eternal. He did not ask as an ordinary Youth, what he should do that he might compass the greatest measure of Sensuality? nor as an ordinary Worldling or man of Wealth, what he should do that he might purchase the greatest Treasure of Gold and Silver? nor as an or∣dinary Ruler, what he should do that he might climb to the highest Honour upon Earth? But casting These Things as it were behind his Back, or treading them down under his Feet, he was intent upon Inquiring, as no ordinary Christian, (even before Christianity had got its Name,) what he should do to get an interest and share in Heaven? How much soever he did abound in the things that are seen, which are temporal; He wholly direct∣ed his Ambition to the things that are not seen, which are Eternal. As the faster he ran to salute his Master, by so much the better he was in Breath; so the Lower he kneeled down, he lifted his Thoughts so much the Higher. Being mounted on the wings of an holy Zeal, His Soul had now taken a nobler Flight, than to Pearch upon any thing on this side Heaven. As if he had lost the consideration of all his
Secular Concernments, such as Houses and Lands, Goods and good Name, Wife and Chil∣dren, if he had any, and other things here below, All the subject of his Inquiry was, what he should do that he might be sav'd? not only saved in the negative, but in the positive sense of that word. Not only so as to be rescued from a Bottomless Lake of Fire and Brimstone; But also so as to be drown'd or swallowed up, in a Boundless Ocean of Bliss and Glory. Nothing would satisfie him but Life; and no other Life than one Eternal. [Good Master, what shall I do, that I may Inherit Eternal Life?] § 2. From him therefore let us learn, how to regulate our Ambitions, and where to fasten our wild Desires. We ought to tread upon the Glories of such a World as This is, (which besides that 'tis a perishing and fading World, is also the Instrument of Satan where∣by to betray us to our Destruction,) and level the Gaspings of our Souls at Things Invisible and Future, Things expressed to us in Scrip∣ture, by a City having Foundations, Heb. 11. 10. and by a Kingdom which cannot be moved, Heb. 12. 28. and here in this Text, by Aeter∣nal
Life.  was St. Paul's Precept to his Colossians, Set and settle your affectionsColoss. 3. 1▪ 2. on things above; And that for this Reason, because your Christ is there sitting at the right hand of God. Set them not upon the Earth, For Iesus Christ is not here, but is long since Risen, (as the Angel once said to his weak Disciples.) And if we are risen together with Christ, let's make it appear that we are Risen, by our seeking those things that are above. Since we were born out of due time to in∣joy the wish of St. Austin, by seeing our Savi∣our in the Flesh; let us look for him where he is, and at least behold him in the Spirit. Since (I say) we were not living when Christ was Conversant upon Earth, Let us redeem the whole Time by a Ghostly Conversation with Christ in Heaven. He who desires in Curio∣sity to see the Pope, or the King of Spain, and all the Rarities to be met with throughout their Countries, will inquire (as he is going) which is the ready way thither; and (Infor∣mation being given) will be sure to take the way which leads to Italy, or Castile; not that which will carry him either to Muscovy, or Poland. After the very same manner, but
with a greater force of reason, if we desire either in kindness, or in a Religious Curiosity, to have a sight of the New Ierusalem, praepa∣redRev. 21. 2. as a Bride adorned for her Husband, of which we hear such strange things from the Traunce and Rapture of St. Paul, as well asQuàm gloriosa dicta sunt de te Civitas Dei! Psal. 87. 3. De Quâ quid dixerit S. Ber∣nardus, videre est in ipsius li∣bro de Animâ, c. 4. p. 1053. Rev. 21. 18, 19, 20, &c. from St. Iohn in his Revelations, where for want of a better and a more lively way of Comparison, he is contented to express that holy City by things so cheap and so homely, as Gold, and Crystal, and Pearl, and Saphir, and Emerald, Chalcedony and Iaspar, Sardo∣nyx and Chrysolite, Sardius and Topaz, Ame∣thystRev. 22. 1, 2, 17. and Iacinth, A River of Life and Immor∣tality, planted round and beset with Trees of Health as well as Pleasure, and shin'd up∣on by the Lustre (not of such obscure things as Sun and Moon, but) of God and the Lamb, (in comparison with whom the Sun and Moon are nothing more, than as a Cou∣ple of Black Spots in the Face of Heaven,) which though the Richest hypotyposis St. Iohn could make of his Vision, and exceedingly beyond the goodliest Things that are visible in the beautifullest parts of the neather world, are yet incomparably short of that New Ieru∣salem
which is above; If we long to be ful∣filling our double Heat and Curiosity, the one proceeding from our Youthfulness, and the other from our Devotion, by an immediate conversation with Adam and Eve, and righ∣teous Abel, in a pleasanter Paradise than that of Eden; by keeping Company with Noah, in a safer Ark; with Caleb and Ioshua, in a better Canaan; with David and Samuel, in a diviner Sion, than that wherein they de∣lighted whilst they were sojourning here be∣low; If we desire to see Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, or in what kind of Robes of Bliss and Glory that noble Army of Martyrs is now ap∣parell'd, of whom the world was not worthy, when they wander'd about in Sheep-Skins and Goat-Skins, in Dens and Desarts, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, not because they could not reach, but would not accept of a Deliverance, to the end they might obtain by so much a better Resurrection: Or if we de∣sire to be recovering what we so many years have lost, our dear deceased Friends and Pa∣rents, or would converse with those Children, and Children's Children, which (by a Succes∣sion of Generations) will descend from our
Bodies when we shall be gather'd to our Fa∣thers; If we do long to be acquainted with those obliging and friendly Spirits, whom we deservedly revere as our Guardian Angels, (to whom the Custody and Conduct of our par∣ticular Persons is peculiarly committed by God Almighty;) and would receive their meanings whilst we communicate our own; not by Language, but Intuition, without the deceitful and poor Assistance of such articulate and successive Discourse as Ours; Or if we would be able to read all Hearts without the detecting of any Secrets, because in a place not to be habited by Shame, or Envy, or private Interest; If we think it a fine thing to have the wings of a Cherub (not only of a Dove, which was the subject of David's wish) and to be mounted by those wings to such an exalted kind of Zenith, or height of Bliss, as shall lift up our Souls above our glorified Bodies; whence looking down upon the Sun, as a thing exceedingly below us, we shall discern the very Epicycle, by which he moves slowly from West to East, even whilst he moves swiftly from East to West, and comprehend all Truths, without the Mother∣hood,
and Pregnancy of such a dull thing as Time, (which yet is the swiftest-wing'd Flyer on this side Heaven,) by grasping all things at once, not one thing first, and then another: InDe Animarum Inebriatione, vid. S. Bernard. de Deo Dilig. p. 953. 958. & super Cant. Serm. 54. p. 728. & Gille∣bertum super Cant. Serm. 41. p. 1897.  Psal. 36. 8. . LXX Interpretes. Inebriabuntur ab ubertate Do∣mus tuae. Vulg. Lat.—è pinguedine Domus tuae. Versio Interlin. Inebriabuntur quasi—pingue∣dine Benedictio∣nis Domus tuae. Chald. Paraph. a word (not to be endless in this beginning of my Discourse) if we inwardly do pant and even gasp after a Day, when fulfilling at once the Appetites of Grace and good Na∣ture, we shall be able to conceive, and hear, and see, what neither Eye hath seen, nor Ear heard, nor hath ever enter'd into the Heart of man to conceive; when we shall not only see, but tast of Bliss; nor only tast, but be filled with it; nor only fill'd, but overflown; nor only over∣flown, but swallow'd up too; when we shall drink, and drink deep of the Waters of Joy, and of such pure Ioy, as shall not be mingl'd with any Drop either of Sorrow, or Interrup∣tion; when we shall be as 'twere inebriated with the plenteousness of God's house (as the Psalmist in his Rapture was bold to speak) by drinking of it as out of a River; Or (to express it in plainer Terms) when our Glory shall be greater than the greatest Ambition of our Desires, and our Ioys far more than our hearts can hold; when we shall be giddy (as
'twere) with happiness, and drown'd in plea∣sures; shall have Raptures, and Transports, and Exiliencies of Spirit, more than Da∣vid himself in his sacred Ecstasie, by which was drawn from him that strange expression; And very much greater than that of Esa, when being cast into a Traunce, he did pre∣sentiate to himself the last and general Resur∣rection, with an [Awake and sing ye that dwellIsa. 26. 19. in the Dust;] when we whose Heads do now ake in comprehending and grasping the shal∣lowest things, shall happily loose all our Doubt∣ings into the clearest Demonstration, our Con∣jectures into Assurance, our Expectations into Injoyment, and Faith it self into Experience; when the three Triads of holy Orders which make up the Hierarchy of Heaven, of which it is said by the Prophet Daniel, A fiery stream is∣sued out, and came forth from before him, Thou∣sand Thousands ministred unto him, ten Thousand times ten Thousand stood before him, (Dan. 7. 10.) shall open those Books whereout the Dead are to be judged (Rev. 20. 12.) And when with them the holy Elders, casting their Crowns before the Throne of him that liveth for ever and ever, (Rev. 4. 10.) shall all salute us, and bid us welcome
into the Ravishing Converse of those Glori∣ous Courtiers; when that Life, and that Eter∣nity, which in my Text are inquired after, shall not only present themselves with their Retinue and Attendants unto the Faculties of our Souls, but shall withal take up their Lodgings in our glorified Bodies: If, I say, we are desirous to injoy a great deal more than we are here ever able to ask or think, even all that we can, and that we cannot ima∣gin; And would meet with all That in the very Life, whereof the Word of God hath given us but a very faint Picture: Then whilst others, like Martha, are busying them∣selves about many things, let us apply our selves (with Mary) to the one thing that is needful: Let us make it the very Centre of all our Projects and Designs: Let our Studies and Disputes, our Aims and Ambitions, our Controversies and Questions end all in This, [Which is the way to the New Ierusalem? And what shall we do to be walking in it? Which is the way to escape a Hell? And what must we do to obtain a Heaven?] For this is certainly the Scope of the young man's Inquiry we have in hand, What shall I do, that I may Inherit Aeternal Life?
§. 3. All the Kingdoms of the Earth can neither satisfie, nor justifie all our Appetites and Desires. But the Kingdom of Heaven (expressed here by eternal life) will be sure to do Both. For if we are Covetous, Here are Riches to make it lawful. If we are A∣morous, Here is Beauty to make it Vertuous. If we are Ambitious, Here is Glory to make it Good. For we must know that our Affecti∣ons receive their Guilt, or Vitiosity, not from their strength, but from their blindness, when they are either double-sighted, and look a∣squint; or else are short-sighted, and cannot see a far off; they embrace those things for fair or pleasant, which (like Ixion's watery Iuno) do only mock them with their Injoy∣ment. Whereas were our Affections so Ea∣gle-sighted, as to see through the Creatures, discerning Happiness in its Hypostasis, and flying at it where it is, our only fault would then be This, That our Ambition is too low, and our Avarice too little, and that we are not Amorous enough. For they are poor-spiri∣ted persons, of thick Heads and narrow Hearts, whose thoughts are groveling upon the Crea∣ture, and aspiring to nothing but what is
Finite. It is an impotent Ambition, a feeble Avarice, and a very flat Love, which makes a stoop at such low Trifles, as Crowns and King∣doms here on Earth. He alone is of a Noble and erected mind, who can say, and say hear∣tily, (with Christ to Pilate,) his Kingdom is not of this World. Alas the Kingdoms here Below are less than Grass-Hoppers, to the very least Mansion in the Kingdom of Heaven. Nor are they genuine, but degenerate and bastard Eagles, which will greedily catch at such lit∣tle Flies. The Soul of man was created for the highest Purposes and Ends. And there∣fore we may not only be lawfully, but even dutifully ambitious, provided our Ambitions are great enough, and every whit as high as our Soul's Extraction: we are not only permit∣ted, but even obliged to be Covetous, upon condition that it be but of solid Riches, which are not liable to Plunder, or to impairment. We ought in Conscience to be inamour'd, if it be of real Beauty, and not of that which de∣pends upon human Fansie; not of handsome Dirt, or well-complexion'd Clay; not of Beau∣ty so call'd, whose Foundation is in the Dirt, which saith to Corruption, Thou art my
Father, and to the Worm, Thou art my Mo∣ther. But if we choose a right object, like the Spouse in the Canticles, we shall never be so well, as when (with that Spouse) sick of Love. For our Bowels ought to yern after the Bridegroom of our Souls; we ought to pant after Goodness, and (in the phrase of E∣spensaeus) to Inter Amoris divini Fructus, liquefactio, & languor enume∣rantur. Vide Claud. Espen∣saeum de tri∣plici languore. c. 1. p. 976. Etiam Franco. Abbat. Afflige∣niensem Tom. 2. de Gratiâ Dei. De Amore quo piae Animae Deum prose∣quuntur, vide Plotin. Enn. 1. l. 6. p. 56. languish after him who is the Fountain of that Goodness, and so to thirst after that Fountain, as never to be satisfied 'till swallow'd up. In this one sense the Ita∣lian Proverb is to be verified, Bello fin fà chi ben amando muore. He makes a good end that dyes a Lover; to wit a Lover of Him, who is the great Lover of Souls. We should not vouchsafe to love our selves, unless be∣cause we love Him, or because he loves us, the only measure of loving whom is to love him without measure. § 4. Seeing therefore we have met with an easy way, whereby to bridle a Passion, and at the same time to let it loose; how at once we may abjure, and yet injoy our Sen∣suality; or (to speak more exactly,) how 'tis the Duty of a Christian, not to evacuate, not to invalidate, not to extenuate his Af∣fections,
but only to regulate and to direct them, to place them there where true Injoy∣ment is to be found; let no man say within himself, what shall I do to get a Fortune, to raise a Family, to erect a Temple unto Fame? what shall I do to be a man of this World of some Authority and Power, able to mis∣chief or to oblige, to beat down mine Ene∣mies, and raise my Friends? what shall I do to be a man of great Knowledge, a fa∣mous Chymist, an exact Mathematician, a remarkable Lawyer, or an eminent Divine? (for the best of These Inquiries has some∣thing in it of Carnality;) But let every man say within Himself, [what shall I do to get an Interest in Jesus Christ? and to be sure I am a Member, not only of his Visible, but of his Mystical Body? what shall I do for a Demonstration, that my Faith is truly such as does work by Love? and that it does work by such a Love, as does bring forth obedi∣ence to the Commandments of Christ? And such a kind of obedience, as Christ will gra∣ciously accept? what shall I do that I may repent? and repent in such a manner, as to bring forth fruits meet for Repentance? what
shall I do to see the secrets of my Heart? and to know by some Token which will not fail me, whether the Good which I do is well enough done? (I mean well enough to deserve Acceptance.) What shall I do whereby to work out mine own Salvation, and yet for all that to serve my God without fear all the days of my life? what shall I do whereby to make my Election sure, and to make my self sure of my Election, so as to be able to say in Truth with St. Paul, Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness? what shall I do, or what shall I not do, or what shall I suffer either for doing or not doing, that by distress, or per∣secution, by nakedness, or famin, by peril, or sword, by banishment, or bonds, by sickness, or death, by any means whatsoever, (how∣ever troublesom, or costly, or any way terrible to the Flesh,) I may but finally inherit eternal Life? § 5. But now how little there is to be found of real and solid Christianity, even in that part of Christendom where Christ and his Gospel are always preach't, (least of all amongst Them who are the great Monopolizers of Life Aeternal,) 'twill not be difficult to guess by
the solemn Theme of their Inquiries, what shall we eat? and what shall we drink? and wherewithal shall we be cloath'd? which shews the Zeal and the Devotion wherewith they Sacrifice to the Flesh. And therefore well said our Saviour (to shew the Religion such men are of) After all these things do the Gen∣tiles seek, (Matth. 6. 25) Thereby intima∣ting unto us, That Christians must seek for diviner things, than such as perish in the u∣sing; for in the seeking of such as these, they do not differ from the Gentiles who know not God. And yet if we look upon those Pro∣fessors who do pretend to an Inclosure of all the good things in Heaven, we may observe them still inclosing as many good things as they can on Earth too. It is enough for poor Lazarus, to have his Good things hereafter; And enough for Rich Dives, to have his pro∣portion of Good things here; But the good men I speak of will needs be happier than Lazarus, and yet much richer than Dives too. They will have their good things, as well in this, as another World. All the subject of their Inquiry, is not how to be better than other men, in Acts of Iustice, and Works of
Mercy, But how to be greater and more re∣garded, which is call'd a being better in point of Quality, and Degree. And after these very things do the Gentiles seek; They of Iava and the Molucco's, They of Tartary, and China; whether as greedily as Christians, I cannot tell. But our Saviour spake only of Food and Rayment, as of things which the Gentiles are wont to seek. And well it were for Real Christians, if Nominal Christians would seek no more. If Food and Rayment would serve the turn, Christians then (like other Creatures) might quietly live by one another. But it seems they have no more than the Name of Christians, who chiefly seek (with the Gentiles) the low concernments of the Flesh. For as many as are Christians in very good earnest, will bestow themselves in seeking the Kingdom of God, and the Righte∣ousness thereof, supposing such things as These will be added to the rest as a good Appendix. Man not living by Bread alone, as our Savi∣our said to Satan, but by bread as it is bles∣sed by the good Word of God. Nor indeed is he worthy to live by Bread, who is not able to live without it; who is not able to subsist
upon better things. When we reckon Food and Rayment among the Necessaries of Life, (which we do with good reason) we only speak of such a painful and dying life, as is not worthy our caring for, unless in order to life Aeternal. And for the nourishing of That, the very famishing of the Body may pass for Iejunium ani∣mae Alimentum est, leves ei Pennas produ∣cens. Bernard. food unto the Soul. From all which toge∣ther it seems to follow, That they who ar∣rogate to themselves, not only the greatest both Faith and Hope, but the perfectest As∣surance of life Aeternal, do prove themselves (unaware) the greatest Infidels in the World; whilst neglecting the grand Inquiry they ought to make after Heaven, they let the Tide of their Affections run out wholly upon the Earth. For did they really look for a Day of Iudgment, as much as they do for an Hour of Death, they would as certainly pro∣vide against the one, as commonly they do against the other. They would take as much Care to be just, and honest, as univer∣sally they do to be rich or healthful. And make as much of their Souls by Mortification and Self-denial, as now they do of their Bo∣dies by a plentiful Injoyment of Creature-Comforts.
'Tis true indeed; Life Aeternal is a thing which is quickly talk't of; nor are there any so uncivil, as not to afford it a friendly mention. It is no hard thing to be another mans flatterer, much less is it difficult to be ones own. To be secure and praesump∣tuous, is cheap, and easy. Yea, 'tis pleasant to flesh and blood, to be carnally set free from that fear and trembling, wherewith a man is to work out his own Salvation. Thence it is that we abound with such an Herd of Fiduciaries and Solifidians; who having per∣suaded themselves to fancy, that Life Eternal is a thing which cannot possibly escape them, and that all the next world is irresistibly their own; They think they have nothing to do in This, but to make a Trial, whether it hath not been decreed, that all shall be theirs that they can get; and whether it hath not been decreed, that they shall get all they try for; and whether it hath not been decreed, that they shall try to get All. When men are season'd with such a Principle, they cannot think it concerns them to give all Diligence, for the making of their Calling and Election sure, by ceasing to do evil, and by learning to2 Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
do well; or by adding to Faith, Vertue, and one Vertue unto another. But supposing their Election so sure already, as to be pass't the possibility of being miss't; It is natural for them to give all diligence, to make them∣selves sure of somewhat else. For (let them say what they will, and let them think what they please, and let them do what they can,) they cannot possibly give diligence to seek a thing in their possession, or to secure what they believe it is impossible for them to lose. No man living will light a Candle, to look a∣bout for those Eyes which he believes are in his Head; nor will he search after his head, which is (he doubts not) upon his shoulders. Our Saviour's two Parables of the lost Sheep and the lost Groat, cannot but seem an arrant Iargon unto a man of such Principles as now I speak of. For will He send about the Country, to find a Sheep which is in his Fold? or sweep the House for a Groat which he prae∣sumes is in his Pocket? No, being poyson'd with an opinion, that he was justified from E∣ternity, and hath Grace irresistible, and there∣fore cannot fall totally, much less finally from Grace; he will esteem it a thing imperti∣nent
for a man of his Talents, to be so anxious as to Inquire, what Good things he ought to do, that he may inherit Eternal Life. § 6. The great unhappiness of it is, (what I am sorry I have reason to believe I say tru∣ly,) That there are few Congregations, wherein there are not such Professors as now I speak of; who as long as fermented with such a Leven, cannot possibly be profited by all our Preaching. And therefore They (a∣bove others) must be inform'd, That by the Nature of our Inquiries, we ought to try (as by a Touchstone) of what sort we are; whether Silver, or Alchymy; whether true and solid Gold, or but polished Iron with double Gilt. By this we may explore, from whence we came, and whither 'tis that we are going; of whom we are, and whom we are for. For that Saying of our Saviour, Matth. 24. 28. which historically refers to the Roman Army, Wheresoever the Carkass is, there the Ea∣gles will be gathered together; must needs be applicable and true in This sense also, which is our Saviour's own Sense, Luke 12. 34. Where your Treasure is, there your Heart will be
also. From whence it follows unavoidably, That if we are men of another world, and have our Treasure laid up in Heaven; we shall behave our selves as Pilgrims and perfect So∣journers here on Earth. We shall be com∣monly looking Upwards, with our Backs up∣on Egypt, and our Faces towards Canaan. Our Souls will be athirst for God, (Psal. 42. 1, 2, 3.) our Hearts will pant after E∣ternity, as the Hart panteth after the Water-Brooks; crying out with holy David in an Exiliency of Spirit, O when shall we appear before the Presence of God? How low soever both our Bodies and Fortunes are, our Con∣versation will be above. , &c.Phil. 3. 20. we shall behave our selves as men who are free of God's City. Our Hearts will ever∣more be There, unless our Treasure is some∣where else. If the Kingdom of Heaven is that Pearl of great Price, to which our Lord in his Parable thought fit to liken it, And if we are those Merchants that traffick for it, we cannot choose but be busy in our Inquiries af∣ter the Price; still resolving upon the Pur∣chase at any Rate that can be ask't; and ever asking what we shall give, or (as here) what
we shall do, that we may any ways inherit Eter∣nal Life. So it follows again on the other side, That if we are commonly looking downwards, and behave our selves here as men at home, as if we did not intend any farther Iourney; If the Burden of our In∣quiries is such as This, [What shall we do to live long upon the Earth, and not see the Grave? or what shall we do to escape going to Heaven, 'till such time as we are pass't the pleasant Injoyments of the Earth? how shall we put the evil Day afar off? how shall we be saved without Repentance, or repent without Amendment, or amend no more than will serve our turn? what shall we do to be good e∣nough, and yet no better than needs we must? what shall we do to serve two Masters, and reconcile the two Kingdoms of God and Mammon? and so confute what is said by our blessed Saviour in the Sixteenth of St. Luke? what for a Religion wherein to live with most pleasure, and one to dye in with greatest safety? what shall we do to live the Life of the sensual'st Epicure, and yet at last dye the Death of the strictest Saint?] If, I say, our Affections are clinging thus unto the Earth,
It is an absolute Demonstration that all our Treasure is here below, and that we are men of the present world, in whom the God of this world hath blinded the minds; For our Savi∣our's famous Rule is at once of universal and endless Truth, Wheresoever the Carkass is, there the Eagles will be gathered together; wheresoever our Treasure is, there our Hearts will be also. And whither our Hearts are gone before, (the Case is evident and clear) our Tongues and our Actions will follow af∣ter. § 7. Now since these are the Inquiries of several Seekers; to wit of Them who do affect to dwell here, and of them that look out for a better Country, that is an heavenly; And since we may judge by their Inquiries, to which kind of Master they do belong, to God, or Mammon; 'Tis plain the Lesson or the Use we are to take from it is This, that when we find our selves beset with a twofold evil, the one of Sin, and the other of Affliction, (in so much as we know not which way to turn, there being on the right hand a fear of Beggery or Disgrace, and on the left hand a fear of Hell,) when (I say) we are re∣duced
to such an hard pinch of our Affairs, we must not carnally cast about, and tacitly say within our selves, [what shall we do to keep our Livelyhoods? or what shall we do to hold fast our Lives?] But what shall we do to keep a good Conscience, and to hold fast our Integrity? And since 'tis nobler to be led by the hope of a Reward, than to be frighted into our Duties, by the fear of be∣ing punish't if we neglect them; let us not ask, like the Children of Hagar, (in the spi∣rit of Bondage which is unto fear,) what shall we do, that we may not inherit a Death Aeternal; But as the Children of Sarah, (in the spirit of Adoption which is unto hope,) what shall we do, that we may inherit Aeternal Life? Which Life being hid with Christ in God, (as St. Paul speaks to the Colossians,) for God'sColoss. 3. 3. sake whither should we go, either to seek it when it is absent, or to find it when it is hid, or to secure it when it is found, unless to Him who hath the words of Eternal Life? thatJohn 6. 68. is, the words which are the means by which alone we may attain to Eternal Life. The words which teach us how to know it, the
words which tell us where to seek it, the words which shew us how to find it, the words which afford us those Rules and Precepts, by our conformity unto which we cannot but take it into possession? There is no other Name to make us Inheritors of Eternity, but only the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ, Acts 4. 12. And considering what is said by our blessed Sa∣viour, That This (and this only) is Life E∣ternal, to know the only true God, [with a practical knowledge] and Iesus Christ whom he hath sent, (John 17. 2.) we should religious∣ly resolve, not to know any thing else. Not (I mean) in comparison of Iesus Christ and him crucified; nor yet to any other end, than to serve and assist us in that one knowledge. Look what carking and caring any Covetous man u∣seth to get his wealth; look what industry and labour an Ambitious man useth to get his Honour; look what vigilance and solicitude any Amorous man useth to get his Idol; the same solicitude and diligence is each Religious man to use, for the getting of an Interest in Iesus Christ. Which gives me a passage from the second
to the third Observable I proposed; from the Nature and Quality of the young man's Inquiry, to the condition of the Oracle inqui∣red of. As he sought for nothing less than Eternal Life, so did he seek it from Him a∣lone, who is the way to that Life, and the Life it self. He did not go to take Advice from the Witch of Endor; (for the madness of Saul had made him wiser, or more at least in his wits, than to knock at Hell-door for the way to Heaven;) Nor did he ask of Apollo Pythius, or go to Iupiter Ammon to be inform'd a∣bout the way to Eternal Life; (for all the Oracles of the Heathen were put to silence by our Messias, (as Plutarch and others of their own great Writers have well observ'd) and should they speak never so loudly, he ve∣ry well knew they could not teach him;) Nor did he go to Aaron's Ephod, to ask the Urim and Thummim about the means of his Salva∣tion; (for he knew that That Oracle was now grown Dimm, and that in case it had been legible, it could not help him;) Nor did he betake himself to Moses, the Iewish Law-giver,
much less to the Scribes, the learned Inter∣preters of the Law; (for he found Mysteri∣ous Moses had still a Veil upon his Face, which the Scribes and Pharisees were not able to Re∣move;) much less durst he go to the Law it self for a Relief; there being nothing more plain, than that the Law worketh wrath:Rom. 4. 15. Those Tables of Stone are as the Hones or the Grindstones, at which the Sting of Death is whetted, and made more sharp. For as the sting of Death is Sin, so the strength of Sin is the Law, (1 Cor. 15. 56.) The Law does thunder out a Curse, as well as a Rigid Obli∣gation, (the one from Mount Ebal, as well as the other from Mount Sinai,) upon every Soul of man who shall but fail in the least Iota. For it is written (saith St. Paul, whoDeut. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. only saith it out of the Law,) Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. Or (to consider it yet more distinctly) admit Ae∣ternal Life had been expected from the Law by this Inquirer, yet sure it may sooner be ask't than answer'd, To which of the Laws he should have had recourse for it? Certain∣ly not to the Ceremonial; for That was but
a shadow of things to come, whereof the Body is Christ, (Coloss. 2. 17.) The very Sacrifice of the Law was not able to expiate, but on∣ly to commemorate the Peoples Sins, (Heb. 10. 3.) Therefore in vain would he have sought to the Ceremonial Law: And as vainly to the Iudicial; For that was a Politick Consti∣tution peculiar only to the Iews, and reach∣ing no farther than to a Civil Iurisdiction. Much less yet could he seek to the Moral Law of Moses for Life Eternal; For the Mo∣ral Law exacted so Universal an obedience, and also denounced so great a Curse (as I said be∣fore) on the least omission, that he could look for nothing thence but the justest matter of Despair. For first our Nature is so corrupt, and our Persons so much corrupter, since our having found out many Inventions, that if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us, (1 John 1. 8.) And secondly if Righteousness come by the Law, then is Christ dead in vain, (Gal. 2. 21.) What then remain'd to this inquisitive Iew, but that the Law should be his Schoolmaster to bring him unto Christ? (Gal. 3. 24.) The Law be∣ing adapted by the infinite Wisdom of God's
oeconomy, either to lead or to drive him thither. For requiring more from him than he was able to perform, and yet denouncing a Curse on his Non-Performance, it could not but make him stand affrighted at the ugly Condition he was in; I mean his desperate Im∣possibility of ever attaining to Life Eternal, by the meer perfection of his obedience. Hence he saw it concern'd him to seek some∣where else. He found it clear by Demonstra∣tion, (and by the woful Demonstration of sad Experience,) he stood in need of a Savi∣our, and of such a Saviour too, as might deliver him from the Curse and from the Ri∣gour of the Law, by being made both a Curse and a Ransom for him. Again he saw both by the Doctrins, and by the Miracles of Christ, that He was most likely to be That Sa∣viour; to wit a Saviour from whom he was to look for such a Clue, as might be able to con∣duct him out of the Labyrinth he was in. And therefore just as this Saviour was gone forth in∣to the way, This kind of Neophyte in my Text came running to him, and asked him, (meekly kneeling upon his Knees,) Good Master, what shall I do, that I may inherit Eternal Life?
Now if Christ was His Oracle who only liv'd under the Law, How much more must he be ours, who were born and bred under the Gospel? Shall men of our Dignity and Profession, of our Proficiency and Growth in the School of Christ, (an holy Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Peculiar People,) shall such as We go in Inquest of Life Eternal, to such deceivable Oracles, as either Zuinglius, or Calvin, Piscator, or Erastus, or Iohn of Leyden? to the Sepulchres of Martyrs, to the Discipline of Monasteries, to daily Ave Maries and Masses, to Papal Indulgences or Bulls, or to the outward Scarrifications and Buffettings of the Flesh? shall we lean upon such Reeds as will but run through our Elbows? or shall we inlighten our selves by Candles, when behold the Sun of Righteousness is long since Risen in our Horizon? or to fly for Refuge to the Saints, when behold a Saviour? Christ is called very fitly the Sun of Righteousness, (Mal. 4. 2.) to whom the Apostles are but as Stars in the Firmament of the Gospel, which only shine forth with a borrowed light, and have no other brightness than what He lends them. Now all the Stars in the Firmament
cannot make up one Sun, or afford us one Day without his Presence. Just so All the learned and the good men on Earth, All the Angels & Saints in Heaven cannot make up one Saviour, (or but light us the way to Eternal Life) with∣out the Influence and Lustre of Jesus Christ. Iairus, a Ruler of the Synagogue, a man that wanted no worldly means whereby to Cure his only Daughter, did yet despair of her Recovery, until he fell down at the Feet of Christ, (Luke 8. 41.) And so the Woman who had been sick of a bloody Flux no less than twelve years together, and had spent all she had in Physicians Fees, was not the better but the worse, until she crowded towards Christ, and touch't the Hemm of his Garment, (Luke 8. 43.) That we are every one sick of a bloody Flux too, appears by our scarlet and crimson Sins. Which Flux and Fountain of our Sins can never possibly be cur'd, unless by Him who is the Fountain for Sin and for Unclean∣ness, (Zach. 13. 1.) For as Red wine is good for a bloody Flux in the Body, so is That which gushed out of our Saviour's Body, who called himself The True Vine, the only Good thing for this Disease in the Soul. And of this Wine
we drink in the Cup of Blessing which we Bless, in the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. To him alone must we fly as to the Physician of our Souls; who saith to us un∣der the Gospel, as once to Israel under the Law, I am the Lord God that healeth thee, Ex∣od. 15. 26. He alone (saith St. Peter) is the Head-stone of the Corner, nor is there Salvati∣on in any other, (Acts 4. 11, 12.) It pleased the Father, that in him should all Fulness dwell, (Coloss. 1. 19) And of his Fulness have all we received Grace for Grace, (John 1. 16.) All things necessary to life, and to life Eter∣nal, are delivered to him of the Father, (Matth. 11. 27.) And this 'twill be easy out of Scrip∣ture, (for I am speaking to Believers, I should not else produce a Text,) to make apparent by an Induction. For first if we are hungry, He alone is the Bread of Life, which whoso eateth shall live for ever, (John 6. 58.) Next if we are thirsty, He alone is the living Water, which whoso drinketh shall never thirst, (John 4. 13.) Thirdly if we are foul, He alone has that Blood by which we may be cleansed from all our Sins, (1 John 1. 7.) Fourthly if we are foolish, He is the Wisdom of the Father,
who hath laid up in Him all the Treasures of Knowledge, (Coloss. 2. 3.) He is Doctor Catho∣licus, and only He. For when he was trans∣figur'd upon Mount Tabor, a bright Cloud over∣shadow'd him, and behold a voice out of the Cloud, This is my beloved Son, Hunc Audite, Hear Him, (Matth. 17. 15.) It is the Top of that Wisdom which we are capable of on Earth, to sit with Mary at his Feet, and to hear his Word, (Luke 10. 39, 42.) Fifthly if we inquire for the only true way, which leadeth unto life, and to life Eternal, He alone is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, (John 14. 6.) Are we affright∣ed at the Law? He alone hath redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, (Gal. 3. 13.) In a word: He is the true Noah's Ark, whereby to escape the Inun∣dations of Sin and Hell. He hath broken the Ice, and made way for us, that we may en∣ter into the Gate, (Micah 2. 13.) He is our Ionathan after the Spirit, who first hath sca∣led in his Person the heavenly Mountain, that we the Bearers of his Armour may follow after, (1 Sam. 14. 1.) The Ministration of his Word is the Spiritual Chariot, by which he carries us with himself into the outward
Court of the Temple, and thence at last with∣in the Veil into the Sanctum Sanctorum. He alone is the Gate both of Grace and Salvati∣on; None can go unto the Father, unless by Him, (John 14. 6.) He alone is the Iacob's Ladder, whose Top reacheth into the Heavens; that is to say the True , by which as by a Bridge, or Isthmus, Heaven and Earth are tyed together; Angels and Men pass to and fro; Angels to Men, and Men to Angels. By Him hath the Father reconciled all things unto Himself, (Coloss. 1. 20.) He it is that invites us, when we are weary and heavy laden, to come unto him for a Refreshment, (Matth. 11 28.) From Him the Spirit and the Bride say, Come: And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst, Come. And who∣soever will, let him come and take freely of the water of life, (Rev. 22. 17.) All which being consider'd, we thus may Argue within our selves. If the great Queen of Shebah did choose to take so long a Iourney as from Shebah to Ierusalem, and all to hear a wise man speak, (Matth. 12. 42.) Or if Socrates, though an Heathen, was such a Lover of Wisdom, as to travel for his Im∣provement
through several Countries, and put himself to learn of every great Master that he could hear of; with how much a greater force of reason should we travel far and near to find out the Wisdom of the Fa∣ther? to learn of that Good, as well as Great Master, who alone hath the words of Eternal Life? But some perhaps may here object, That the Man in the Text met with Christ in the way, whilst here on Earth. How shall we find him out since his Ascension into Heaven? The Psalmist tells us He is in Heaven, and in Hell too. If we go up into Heaven, he is there; And if we go down into Hell, he is there also. But to Heaven we cannot, and to Hell we dare not go. To which the Answer is very obvious. That if Christ is in Hell, because he is every where, by the necessity of his Godhead; he is by consequence here on Earth too, for the very same reason. And that we may not say with Seneca, [Qui ubique, nusquam,] that he who is every where is no where, for that he is every where invisible, and so as difficultly found as if he were not; The Righteousness
which is of Faith speaketh on this wise, SayRom. 10. 6, 7, 8. not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Hea∣ven? (that is to bring Christ down from above) Or who shall descend into the Deep? (that is to bring up Christ again from the Dead,) For Christ in his word, is very nigh thee, even in thy Mouth, and in thine Heart, that is, the word of Faith which we preach. We need not go to Compo∣stella, or travel in Pilgrimage to other pla∣ces, where they pretend at least to shew us his Seamless Coat, and his Cross, and his Crown of Thorns. We need go no farther than to his Word, and his Sacraments, his Ministers, and his Members. And having thus found him out, we must not content our selves, with Herod, to gaze upon him in Curiosity; but, with Zachaeus, out of Devotion. Nor must we grow old in our setting out, but rather hasten to him be∣times, and as fast as we can run too, And as humbly as it is possible we must go kneeling to him, and ask him, Good Master, what shall we do? or with the Disciples upon the Sea, Master, Master, we perish. That is, weLuke 8. 24. perish of our selves, without thy stretched out Hand to support and save us. And therefore
lift we up our voices, with those Ten Lepers in the way, Iesus Master, have Mercy on us. ForLuke 17. 13. indeed he will never have Mercy on us, unless we have mercy upon our selves, that is to say, unless we take him upon his own most righ∣teous Terms; not only as a Iesus who came to save us, but withal as a Master, who does expect to be served by us. And this does lead me to consider the Compellation of our Inquirer, concerning which I shall discourse upon the next Opportunity. Now to the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisi∣ble,1 Tim. 1. 17. the only wise God, be Honour and Glory for ever and ever.
THE Goodness of Christ AS A LEGISLATOR. MARK X. 17. , &c. Good Master, what shall I do, that I may Inhe∣rit Aeternal Life? § 1. HAving done with the Person who here inquires, and with the ex∣cellent Nature of his Inquiry, and with the only true Oracle inquired of; It now remains that I proceed to the significant Compellati∣on, wherewith the Person who here inquires, praepares the way to his Inquiry. The Com∣pellation (as hath been said) does consist of two Parts; first the Subject, , Master; next the Adjunct or Qualification, , Good.
§ 2. From the first being compared with the matter of the Question, (that is to say, with the ) 'tis very obvious to draw forth this Doctrinal Proposition. That the Son of God Incarnate, who at present is our Advocate, and will here∣after be our Iudge, and who purpose∣ly came to save us from the Tyranny of our Sins, is not only a Saviour to of∣fer Promises to our Faith, but also a Master to exact Obedience to his Com∣mands. We must not only believe him, which is but to have him in our Brains; nor must we only confess him, which is but to have him in our Mouths; no nor must we only love him, which (were it possible to be done) were only to have him in our hearts; But farther yet we must Obey him and do him Ser∣vice, which is to have him in our Hands and our Actions too. ; Master, what shall I do? § 3. A Proposition of such Importance to all that are Candidates for Heaven, and so∣licitous for the way which will lead us thi∣ther; that truly a Sermon on such a Subject
should be as long as a man's life. We cannot touch on that string either too often, or too much, by which we are taught to bear a part in the Quire of Heaven. And therefore if at present I only touch upon it in short, I would be known so to do for these two Reasons. First because I must consider it in the second Doctrinal Proposition, (it being impossible to consider that Christ is a Good Master, and not to consider at the same time that he is a Master;) Next because I shall resume it upon a sitter passage of Scripture, which I shall handle either in this, or in a Neighbouring Congregation. § 4. It shall therefore suffice me to say at present, That almost All the Appellatives which are any where given to Christ in Scrip∣ture, do either express or imply his Empire. He is A Prince in the Prophet Esa, and hasIsa. 9. 6. a Government on his shoulders; A Ruler in Micah; A Sun of Righteousness in Malachi.Mic. 5. 2. In as much as we are Soldiers, he is the Cap∣tain of our Salvation; As the Sheep of his Pa∣sture, he is our Shepherd; As fellow Members of a Body, he is our Head. He is a King and a Lord in the Revelations. Nor is he only asRev. 19. 16.
other Kings, The Lord's Anointed, or The Lord's Christ; But by way of Supereminence, Christ the Lord. Acts 3. 15. The Lord of Life he is in one place; and The 1 Cor. 2. 8. Lord of Glory in ano∣ther. Every Tongue must confess that Ie∣sus Christ is THE Lord, (Phil. 2. 11.) § 5. Farther yet, he is a Lawgiver, as well as a Lord. For so we read in two Prophets, (who plainly speak it of our Messias,) Out ofIsa. 42. 21. Zion shall go forth a Law, (Isa. 2. 3. Mic. 4. 2.) and our Apostle tells us expresly, That how∣ever we are free from the Law of Moses, yet still we are under the Law to Christ, (1 Cor. 9. 21.) To understand which the better, we must know the Moral Law imports a threefold Obligation. One, as being the Law of Na∣ture; And so 'tis obliging to all Mankind. Another, as being the Law of Moses; And so 'tis obliging in special manner unto the Iews. A third, as being the Law of Christ; And so 'tis obliging unto as many, as do call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who did not come to make the Law of none effect through Faith, (As many thought in St. Paul's Days, and more in Ours,) but by Faith to establish the Law, Rom. 3. 31. That 'tis
indeed the Law of Christ, and the Law to be fulfill'd, is very evident from the words of St. Paul to the Galatians, Bear ye one anothers Burdens, and so fulfil the Law of Christ, (Gal. 6. 2.) § 6. Thus we see by , which here relates to the , is meant a Master to Command, as well as Teach. For Moses him∣self was somewhat more than a Teaching Ma∣ster, who yet did humbly submit and do o∣beysance unto Christ; As when a King enters a City, The Maior of the Town yields up his Mace. Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a Servant; But Christ as a Son, and as a Son over his own house, whose house are we, (Heb. 3. 5, 6.) When I say that Master Moses did submittere Fasces, as it were yield up his Mace to Christ, I speak as prompted by Him∣self in the Eighteenth of Deuteronomy, at the Fifteenth Verse; where saith Moses to the People, (by a Divine and Prophetick Spirit,) The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Pro∣phet from the midst of thee of thy Brethren like unto Me, unto Him shalt thou hearken; that is, to Him shalt thou be obedient. A Text so plainly understood touching the Master∣ship
of Christ, or of his being a Legislator, that 'tis cited by St. Peter in the Third Chap∣ter of the Acts; and by St. Stephen, Acts the Seventh; and by both to the purpose at which I drive. To which agreeth this Observati∣on, That as at the close of our Saviour's Ser∣mon which he deliver'd upon the Mount, he is said to have taught the astonish't People, as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, (Matth. 7. ult.) so in the close of that Com∣mission with which he shut up all his Sermons, and sent his Preachers into the world, he gave them charge to preach his Gospel, as that in which was contained his Royal Law. [All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth, go ye therefore, and teach all Nations to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, (Matth. ult. ult.) In a due discharge of which Commission, we find St. Paul, (Rom. 13.) and St. Iames, (Chap. 2.) and St. Peter and St. Iohn, in several parts of their Epistles, re∣quiring absolute obedience to the Command∣ments of Christ, that is to Christ, as a Legis∣lator. The words of St. Paul are most re∣markable, (1 Cor. 7. 19.) Circumcision is no∣thing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, but the
keeping of the Commandments. As if the A∣postle should have said, Let us not please our selves too much with our being of This or That Religion, embracing such or such a Sect. For no man living shall be sav'd for being of this or that Profession, a Iew, or a Gentile, an Unbeliever, or a Believer, (a Papist or a Protestant, a Presbyterian, or a Prelatist.) But men are better, or worse, and in a more sava∣ble or unsavable Condition, as they are more or less obedient to the Commandments of Christ. This I take to be the meaning of that Expres∣sion in St. Paul, which is so far only difficult as it is spoken by an Ellipsis: Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, Confer hunc locum cum Gal. 5. 6. but the keeping of the Commandments is all in all. That is it must do us good in the Day of Wrath, because 'tis That that Christ requires, as the Condition of the Covenant 'twixt Him and Us. And without which it is impossible that we receive him as a Lord. But there is nothing more pertinent to prove the Ma∣stership of Christ, (as here we have it in the Text,) than his own resolution of the young mans question, as we find it set down in St. Matthew's Gospel; where no sooner was it
ask't by our Inquirer, [Good Master what good thing shall I do that I may inherit Eternal Life;] but straight the Master return'd this an∣swer, If thou wilt enter into life, keep the Com∣mandments, (Matth. 19. 17.) And being pre∣sently ask't which, our Saviour passed by the first, and only instanced in those of the se∣cond Table. To shew, that Faith will not avail us without Obedience; Nor Obedience to the first Table without Obedience unto the second. Whereby 'tis intimated unto us, That They are desperately Erroneous who think they are lovers of their God, whilst they are haters of their Neighbour; And that be∣cause they do not worship more Gods than One, have no Images in Churches, are no Swearers, or Sabbath-Breakers, they have therefore dis∣charged their Duty towards God, notwith∣standing their dishonouring of Publick Parents, their Killing, their Cousening, and their bearing False-witness. Such as these must be taught by the Answer of this Master to this Inquiry, that their chiefest Duty towards God is their Duty towards their Neighbour; and that their Godliness is but Guile, whilst they acknowledge the true God, and yet disown
his Vicegerent; Abhor Idols, and yet com∣mit Sacrilege; Scruple at vain or common Swearing, but yet dissemble, and lye, and en∣ter into Solemn Covenants against their many most sacred and praevious Oaths; whilst they are strict Sabbatizers, but disorderly walkers six days in the week; ever putting on the Form, but ever denying the Power of Godliness. The Good Master in the Text will not thus be serv'd by us; for he expects good Servants too. And to our being good Servants, there is nothing more needful, than that we be ho∣nest and upright men. In this especially (saith our Saviour) consists the way to Eternal Life. So that the Liberty and Freedom so much spoken of in the Gospel is a Manumission from Satan, and not from Christ; who did not live our Example, that we might not i∣mitate him; or praescribe us Praecepts, that we might not obey them. No, the Liberty of the Gospel doth only make us the more his Servants. And though his Service is perfect Freedom, yet doth it not cease to be a Ser∣vice. For as he that is called in the Lord, be∣ing a Servant, is the Lord's Free-man; so is He the Lord's Servant, who is called being free,
1 Cor. 7. 22. We are not said with greater Truth to be infranchiz'd by the Gospel, than to have made an exchange of Masters. We were before Servants to Sin, But now to Righ∣teousness. Before to Satan, but now to Christ. We did before serve an Hard Master, but now a Good one. And this I come to shew at large upon My second Doctrinal Proposition. That our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is not any severe Egyptian Master, But a Master full of Mercy and Loving kind∣ness. And this he is in two Respects, In respect of the Work which he re∣quires, which is not foesible only, but pleasant; And of the Wages which he promiseth, Aeternal Life. He is, for each of these Reasons, , A Good Master. § 1. That he is a good Master, and a good Master in perfection, we may discern by the particulars of which a perfect good Master must be compos'd. For He who exacts no
more Duty than we are able to discharge, and yet affords a greater Recompence than we are able to deserve; He who sets us such a Task, as is not only always possible, but most times . Philo . p. 293. easy; nor only easy to be perform'd, but al∣so pleasant in the performance; He who treateth his Servants as Friends and Brethren, as if he were their Fellow-Servant, or indeed his Servants Servant; He who when he takes upon him the most of Mastership and Empire, commands his Servants no meaner things, than he Himself in his Person hath done before them; He who when he is affronted, is very easily reconcil'd, and even sues to his Servants for Reconcilement; He whose work is worth the doing because to do it is a Reward, and yet rewards it when it is done, above all that we are able to ask or think; He is sure a good Master, and a good Master in perfection; even as good as we are able to wish, or fancy. And just such a Master is Iesus Christ. He is the Master that makes us Free, (Gal. 5. 1.) the Master whose Service is perfect Freedom. Rom. 6. 18, 22. The Master that frees us from all other Masters besides Himself. The Master that bids us call no man Master upon Earth, For
one is our Master, and He in Heaven, Matth. 23. 10. § 2. Indeed if Moses were our Master, and none but He; Our Case were then very hard. For He requireth more Service than we are able to perform, and pronounceth aLex moralis datur Duris in flagellum, Profi∣cientibus in Paedagogiam, et perfectioribus in solatium. Curse in case we do not perform it, and yet affords not any strength whereby to adapt us for the performance. But yet however he is an hard Master, he is not a Cruel or an Un∣just one, because he is an hard Master in order to a just and a gracious End. That is, he drives us from Himself, to make us look out for a better Master. He gives us a Law by which we cannot be justified, (Gal. 2. 16.) that we may seek to be justified by somewhat else. He pronounceth a Curse to as many as are of the works of the Law, that he may fright us into His Arms, who hath redeemed us from the Curse by being made a Curse for us, (Gal. 3. 13.) In a word, he is our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that being under Christ we may be no longer under a Schoolmaster, (Gal. 3. 24, 25.) And thus having ascended from Moses to Christ, from the hard Master to the mild One, we are no longer under the
Tyranny and Exactions of the Law, but un∣der the Kingdom and State of Grace, (Rom. 6. 14.) no longer in bondage under the Ele∣ments of the World, (Gal. 4. 3.) but have re∣ceived the Adoption of Sons, (v. 5.) We are no longer under a Master who can only forbid Sin, but we are now under a Master who can forgive it. No longer under a hard Master, who the longer we serve him, keeps us in bon∣dage so much the more; But we are now under a Good one, who turns our Service in∣to Sonship, translating us into Heirs and Coheirs with Himself, (v. 7.) § 3. But here it cannot be deny'd, That if we look upon Christ as nothing more than a Master, who came not to abrogate, but to fill up the Law, (Matth. 5. 17.) our Condition is not better, but rather worse than it was before. For Christ is stricter in his Pre∣cepts than Moses was; and seems to have set us an harder Task. He commands us to for∣give and to love our Enemies; Not to look up∣on a Woman with the Adultery of the Eye; to rejoyce in Persecutions; and to leap for Ioy when we are Mourners; He commands us to fight with all that is in the World; and not to
give over fighting until we conquer. I there∣fore say with all that is in the World, because as the Sublunary World was divided of old (before the Times of Columbus, and Ameri∣cus Vesputius,) into these three parts, Europe, Asia, and Africa, to wit the parts of That World which was created by God alone; so St. Iohn in his first Epistle hath divided the World of Sin and Wickedness, the World created by Men and Devils. For as he tells us in one place, That the whole World lyeth in wickedness, (like a . Dionys. . Net cast into the Sea,) so he tells us in another, That All that is in the World1 John 2. 16. is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. And methinks This Trichoto∣my hath such an Analogy with the former, as that the one may seem to have given occa∣sion unto the other. Africa for its Heat, to the lust of the Flesh; Europe for its Avarice, to the lust of the Eye; Asia for its Bravery, to the pride of Life. Now to conquer a world of Temporal Enemies, is more than any one man could yet Attain to; How much less can any conquer a world of Sin? Such an A∣morous man as Scipio might sooner conquer all Africa, than the lust of the Flesh. Such a
Ravenous man as Caesar might sooner con∣quer all Europe, than the lust of the eye. Such an Ambitious man as Alexander might sooner conquer all Asia, than the pride of life. All these Admirable Victors were Slaves to Sin, which had subdued them from their Cradles, and led them Captive into their Graves. Admit that Alexander had conquer∣ed the World without him, (which yet we know he did not, and Livy tells us he couldVide Tit. Liv. l. 9. p. 332, 333, &c. not do,) sure we are he was enslaved to the world within him; to the lust of the flesh, by the Queen of the Amazons; to the lust of the eye, which nothing could fill but another's Empire; and to the pride of life too, because by That He affected an Apotheosis upon Earth. But now the Soldiers and Servants of Iesus Christ are commanded to conquer this world of Sin. And that our Master should command us to overcome that Triumvirate, to which the universe of men hath so long been tributary, may seem as unreasonable to flesh and blood, as to flesh and blood it is impossible. So that it cannot be deny'd, but that if Christ were nothing more than a Master to us, we should not only be in a
dangerous, but in a desperate condition. And the setting his Servants so hard a Task, would loudly speak him as hard a Master. § 4. But again we must confess on the o∣ther side, That if we look upon Christ as more and better than a Master, to wit a Sacri∣fice, and a Priest, an Elder Brother, and an Advocate, not only a Lawgiver, but a Propi∣tiation, not only a Acts 5. 31. Prince, but a Acts 5. 31. Saviour too, who gives Acts 5. 31. Repentance as well as Prae∣cepts, and Acts 5. 31. forgiveness of Sins; who requires no more of us than he enables us to perform, and expects not to reap, but after the mea∣sure that he hath sown; Our case is infinite∣ly better than under the Paedagogie of Moses, and we must needs be concluded to serve a very good Master. For though he bids us have an Eye to the Perfection of his Com∣mands, yet is he pleas'd to have an Eye to the Imperfection of our Nature, and looks not on the Imperfection, but on the meer sincerity of our Obedience. Though we must fasten an Eye of Fear on the exactness of his Injuncti∣ons, yet he does cast an Eye of favour upon our weakness to undergo them. This is a Rule which will never fail us. (And be it
spoken to the comfort of whosoever has a wounded and broken Spirit;) Our Master Christ is so good, as to put a great value upon the willingness of our minds; Accepts the Tri∣bute of our Obedience, even according to the Power and Ability which we have, not ac∣cording to what we have not, (2 Cor. 8. 12.) He either enjoyneth no harder things than he gives us Ability to accomplish, or else he satis∣fieth his Iustice with a great deal less than he injoyneth. In each of which Cases he is a ve∣ry good Master. For what we cannot per∣form for want of strength, He himself hath performed in our behalf, and still doth take in good part our hearty Indeavours of Per∣formance. Be it so that he leads us upon very hot Service; commands us to fight a∣gainst all the world; and fight it out until we conquer; (or at least until we are beaten into , that is to say, into more-than-Con∣querours, by being manfully overcome, and valiantly trodden under foot;) yet if we e∣qually consider, as well the proof of our Ar∣mour, as the prowess of our Enemies, compa∣ring the Armory of Grace with the Artillery of Temptations; and the strength of Him
that fights for us, with the strenth of Him that fights against us; we cannot choose but confess (if we have any Ingenuity abiding in us) That as there are lusts of the flesh, which war against the Soul, so there are weapons of the Spirit, which are abundantly sufficient to give them Battle. And though our E∣nemies are so urgent, that we cannot expect to injoy a Peace; yet when Christ is our Captain, we may rationally hope to obtain a Victory. And sure a Victory over Sin, must needs be very much better, than to be at Peace with it. If indeed we can do all things through Christ that strengthens us, (as the A∣postle tells us we can) How can we dare to be afraid, whilst our Commander is our strength too, who whilst he leads us by his Example, does also follow us by his Grace? 'Tis true indeed, Had he commanded us to fight, where he knew we must be conquer'd; and only promised an Eternity, upon the per∣formance of things Impossible; It had not been to incourage, but jear our weakness; to reproach our Endeavours, and not reward them. But (to speak in the phrase of the Royal Psalmist) The Lord is Righteous in all
his ways, and perfectly holy in all his works. The Fortifications of every Soul are so pro∣portion'd to the Besiegers, that (excepting such as Pharaoh, who was finally given over,) God permits not a Temptation to make a Bat∣tery, where he provides not a Grace to pre∣vent a Breach. —Nec enim bone DuctorPrudentius in . Magnarum virtutum inopes, nervis{que} carentes Christicolas vitiis populantibus exposuisti. As by the Tenor of his Praecepts we must do any thing that we ought, so by the Pow∣er of his Grace we can do any thing that we. Pyth. in . must. For 'twas very truly said by the Py∣thagoreans, That Ability does dwell the next Door to Necessity. We can, if we will, shut out Adultery from the Eye, and keep out Murder from the Heart. But then the utmost of their Assaults requires the utmost of our Resistance. We cannot do it by sleeping, or sitting still. It is required that we stir up the Gift of God that is in us, and exert our very utmost of skill and strength. There is a Time when we must strive to such a Degree against
Sin, as to resist it even to Blood. As God on his part is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted beyond our strength, so must we be faithful too, and persevere in our Resi∣stance, although our Resistance may cost us dear. § 5. I cannot make this plainer than by Example, nor by a plainer Example than what our own Good Master was pleas'd to give us, Matth. 5. 28, 29, 30. where first having for∣bidden us even to look upon a Woman with such an Eye, as is the inlet of vanity, or the outlet of Lust, He immediately commands us, if our Eye offend us, to pluck it out; if our Hand offend us, to cut it off; if our feet offend us, to cast them from us. That if we cannot conquer one way, to wit by way of Prevention, we may yet do it another, by way of Cure. Or that if we cannot conquer our Ghostly Enemy, yet at least we may vex him by our Escape. If we can do ei∣ther,Amoris reme∣dia, secundum Cratem Cyni∣cum sunt . Dio∣gen. Laert. l. 6. it will suffice. For if we are able to keep our Eye from offending us, then we need not pluck it out; Or if we are able to pluck it out, then we can keep it from offending us. And this is most certain, That if we fail of
the one, we may attain unto the other. If we cannot keep our Eye from offending or insna∣ring us, or from making us to stumble and fall into Sin, (as the word  doesTertull. Apolog. c. 46. p. 76. there import) yet (like Democritus in Ter∣tullian) we can pluck it out of our Head, and cast it from us. Or if we cannot keep in our Tongue, yet (like Zeno Eleates) we can chaw it between our Teeth, and so spit it out of our Mouths. If not our Heart fromProjice quaecun∣que Cor tuum laniant. Quae si aliter extra∣hi nequeant, Cor ipsum cum illis evellendum. Seneca. scandalizing us, yet (like Cato Vticensis,) we can tear it out of our Bosome. Or we can take a more gentle and legal Course. For we can block up its Avenues, and intercept its Provisions, and so compel it to a surrender for want of Victuals. There is not any kind of Devil, no not the Devil of Concupiscence, but may be cast our of the Heart, one way or o∣ther. Fervent Prayer peradventure will exor∣cise it of it self; especially if we continue and persevere in that Duty; if we pray without ceasing, and that in the sense of the Apostle. But if to the stratagem of Prayer, we add the Engine of Fasting too; and of fasting from the Occasion, as well as from the Food of that hungry Enemy; we shall famish and
enfeeble the strongest Lust; and so by famish∣ing the Monster, preserve the Man. § 6. But some perhaps may here object, and silently expostulate within themselves: Is the Case of us Christians so hard and tedious, as that we cannot be Saints but at the price of being Monsters? Are we not fit to see God, 'till we have pluck't out our Eyes? or must we cut off our hands, for the working out of our Salvation? Or must we cut off our feet and cast them from us, that we may walk so much the better in the narrow way of the Command∣ments? Does not St. Iohn tell us of Christ, (to prove he is a good Master,) that his Com∣mandments are not grievous? But what more grievous, than to pluck out an Eye? And are we not told by Christ Himself, (to prove he is a Good Master,) that his yoke is easy, and his burden light? But what is more uneasy, than to cut off an hand? what more burden∣some to our Shoulders, than what we cannot stand under, unless with the loss of our very feet? And how is Christ a good Master, whilst he placeth his Servants in such great Exigen∣ces and Streights, that to preserve our Inte∣grity, we must be forc't to be dismember'd?
If That which opens into Life is such a ve∣ry strait Gate, that to make our selves slen∣der, we must cut off our hands; and a Gate so very low, that to be short enough to en∣ter, we must cut off our feet; where is the easiness of the Service so often talk't of? This proves indeed he is a Master with a witness, But that he is a good one, it does not prove. This indeed shews his work is possible; But 'twas affirm'd it should be ea∣sy, and pleasant too. § 7. 'Tis true I did, and still I do. For though to one who should literally pull his Eye out of his head, I might say with as good reason, as he in . Antonius ad Didymum apud Cedrenum, p. 245. Cedrenus did to Didymus, [Be not troubled at the loss of those fleshly Eyes, which are obnoxious to the Attempts of every pe∣tulant Fly; But let it rather be thy comfort, that by being thus blinded, thou hast such Eyes left thee, as by which Angels themselves do see,] I say though this were an Answer which might satisfie the Objection, and which would not with ease be reply'd unto, yet the Answer I shall give will be far more welcome. For the words of our Master are spoken only by a fi∣gure, and do signifie in substance no more
than This; That we must rather part with any thing, than at once with the Purity and the Salvation of our Souls. Be it Friend, or Profit, be it Pleasure, or Reputation, whatso∣ever we love as we love our Eyes, or think as useful to our purpose as hands and feet; yet if it entice us to any wickedness by which we Shipwrack our Conscience, or fall from the favour of our God, we must rather cut it off, and cast it from us, than indure to be cap∣tiv'd by its Allurements. If before we are aware we are surpriz'd with a Temp∣tation, so as Lust does conceive and is im∣pregn'd in the heart, we must destroy it in that Instant, e're it hath time to bring forth. Or if perhaps it hath brought forth the Act of Sin, we then must rob it of the all that may feed and nourish it, that so it may be no more than an Act of Sin; and that, for want of Provi∣sion, it may not prosper into an habit. It be∣ing better to suffer any thing, in hindering Lust from conceiving, and from bringing forth Sin, than suffer Sin (by being finished,) to bring forth Death. This I conceive to be the upshot of those hard sayings, If thine Eye offend thee, pluck it out; If thine Hand offend
thee, cut it off; if thy Foot offend thee, cast it from thee. Nay in the Judgment of St. Chry∣sostom, (upon the Place,) To pluck out our eyes, is but to turn them aside from their Tempting objects. To cut off our hands, is on∣ly to lay them upon our hearts. And to cast our feet from us, is no more than to direct them another way; to abstain from the occa∣sions and opportunities of evil; to turn aside from all Incentives and Temptations unto Sin. And therefore hitherto there is nothing in this very hardest of Christ's Commands, but what consisteth with his being a very good Master. For since he commands what he commands us, both in order to our gaining the greatest Good, and in order to our escape from the greatest Evil; (a Lake which evermore burns with Fire and Brimstone;) The very hardest and sharpest of his Commands, must be comparatively easy, and pleasant too. Thus I have dwelt somewhat long upon this one Precept, [if thine Eye offend thee, pluck it out,] because it seems to be the hardest our Master Christ hath praescrib'd; And so by consequence to evince him a good Master here, is to evidence his Goodness in all the rest.
§ 8. If again it be objected, That our Master doth praescribe us an impossible Task, whilst he commands us to be perfect as our Fa∣ther in Heaven is perfect, although the Mat. 5. ult. righteous man falleth seven times a day; James 2. and in many things we offend all; and no Psal. 143. 2. flesh is righteous in the sight of God. § 9. The Answer to it is briefly This: That 'tis not said by our Master, [Be ye as perfect as your Father in Heaven,] But, Be ye perfect as he is perfect. Which is as if he should have said, Be ye perfect pro modulo, as He is perfect sine modo. You after your measure, as He without it. It is meant of a Likeness, and not at all of an Equality. Be ye perfect, as the word perfect is oppos'd to unsincere, and only signifies Integrity; not as opposed to Infirm, and signifies absolute perfection. Or to expound it more exactly, Our Master speaks in that place touching the latitude of our Charity, which he would not have con∣fin'd within the limits of our Country, or our Acquaintance, our Friends, and Brethren; But he would have us extend our Love, as our Father in Heaven extendeth His, as well to our Enemies, as to our Friends. That
this is the meaning of the Text, is very e∣vident from the Context, and from the pa∣rallel place of Scripture, Luke 6. 36. where on the very same occasion of exhorting his Disciples to love their Enemies, he concludes in these words, Be ye merciful as your Father in Heaven is merciful. But now suppose that That Text were to be literally expounded, and that our Master had commanded us, not only an impartial, but an immaculate obe∣dience; an obedience without Sin, as well as without Unsincerity; yet by Aristotle's Rule, which may be a Rule amongst Christians too, [That what is possible by our Friends, is al∣so. Aristot. Eth. possible to us,] our Obedience may be ade∣quate to the very exactest of his Commands. For our Master is our Friend; (as he himself hath call'd himself, Iohn 13. 15.) And he hath satisfied the Law, as well by his Active, as by his Passive Obedience; And this he hath done in our behalf too. And if by the Friend∣ship of our Master (imputing to us his own Obedience) his Commands are foesible, and to be done; If we can do all things through Him that strengthens us by his Grace, through Him that directs us by his Example, through
him that satisfies for our Rebellions by his per∣fection of Obedience in our Behalf; we can ne∣ver sure complain of an Egyptian Task-master, But may modestly rather make him St. Au∣stin'sAugustin. l. 10. Confussionum, c. 28, 29, 30. Challenge, Da Domine quod jubes, & ju∣be quod vis. Do thou command us, ô Lord, even what thou wilt, whilst thou dost give us both to will, and also to do what thou com∣mandest.Philip. 2. § 10. Come we now from the first unto the following Ingredients, of which a perfectly good Master must be compos'd. He sets his Servants such a Task, as is not only possible, but easy too; nor only easy to be done, but pleasant commonly in the doing. First so ea∣sy to be done, that Sincerity is imputed and reckon'd to us in stead of Innocence; and a well-meant Endeavour doth pass with Christ for a Performance. Himself hath told us (Matth. 7. 7.) That as pretious as Heaven is, we may have it for the asking. As in∣accessibly as God is plac'd, we may find him for the seeking. And as fast as the Door is shut, we shall have it open'd for but the knocking. 'Tis true indeed our good Master hath both a Yoke, and a Burden, (Matth. 11.
30.) But the one is so easy, and the other is so light, that even his Yoke gives us freedom, and his Burden strength. It is therefore a , or cold expression in St. Iohn, to say His Commandments are not grievous; for (to use the Physician's Language) they are cordi∣al and restaurative to such as faint, paregorical and anodynous to such as are in great pain. Witness the Recipe which is given by the great Physician of our Souls, Matth. 11. 29. where first having praemised, Come unto me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest; he presently adds this Receipt, , Take my Yoke upon you, [that is, my Praecepts,] and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls. He binds us, we see, But with silken Fetters. He loads us indeed, But as the Poets loaded Atlas, when they plac'd that Heaven upon his shoulders, without the In∣fluence of which he could not have stood upon his Feet. Thus our Lord (without a fiction) bids us bear our own Prop, and un∣dergo such a Burden as holds us up; yea such a Burden as mounts us upwards. Nor could we soar as high as Heaven, if we were not thus laden.
§ 11. Such is the easiness of our Service; And then for the pleasantness, we have the Verdict of St. Chrysostom, . Vertue, without a Heaven, is so much pleasanter than Vice, that all the School of theGloria est Gra∣tia consumma∣ta. P. Ferius Specim. Schol. Orth. c. 13. Peripateticks thought sit to call it their Sum∣mum Bonum. Nor is there any thing more obvious in several parts of our Gospel, than for Grace to be express'd by the Kingdom of Heaven. As if our present state of Grace were the Inchoation of our Glory; and that by the newness of our Life, we did but an∣tedate our Resurrection. The greatest Hap∣piness under Heaven, being as Aristotle de∣fines it, when . Aristot. Eth. l. 1. c. 7. our Souls are ever working by the square and directions of the most ex∣act and consummate vertue. For what but this was the design of our own good Master, in that Abridgment of all his Precepts, Be ye perfect as your Father in Heaven is per∣fect? § 12. That other Master of mens Souls, Christ's Competitor for our Service, treats all his Vassals with greater Tyranny, than even the Malice of Zosimus could describe in Constantine, or Suetonius in Vespasian. Not
only puts excize upon their offices of Na∣ture, and makes them prostitute their Daugh∣ters to pay their Tribute; But even tortures them with the moral of what the Poets could but Invent. Uses the Proud man like Sisyphus, the Envious like Prometheus, the Avaricious like Tantalus, and the Lustful like Ixion. But now with This let us compare the most rea∣sonable Service which Christ injoyns. He does not busy us at once about many things. ForQuae unquam brevior et effi∣cacior Doctrinâ tuâ Iesu bone? non suades nisi credere, et non praecipis nisi a∣mare. Quid facilius quàm Deo credere? Quid dulcius quàm ipsum a∣mare? Quàm suave est Iu∣gum tuum, quàm leve o∣nus! Nicol. de Cusa de visione Dei. cap. 24. p. 207. his Commandments at the largest are but a Decalogue, and yet are shrunk to a Dichotomie. The whole Duty of a Christian being only This, To love his God with all his heart, and his Neighbour as himself. Now is there any thing in the world, either more suitable to our Nature, or more agreable to our desires, (I mean to our desires either of profit, or reputation,) than to love God and our Neigh∣bour after the measure that he injoyns? No∣thing sure is more noble, than by the loving of our God, to become his Favourites and Friends; nothing more profitable or gainful, than by the loving of our Neighbour, to lay up Treasure upon use in the Bank of Heaven. Yet into these two Bottoms the several Duties
of a Christian are all wound up. Which if we unravel into Particulars, what a lovely Rank of Graces may we observe to march forth? such as are Faith, and Humility, Chastity, and Sobriety, Mercifulness, and Iustice, and other Couples of the like nature; Quae utique om∣nia non onerant nos, sed ornant, as somewhere Salvian is pleas'd to word it. That is, our Duty is so much our ornament, our Labour so much our ease, and our Burden so much our prop, That our good Master in effect requires no more of us than This, That at least for his sake, if not our own, we will do so much as be at Liberty; that we will gratisie him so far, as to take our ease; and that in love to so good a Master, we will vouchsafe but to be happy. § 13. But, to pass a little farther to other Instances of a good Master; Our Master Christ doth command us no meaner things, than He Himself in his person hath done before us. He suffer'd a Birth, that he might beGal. 4. 4. under the Law; and-indur'd a Life, that he might fulfil it. Like the Emperour HadrianHadrianus om∣nia ad Grega∣rij Militis mo∣dum fecit. Spartian. in Spartianus, (who underwent as much Ser∣vice as the meanest Soldier in his Army,) our
Master thought it not below him, to washJohn 13. 5, 15. and wipe his Disciples Feet: Call'd Iudas Friend, in the same Instant that he betray'd him. He emptied himself of Glory; became of no reputation; not only prayed for his Per∣secutors, but laid down his Life even for them that took it away. In every Action of his con∣verse he set us a Copy of Obedience, as well to facilitate our Transcript, as to commend it; that we might neither think it much, nor find it difficult. § 14. It is another great point of our Master's Goodness, That he does not break with us for every fault. Although we run away from him, (as, God know's, we do too often;) yet he does not in his displeasure presently turn us out of his Service; but de∣sires that his Goodness may lead us back unto Repentance. And as he is not soon offended, so when he is, he is quickly pleas'd. We shall be sure to find mercy, at the price of shew∣ing it. For Luke 6. 37. we are promis'd an  for a cheap , 'Tis but for∣give, and ye shall be forgiven. Nay so vehe∣mently Good is our Master Christ, that he sends and sues to us for our consent to be for∣given.
We are Embassadours for Christ, (saith St. Paul by the Spirit in his Epistle to the Co∣rinthians,) as if God himself did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God, (2 Cor. 5. 20.) Is not this a strange height of Condescension, That God in Christ should beseech us, and that Christ by his Am∣bassadours should pray unto us for a Paci∣fication? That being neglected, He should court us? That being repulsed, He should co∣vet us? That being buffetted, He should bless? and most unworthily affronted, he should intreat? Nay consider what it is, which he intreats to have granted. Not that He may be invited to be reconcil'd to us, but that we will be so gracious as to be reconcil'd to Him; implying God to be already reconciled unto us. And so his Intreaty is only This, That having done him a thousand wrongs, we will at last be friends with him. That how many Injuries soever we have offer'd him for the time pass't, we will not aggravate them All, by our Contempt of that Pardon he offers to us. That having offended against his Iu∣stice, we will not sin-away his Love, and his Mercy too. But that after the many Breaches
which we alone have made wide betwixt Him and Us, we will finally admit of a Reconcile∣ment. Thus it appears by the Ingredients of which a perfect Good Master may be com∣pos'd, that Jesus Christ is a Good Master, and a Good Master in perfection. § 15. Last of all, if to the work which our Lord requires, to wit obedience unto his Praecepts, we add the wages which he promi∣seth, Eternal Life, we must confess him as good a Master, as his Servants are able to wish, or fancy. Do but compare him with the Masters of greatest Note amongst the Heathen. Diog. Laert. in vitâ Epic. Epicurus taught his Scholars, that the great∣est Happiness they could aim at was the Plea∣sure of the Mind. Aristippus and Eudoxus wereAristot. Eth. l. 10. cap. 2. for that of the Body. Diodorus went no high∣er, than to the Absence only of Pain. Herillus thought rather the Perfection of knowledge. The Stoicks gave the preference to an Unpassionateness of Life. The Peripa∣teticks made it of three Ingredients. The first whereof was Vertue, which they call the , or great Essential; The second In∣gredient was a Compound, comprehending all the Goods both of Body and Fortune, and
those as the , not as Parts, but Subservients to the Foelicity of Man; The third was Pleasure, and that they were pleas∣ed to express by the , not as a part, or a subservient, but a meer Conse∣quent of Bliss. Thus the great Masters a∣mongst the Heathen did direct their Disciples by the Dimm light of Nature. But Christ a∣lone is the good Master, who has both taught us as his Disciples, and also promis'd us as his Servants, Eternal Life. § 16. And the least Measure of such Wa∣ges, as Life added to Eternity, and to Both the Fruition of God himself, is transcendently greater than the greatest measure of our Obe∣dience. A Christian's Vails are more worth, than his Service comes to. The very Ear∣nest our Master gives, (if we compare it with our work,) might very well suffice for our Wages too. But his final Reward (which is express'd by Life Eternal) does amount to so huge and unconceivable a value, that theQuantò diutiùs considero, tantò mihi Res vide∣tur obscurior. Simonid. ad Hi∣eron. Case stands with us, as heretofore with Si∣monides, when demanded by Hiero the Defi∣nition of God; the longer we study to sum it up, the more we shall find it unconceivable.
And what we cannot conceive, we can much less utter. It is not only the greatest that we can have, nor only the greatest that can be had, but even the greatest we are able to ask or think, the greatest we are able to wish or fancy. The very Hope and Expectation of Life Eternal, although at many years di∣stance, and wrapt up in Futurity, does carry with it the greatest Pleasure of which we are capable whilst we are here; not to mention those Pleasures which it will ravish us with hereafter. For That is sure the greatest wa∣ges, and carries with it the greatest pleasure, whose very hope and expectation is apt to soften the hardest work, and able to alleviate the heaviest Burden. But the hope and ex∣pectation of Life Eternal, and the Glory to be reveal'd, is apt to soften the hardest work, and to lighten the heaviest Burden; therefore That is the greatest wages, and carries with it the greatest Pleasure. The Assumption is to be prov'd by an Induction of particulars: I mean the admirable Experiments which have been made in this life by Saints and Martyrs; whose very Torments have been sweeten'd and made delicious, by nothing else but the Fore∣tasts
of Life Eternal. Were Life Eternal. Calli∣machus in Hymn. ad A∣poll. nothing better, than a kind of perpetual Youth, an unmovable station upon the point of One-and-twenty, we may guess how much admir'd, and how much coveted it would be, by the Care which People take of their Em∣bonpoint. How many use their Thrid of Life, as prudent Penelope did her Web? when being wound up to a Real Age, they unravel it again to a seeming Youth? So very willing they are to live, and yet so very unwilling to outlive Beauty, that they will needs court E∣ternity by a Nursery of Colours. So that when fifty or threescore years begin to be le∣gible in their Faces, (characters there dug by the Plough of Time,) A Dash or two of their Pencil will strike off Twenty. And therefore the years which they have liv'd, though scarce the Childhood of Life Eternal, may yet assist them in its Discovery as far as a little im∣perfect Guess. They who fain would never dye, can tell me best how sweet is life; And They who fain would ne're be old, can best inform me of Eternity. § 17. But I must not here make a Pane∣gyrick of Life Eternal; as well because I
insisted on it in considering the nature of the young man's Inquiry, as because I must hasten to make Advantage of what already hath been deliver'd. Since therefore Christ is so much a Ma∣ster, as to beget our greatest Reverence; And yet a Master so full of goodness, as to merit our greatest Love; a Master, to challenge our obedience; and a Good Master, to invite it; A Master, to keep us from Contempt; and yet withal a good Master, whereby to give us Familiarity; A Master, to set us on work; and a good Master, to reward us; Since (I say) he is so good, as to be willing to Allure, what he is so much a Master, as to be able to compel; Since our Imployment is not only very proportionable to our strength, but very conformable to our Nature; not only tending to our Interest, but even agreeable to our Desires; Since our Master is Goodness it self, our Service Freedom as well as Pleasure, and our Wages Eternal Life; Let us not serve him only for fear, but let us fear him only for love. Rather as a Good Master, who will Re∣ward, than as a Master, who can punish. Let not our obedience be meerly servile, and
only paid to the Law of a Carnal Command∣ment, (Heb. 7. 16.) But filial rather and in∣genuous, to the Law that is Spiritual, (Rom. 7. 14.) Iob was objected against by Satan, that he serv'd God for something; and that the source of his obedience was but a mercenary Devotion. Now though we cannot but have something for serving God, yet (that Hell may not upbraid us) let us serve him for nothing more, than the honour and happi∣ness to serve him. Shall we serve our Good Master from the same base Principle, from which the very worst Servants will serve an ill one? For shame let us not serve him, as vanquish't People do serve their Tyrants, or as some poor Indians do serve the Devil, only to the end that he may not hurt us. Will he accept of our Service (think ye) when we do make him our shelter, but not our choice? a kind of , or a meer Plank after a shipwrack? He is little behold∣ing to such a Proselyte, whom only his Ene∣my hath made his Friend; and may rather thank Hell for our Obedience, when we come to him but in a Fright. I would not (with the Woman who was met in the way
by Bishop Ivo, with a Firebrand in one hand, and a Bucket of Water in the other,) either burn up the Joys of Heaven, or ex∣tinguish the Fire of Hell; But so much I am of that Woman's mind, that (if I might have mine own wish,) I would have all Christian Servants to love This Ma∣ster a great deal more than the Ioys of Hea∣ven; And I would have them fear his Anger a great deal more than the Pains of Hell. If He did empty himself of Glory, and as it were go out of Himself to give us Grace; How should we empty our selves of all that is dear unto us, and even go out of our selves too, by Self-denials, to advance his Glory? O let us therefore be such gene∣rous and disinteressed Servants, as to vye O∣bedience with his Commands. In an hum∣ble kind of Contention, let us indeavour to out-do, and (if occasion ever serve) to out∣suffer what he commands us. Since Hea∣ven it self is the Merchandize, which (in theMatth. 13. 46. Parable of our Lord) must be sold for sweat; let us more out-bid the Pharisees, than the Pharisees did the Law. And that our Ma∣ster may say to us in his Kingdom of Glory,
[Well done good Servants,] Say we to him in this of Grace, [Good Master what shall we do?] Let us not admit of Ignobler Motives for the present exciting us to our Duties, than the bare doing them in this world, and an Inheritance in the next. A good life here, and hereafter an Eternal. Now the Earnest of our Service, and then the Wages. The very Earnest of such an Estimate, but so in∣estimable the Wages, that 'tis not so fit to be describ'd, as to be press'd and urg'd home on a Congregation. For the Knowledge of This (unlike That of other things) dwells in the Matth. 13. 15. Heart, not in the Head. The way to understand the Joys of Heaven (with St. Paul,) is (with St. Paul) to be rapt up thi∣ther. Rapt up in zeal, and affection, not in fancy, and speculation. In the yerning of the Bowels, not in the working of the Brains. Let the Scepticks therefore dispute themselves to Heaven, whilst we in silence are walking thither. Let the Schoolmen take it in subtil∣ty, and we in deed. Let the Pelagians or So∣cinians try to purchase Eternal Life, whilst we inherit it. Let the Sanguin Fiduciary possess himself of Bliss, whilst we contend for
it. Let the Philosopher injoy it as well as he can in his Contemplations; we shall best con∣template it in our Injoyment. Which God of his Mercy vouchsafe un∣to us, even for the Glory of his Name, and for the worthiness of his Son, our great and good Master the Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father in the Unity of the Spirit, be Honour and Glory both now and for ever.
THE INHERITANCE OF ETERNITY IS God's Free Gift After all our WORKING. MARK X. 17. Good Master, what shall I do, that I may Inhe∣rit Aeternal Life? A Quaestion set forth in such happy Terms, that I conceive it will be easy to resolve it out of it self. For the way to inherit Eternal Life, is to receive and own
Christ both as a Master, and as a Good Master; to obey him as the first, and to love him as the second, and to revere him as both together; and when All is done, still to ask what we shall do; to believe he will reward us accord∣ing to our Doings, and not only so, but above them too. The Compellation having been handled in both its parts, I must proceed unto the mat∣ter and the manner of the Quaestion, together with the manner of attaining to the End, or the final Cause. The matter is imply'd in the , and the manner in the . From both together there ariseth this Doctrinal Proposition. That in duty and gratitude to such a Good Master as This, we must accompt our selves obliged to two Returns. To wit a Readi∣ness of obedience, and a Resignedness of Wills. First a Readiness of Obedience, even because he is our Master: Next a Resignedness of Wills, because he is a Good Master. Our Christian Tribute to both together, [to wit his Authori∣ty, and his Goodness,] must be at once Uni∣versal and Unconstrain'd. ; what shall I do? that is to say, I will do any thing.
I am ready to perform whatsoever thou shalt appoint, be it never so harsh, or be it never so difficult. For Life Eternal is such a prize, as for which I can never do enough. I say not therefore what I will do, but humbly ask what I shall. This I take to be the Scope of the ; and by consequence the ground of my Proposition. When I contemplate on God Almighty as the , (to use the phrase of the Pythagoreans,) both as a God, and as a Creator, In his Essence, and in his Attributes, in the Unity of his Nature, and in the Variety of his Works; I know not whether I should conclude him to be more simple in Himself, or else more different in his Dispensations. And though this Difference does appear in the whole oeconomy of the Creation; yet is it no where so conspicuous, as it is betwixt us, and our Fellow-Creatures. Which if we have leisure but to compare, we shall find in other Creatures so many Traces of God's Divinity, But withal in our selves such great Remarques of his special Favour, that though to Them he is a just and a gracious God, I may say
that to us he is a Partial one. They acknow∣ledge him a Soveraign; But we have the ho∣nour to call him Father. They are the ob∣jects of his Almightiness, But we of his In∣dulgence and tender Love. Them indeed he created, But us he created in a Similitude with Himself. Them he hath confin'd unto the Dictates of an Appetite; . Philo . p. 234. But hath turn'd us loose unto the Liberty of a Will. Them he condemn'd to be infallible, for want of reason; To us he gives the use of reason, and so the privilege to be led into Truth or Error. As they are never unfaithful, so are they ever press'd Soldiers in God's great Host. But we have the honour to be capable either of Blame or Commendation, by our being either Rebels, or Voluntiers. And according to this Diversity of Endowments in the Creature, 'Tis very just he should expect a like Diver∣sity of Obedience. From Them a fatal obe∣dience; from us a filial. They are to suf∣fer their Maker's will; But we properly to do it. They to serve him out of necessity; But we from choice. They are to submit to his Good Pleasure; But we to love it. Or (to sum up the Difference with greater prae∣ciseness
as well as brevity,) The other Creatures may be said not to resist his Commands; But we only to obey them. Obedience properly being That, which proceeds from Option; And That the best of our obedience, which is the Production of our Love. But see how much the Scene is shifted, since first we enter'd upon the Theatre; and how oppositely we act to God's Great Design. For the Ox knoweth his owner, and the Ass his Ma∣ster'sIsa. 1. Crib; God's other Creatures will, but only his People will not obey him. The Sun was not too high, nor the Matth. 8. 27. Sea too unruly; Hell was not too guilty, nor the Grave too strong. For we know the very Devils obey'd our Saviour in his Life; and Death it self at his Resurrection. But as if the partiality of God to man, by which he made him as the youngest, so the dearest Child of his Creation, had only given us that sad and accursed Privi∣lege, of becoming more obliged, and by consequence more miserable, because more ingrateful than all the Rest; we, the  in St. Chrysostom, even the Pride of his Workmanship, and the prime Business of his Providence, are the sole Remnant of his
Creation, who turn the Instances of his Good∣ness into Unnatural Instruments of his Disho∣nour. The only sublunary Creatures that Understand his will, And yet (the Devils a∣lone excepted) the only Creatures that dis∣pute it. Some there are who will obey him by all means possible, But with a tacit Proviso that he will first obey Them. So far forth as they are pleas'd with the condition of his Service, they are ready to serve him in what he pleas∣eth. If Christ but once say the word, they will quickly follow him to Mount Tabor, orMatth. 17: 4. (if need be) they will go before him. But when he goes to Mount Calvary, they will be sure to stay behind; or they will follow him then too, that is, they will not come near him. Move after him they will, but will think it good manners, to do it at a great and an humble Distance, like the Catharists of old, who of late are call'd Puritans, (the more Unclean in God's Eyes for being so righteous in their own,) on a praesumption they shall dye the Death of the righteous, they do not much scruple what life they lead. The Promises of their good Master they swallow
down very glibly; But his Praecepts they cannot digest. They had rather idly gape after Life Eternal, than by a rigid obedience take the pains to go towards it. Or if per∣haps they are content with the working out of their Salvation, yet their Assurance of their Election will not suffer them to do it with fear and trembling. They so abominate the Po∣pery of coming thither ex condigno, and so hate the Pelagianism of seeming worthy, as not to take any care of becoming fit. 'Tis most agreable with the privilege which they pretend to, to be with Christ at his Ascension; from whence they leave him all his life to converse with Publicans; and look upon him at his Death as fit to be companied only by Thieves. There are others of a less Sanguin, and so a less credulous constitution; who do not throw themselves so wholly, or rather so supinely, into the Arms of Christ Jesus, or so expect to be car∣ried upon his shoulders, as not to make use of their Eyes and Feet too. Only the worst of it is this, that having cheerfully follow'd him through all the passages of his Life, they at last forsake him at his Cross; And if they be∣tray
him not, like Iudas, yet like Peter, they will not own him. Keep him company they will to the Brink of Happiness, But there affrightedly start back like their Brother De∣mas. Or else like Agrippa, , they are within a very little of being good Christians; as having made a fair shift to pass the narrowness of the way, but only sticking as 'twere at last at the straitness of the Gate. As if when after a tedious march they are advanced as far as the Door of Hea∣ven, they would not be at the pains to en∣ter in. I cannot exemplifie what I say with so much pertinence to my Text, as by the young and wealthy Ruler concerned in it. It appears by the Question which here he makes, and by his Care of the Commandments, (v. 20.) and by our Saviour's Love to him, (v. 21.) that he was one of some growth in his Ma∣ster's School. But withal it appears, (v. 22.) that he shrunk at the thought of an harder Lesson. He had observed the Commandments even from his youth. That was well, but not enough. For one thing he lacked, (as his own Good Master told him,) even the selling all he had, and giving it to the Poor. But as if he
had forgotten the generosity of his Quaesti∣on, [; what shall I do?] whereby he evidently imply'd he would stick at nothing, which by this his Good Master should be in∣joyn'd; he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved. And the reason of it was, He had great Possessions, (v. 23.) It seems a Treasure here on Earth is so commonly inconsistent with one in Heaven, that we must part with the one, to injoy the other. And agreably our Saviour Matth. 13. 46. compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a Pearl of great price, which a Merchant sold all he had to purchase. Great Possessions do so incumber a spiritual Traveller in his Iourney, that the Door of Heaven to a Dives, is (in the Judgment of our Master who cannot err) as the Eye of a Needle to a Camel, (v. 25.) which 'tis impossible he should enter, or be able to pass through, unless by crumbling his Possessions into as many small parts, as there are objects of his Charity to assist him in the Division. I do not say as many parts, as there are poor men and women who crave for Alms, (the parts would then be too little, and instead of entring the Needles Eye, would fall
beside it,) But I say as many parts, as there are objects of his Charity; which all are not, who are very poor, because their Poverty may be their Sin, (by an obvious Metonymy of the efficient for the effect,) unjustly gotten, for want of labour; and for the same want of la∣bour, unjustly kept. Else our Laws had been unchristian in providing a Bridewell and a Beadle for such as beg; nay St. Paul had been cruel in condemning some of them to dye by Famin. For he commanded his Thessa∣lonians, that if any would not labour, they should not eat, (2 Thess. 3. 10.) But (to resume my Discourse, where this Parenthesis made me leave it;) we see the Camel, or the Rich man, may not only be enabled to pass the Eye of a Needle, (that is to say, the Door of Heaven,) by giving the Bunch upon his Back, that is, his Riches to the Poor; but he may do it and still be rich; nor can be rich in good works, until 'tis done. For though by ha∣ving great Possessions he is in a capacity of being rich, yet truly His they cannot be, until he has mercifully employ'd them. Quas dederis solas semper habebis Opes.
But however this is pertinent to as much of my Text as I am upon, if the wealthy man's Quaestion be duly compar'd with the following Answers; yet it seems 'tis so sub∣lime and so untrodden a piece of our Lord's Philosophy, so very heterodox and strange to the conceptions of Carnality, that it either transcendeth our Capacities, or is too oppo∣site to our Desires. Such incompatible Ma∣sters are God and Mammon, that as Conscience by a Proverb is the poor man's Vertue, so Life Eternal by a Promise is the poor man's Re∣ward. For though to have life wedded to E∣ternity, is a Match we like well; yet unwil∣ling we are often to pay the Dowry. We are commonly more inclinable to part with our Sweat, than with our Mony; and are readi∣er, of the two, to earn Heaven, than to buy it. And yet this Earning of it also, as it does too much exceed our strength, so it too much crosses our Inclinations. We are contented to serve our Master, but so as it may stand with our ease, and leisure. Like that Disci∣ple in St. Matthew, who was willing andMatth. 8. 21. ready to follow Christ, but so as in the first place to bury his Father. Or like them that
were bid to the wedding Feast, if we have no∣thing else to do, we are forsooth his hum∣ble Servants. But if we have either a Field to prove, a yoke of Oxen to try, or a Wife to marry, we receive and return his Invitation, with an [I pray you have me excus'd] If he invites us to the Miracle of Loaves and Fishes, then indeed the Case is alter'd, and we shall flock to him by thousands. But if we are bid to sup with him upon a Mess of sowre Herbs,Matth. 14. 21. (as at the Passover,) or to partake of an Oleo made of Vinegar and Gall; (as at the time of his Crucifixion,) then we affect be∣ing abstemious, we lay our hand upon our mouth, and thank him as much as if we did. That is to say, in all such Cases, either we are not at leisure, or else we do not like our Fare. Whereas when the Master is so transcendent∣ly Good, that for the work of a few Minutes he gives an Eternity of Reward, we should prevent his Commands with a , what kind of Service wilt thou command us? we should afford him (for shame) as great a Resignedness of Wills, as that Heathen man Cleanthes gave to his Iupiter, and his
Fate. . Since on condition that he saves us, we care not how; we should invite him to com∣mand us, we care not what; and to lead us, we care not whither. We should give him up our Souls as so many Blanks, or unwrit∣ten Tables, aequally susceptible of all, which our Master shall be pleas'd to imprint upon us. For in the Eighteenth Chapter of St. Luke, (v. 17.) Whosoever shall not receive the King∣dom of God, (that is, the Praecepts of the Gos∣pel,) , as a little Child, (that is, as one who is passive, and of a teachable Dispositi∣on, impartially receptive of all impressions, which the Tenor of the Gospel shall stamp upon him;)  saith our Saviour,Matth. 26. 42. he shall in no wise enter therein. And this, no doubt, is the meaning of that Petition in the Lord's Prayer, Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Which notes a sufferance (saith Tertullian) to which, when we pray,Sufferentiam no∣tat ad quam nos ipsos admo∣nemus. Tertull. we excite our selves. But certainly That cannot be all. For we pray in that Petiti∣on, as well for the doing of what he com∣mands, as for the suffering of what he in∣flicts. Thy will be done, not only upon us,
but by us too. Let it be done here on Earth, with the same Alacrity as in Heaven; Let it be done by thy Children, with as much Im∣partiality as by thy Servants; Let it be done by us Men, as unconstrainedly as by Angels. If thou wilt have us to buy Salvation, let us not choose our own Price. If thou wilt have us to work it out, let us not choose our own Task. If thou wilt have us to do it pre∣sently, let us not choose our own Time. Give us Resignedness of Spirits, and with That, what thou pleasest. Be thy Injuncti∣ons never so hard, or thy Cross never so hea∣vy; be it the giving up our Livelyhoods, or be it the parting with our Lives, , Thy will be done. 'Tis true we may pray with our Blessed Saviour, Father if it be pos∣sible, let this Cup pass from us. But then we must pray with our Saviour too, Neverthe∣less not our will, but thy will be done. I remember Herodian reports of Alexan∣der,Herodian. l. 6. p. 129. (the Cousin German to Pseud Antonine,) He was so perfectly at the Devotion of his Mother Mammaea, as to obey her in those things , in which he was most of all displeased. Not disobeying her
even in those, in which Disobedience had been a Duty. And 'twas Pythagoras his Theology, not only , in Iamblicus, but  in Hierocles; not only not to repine at God's oeconomy, but with all gentleness to embrace it. Nor only to observe, and to do his will, even then when it thwarted theirs; but to accommodate and conform their will to His. I am sorry I must say, (what yet I must,) that were Pythagoras his Metempsychosis now to be ve∣rified in Himself, and He again to teach Philosophy in these our days; I know not which were the more probable, either for us to be the better for his Christian-like Princi∣ples, or for Him to be the worse for our Hea∣then-Practice. And because Reason, by ma∣ny Auditors, is more attended to than Scrip∣ture; let me bespeak you in the Person, not so much of a Christian, as of a Philso∣pher. Is there any thing in the World (I do not say more impious, but) more unpolitick, than for a Lump of Infirmities to enter the Lists with the Almighty? or for a thing of a Span long to resist Immensity? Our Dis∣obedience
to such a Master will be found ae∣qually ridiculous, whether we hope to thrive in it by Opposition, or Avoidance. For dare we stand against Him who is Omnipotent? Or can we fly from Him that's every where? Do we live in fear of Them that can hurt theLuke 12. 4, 5. Body? and are we undaunted only at Him who can kill the Soul? Iacob could not wrestle with him, though he did it for a Blessing, without the Disjoynting of his Thigh; and shall we struggle for a Curse, even at the priceNon tutum est in illum scribere qui potest pro∣scribere. Auson. of a Damnation? If Ausonius could say of the Roman Emperour, That 'twas not safe scribling against a Man, who had the PowerNon recte sua∣detis, Familia∣res, qui non pa∣timini me il∣lum doctiorem omnibus esse credere, qui 30. habet Legiones. Spartian. in vi∣tâ Hadr. p. 14. to proscribe; And Phavorinus of Hadrian, That 'twas not good to dispute with such a Person, as had the command of thirty Legions; Then with a greater force of reason, Is it not Wisdom, as well as Duty, to yield obedi∣ence unto a Master, who is infinitely Great as well as Good, and has the power to compel, as well as the sweetness to invite, and that not only our Obedience, but our Assent too? We count it prudence in other things, to make a vertue of Necessity. And being con∣vinc'd we are unable to prevail against our
Master; why do we not strive to be un∣willing, and at least make a vertue of so much weakness? If we duly contemplate Inferiour Nature, we shall find but too much reason even to aemulate and strive with the things below us. Which yet, in this respect at least, are so much higher than our selves, by how much the more they are conformable to the Blessed Will and Pleasure of him that made them. Not only the Beasts, which have no Understanding, but the Elements, which have no Sense, do silently preach to the Christian World, at once Obedience, and Self-denial. For what more contrary to Na∣ture, than for the Earth to give Rain? or what are the Clouds more unwilling to, thanLiv. l. 28. p. 678. they are to rain Earth? And yet Obedience to their Maker is a thing so natural, as that they obey him against their Nature. What is the Sun more averse to, than either going back, or standing still? And yet in obedi∣ence to God's Command, He did not only stand still in Gibeon, but withal went back up∣on the Dial of Ahaz. Hereupon it will be useful thus to reason within our selves. Are God's Drudges so in∣clinable
to his Commands? and shall we his Darlings be so averse? They are only ob∣liged to their Creator for being made; Our Obligation is far greater, by our being made men; and greater yet by our being remade. We are not only the Work, butNon modo Dei opus, sed Dei Flatus. Tertull. de Animâ, c. 19. the Breath of God, saith Tertullian. Nay farther yet, whereas he spake only for Them, for Us he died. And if they are so thankful for being the work of his Hands, shall not we be much more, for being the price of his Blood? yes sure. As 'tis our privilege, a∣bove them, to have a Saviour, and a will, so our obedience must be more, and it must be more willing. It must not only be Univer∣sal, (for so is Theirs,) but also free, and un∣constrain'd. As other Creatures are obedient, because they cannot resist, so ought we, be∣cause we will not. We must not obey him only in fear, because he is a great Iudge; but because he is a Saviour, we must take Pleasure in our Obedience. We ought to look upon his Praecepts, with as kind eyes as on his Promises; and the employment of such a Master, should as much incourage us as our pay. We ought to think the Day lost
which is not spent in his Service; and execute his Precepts with so much readiness, as wishing at least we could prevent them. We should not only be , but : not on∣ly ready with the Praescriptions, but Freewill-Offerings of our Obedience. It being a Gal∣lantry of Devotion, and most worthy of a Christian, to be most of all afraid of offend∣ing Him, (not whom we find a meer Master very inclinable to punish, But) whom we find a good Master, most apt to pardon. Let us hasten to him therefore preaching to us from the Mount, and let us give him our Attention in the spirit of the two Em∣blemes of the Law and the Prophets, which had the honour to attend him upon Mount Tabor. Undergoing his meanest Offices in the humility of a Moses, and with the greatest earnestness performing them in the zeal of an Elias. Let us render him every Faculty both of our Souls and of our Bodies; our Mouths to confess him, our Heads to believe him, our Hands and Feet to serve him, our Wills to be ruled, and our Wits to be capti∣vated by him, our Hearts to love him, and our Lives to dye for him. All which,
though it is All, is still too little, if we im∣partially consider the Disproportion of our Reward, that blessed Parallel drawn out for us by God's own Compass, Life, and Aeternity. A man (you know) would do any thing whereby to find Life, though (in our Savi∣our's Oxymôron) it is by losing it, Matth. 10. 39. And as a man will part with any thing, to save his life; so with life too, to eternize it. If therefore our Saviour does bid us follow him, let us not venture to choose our way. And if we can but arrive at Heaven, it mat∣ters not much though we go by Hell. For comparing his Goodness with his Mastership, his Promises with his Precepts, and the Scant∣ling of our Obedience with the Immenfity of our Reward; we shall find that our work hath no proportion with our wages; but that we may inquire, when all is done, Good Master what shall we do? And this does prompt me to proceed to my last Doctrinal Proposition. That when all is done that can be, we are unprofitable Servants; Our Obedience is notLuke 17. 10. the Cause, but the meer Condition of our Re∣ward.
And we arrive at Eternal Life, not by way of Purchase, as we are Servants; but of Inheritance, as we are Sons. It is not here , but only , not to de∣serve, but to inherit Eternal Life. As Christianity, like Manhood, hath its se∣veral steps and degrees of growth; so the Soul, as well as the Body, doth stand in need of Food, and Raiment. And agreable to the Complexion of immaterial Beings, she is not only bedeck't, but sustain'd with Righteous∣ness. Now as none can inherit Eternal Life, but He that is born of the Spirit; And as he that is born of the Spirit, must also be nou∣rished with the Spirit, before he can possibly live an holy, and spiritual Life; so it is on∣ly God the Spirit that gives us Birth, God the Son that gives us Breeding, and God the Fa∣ther that gives us the privilege of Adoption. The Spirit feedeth us as his Babes; the Son instructs us as his Disciples; the Father in∣dows us as his Heirs. It is the Spirit that fits us for our Inheritance, the Son that gives us a Title to it, And 'tis especially the Father who doth invest us with the Possession.
But now of all God's External and Tem∣poral Blessings which have any Resemblance unto his Spiritual, methinks the Manna that fell from Heaven is the liveliest Embleme of his Grace. Of which though some did gather more, and some less; yet they thatExod. 16. 17, 18. gather'd most, had nothing over, and they that gather'd least, had no lack. Thus as Manna, like Grace, is the Bread of Heaven;John 6. 31. so Grace, like Manna, is also measur'd out by Omers. For even they that have least of the Grace of God, have enough (if well us'd) to inherit Heaven; and even they that have most, have not enough to deserve it. But still the Parallel goes on. For the reason why the Manna which God sent down to the People Israel, would not indure above a Exod. 16. 21. Day, was (saith Philo upon the Place) lest considering the Care by which. Philo. their Manna was preserv'd, more than the Bounty by which 'twas given, they might be tempted to applaud, not God's Providence, but their own. Thus if God had bestow'd so full a measure of his Grace, as to have left us altogether without our Frailties, per∣haps our very Innocence might have been our
Temptation. We might have found it an Inconvenience to have been dangerously Good. Like those once happy, but ever-since unhap∣pyEadem est Cau∣sa nostri Infor∣tunij, quae om∣nium, nimia foelicitas. Florus. Angels, whose very excellency of Nature did prove a kind of Snare to them; even the purity of their Essence did give occasion to their defilement; Their very Height and E∣minence was that that helpt to pull them down; and one reason of their falling was, that they stood so firmly. For though they were free from that Lust, which is the Pollu∣tion of the Flesh; yet they were lyable to Ambition, which is the Filthiness of the Spi∣rit. As if their Plethory of Goodness had made them Wantons, or the Unweildiness of their Glory had made them Proud; 'twas from a likeness to their Creator, that they aspir'd to an Equality; and so they were the first of all the Creatures, as well in their Fall, as their Perfections. Now adding to this the consideration, that Ingratitude does gather Increase of Guilt, from a greater abundance of Obligations, (so as the Angels falling from Heaven, could not fall less than as low as Hell,) we may perhaps find a reason, for which to con∣gratulate
to our selves, that Dimensum or Pittance of God's free Grace, which hath left us our Infirmities as fit Remembrancers to Humility. That being placed in a con∣dition, rather of Trembling, than of Secu∣rity, every Instance of our defect may send us to God for a Supply. God hath given us our Proportion, that we may not grumble, or despair; but not such a Perfection, as once to Adam and the Angels before their Fall, that we may not (like Them) be either careless, or presume. So that making a due comparison, of that faint measure of Good∣ness which now we possibly may have by the Grace of God, with that full measureIndignum est ad futurae gloriae Comparationem omne opus hu∣manum. Salvi∣an. of Glory which now at least we hope for, we must be fain to acknowledge, when all is done, that the greatest measure of our o∣bedience is far from deserving the least of Bliss. For as the Sun appears to us a most glorious Body, and yet is look't upon by God, as a spot of Ink; so though the Righteousness of men doth seem to men to be truly such, yet compar'd with our Reward, it is no more than as filthy Rags. That other promise of our Lord, Never to see or to taste of Death, hadJohn 8. 52.
been sufficiently above our merits; But to inherit Eternal Life too, though I cannot af∣firm it above our wishes, yet sure it is often above our Faith. Had we no more than we deserv'd, we should not have so great Bles∣sings as Rain and Sunshine; and God had still been Iust to us, had he made our best wages to be as negative as our work. For as the best of us all can boast no more, than of being less guilty than other men; so we can claim no other Reward, than to be somewat less punish't; (that is, to be beaten with fewer stripes.) As the Ox amongst the Iews being unmuzzl'd upon the Mowe (by the special appointment of God himself,) at once did eat, and tread the Corn, whereby he received his Reward, at the very same In∣stant in which he earn'd it; so the Protection of such a Soveraign is Reward enough for our Allegiance; and the present Mainte∣nance of a Servant is the usual Recompence of his labour. Whatsoever God affords us be∣sides our Being, is to be reckon'd supra Com∣putum. Life at least is our stipend, and Ae∣ternity but our Donative. Nay if we seriously consider, that we are
properly the Authors of all that is evil in our selves, and nothing more than the Instru∣ments of what is good; that when we pray very devoutly, 'tis God that sets our lips a going; and whensoever we give Alms, 'tis God that mollifies our hearts, and that stretch∣eth1 Cor. 4. 7. out our hands too; He abundantly re∣quites us for our obedience, by his enabling us to obey. For that the Goodness of a mans life is . Plato in Menone. neither infus'd by Nature, nor ac∣quir'd by Industry, but a special Benefaction of God's free Grace, Plato himself, though an Heathen, had yet Discretion enough to say. Si à Deo con∣fertur Continen∣tiae virtus, Quid gloriaris quasi non acce∣peris? Tertull. de Virginibus velandis, c. 13. Why then do the Hebrew or Roman Pharisees take a pride in the doing of this or that Duty, or boast the giving of this or that Alms, as if they had any thing to give, which they themselves had not receiv'd? . Clemens Rom. in Ep. ad Cor. p. 50. Why do they glory in their Widowhood, or Single life, when 'tis only from God that they have their Continence? or why do they think to merit Heaven by being Rich in Good works, when even the Goodness of their works does but increase their obligation? Can they expect to be rewarded for their Acceptance? or think that ought is due to them, for their having
been already so much oblig'd? If from the liberty of their Wills they argue the merit of their Obedience, they must know they do impose a double fallacy on them∣selves. For neither can the Wills of men incline to good without Grace, nor is the Liberty of their Wills any whit less of God's giving, than all the rest. 'Tis God that makes us, not only able, but willing too to be obedient; So that the privilege of our choice does not only not lessen, but greatly heighten our Obligation. And since to perform our whole Duty, is but to pay our whole Debt, our Lord might legally have awarded us, not a Recompence, but a Discharge. Nay let me say a little farther, That had our Master proposed to us neither an Heaven to incourage, nor an Hell to fright us to our Obedience, it had been yet Reward sufficient, to have but our La∣bour for our Pains; And Christ were still a Good Master, in crowning our Foreheads with their own Sweat; in making it the Reward of our Christian Race, to injoy the Satisfaction of having run it. For the
Commandments of God are so extremely for our Interest, and so conformable to our Reason, that even in keeping them (saith the Psalmist) there is great Reward, (Psal. 19. 9, 10, 11.) This I endeavour'd to make appear in the last days Subject of my Discourse, shewing the Goodness of our Master from the Work about which he em∣ploys his Servants; (As I shall also make it appear upon some other opportunity.) And indeed 'tis so impossible, that any Arrears of Bliss and Glory should be due to us in Heaven, for our having been o∣bedient (that is happy) here on Earth, that (in the Nineteenth Chapter of St. Matthew at the Nine and twentieth Verse,) Whoso∣ever hath forsaken either Father, or Mother, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Wife, or Children, or Houses, or Lands, for the Name of Christ and his Gospel; although he shall receive an hundred fold, and that perhaps in this pre∣sent World, yet 'tis only , He shall not purchase, but inherit Eternal Life. 'Tis true indeed that our Obedience is the Causa-sine-quâ-non, (that is) the Necessa∣ry
Condition, which is required by God to our being there; But it follows not thence that 'tis the Causa Energetica, the effectual Cause of our coming thither. For we can∣not duly say, A man does walk with his Hands, or eat with his Ears, because he neither eats nor walks without them. And 'tis as illogical to affirm that we can climb Heaven by our Good works, because with∣out them we fall to Hell. They keep us company indeed, but they do not carry us. Thus if a Patron gives me a Mannor, and only covenants for the payment of some small Quit-Rent; or else bestows upon me an ample Field, upon condition that once a year I shall present him with a Turf; I cannot say that that Turf is a Recompence for the Field, but an acknowledgment of the Favour: Not the paying him for a Bargain, but the thanking him for a Bene∣volence. And such is the infinite Dispropor∣tion betwixt the best of our Obedience, and our least Degree of Bliss, that 'tis but a Token of our Homage, not an earning of our Reward. And therefore 'tis aptly ob∣serv'd by Grotius, that the word in the
Hebrew Text which answers to the Matth. 6. 1. in the Sixth Chapter of St. Matthew, (v. 1.) doth promiscuously signifie both a Gift, and a Reward. Thus Life Eternal is a Reward, because 'tis given upon Condition; but withal it is a Gift, because 'tis given us. Say we therefore with holy Iob, If we are wicked, wo unto us; And if we are righ∣teous, we will not lift up our Heads, Job 10. 15. Or let us say rather with St. Paul, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but that our sufficiency is of God. That though indeed we can work out our own Salvation; yet it is upon this accompt, that God Him∣self worketh in us, both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. That though perhaps we can do all things; yet it is only through Christ that strengthens us. That neither our Duty, nor our Happiness, are any way Ne∣cessary to God; who, as he needeth not the sinful, so neither hath he need of the righte∣ous man. And therefore (to pass out of this Point, at the same Door where I came in,) let us confess, that at our best, we are
but Unprofitable Servants; that our Obedi∣ence is not the Cause, but meerly the Con∣dition of our Reward; And that if ever we arrive at Eternal Life, it will not be by way of Purchase, as we are Servants; but by way of Inheritance, as we are Sons. Which God of his Mercy prepare us for, not for our Faith, or for our Works, but for the worthiness of his Son. To him be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.
A SCRIPTURAL PROGNOSTICK OF JESUS CHRIST's Second Advent TO Iudge the World.
A PROGNOSTICK OF THE Coming of Christ TO JUDGMENT. LUKE XVIII. 8. But when The Son of Man cometh, shall he find Faith upon the Earth? That is to say, He shall not. (According to the Rule of all Grammarians and Rhe∣toricians, that an Affirmative Interroga∣tion is the most forcible way of expres∣sing a flat and positive Denial.) § 1. THE Cohaerence 'twixt These, and the words foregoing, is so hard to be discerned at first appearance,
that some have thought there is none at all. For if God will come speedily to the Aveng∣ing of his Elect, (as our Saviour saith he will, in the two next Verses before my Text,) who were not Elected without a Praescience, as well of their Faithfulness, as of their Faith; How can it be that when He comes, He shall not find Faith upon the Earth? But if we atten∣tively consider the Text before us, as it stands in relation to all the Verses going be∣fore, and more especially to the first, This Objection will quickly vanish, and we shall find a good Connexion, between the prae∣cedent, and praesent words. For our Lord having exhorted The Neophyte-Disciples to whom he spake, Not to faint in their Pray∣ers, but to pray-on with Perseverance, (v. 1.) excites them to it with an Assurance, that their Prayers shall not be fruitless. And that their Prayers shall not be fruitless, He convinceth them by an Argument à minori ad majus. This appears by his whole Para∣ble touching the Widows Importunity, praevail∣ing over the Heart of an hardned Iudge. From whence the Argument is as natural, as it is logical, and convincing. For if the
Prayer of the distressed and importunate Wi∣dow returned at last into her Bosom with good Success, thô from a most corrupt Iudge, who had no fear of God, nor regard of Man, (v. 2.) , with how much a greater force of reason shall all the Prayers of The Faithful receive an acceptable Return, from the Father of Mercies, and God of all Consola∣tion, who is (not only no unjust or obdurate Judge, but) , The Rewarder by way of Eminence of them that diligently seekHebr. 11. 6. him, either sooner, or later, as he sees fit? Yes the time is now coming, when They shall be freed from their Afflictions, and when the Vengeance due from God shall speedi∣ly fall on the Authors of them. To which He adds by way of complaint, and by a Compassionate Erotésis, or Expostulation, (cohaering with what he said before, by a Conjunction Adversative,) that when He shall come in the later Days to be an Avenger of his Elect, The Apostasie will be so general, He will find but Few of them. Of the ma∣ny who are Called, He will find but few Chosen. Amongst a Multitude of Flatterers, he will find but few Friends. In a world of Prae∣tenders,
He will find but Few Faithful; and with very much Profession, very little True Faith; They alone being Elect, who persevere unto the End in The Faith of Christ; and whose Faith is efficacious, as well as suf∣ficient to make them Faithful. § 2. We see The Cohaerence of the Text, which will help us not to err in the Mean∣ing of it. For in that our Lord asks, When the Son of Man cometh, shall He find Faith upon the Earth? It is as if he should have said in plain and peremptory Terms, That at his second Coming from Heaven to judge the Inhabitants of the Earth, He shall not find Many Christians, who will pray with that Faith, which alone can inable them to pray without ceasing, and not to faint. When He shall come to save Believers, He will find but few such in the Gospel-sense. Not none simpliciter, but none secundum quid. Compa∣ratively none, or none to speak of. The great∣est part of men will perish, even for want of That Faith, whereby men's Prayers become effectual. 'Tis not through any defect of Goodness, and longanimity in God, that so few will be safe in the Day of Judgment; But
through a miserable defect of Christian Faithfulness, and Faith, The great Condition of the Covenant, which God in Christ (the only true Shechinah) was pleas'd to make with the Sons of Men. Historical Faith there is in many, such as is common to men with Devils, who are said by St. Iames, to be∣lieve, and tremble. A sturdy Praesumption there is in Many, which they mistake for the perfection and strength of Faith. A Car∣nal Security is in Many, which they take to be the Product and Fruit of Faith. There is in many such a Carnal and Human Faith, con∣cerning the Being of Heaven and Hell, a Life after Death, and a Day of Judgment, as that there is such a Place as Constantinople, or Eutopia; whereof thô This is as fictitious, as That is real, yet by Ignaroes in Geogra∣phy they are believed Both alike. Thus in one sense or other, Faith is as common as Infidelity: a Weed which grows in most mens Gardens. But very few have That Faith, of which our Lord does here speak; to wit a Faith which is attended with Hope, and Cha∣rity; a Faith coupl'd with Fear to offend our Maker; a Faith productive of obedience un∣to
That which is called The Rom. 3. 27. Law of Faith; a Faith importing all faithfulness in the dis∣charge of that Service we owe our Master; a Faith expressed by a submission, first to God rather than Man, and then to Man for God's sake; lastly a Faith joyned with Pati∣ence,Rev. 13. 10. and Perseverance unto the End in the work of Prayer; to which our Saviour had exhorted in the first Verse of This Chapter, and which indeed is the Scope of this whole Paragraph. § 3. Thus we have clearly a Praediction, that the last Times will be the worst; or that the World, towards its End, will be most dissolute, and debauch't; that 'twill not be only an Iron-age, but that the Iron will be corrupted with Rust and Canker. This is the Doctrine of the Text, and this must be divided into two distinct Branches, as the word Faith may here be taken in two distinct Con∣siderations. For in which sense soever we understand the word Faith in the Text be∣fore us, whether for a firm Adhaerence unto the Truth of Christ's Gospel in all its Doctrines; or for a faithful punctuality in All Commerce and Transaction 'twixt Man and Man; whe∣ther
in That as the Cause of This, or in This as the Fruit of That; (for 'tis not perti∣nent now to mention all the other acceptions of Faith in Scripture,) we shall have reason to suspect, The World is drawing towards its End, in that the Praediction of our Sa∣viour is drawing so near its Completion. Be∣fore I come to prove or apply the Doctrine, it will perhaps be worth while, to take a view of the Description of the last and worst Days, as St. Peter and St. Paul have drawn it up for us in their Epistles: the one in Gross, and the other in the Retail. First St. Peter tells us in general, There shall come in2 Pet. 3. 3. the last days Scoffers, walking after their own own Lusts. St. Paul acquaints us in parti∣cular,2 Tim. 3. what the several Lusts are: This know also (saith he to Timothy,) that in the last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be Lovers of their own selves; covetous, boast∣ers, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy; without natural affection, truce-breakers, make-bates, (otherwise called false Accusers,) incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good; Traitors, heady, high∣minded, Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers
of God; having a form of Godliness, but deny∣ing the Power thereof. From These (saith He) turn away. And presently after he gives his Reason. For of this sort are they who creep into Houses, and lead captive silly women laden with Sins, and led away with divers lusts; Ever learning, but never able to come to the know∣ledge of the Truth. After this they are compared to Iannes and Iambres withstand∣ing Moses, men of corrupt minds, or men of no . judgment, and Reprobate concerning the Faith, (2 Tim. 3. from the first verse unto the ninth.) This is St. Paul's Exact Description of wick∣ed Doers in the last Days, and that in the Bo∣somNon est creden∣dum Ecclesiam aliquam in hoc Seculo incorrup∣tam, sed fore potiùs magnum perditissimorum proventum, in ipso etiam Ec∣clesiae sinu, qui tamen summam pietatem prae se ferent. Beza in locum. of The Church too, as learned Beza ex∣presly words it. Now whether the last Days refer to the Destruction of Ierusalem, or to the End of the World, or have an Aspect upon Both, (which I conceive to be the Best of the Three Opinions,) we cannot but say it suits well (a great deal too well,) with the Days we live in. For § 4. If we consider the Faith of Christ in the first general sense I lately mention'd, How is it totally rejected, or most wretch∣edly depraved, by the Mahomedans in the East∣ern,
and by the Multitude of Fanaticks, in the Western parts of the World? what with Heathens, and Iews, arrant Atheists, and empty Theists, modern Arrians or Socinians, what with Dogmatists, and Scepticks, and the more brutish Acatalepticks, and damna∣ble Hypocrites in Religion, who (if it is possi∣ble) may be thought worse than the worst of These; How few in Christendom are Christi∣ans, or more than Professors of Christianity? And even of Professors how many are there, who in their words do own Christ, whilst in their works they quite deny him? like Those concerning whom St. Paul saith to Titus,Tit. 1. 16. They are Abominable, Disobedient, and to every good work Reprobate. Do not the Turks use our Saviour with much more reverence and respect, thô they believe him but a meer Prophet, than many Thousands of Verbal Christians who do profess him to be a God? The Turks chastize their Christian Slaves, whensoever their Anger or Impatience moves them to swear, or to blaspheme. A Turkish Sultan could afford Curopalates apud Baronium ad An. Ch. 1071. a good Ad∣monition to a Pope, and a Christian Empe∣rour, that Iesus Christ had commanded them
to put up Injuries and Affronts, but not to offer, or to revenge them. How like an Heathen did Coelij Au∣gust. Curionis Hist. Saracen. l. 1. p. 62, 63, 64. lib. 2. p. 136, 137. l. 2. p. 150. Iustinian break his Contract with the Mahomedans? and how sadly did they make an Example of him? How did Nicephorus do the like with the Turkish Aaron? and how was he made a like Example? A whole victorious Christian Army, dead in Drunkenness and Sleep, was so cut off by the Saracens during the Reign of Michael Ducas, that only a man was left alive to car∣ry home Tidings of that Calamity. The Christian Emperour Diogenes found as much Faithfulness and Humanity from the most admirable Axan, (a Turkish Sultan and anL. 3. p. 202, 203 confer Sponda∣num ad A. D. 1071. Enemy,) who took him Pris'ner, as he found Falsness, and Barbarity from his own Christi∣an Subjects at his Enlargement. Lord! the wonderful difference between these Two! His Turkish Enemy sav'd his life, his Chri∣stian Subjects took it away. And the mostWolf. Dreschs. de rebus Turci∣cis A. D. 1444. Scandalous * Violation of Christian Faith with the Mahomedans, to which the impi∣ous Pope Eugenius had most unchristianly exhorted the King of Poland, cost Ladislaus the signal loss of more than Thirty thousand
Soldiers, whom their good Father of the Papacy may well be esteemed to have slain. To deal impartially with our selves, as well as honestly with our Enemies, and religious∣ly with our Saviour, (whose Praediction in my Text I am now justifying and proving;) what Incouragement have the Turks to joyn themselves with the Christians, whilst they observe so many Christians wearing Religion as a Cloak? a Cloak to cover Irreligion? a Cloak of Maliciousness and Hypocrisie, to be put off and on as occasion serves? a Cloak for Knavery, and Sedition, and Violation of Oaths? What Invitations or Inducements have the Worshippers of Mahomed to be con∣verted to Christianity, whilst for one Drunk∣ard in Turky, They see there are Multitudes in Christendom? or whilst they fear, by turning Christians, they shall be under the Persecution of Fellow Christians? whereas continuing to be Turks, the Christians can do them but little Hurt? or whilst they find Christian Princes buying Peace of the Great Turk, that they may break it with one another; or whilst they hear that Prosperity is avowed by many Christians, to be a Mark
of the True Religion? or whilst they read that a most gracious and religious Christi∣an King, Charles the First of Great Britain, was cruelly kill'd in cold Blood by his Christian Subjects, and by the best sort of Christians (as some esteem them, at least as They esteem Themselves,) Dissenting Protestants, and Re∣formers, Refiners of The Reformation, and even Menders of the Magnificat? Now what says The Mahomedan, within himself, and to others on this occasion? If such as These are the Characters whereby Christians are to be known, and Christians of the purer sort too, Christians tenderer in Conscience than others are, Christians scrupling at a Sur∣plice, or Cross in Baptism, sit Anima mea cum paganis, (The Turkish Musulman will say,) Let my Soul be with Theirs, who never once heard of the Christian Creed. O my Soul, (says the Infidel,) come not Thou into their Secret; to their Assembly, mine Honour, be not Thou united. For in their Anger they slew a Man; and in their self-will they digged down a strong Wall; (Him who was to His People for Walls and Bulwarks.) Cursed be their An∣ger,Gen. 49. 6, 7. for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was
cruel. Such is the Infidel's Indignation, thô expressed in the words of a most Faith∣ful dying Iacob, concerning two of his ownGen. 49. 6, 7. Sons. Unto which may be added That o∣ther Prophecy of the same Iacob, touching the same combining Sons, as Sons of Vio∣lence and Bloodshed, (that sooner, or later,) God will divide them in Iacob, and scatter them in Israel. § 5. But let us consider whether The Iews have greater incouragement than The Turks, to unite with Those Christians in point of Faith, who hold that None is to be kept with their Fellow-Christians, if (forsooth) they are not fully of their Perswasion, and for That reason only are called Hereticks. The Italian Iews at this day do hate Adultery to the Death; whilst they observe Italian Chri∣stians do hardly accompt it a greater Crime, than to eat Flesh upon a Friday. The Iews are so much at unity within themselves, that (as covetous as they are, and how much so∣ever scatter'd abroad,) they have a kind of Community of Goods and Fortunes, in that they leave not their Poor ones without Re∣lief, nor their Captives without a Ransom.
Whereas the Christians, (they observe,) and as well Protestants, as Papists, are full of En∣mity, and Strife, and perhaps of somewhat more than Vatinian Hatreds, from whence a∣rise their Departures and Separations from one another. They will not meet to serve God under one and the same Roof with their Christian Brethren, for fear they should o∣bey Man, and the Laws in force. Now the Iews cannot believe The Spirit of Truth is in our Dwellings, because He is also The Spi∣rit of Unity; and They conceive we could not be liable to such Dissentions and Divisions as are amongst us, had we The unity of Truth in our Fundamentals. How many Fractions of Religion have been observed to be in Poland? How many in England, and in Holland, and in other Christian Countries, 'tis hard to say. I will say a strange thing, no whit stranger than it is true. There is not a Christian in all the World, who is not an Haeretick, or a Schismatick, in the ac∣compt of other Christians, perhaps no bet∣ter than Himself. How full are all Parties of hot Disputes, whereof the End commonly is rather Victory, than Truth? And what a
Disgrace must it needs be to the Christian Name, that in all the bitter Contests be∣tween the Iesuites, and the Iansenists, the Dominicans, and the Franciscans, the Gallican Church, and the Church of Rome, the Po∣pish Churches, and the Reformed, the Regu∣lar Protestants, and the Irregular, the Prote stants by and for, and Those against the Law establish't, the Constant Protestants, and the Protestants given to change, the Re∣monstrants, and Antiremonstrants, the Sub, and Supralapsarians, and many other opposite Parties, (too many to be now reckon'd,) a greater Care is commonly taken to keep up the Credit of a Syllogism, or Reputation of a Side, than the Unity and Peace of The Church of God? If an Erasmus, or a Modreri∣us, if a Melancthon, or a Wicelius, if a Cassan∣der, or a Thuanus, a Spalatensis, or a Grotius, does but indeavour to make up Breaches, or perswade men to meet in the Middle way, (such as is the way of the Church of England, or That of the Augustan Confession,) how is he hang'd, drawn, and quarter'd by the Implacable Professors of both Extremes? as if the Unity of Christians, and the Peace of
The Church, were to be, of all Things, the most avoided; or, if not to be avoided, at least despair'd of, as the most vain and the most fruitless, (if not the most odious) of any project in the World. So that if there was Truth, as well as sharpness, (which God for∣bid) in what was said by the Spanish Friar, that few Soveraign Princes shall go to Hell, because in All they are but few; it may perhaps be said as truly in This case also, that few True Christians shall go to Heaven, because True Christians (comparatively speaking) are very few. § 6. There are Multitudes indeed who are called Christians; and so are Those of The Marrani, Arabians and Moores in the South of Spain, a kind of Baptized Iews, and circumcised Christians, Men as bad as the ancient Gnosticks, of one Religion in their Mouths, and of another in their Hearts; or like that far more ancient People, the Peo∣ple of Sepharvaim, who feared the Lord, and served their own Gods. If not Both at once, yet at least Both by Turns. It being the com∣mon Custom and Policy of the very worst men, to be Professors of the Religion the
most in fashion, the easiest, and cheapest, most for their Secular Ends and Interests, and where their wickednesses may pass with the greatest freedom. But our Saviour in the Text which is now before us, did only speak of a Divine, and a Saving Faith, which is peculiar to unfeigned and real Christians; not at all of That Human or Historical Faith, which is common to every titular or nomi∣nal Christian, or hypocritical Professor of Christ's Religion. So that the meaning of the Text does seem to be evidently This: [When the Son of Man cometh to be The Judge of the Quick and Dead, shall He find Faith, shall He find Charity, shall He find Iustice upon the Earth?] For Saving Faith infers Charity, and Charity Justice. Where Justice is wanting, there can be no Chri∣stian Charity; and where there is not such Charity, there can be no Christian Faith. Now what Corner is there in Christendom, which does not live out of Charity with one sort or other of Christian People? and commonly the most with their nearest Neigh∣bours, whom Christians should love as they do Themselves? How universally do the Itali∣ans
despise the Germans, if not abhor them? and again how do the Germans pay them back with Detestation? How do the Little States of Italy malign the four Great ones? and how do they all detest the Protestants who are of Piemont, and Saluzzo? What Disaffections are there in Swisserland, between the Wealthy sort of Protestants, and War∣like Papists? Those for France against Spain, and These for Spain against France? and what Antipodes unto each other are these Next Neighbours? parted more by their Animosities, than by their Pyrenaean Hills? If we look but as far back, as the last Civil Wars of France, what mutual Hatreds may we observe betwixt the Hugonots, and the Leaguers? even as great as Those in Spain between the Castilians, and the Portugais; or as great as Those in Italy, 'twixt Guelphs, and Gibelines; or the Bianchi, and the Neri. How do the Lutherans hate the Papalins? and the Papalins Them? How do they Both hate the Calvinists? and the Calvinists Both? and what a Pique have All Three, at the most sober and the most moderate of All the Prote∣stants upon Earth in The Church of England?
Even the Great House of Austria is hardly in charity with it self. For how often have the Spaniards diverted the Turks upon the Em∣perour? and to shift clear Themselves, how have they bribed the Bashaes, to put their Master upon Germany? How many Church∣es are there in Christendom, whereof each has its different Government, its different Ceremonies and Rites, its different Method or Manner of Publick Worship, its different Opinions from all the rest? And thô their Differences are innocent when about things Indifferent, yet what reciprocal Disaffections are wont to arise from That Variety? What wants of Charity there have been, between the principal Christians of Note, (the most considerable I mean, both for Power, and Number, if not for Name too,) we may judge but too easily, by Inquisitions upon one hand, and by Rebellions upon another, by the Massacres, and Libels, and Conspira∣cies upon Both. And that the stronger Parts of Christendom have not yet swallow∣ed up the weaker, They are beholden to the Great Turk, (next and immediately under God) for having found them other Employment.
§ 7. Now such as is the Cause, a want of Faith in the first sense, such is also The Ef∣fect, a want of Faith in the second. For, be∣sides the wants of Charity, whereby I have proved the wants of Faith, there are as no∣torious wants of Iustice, whereby to de∣monstrate the wants of Both. Men are so generally deceitful, in all their Promises, and Contracts, in their Alliances, and Leagues, in their Covenants, and Ingage∣ments, in Matters of Traffick, and Com∣merce, and as well between Publick, as Pri∣vate Parties; Obligations first meant as a Restraint unto the Guilty, are so turned into a Gin to ensnare the Innocent; and They who have dispensed with other mens Oaths, have so taught them by That Example to dispense easily with their own, that if the Iews are ask't the Reason why the Mahomedans are permitted by God Almighty to prevail a∣gainst Christendom, for more than a Thou∣sand years together without Controul, and to boast of their Prosperity as a notable mark of the True Religion (an Argument ad ho∣mines, I mean to the Romanists and the Fa∣naticks, not easily to be Answer'd) They will
ascribe it to the Blasphemies, Execrations, and Violations of Oaths, (Those of Allegiance more especially,) which have abounded, and do abound, more amongst Christians than amongst Them. For the End of Tem∣poral Blessings, are Spiritual. If God gave the Lands of the Heathen to the Israelites, to this end he gave them, that they might ob∣serve his Statutes, Psal. 105. 44. And there∣fore when we forfeit our Spiritual Blessings, we cannot rationally expect to injoy our Temporal. Should we pass through all Or∣ders and Ranks of men, (which might be done with ease enough, but that the Time will not permit it,) Lord! for how little Christian Faith, how much faithlesness, and falsness, and praevarication should we disco∣ver? Excepting only These Nations where∣in we live, Soveraigns mind nothing more, than the exhausting of their Subjects; and (not excepting These Nations wherein we live,) Subjects mind little less than the en∣feebling of their Soveraigns. If the People here in England would either All travel a broad, or at least take the pains to be taught at home, how like Princes, rather than Sub∣jects,
(in point of Liberty, and Propriety,) they live at home, (being compared with o∣ther Subjects throughout the habitable World,) They would be certainly more contented, than now they are, with their Condition. They would be certainly so far from being given to change, and such passionate Abhorrers of All Sedition, as not to suffer themselves for ever, to be undone by their Foelicities. Men of all Ranks and Qualities would acquiesce in their great happiness, and learn to know when they are well. Men of Trade would be contented to part with the paring of their Nails, to secure their Fingers. Men of Land would be contented to pay little Taxes; and Men of Mony would not grumble to pay None at all. Dissenting Clergymen would not study to please the People for their own profit, more than to profit them for their own pleasure. Nor would the People on the other side be so addicted as they are commonly, both to envy, and de∣fraud, and defame the Clergy. Men of Law would be contented to raise up great Fortunes to Them and Theirs, out of the
Ruins of other mens; and to injoy in full Peace, All the Profits and Effects of Dire Contention. Physicians would be contented to dispose of mens Lives, not only at a safe, but at a profitable rate; and with Tentimes greater Fees, than were ever yet heard of in Foreign Parts. All sorts of People (in a word) would most thankfully acquiesce in their several Stations. Whereas for want of due knowledge, or of an ingenuous Con∣sideration, how much better even Artificers and common Mechanicks do live in England, than men of the noblest blood and breeding un∣der All foreign Governments without Ex∣ception, (I say for want of due Reflection on This great Truth,) All the Foundations of our Earth do seem to be utterly out of Course. Men are so drunk with their Prosperities, so tired out with Tranquillity, grown so restive with sitting still in the Scorner's Chair; In contradiction to The 1 Thess. 4. 11. Apostle, and His Advice, They do so study to be unquiet, and not to do their own business, (but the business of other men;) they are so sharp and quick∣sighted in ordering other mens Affairs, though most commonly blind as Beetles in all the
Managements of their own; are so perplext and dissatisfied with they-cannot-tell-what; are so restless in their Indeavours to pre∣vent things unavoidable, to bring about things impossible, and to provide against things which never are likely to ensue; they do so mutiny and repine at the good Provi∣dences of God, and are so unwilling to per∣mit him to rule the World his own way; (being bewitch't with an Opinion that They are able to do it better by quaint Contri∣vances of their own;) are so unwilling that their Governours may be enabled to Pro∣tect, for fear they should be tempted by such an Ability to oppress them; I say by All these Infelicities which too much Felicity hath occasion'd, The World is now grown to so ill a pass, that we may take up the words of the Prophet Ieremy, and apply them to the Places and Times we live in. Run to and fro through the Streets, and seek into all the broad Places thereof, if ye can findJer. 5. 1. a man, if there be any that executeth Iudgment, that seeketh the Truth, and I will pardon it. § 8. I know it may easily be objectedAn Objection Answer'd. against the Argument I have us'd, That no
wants of Faith in the second Notion of the word can prove 'tis wanted in the first. For let the Practice of men amongst us be what it will, yet their Principles (they will say) may be as Orthodox as their Professions; and they have still a firm Assent unto the Truth of Christ's Gospel in All its Doctrines. But to This Objection it may as easily be Answer'd, that as a Practical Infidel or Atheist is a worse Monster than a Speculative, so there is no better way to prove the first, than by the second. Men may believe the Word of God with an Human Faith, when yet 'tis easy to demonstrate, They do not believe it with a Divine one. Nor is there any greater In∣stance of the Deceitfulness of a man's Heart, than is his Treacherous Belief that he does Believe, and that with a truly-Christian Faith; when yet he proves by All his Pra∣ctice, that he is either no Believer, or such a Believer of the Gospel, as he is of Iulius Caesar's, or Cicero's Works, and no whit bet∣ter. For why should men be more forci∣bly, and more effectually restrain'd, (as we see they are,) from committing a lesser E∣vil, which is forbidden under the Poenalty
of a meerly human Law, and where the Poe∣nalty is no greater, than the loss of a man's Ears, or the forfeiture of his Estate, than from committing a greater Evil, which is forbid∣den by God himself, under the Poenalty of their missing the Ioys of Heaven, and also of abiding the Pains of Hell, but that they do more believe the one, than they do the other? It cannot be for This reason, that men do think it a greater Misery, to suffer a little for a short Time, than all imaginable Tor∣ments to all Eternity. It cannot be, that they had rather fry in Hell without ceasing, than indure the short loss of Life and For∣tune. But the true Reason must needs be This, that men are as Confident of the one, as they are Diffident of the other. They have a manifold Experience of Temporal Punish∣ments, But the Tempter makes them hope there are none Eternal. They are strong in the faith of what concerns the praesent world, but they stagger in the faith of a world to come. They have an ordinary re∣lish of sensual Pleasure, But ghostly Pleasure is a Iargon they know not how to make sense of: They think it meerly a piece of gibbrish
of Ecclesiastical Investigation. They make no doubt but they shall dye, and that their Bodies being buried, shall all be moulder'd into Dust. But they secretly suspect they shall never Rise; they are Infidels in the point of a Resurrection. They either doubt, and make a Quaestion, or else they utterly disbe∣lieve, both a Life after Death, and a Day of Judgment. This is the only reason as∣signable, why men are more afraid of Them who can kill the Body only, (but are not a∣ble to hurt the Soul,) than of Him who can cast both Soul and Body into Hell. No o∣ther reason can I imagin, why men do commonly run counter to that known Maxim,  why when 'tis every man's wisdom to choose the least of two Evils, men (in avoidance of the least) do choose the greatest, even to dwell with E∣ternal Burnings. And therefore well may it be said, as here it is in my Text, that when the Son of Man cometh, he shall not find Faith upon the Earth: He shall not find Evangeli∣cal and Saving Faith; He shall not find it at least in many; nay he shall find it in few or none; in comparatively None, or None to speak
of. Let men pretend what they will, and let them will what they please, ye shall know them by their Fruits, saith our Blessed Savi∣our. And the Fruits of True Faith, where∣of the Professors are True Believers, are no where better to be seen, than in the Eleventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews: wherein we have Faith commended to us in four principal Respects; and all within the narrow compass of the Six first Verses. First in respect of its Definition, which is to be the Substance of Things hoped for, and the Evidence of Things not seen. Secondly in respect of its great and wonderful Effects, whereof we have there Two choice Examples; the one in Abel, the other in Enoch. Thirdly in re∣spect of its greatest Benefit, as being That Qualification by which we please God. Lastly in respect of its indispensable Necessity, as be∣ing That without which, it is impossible to please him. How could so many in the old Te∣stament (of whom we have an accompt in the later parts of That Chapter,) have cho∣sen Poverty rather than Wealth, and Dis∣grace rather than Glory, and Pain it self ra∣ther than Pleasure, if they had not had Heb. 11. 26. Re∣spect
(and that a strange respect too,) unto the Recompence of Reward? if by the Tele∣scope of Faith, (as 'tis the Evidence of Things not seen,) they had not Verse 27. seen Him who is In∣visible? if they had not been enabl'd to spy Reward Verse 13. afar off? and to look clearly through the Veil, which interposed as a Skreen 'twixt It and Them? if they had not had a Prospect of the several blessed Mansi∣ons prepared for them, in the City of God whereof they had been made Denisons, and in the House of That Father of whom they were the adopted Sons? if they had not had an Eye upon their particular Resurrecti∣ons? and such an Eye too, (so full, so clear, so more than Lyncean or Eagle-sighted,) that even Then when they were tortur'd, they would not accept of a Deliverance, to the endVerse 35. they might injoy by so much a better Resurre∣ction? § 9. This is a truly Salvisick Faith, and such as necessarily signifies (amongst other Vertues) a firmer Adhaerence and Assent unto the Truth of Christ's Gospel in all its Doctrines, than any man can ever have, by any human means possible, either to Seneca's,
or Cicero's, or Caesar's Works. This is That for want of which, men will do and suffer more, to save their Bodies, or Estates, and that for a little space of Time; than they will either do or suffer, to save their more preti∣ous Souls, and that for ever. It was for want of This Faith, that the Iews were broken off;Rom. 11. 20. and by This only we Gentiles stand. This is That Faith the Iust shall live by. This is ThatHebr. 10. 38. on which depends our Bliss, or Misery for e∣ver; according to the words of our Blessed Saviour, whereof it is an Explication, Mark 16. 16. He that believeth, shall be saved; but He that believeth not, shall be damned. Here is short work indeed; and such as might have sav'd the labour of many Con∣troversial Volumes, which have been writ∣ten, and made publick, between the Moli∣nists and the Iansenians; the Franciscans and the Dominicans, or the Scotists and the Tho∣mists, between the Lutherans and the Calvi∣nists, the Arminians and the Gomarists, the Remonstrants and Antiremonstrants, concern∣ing the Nature of God's Decrees, and Quae∣stions depending thereupon. Our Saviour tells us very succinctly, in words most plain,
and most univocal, who are Vessels of Electi∣on, and who of Wrath: Who were decreed from All Aeternity to Heaven, and Hell; e∣ven Believers, and Unbelievers. No more but so: He that believeth, shall be saved, and He that believeth not, shall be damn'd. Which cannot possibly be meant concerning every human Faith, whereof the World is too full. It cannot be meant of such a Faith, as makes a man abhor Idols, but not abstain from committing Sacrilege. Nor can it be meant of such a Faith, as is strong enough to re∣move Mountains, (to wit The Laws and the Land-Marks of Church and State,) to pull down Kings, and unsettle Kingdoms; But not strong enough to bring forth Obedi∣ence to Christ's Commands, and (by a con∣sequence unavoidable) to God's Vicegerents upon Earth. It cannot be meant of the Antinomian, or the Fiduciarie's Faith, which sets it self into a kind of opposition unto Good works; and so by consequence is the Parent of nothing but practical Infidelity. But 'tis meant of That sanctifying and sa∣ving Faith, which whosoever hath, over∣cometh the world, 1 John 5. 5. 'Tis meant
of Iustifying Faith, not only in the mystical, but literal notion of the word; a Faith which so justifies, that (in a competent de∣gree) It does evermore make its Possessor Iust. It makes him an upright and honest man. Saving Faith being a Grace, which, as it is the most commonly talk't of, so it is (I am afraid) the least commonly understood, of any one thing in the Christian Code. We could not else so much abound with Knaves and Hypocrites as we do in the Christian World. That which we call Divine Faith, which is a justifying and sanctifying and saving Faith, and upon which The Word of God does every where lay so great a stress, must be an Habit of the Will, as well as of the Understanding; not only flourishing in the Head, but deeply rooted in the Heart. It must be such as does contain a full and generous Belief he dares to dye for; a full and Practical Belief that Iesus Christ is the Messi∣as; a , a full and absoluteHeb. 10. 22. Belief, both in his words, and in his works; both in his Counsels, and his Commands; both in his Promises, and his Threats. For He who Thus is believing, is ipso facto, and eo ipso, at
once an Obedient and Loving Christian. A Christian so loving, that the longer he lives, the more he lives the Life of Faith; the more he is weaned and sequestred from the things here below; the more he is wedded and betrothed unto those things that are a∣bove. His Affections are taken off from the beggarly Elements of the World, and fix't entirely upon God, as his soveraign Good. I mean they are set upon God in Christ, reconciling the World unto Himself. And overcome The world he does, (as St. Iohn must needs mean,) by overcoming its Temptations; its Pomps, and Vanities; its Smiles, and Flatteries; nor only the Plea∣sures, but Terrors of it. He overcometh That world, which St. Iohn has comprized under three general Heads, to wit the lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye, and the pride of Life. For a sincere Faith in Christ, in his Death, and Resurrection, and in the Consequences of Both, gives us a much greater Byass, a stronger Bent and Inclina∣tion to all good Things, than the whole World can to the contrary, by all its flatteries, or its frights. It possesseth us immediately
with Inward Ioy in the Holy Ghost, and prae∣possesseth us with an Antepast of The Glory to be reveal'd. It praesentiates unto us such Joys to come, as do exceedingly over-weigh the frowns and favours of the world. It is ex∣pressed by St. Iohn (in the place before-cited) not only as the means whereby we grow Victors, But as the Victory it self. This (saith he) is The Victory which overcometh theVerse 4. world, even our Faith: As if it were not on∣ly the Instrument, but Essence of it. § 10. It follows then that we must di∣stinguish, with exceeding great Care, and e∣very minute of our Lives, between two things which do extremely much differ, (like Heaven, and Hell,) and yet are com∣monly confounded to admiration. I say we must carefully distinguish, not only between an Idle, and an Operative Faith, a Faith which works, and a Faith which works not; But withal between a working, and work∣ing Faith; between a Faith which only works by the Love of a man's self, and a Faith which duly works by the Love of o∣thers. For when the Son of Man shall come with his holy Angels in flaming Fire, taking
Vengeance of them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Iesus Christ, He will find e∣nough idle, unactive Faith, which either works not at all, or not at all by Love, or else by none but Self-love, which is the worst and greatest Evil that can possibly come to pass in the last and worst Times. St. Paul sets it down, in his long Catalogue of Impieties which shall be in the last Days, as The Ring∣leader and Head of All the Villanies which ensue: as the first and greatest Link of that Chain of Darkness, which draws the other Links after it, and reacheth as far as from Hence to Hell. In the last days (says he to Timothy) perilous Times shall come; For men shall be Lovers of their own selves, and (in consequence of That,) All the Devilish Things that follow, from the First Verse unto the Ninth, of that Third Chapter of the Second Epistle to Timothy. A Chain of Darkness almost as long, as That the Devils themselves are held in, and reserved (saith St. Iude) until the Iudgment of the Great Day. Nor is it my opinion only, But that of E∣stius,Hoc vitium primo loco po∣nit, quia caete∣rorum fons est. Simplicius, and Strigelius, that the Sin of Self-love is set down First in The Black
List, as The Head-spring and Fountain of all the Rest. For I think I may challenge any man living (without immodesty) to Name any one Actual and Damning Sin, which has not the Sin of Self-love for its most execra∣ble Original. It was meerly Self-love, which turned Luciser into a Devil, and made the Son of the Morning The Prince of Darkness. It was the Sin of Self-love which turned those Protoplasts Adam and Eve out of their Innocence, and by consequence out of their Paradise, which they held and possessed by That one Tenure. It was at first the Love of Self, and of Self-preservation, which mo∣ved Peter to renounce and abjure his Master. And it was first a Self-love, which produced in Iudas a love of Mony, wherewith he was tempted to betray, and to slay his Master. Thence it was that Self-denial, or Self-abne∣gation, was the very first Lesson our Saviour taught his first Disciples. And 'tis the first we are to learn, in the School of our Ma∣ster Iesus Christ. It being the Causa-sine-qua∣non of all other Duties in a Christian. For whosoever has once attain'd a good Degree of Self-denial, or of Self-hatred for Sins
committed, can fast from eating, when he is hungry; and even from drinking, when he is dry; from stealing, when he is Poor; and from coveting, when he is Rich; from repining, when he is low; and from oppres∣sing, when he is lofty; and so from every thing else, which either is sinful in it self, or so much as a Temptation inducing to it. How did St. Peter, when he repented, revenge him∣self upon himself, for his having so basely (out of Self-love) not only disown'd, but forsworn his Lord? He did not only deny Himself, in opposition to his Denial of Jesus Christ, But abhorr'd himself too, in oppositi∣on to his Self-love, which betray'd him to it. How triumphant was his Faith, and his Self∣denial? how triumphant over Himself, and his former Cowardize? how did he preach up Christ Crucified, for which he was Cru∣cified with his Head downwards? and in All he did, or suffer'd, how did he bear down all before him, (not only all the World, but the Flesh, and the Devil too,) as mighty Cataracts and Torrents do sticks and straws? So did Peter, as well as Paul, courageously sight the good sight of Faith. Such in Him
was That Faith which overcometh the World. And when the Son of Man cometh to be the Judge of Quick and Dead, (Lord!) how much (or rather how little,) shall he find of such fighting and conquering Faith upon the Earth? § 11. This is infinitely far from That Carnal Faith, which only works (by Self-love) All the Degrees of Disobedience to Christ's Commands. No, The Faith which He shall find in comparatively None (that is to say in very few) at his second Coming, is such a Faith as strongly works by a Love of others; which is said with great reason to be The ful∣filling of the Law in Both the Tables of The Decalogue, (which our Blessed Lord came to fulfil and perfect, not to abrogate, or to destroy;) because 'tis hard, if not impos∣sible, for us to name any one Duty, incum∣bent on us as Men, or Christians, which is not the Necessary Production of such a Love as Faith works by. For as immoderate Self∣love, which consists with an human and worth∣less Faith, is the Root of All Evil without Exception; so a truly Christian Faith, which is operative, and works by a due love of others,
(a love of God with all our hearts, and of our Neighbour as our selves,) cannot choose but be the Root of all the Good fruits to be ima∣gin'd. For how can any man indure to be rebelling against his God, whom he does love with all his Soul, and above Himself? And how can any man (knowingly) suffer him∣self to be induced to wrong his Neighbour, whom he does love without hypocrisie, and As Himself? that is, as sincerely, thô not as well; or as well, (if you please,) thô not as much. With a sicut similitudinis, thô not ae∣qualitatis. In which sense 'tis said by our Lord Himself, Be ye perfect, As your Father inMatth. 5. ult. Heaven is perfect. He does not there say, Be ye as perfect as he is perfect; But be ye perfect as sincerely, as he is perfect consum∣mately. Be ye That in your measure, which He is without measure. Be ye per∣fect comparatively, as He is absolutely per∣fect. For as God is said in Scripture to have made Man in his own Likeness, so we may say by the same reason, that he makes a Man's perfection, (thô at a vast and humble di∣stance) in the Similitude of his own. Now if what I have said of a True Christian Faith
as it works by Love, and as it is the Substance of Things hoped for, and as it is the Evidence of Things not seen, and as 'tis that whereby a Believer overcometh the world, be duly com∣pared with all before it, touching the faith∣lesness, and malignity, the wants of love, and common honesty, wherewith the world is overcome; 'Twill not be difficult to con∣clude, That when the Son of Man cometh, (let his coming be when it will,) He will find his own Prophecy fulfill'd amongst us. § 12. Perhaps 'tis too little a thing to mention either Cotterus, or Dabricius, or Christina Poniatovia, however their Praedi∣ctions touching Christendom in general, and particularly touching the whole House of Austria, and That of Bourbon, (long Revelatio∣num Divina∣rum Christofero Kottero, Christi∣nae Poniatoviae, Nicolao Dabri∣cio factarum E∣pitome, Excusa A. D. 1663. and long ago printed,) are coming to pass in These our Days. Nor will I apply That of David touching Absolom's Rebellion, and the general Revolt occasion'd by it, stigmatized in the Fourteenth and in the Three and fiftieth Psalm: The Fool hath said in his Heart There is no God. Where by the Fool he means a Multitude, as appears by his next words. The
Lord looked down from Heaven upon the Chil∣dren of Men, to see if there were any that would understand, and seek after God. But they are all gone out of the way, they are al∣together become Abominable, There is none that doth good, no not one. Nor will I descant upon That of the Prophet Micah, The Good man is perished out of the Earth. There is none upright among men. They all lye in wait for Blood. They hunt every man his Brother with a Net. They do evil earnestly, and that with Both hands. The Iudge asketh for Reward.Micah 7. 2, 3, 4. The Great man uttereth his Mischievous Desire. The Best of them is a Briar: and the most Up∣right of them is sharper than any Thorn Hedge. (I do not speak of These things in this un∣limited universality, unless it be by a Paralip∣sis.) But This I think I may say with eve∣ry man's suffrage and consent, There is so eminent a Defection from God and Good∣ness throughout the World, that Most do seem to have renounced, and to have ut∣terly cast off, All Fear, and Care, if not Acknowledgment of the most High. The Tongues of men are their own; their Thoughts are free; their Wills invisible; and the se∣crets
of their Hearts are known to God on∣ly, The Searcher of them. But yet as far as mens Actions are the Interpreters of their Hearts, and as far as they discover an E∣pidemical Decay of Christian strictness, a Decay of That Seriousness in Reality and Substance, which some poor Quakers re∣tain in Shew, a Decay of all Duties to God and Man, a Decay of Moral Honesty, and Humanity it self, and (which is the Top of all Impiety) a devilish blending and confound∣ing the very Natures of Right and Wrong, a turning Religion Topsy Turvy, calling Evil Good, and Good Evil, putting Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter, Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light, holding Perjury, and Parricide, Killing of Kings, and Subverting of Kingdoms, not only Innocent, but Pious, not only Laudable and Vertuous, but the most highly Meritorious, and Supererogating Works of the purest Christians, nor only of the purest, but of the only true Christians in all the World, the Only Members of the true Church, and Only Heirs of Salvation, whilst they who dare not break Oaths of Al∣legiance and Supremacy, dare not rail at
and libel the Laws in force, dare not rebel against their Governours, dare not fall down and worship the Jesuites Idol, even for This very Reason are Damn'd for ever; I say as far as men's Actions are Thus the Indices of their Hearts, we may conclude there is a Prin∣ciple of downright Atheism within them; at least an Heathenish Belief that their Souls are not Immortal; and that for what they do in This, they shall not be brought to give Accompt in Another World. § 13. I am far from undertaking (what yet some have done) to name the last Days of the Son of Man, or the Time of his coming to the avenging of His Elect, and to judge the World. But of This I am certain, (be∣cause I have it from his own Mouth, as well as from the Mouths of Three at least of his Apostles,) that we must not infer the Day of Doom is far off, because there are few prepare for it, and even the wisest do not expect it; No, It's seeming very far off, is rather a Sign of its Approach. For The Scriptures tell us1 Thess. 5. 2, 4. 2 Pet. 3. 10.  Rev. 3. 3. & 16. 15. expresly, That Christ at his Coming will surprize us as a Thief in the Night. His Com∣ing, for Quickness, will be like Luke 17. 24, 25, 26, 27, &c. lightning.
It shall be as suddain (saith our Lord) as No∣ah's Deluge was to All, Noah himself being excepted. They did eat, they drank, they mar∣ried wives, even until the very day of Noah's entring into the Ark, when behold the Flood came, and destroy'd them All. It shall at least be as surprising, as was the shooting of Hell from Heaven in the Days of Lot. And how surprising That was, our Saviour tells us in the next words: They did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded, (unto which it may be added, they play'd, they sported, they were indulging all their Lusts,) when behold the same day wherein Lot went out of Sodom, The Fire and Brimstone rained down, and destroy'd them All. So swift, so suddain, so surprising shall be The Day, of The Son of Man's Coming to judge the World. Watch therefore (says our Saviour) for yeMatth. 24. 36, 42, 44, &c. know not what hour your Lord will come. Hea∣ven and Earth shall pass away; But of That day and hour knoweth no man (says he again,) no not the Angels of Heaven. Again (says he) be ye ready: for in such an hour as ye think not, The Son of Man cometh. All which that it is meant of the Day of Judgment, and
the Consummation of all things, not only or chiefly of the Jews , and the De∣struction of Ierusalem, seems to be evident from the Conclusion of That whole Pro∣phecy of our Saviour: For if That Evil Ser∣vantVerse 48, 49, 50, 51. [That Man of Sin by way of Eminence, whether without Christendom, or within it, whether in Asia, or in Italy, in Germany, or in Spain, in France, or England,] shall say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his Com∣ing, whereupon He shall praesume to smite his fellow Servants, and to riot it with the Drunken, The Lord of that Servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour he is not aware of; and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his Portion with the Hypocrites; There shall be weeping, and gnash∣ing of Teeth. § 14. What now is to be done, by us who live in These Times, wherein I have shewn there is so Common, so Universal, so Epide∣mical a state of Depravation, but that every one in his station do labour hard to mend one: That we all watch and pray, lest we enter into Temptation? or that if we cannot escape the Temptations of the World, yet by the
powerful Grace of God, well cooperated with, we may be able to overcome them? In order whereunto, we must not only watch and pray for a Time, and Gal. 1. 5. examin our selves duly, whether we be in the Faith of Christ; But we must not faint in it. We must quit our selves like Men. We must be strong in the Faith.1 Cor. 16. 13, 14. We must stand fast in it. Our watching must be constant; our praying always. So expresly saith our Saviour in the first Verse of That Paragraph, whereof my Text is the Con∣clusion. For The Parable which he spake, was (says St. Luke) to This End, that men ought al∣ways to pray, and not to faint. We ought to pray without ceasing, as St. Paul bids his Thes∣salonians.1 Thess. 5. 17.  saith the first,  saith the second, we must be a kind of Eu∣chites, (be it spoken cum grano Salis,) we must pray without End, or Intermission. And that for This reason, as well as for This end and purpose, that our Lord at his Coming may find us praying. A work of so very great importance, and so conducible to Salvation, that even Then when Simon Magus was in theActs 8. 22, 23. Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity, St. Peter bid him Pray to God, if perhaps the
Thought of his heart might be forgiven him. Pray therefore we must, that we may not fall. And if at any time we are fallen, still we must pray, that we may rise. And still for fear of relapsing, we must Eph. 6. 18. watch unto Prayer, and we must watch thereunto with all Eph. 6. 18. perseverance. That so at what time soever The Master of the House shall come, whether at Evening, or at Midnight, or in the Morning, we may beMatth. 24. 45. found like wise Virgins with Oyl in our Lamps, or in the Number of the few Faithful and blessed Servants, whom our Lord when he comes shall find so Doing: and that finding us so doing, He may receive us with an Euge, Well done good and faithful Servants, Enter yeMatth. 25. 21, 23. into the Ioy of your Lord. Which God The Father of his Mercy pre∣pare and qualifie us for, even for the Merits of God The Son, and by the powerful ope∣ration of God The Holy Ghost. To whom be Glory for ever and ever.
AN ANTIDOTE OR PRAESERVATIVE Against the Prurigo of Ambition.
Satan's Masterpiece AS A TEMPTER TO WORLDLY GREATNESS. MATTH. IV. 9. All these Things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. Or (as St. Luke sets down the words,) LUKE IV. 6, 7. All this Power will I give thee, and the Glory of them; for That is delivered unto me, And to whomsoever I will, I give it. If thou therefore wilt worship me, All shall be Thine. § 1. THere is a Time when in Scripture God is said to tempt Man. And again there is a Time when Man is said to
tempt God. Last of all there is a Time when the Devil is said to tempt Both; and Both at once in this Text, in which are met the two Natures of God and Man. Now though to Tempt in each Case is still a phrase of one sound, yet is it often found to be of very different significations. Indeed so different, that they may seem to contradict. For Mo∣ses saith, God tempted Abraham; And yet St. Paul saith, God tempteth no man. It is implyed by our Saviour, that God is tempt∣ed at least by some; And yet 'tis said by St. Iames, He is not tempted of any. Now the way to reconcile them is briefly This. When God is said to tempt Man, it signi∣fies nothing but a Trial, a kind of Search which God makes in the Heart of man. Not that God can be in doubt, or stand in need of an Inquiry, how any man's heart is affected towards him; But 'tis to admonish him of his weakness, or to convince him of his hypocrisie, or else to evidence his Faith, or to exercise his Patience, or to make his Integrity the more conspicuous, and rewarda∣ble, that God is pleased to explore and to search his Heart. Thus in Genesis, and Exo∣dus,
and in the Thirteenth of Deuteronomy, our Father Abraham and the Israelites are said to have been tempted by God him∣self. § 2. Man (in the second place) is said to tempt God, when without any Necessi∣ty, or Assurance of Success, he rashly goes out of his Calling to meet with Danger. Or when without any Warrant, whether from the Spirit, or Word of God, he gladly fallsHistoriam de falso Messiâ El∣david, A. D. 1135. ex libro Schevet Iehuda sumptam, apud Buxtorphum videre est in suo Linguae Sanctae The∣sauro, p. 683. into Distress, (like Eldavid the false Messias, of whom we read in learned Buxtorf,) sup∣posing God, by some Miracle, will help him out. For what is this but to explore, or to make a Trial, both of the Power, and Goodness, and Truth of God? not at all out of Faith in his Word and Promise, but out of a wanton Curiosity, or bold Praesump∣tion. § 3. But now the Devil is said to tempt either God, or Man, and Both together in the Text, when not only without, but against the Word, he does solicite and intice to something or other which is Evil. And thus our Lord is said in Scripture to have been tempted, even as We. Not by Hun∣ger
only and Thirst, by Cold and Naked∣ness, by Slander and Disgrace, by Pangs and Torments, and all Degrees of Affliction to which the Name of Temptations is justly fixt; But to the worst of Afflictions, that is, to Sin; and to the worst even of Sins, to wit Idolatry; And to the worst of Idolatries, even the worshipping of the Devil. Who being permitted to take him up to an exceeding high Mountain, did shew him from thence, as in a Landskip, All the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them; And there∣upon made him this glorious Offer, All these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me: Or , If, fal∣ling down, Thou wilt worship me. § 4. Which words do present us with Satan's Masterpiece; And the Motto on his Ensign, is [Now, or Never.] For as the Roman Triarij, when their two first Squa∣dronsT. Liv. Dec. 1. l. 8. had fought in vain, were depended upon at last as their only Refuge; So when the Devil had been improsperous in his two first Onsets upon our Saviour, He comes at last to make use of All the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them; clearly look∣ing
upon This, as his most formidable Re∣serve; And even against the Fortifications, not only of the Innocence, but the Divinity of our Lord, (who was no less the Lord of Armies, than Prince of Peace,) his most in∣genious, most powerful, most hopeful Stratagem. The Text, at first view, affords no more than two Generals. To wit the Devil's vast Offer, And the unreasonable Condition with which 'tis clogg'd. But out of these Ge∣nerals put together, we may (by the help of a little Logick) draw four Particulars. Each of which will be a Doctrin, whereof it will be easy to make good Use. 1. The First particular Doctrin is, That the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them, being all met together (as here they are,) do amount to nothing more, than so many glittering Temptations. 2. The Second is, That all the Goods of this World, however lovely they may appear to Carnal Reason, or Common Sense, are yet by God's Patience, and wise Permissi∣on, in the Devil's Proffer, and Disposal. I
say They are so by God's Permission, be∣cause the Devil can give nothing, till God gives leave; which, for wise and just Ends, it often pleaseth him to afford. 3. The Third Doctrin is, That the utmost Scope and Drift of all the Donatives of the Tempter, is to steal our Hearts from God, and to turn them wholly upon Himself. He never Proffers, but with a danger∣ous Proviso. He does it liberally indeed, [All these things will I give thee,] But with a covetous Supposition, [if, falling down, thou wilt worship me.] 4. From whence it follows in the fourth Place, That how incessantly soever some men do labour, whereby to purchase these Gifts of Satan, yet there is nothing in the World with greater easiness to be compass'd; if the Devil may be try'd by his own Confession. Who, though the things here spoken of are great, and goodly, (even the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them,) is yet most ready to part with All, in exchange for an Act of our Adoration. To attain the , The All that our Tempter can
give, or offer, nothing more needs be done, than to fall down to him and wor∣ship him. § 1. To prove the First of these Four, [That the Kingdoms of the Earth, when they are All put together, make but a glittering Temptation, or handsom Snare,] we need not argue or dispute from a fitter Topick, than the very signal Method the Devil here useth. Who, when he could not cor∣rupt our Saviour by all the Miseries of Want, did now at last attempt to do it by the boun∣tiful Overtures of Plenty. Nor can we think he was so silly, as not to rise in his Temptati∣ons, from the less unto the greater. It being for nothing but his Subtilty, in con∣junction with his Malice, that He is call'd The Old Serpent; And is said by St. Iohn, toRev. 12. 9. have deceiv'd the whole World. And if the Children of this World are wiser in their kindLuke 16. 8. (as our Saviour says they are) than the Chil∣dren of Light, How much more is their John 8. 44. Fa∣ther, who for the Power of his working, and Success of his Policy, is called sometimes The John 14. 30. John 16. 11. Prince, and once 2 Cor. 4. 4. The God of this World?
Nor is it certainly for Nothing, that The Devil has in Scripture such glorious Titles. For if we consider the world of men, who are divided in their Affections 'twixt Christ and Satan, we shall find by their Actions, (the best Interpreters of their Hearts) that the Territories of Satan are much the greater. Our Saviour tells us of a Broad way which leadeth to Destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; whereas (in comparison,) the way to Life is but Narrow, and They that go thither (he saith) are few. And there∣fore Those unclean Spirits which are expres∣sed by St. Paul to be the Spirits now workingEph. 2. 2. in the Children of Disobedience, are but little after call'd by the same Apostle, The Princi∣palities, and the Powers, and (which is more) , the Rulers of thisEph. 6. 12. World. § 2. That thus it is, the Scripture tells us. But some may wonder that thus it should be. What may therefore be the rea∣son, why so few should fight manfully under the Banner of our Saviour, who therefore said truly, His Kingdom is not of this World, And so many under Satan's, who thence is
said to be the Ruler, and the God of this world? It cannot be because God is more unwilling to be obey'd, and belov'd by his People, than Satan is. Nor can it be because God did make it necessary for Satan, to have a great∣er success in the World than Christ. Nor can it be because God is more delighted in the Damnation, than the Salvation of his Creatures. (He would not fo gratifie the Prince of Darkness; nor could his Mercy have been then over all his Works.) Nor can it be because Satan is of more strength than the Almighty, or more powerful to corrupt, than God to purifie. For could it consist with God's oeconomy, to work on our Wills by That Omnipotence, by which the Wind and the Fire and the Sea obey him, we should not be in a capacity to break his Praecepts; we should act only as natural, spontaneous Agents; and do our Duties as the Stones do, in tending downwards. Where∣as having made us an other Thing, to wit a rational sort of Creatures, and that in viâ; not yet arriv'd at our Journeys end, but in a Tendency from Earth, either to Heaven, or to Hell; not indefectibly good, like the
Spirits in Heaven, nor consummately evil, like those in Hell, but as it were , in the Skirts, or the Confines betwixt them Both; to wit inclinable to evil, and also capable of good; does therefore work upon our Wills in a congruous manner; in such a manner as is agreeable with the nature we are of, and with the condition we are in. Does not press us by any force to list our selves in his Army; But freely leaves us our option, ei∣ther to be Royalists, or Rebels to him. Nor can it derogate from his Goodness, that he leaves it in our power to be rebellious; be∣cause he gives us sufficient Grace, whereby he enables us to obey. It is not therefore by a Fatality that Satan has got so many Soldiers; but by the voluntary Defection of such as serve him. Who cannot say that the Tempter does irresistibly debauch them, though with the Vanities of the World he does assault them from without, and with the Treacheries of the Flesh he does surprise them from within. For the Devil's very utmost is but to tempt us. And let the matter of Temptation be what it will, whether Honour, or Disgrace, whether Pain, or Pleasure, whether Frights,
or Flatteries, whether want, or superfluity, or even the same in the Text wherewith he tempted our Blessed Saviour, [All the King∣doms of the Earth, and the Glory of them;] Yet because by all These he can but solicite, and intice us, we cannot say he does ravish, but court our Wills. 'Tis true, the Devil is re∣presented by many terrible Appellations throughout the Scriptures; as that of A∣baddon, and Apollyon, a Murderer from the Beginning, a Lyon, and a Red Dragon, a Roaring Lyon, and a Serpent. And in one respect or other he is indeed each of These. But yet he carrys away the Wills and Assents of men, not as a Lyon, only by Strength; nor as a Roaring one, by Rapacity; but ra∣ther as a Serpent, by Circumvention. § 3. Now then let us return to see how the Argument will go on; (having seen e∣nough already, upon what foot it stands, and put a Block out of the way too, at which too many are wont to stumble;) can we imagin it to be likely, that the old ex∣perienced Serpent, the subtlest Creature under Heaven, could be so stupid and obtuse in the Art of Mischief, as to employ his chief
strength upon a Design of less importance, and to reserve his weakest force for his very last Onset, or Assault? At first he tempted our Blessed Saviour to nothing else but Di∣strust; and therefore only made use of his being hungry, (v. 3.) Next he tempted him to Praesumption, which is the opposite Pro∣vocation; and thought it enough for that Effect, to put him in mind of his Praeroga∣tive, (v. 6.) But now at last he runs high∣er, and seeks to bribe the most righteous Iudge to the greatest unworthiness in the World, an Idolizing the unworthiest of all his Creatures. He knew that Christ was the Son of God, because he heard him so de∣clared by God the Father, (Chap. 3. v. 17.) He also knew the Son of God to be God the Son too. And he knew that God the Son was even the Wisdom of the Father. And when he would tempt Wisdom it self to Ido∣lize the very Tempter, he could not but know he was to use the highest Allective to be imagin'd. Which by what other means should he hope to do, than by taking up our Lord to an exceeding high Mountain, shewing him there, as in a Synopsis, All the
Kingdoms of the World, with the Glory of them, and then by making this lusty Proffer, All These will I give thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me? § 4. This then does lead us to see the reason, why 'tis said by St. Paul, That the1 Tim. 6. 10. love of mony is the Root of all Evil. And why by St. Iames, Go to now ye rich men, weep andJames 5. 1. howl for the Miseries that shall come upon you. And why 'tis said by our Saviour (of whom we believe that he shall come to be our Judge,) Wo to you that are Rich, for ye haveLuke 6. 24, 25. received your Consolation. Wo to you that are full, for ye shall hunger. Wo to you that laugh, for ye shall mourn and weep. And why 'twas said by the Spanish Friar, That Few Potentates go to Hell, because (compa∣ratively speaking,) they All are but Few. And why we vowed in our Baptism to fight man∣fully under Christ's Banner, as well against the World, as the Flesh, and the Devil. And why we pray in our publick Litany, not only In all Time of our Tribulation, of Light∣ning and Tempest, of Plague, Pestilence, and Famine, of Battle, and Murder, and suddain Death; But (as a Danger, if not a Mis∣chief,
as great as either,) In all Time of our WEALTH, Good Lord deliver us. Nor can we render a better reason, (as long as Chari∣ty sits as Iudge,) why so many who have been placed upon exceeding high Mountains, (a great deal higher even than That on which the Devil here placed our Blessed Saviour,) from whence they could not only see, but injoy the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them, have gladly laid down those Kingdoms, and divorc'd themselves from those Glories, as having known them by sad experience, to be but exquisite Temptati∣ons, and pleasant Snares. § 5. But here I would not be so mista∣ken, as our Lord was by his Disciples, when he pronounced it impossible for a rich man toMatth. 19. 24. enter into the Kingdom of God. For when I say that worldly Greatness is one of the De∣vil's most cogent Engines, whereby to bat∣ter down the Castle or Soul of Man, I am far from implying 'tis irresistible. Though I argue that the Devil is then the greatest Poliorxetick, (as Soldiers word it) when he lays Siege to a man's Soul with All the King∣doms of the Earth; yet can it not therefore
be deny'd, but that we may beat him out of his Trenches, through him that strength∣neth us; and that (as He did,) with an , get thee hence Satan. Honour and Riches are but Temptations; and Temp∣tations in Themselves are but Things Indiffe∣rent; which, accordingly as they are us'd, do administer a Nourishment to Vice, or Vertue. Just as the very same Sword is of it self apt to serve to the most contrary Effects; as well to punish, as to protect the Guilty; and either to defend, or to kill the Innocent. And thus the same Meat and Drink, as it meets with an immoderate, or sober Appe∣tite, serves for the Mischief of a Surfeit, or for a necessary Refection. The strength of a Temptation, as it does in part lessen the Sin∣ner's Guilt, when yielded to, and comply'd with; so does it heighten the vertue too, when victoriously resisted. And as the Angels who fell from a state of Innocence and Bliss, were the less capable of rising, in that they fell without a Tempter; so the Angels who never fell, are the less capable of the Coronets which Virgins and Martyrs shall wear in Heaven, because they are pure, and impassive, and
so exempted by God Almighty from the Dignity and Privilege of suffering for him. This then (we must confess) is the great Be∣nefit of Temptations, (to give our Enemies their Due,) that by resisting them to the end, we manfully fight under Christ's Ban∣ner, conform our selves to his Example, and suffer for his sake, as He for ours. In which respect (no doubt) it was, (as before I no∣ted) that St. Iames began his Epistle with this remarkable Exhortation, Brethren count it all Ioy when ye fall into divers Temptations. Some may wonder at the Expression, and think it impious, that at the instant in which we pray, lead us not into Temptation, we should be glad of those things we daily deprecate. But St. Iames does there speak touching proportionable Temptations, such as are not above our strength; and are not for the staggering, but for the trial of our Faith. Now the Trial of our Faith workethJames 1. 3. Patience, and Patience breeds Hope, and Hope maketh not ashamed. Again, The Trial of our Faith shall be found unto praise, and ho∣nour, and glory, at the blessed Appearance of Iesus Christ. If Christ himself had not been
tempted with all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them, yea and afterwards too with Disgrace, and Torment, and Death it self, How then could he have led Captivity Captive? but for Injuries, and Pains, where were our Fortitude, and Patience? were it not for all sorts of forbidden Fruit, where were Continence, and Sobriety, and all other Abstinencies from Evil? were it not for Wealth and Plenty, where were Munificence, and Works of Mercy? where the Victories of Meekness, and Moderation, if there were no such thing as Glory, and worldly Great∣ness? Yea but for Danger, Destruction, and Death it self, how should we come by our Immortality? Our Saviour therefore, when he compar'd a rich man's Entrance into Hea∣ven, with the Entrance of a Camel throughMatth 19. 24. the Eye of a Needle, did not speak of a natural, but of a moral Impossibility. For wealthy Abra∣ham went to Heaven, as well as poor forsaken Lazarus. And therefore St. Mark does very fitly, (not only translate, but) explain St. Matthew; saying, How hard; not, how Im∣possible;Mark 10. 24. Nor for them that have Riches, but for them that trust in them, to enter into
the Kingdom of God? And this may com∣petently serve to keep the Richest out of Despair. § 6. Yet even This Alleviation may serve to keep them from Praesumption, and make them humble; because 'tis hard to have Riches, and not to trust in them. Nor is there any one Thing (that I am able at least to think of) throughout the Gospel, a∣gainst which we are admonish'd, praepar'd, and arm'd, with greater store either of ex∣plicit, or implicit warnings. When an inge∣nuous young Ruler, whom Jesus Mark 10. 21. lov'd, came to inquire after Eternity, and after the Means of its Attainment, there was not any thing but his Luke 18. 22. Possessions, which seem'd to stand betwixt Him, and Heaven. For when his Oracle had told him, He must sell all he had, and distribute unto the Poor, he was sad atIbid. Qui omnia se fecisse dicebat, in primo certa∣mine divitias vincere non po∣test. Hieron. ad Julianum. l. 2. Epist. 21. that saying, and went away grieved. So great and real is the misery of too much Happi∣ness upon Earth. Had he been worth but two Mites, he would (no doubt) have part∣ed with them (as the poor Widow did) for a Treasure in Heaven. And That was pro∣mis'd by our Saviour, in the very same
Breath, in which he was exhorted to sell all he had. But, however such a Praecept could not be possibly so heavy, as not to be made exceeding light by such a Promise as was an∣next; Yet such a dangerous thing it is to have the Friendship of this World, by injoy∣ing all the Pleasures which Power and Plenty can purchase for us, that the Treasure in Hea∣ven was but of cold signification, and he was sad at That Saying, that he must sell all he had. Eternal Happiness in Reversion was but a Melancholick thing, when only promi∣sed on condition of being merciful to the Poor. The Expression of St. Luke is short and pithy on that Occasion; He was very sorrowful, forLuke 18. 23. he was very Rich. And from That Single Instance our Lord took occasion to say in General, and of All, How hardly shall theyVerse 24. that have Riches, enter into the Kingdom of God? Let the Persons be who they will, Great and Rich, or Rich only, Rich and Prodigal, or Covetous, yet in case they Have Riches, their Case is difficult. They may be sav'd, but very hardly. Possibly they may, but with much ado: With very much strug∣ling and striving to enter in at the strait Gate.
A man of great Bulk may possibly (though hardly) be able to pass at a little Door, by a great deal of squeezing, and compression, and coarctation of himself, perhaps by rubbing off his Flesh, and by bruising some of his Bones. And so a Camel may enter through the Eye of a Needle; But then the Beast must be burnt to Ashes, or cut at least into shreds and fitters, that one shred may enter before another, and all may pass in the Conclusion. A very cold degree of Comfort, not to be in any likelyhood, but in a bare Possibility of being sav'd. § 8. It is enough to deterr us from being grieved at the loss, or overglad in the Injoy∣ment of worldly Goods, That the good things of this World are apt to be Enemies to all that's Good. They are often Enemies to Preaching; for the Deceitfulness of Riches choaks the Word, and makes the Hearer be∣come unfruitful, (Matth. 13. 22.) They are usual Enemies to Praying; for you ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your Lusts, (James 4. 2.) They are common Enemies to Loyalty, and upright dealing; for Iudas being Christ's
Cash-keeper did quickly find his very Of∣fice became his Tempter. He did not stab, but sell his Master. Nor that out of malice, but love of mony. And when the Husband∣men of the Vineyard conspir'd to murder their Landlord's Heir, It was to this end alone, That the Inheritance might be Theirs, (Mark 12. 7.) Again the things of this World are general Enemies to Religion; to Religion in its practical and chiefest part; whose Truth and Purity does stand in This, That we keep our selves unspotted from the World; that is to say, from the Wealth, and Friendship, from the Luxuries, and the Lusts, and the Glories of it, (Iames 1. 27.) Briefly, they are Enemies to the Eternal Salvation of Soul and Body. For they that will be rich, fall into Temptation, and a Snare; into very many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown the Soul in Destruction and Per∣dition, (1 Tim. 6. 9.) Nor was it sure with∣out Cause, that our Saviour made Dives the Repraesentative of the Damn'd. A man of Quality, and Fortune, highly befriend∣ed by the World, cloath'd in Purple and fineLuke 16. 19. Linnen, and faring sumptuously every day.
Which was so far from being a Narrative of any Particular man's Case, that I could ne∣ver read of any whose name was Dives, much less that there was such in the time of Lazarus. Nor was Lazarus there meant of any Begger in particular, who lay full of Sores at the Rich man's Gate. But all was spoken in a Parable, And that as 'twere on purpose to let us know, what kind of Voia∣gers more especially are bound for Heaven, and for Hell; and with what sorts of Peo∣ple they Both are aptest to be stock't: to wit with poor Lazars, and wealthy Gluttons. Those Inhabitants of Heaven, as These ofDifficile, immò impossibile est, ut et praesentibus quis et futuris fruatur Bonis: ut et hic ven∣trem, et ibi men∣tem impleat; ut de deliciis transeat ad de∣licias; ut in utroque seculo primus sit; ut et in Coelo, et in Terrâ appareat gloriosus. Hie∣ron ad Julia∣num, l. 2. Epist. 21. p. 266. col. 2. Hell. Again it teaches us how frequent and usual 'tis, for every man to have his Portion of Pain, and Pleasure; either in This, or ano∣ther Life. His good things here, and his evil things hereafter; or his evil things now, and his good things then. For so said A∣braham out of Heaven to the Rich man in Hell; Verse 25. Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; But now he is comforted, and Thou art tormented. And when (agre∣ably to this) our Blessed Lord denounc'd a
Woe unto Them that were Rich, He gave this Reason, Because they had received theirLuke 6. 24. Consolation. They had already been possess'd of their Lot and Portion of Felicity. The Scales hereafter would be turn'd, and the Scene quite chang'd, when They should have their full Share of Afflictions too. And in this respect at least 'twas fitly said by those Voluptuaries, the Hectors of their Times in the Book of Wisdom; Let none of us goWisd. 2. 6, 9. without his Part of Voluptuousness. Let us leave Tokens of our Ioyfulness in every Place: For this is our Portion, our Lot is This. § 9. Now the Reasons of this unhappi∣ness, That the good things of this World are the goodliest Snares and Temptations, and such as our Adversary the Devil does put his chiefest Trust in, are these that fol∣low. First 'tis hard, in the use of Riches, to steer a safe and equal Course betwixt the Rock, and the Whirl-pool; Avarice on the one side, and Prodigality on the other. Very hard not to offend, either in laying up Riches, or at least in laying them out. § 10. As for the former, He whose Trea∣sure
is not his Slave, is clearly made a Slave by it; and is extremely more stupid than the Beast on which he rides, because he is ridden by a Beast, (that is to say,) by The , or Fourfooted Beast which reigns within him. He does not more pos∣sess his Riches, than he is possess'd by them; and may be called not improperly his Mam∣mon's Mule. Our Lord ingeminated his Caveat against the Daughters of the Horse-Leech, as if 'twere That against which a Man could never be too much warn'd. Take heed (saith He) and beware of Covetous∣ness:Luke 12. 15. , See, and be kept safe. Take heed, and take heed. A thing which looks like a Battology, But is indeed no∣thing less; a Caution purposely redoubled, for the securing us from an Affection which is the Root of all Evil. So very far is a man's life from consisting in the Abundance of theVerse 15. things which he possesseth, so very far from being able to add a Cubit to his Stature,Verse 25. a Minute to his Duration, or a Grain to his Contentment, that they give him a Poverty to be pitied, in that they make him not rich, towards God, or Himself. Rich towards God
he cannot be, who layeth up Treasure for him∣self.Verse 23. No nor Rich towards Himself, who lay∣eth it up for he-knows-net-whom; whether his Son, or his Son's Guardian, or for One who will be able to squeeze them Both. There being commonly one or other to whom the rest are but Spunges; nor can they tell either how soon, or by what kind of Hand they may all be squeez'd. Now 'tis a very great Punishment, as well as Sin, for a man to bereave himself of Good, that no-body-knows∣who may fare the better, and as likely his Enemies, as his Friends. It was the Character of a Fool, which David gave of the Niggard, He heapeth up Riches, and cannot tell whoPsal. 39. 6. shall gather them. And the Niggard (as I think) is the only man, on whom our Lord fastens the name ofLuke 12. 20. Fool. Dost thou talk of pulling down, and of building up, and of making provision for time to come? Thou fool! this Night thy Soul shall be required of thee. Then whose shall those things be which thou hast provided? Not thy Childrens per∣haps, but thy Children's Tyrants. Thy Riches are not in Their power, who are Themselves in the Power of somewhat else, either with∣out
them, or within them. They have lost their Propriety in all their Legacies and E∣states, if a Vespasian or a Copronymus shall chance to Rule them; much more, if they shall live under the Tyranny of their Lusts. For if they pay Tribute to their Ambition, and Contributions to their Gluttony, and large Ex∣cise to their other Vices, such as is their child∣ish dotage upon the Vanities and the Pomps and chargeable Customs of the World, (alas!) the main of their Revenue goes out in Taxes. For a man's own Lusts are the greatest Op∣pressors to be imagin'd. Besides, A man's * Enemies commonly are they of his own House.Micah 7. 6. Even the Fruit of his Body is the fullest of bitterness to his Soul. The more he heapeth up Treasure, in Intuition of his Children, the more he tempts them to be his Enemies, if They at least may be thought Enemies, who do not only wish his Death, but many times contrive it too. A poor man's Child will love the life of his Parents, because he lives by their labour; whilst the wealthier sort of Parents are apt to be troublesom to their Children, because they stand betwixt them and Plenty; 'twixt them and their Liberty to
live as deliciously as they list. But because a Man is ignorant, who or what shall be after him, his heaping up is nothing else but be∣ing prodigal to his Purse; all his carking and caring is, that his Purse may never be in want. He is content for his own part to fare very hardly, and to eat the Bread of Scarceness, so that his dearly beloved Purse may be but plentifully fed. So great a friendship there is betwixt Him and It. And thus it was with the wealthy Niggard in the Gospel; who wanting Room enough wherein to lay up his Crop in a plenteous Harvest, did not rationally say, I will sell away my Overplus, and bestow it upon my Friends, in Hospitality; upon my Beadsmen, in Alms; upon my Self, or my Family, in Food and Rayment; but I will pull down my Barns, and build greater, and There will I bestow all myLuke 12. 18. fruits and my goods. The English word in the Translation proves very emphatical, and seems to import the Niggard's Largess. It is not translated, I will gather my Goods toge∣ther, or lay them up, (as the word  might well have been,) but I will bestow them, or lay them out. Although he was
sordid to himself, and as close-fisted to his Fa∣mily, and to all other Persons an arrant Churl, yet to his Storehouses and Barns he was very free-hearted; he gladly bestowed upon Them, even as much as they could hold. To those his Favorites and Darlings he could not be liberal enough; and therefore widen'd their Vacuities, that he might fill them. The Reason of which is very obvi∣ous. For as where a man's Treasure is, thereLuke 12. 34. is his Heart; so wherever his Heart is, there he loves to lay his Treasure. Had the Rich man's heart been either in Heaven, or upon Christ, he had bestowed all his Goods upon Heavenly things; had fed Christ in his hun∣gry Members, or cloathed him in his naked ones, or redeemed him in his Captive impri∣son'd Members. He had erected, or indow∣ed, either a College, or a Church, an Hospi∣tal, or an Alms-house. But his Heart ('tis plain enough) was wholly set upon his Barns; They had drawn out his Bowels; Thi∣ther went his Affections. Though a little was too much to be bestow'd upon Himself, yet All was little enough for Them; He was so passionately kind, and partial to them.
One spends all upon his Back; another up∣on his Belly; a third upon his Titles, and Stiles of Honour; a fourth upon his Sports and Recreations; And there are (as That Pa∣rable does plainly shew,) who spend and la∣vish out all they have, on their Barns or Purses. § 11. Thus 'tis difficult not to offend in the laying up Riches; And 'tis as difficult to be innocent in the laying of them out too. For we may borrow from our Avarice, for the maintaining of our Pride; and what we spend on our Ambition, is at least as ill laid out, as what we bestow on our Barns or Baggs. To keep an open Cellar, and a very large Table, is not the Vertue oppos'd to Avarice. For we may lavish out our All, in dishonour of God's Name, as well as treasure all up, in distrust of his Providence. Our hearts will be (as I said before) in what place soever our Treasure is; and as good in our Coffers, as in our Kitchens. A Talent wrapped in a Napkin will be no more imputed to us, than one consumed upon our Lusts. We know a man of great Fortune has wherewithal to entertain and to cherish Vice. Has abun∣dance
of Fewel to feed his Fire. Is able to purchase (at any rate) whatever is acceptable and pleasing to the greedy Appetite of the Flesh. Whereas a man that is poor, cannot go to the price of many chargeable Sins. His Lamp burns faintly, for want of Oyl. Ezek. 16. 49. Fulness of Bread is such a thing, as was reckon'd for one of the Sins of Sodom, and commonly follows a Great Estate. So that That which the rich man esteems his bles∣sing, may prove the subject of a very great Curse. For thus we read in the Psalmist, Let their Table be made a Snare to take them withal. And that which should have been for their welfare, let it be to them an occasion of falling, Psal. 69. 22. Thus we have the two Branches of the first and chief Reason, why the Worlds Good things are the goodliest Snares and Tempta∣tions; and such as our Adversary the De∣vil does most rely on. § 12. Again the Goods of this World are apt to breed and nourish Pride; which was another great Sin in the men of Sodom. Plenty makes men contemptuous, and super∣ciliously looking down on such as are poorer
than Themselves. Thence is the Latin word Superbia, à superhabendo. Pride does take its Derivation from having Wealth above o∣thers. Does not breed that Respect which is due to others, But that undue Respect of Per∣sons which is express'd by Partiality, and de∣clared against as an heinous Sin, James 2. 1, 9. It is a Custom whose Tyranny has invaded most parts of the World we live in, to have respect unto Him who weareth gay Cloathing, and to make him sit down in the upper place; whilst 'tis said to the poor man, stand Thou there, or sit here under my Footstool, (James 2. 3.) Not at all laying to heart, (as St. Iames goes on,) That God hath chosen the Poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom which he hath promis'd to them that love him, (V.5.) This is one of the main Branches of That most fatal and fruitful Tree, whereof the Love of this Worlds Goods must needs be granted to be the Root. § 13. Again the Goods of this World are very apt to breed Sloath; And this was the Third great Sin of Sodom. Not only Pride, and Fulness of Bread, but Abundance of Idleness was in her. A man who lives by
his labour has not Time and Opportunity to commit many Sins, to which abundance of leisure would have betray'd him. He whose Ambition leads him no higher than to the foddering of his Cattle, or the Government of his Plough, will have the least Cause of Scruple, (in all probability,) as well in his Conscience, as in his Stomach. Whereas a Man of great Plenty is not so apt to have Employment to keep him▪ safe; and so much the less, by how much the less he has need of working. He is not only able to buy the various Nourishments of Vice, but is at leisure to be hurt, and debauched by them. He is not fortified with Labour; is not fenc'd and barricado'd with store of Business; the Avenues of his Soul lye always open; so as the Tempter needs not besiege him, But may take him by a Surprise. Whilst David liv'd at Bethleem with his poor Father, Goodman Iesse, where his Thoughts were taken up with his Attendance upon the Cattle, his following the Ewes great with young, in the Spring, his washing and sheering them, in the Summer, his giving them Fodder, in the Winter, and his keeping them from the
Wolf, at every season of the year; whilst he was thus keeping Sheep, He was able to keep Himself too, as Chast, and Harmless. But when he was placed as a King, upon a very high Mountain of worldly Greatness, although he was placed there by God, he was so tempted there by Satan, (and that like Christ, the Son of David, with the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them,) as to have fallen into diverse most deadly Sins. When2 Sam. 11. 1. he lived at his Ease, and tarri'd still at Ierusa∣lem, stretch't himself upon his Bed, and that at Noon too, and had nothing else to do, (when he rose from it in the Evening,) but to walk up and down upon the Roof of his Palace, where his Employment was no∣thing greater, than the feasting of his Eyes with all the Varieties of the City; none isVerse 3, 4, 5, 6, &c. so ignorant of his History, as not to know what did ensue. Had he been with his Ar∣my, as by right he should have been, (for the Text tells us 'twas at the Time when Kings go forth to Battle,) He had been probably too busie, to have been tempted, as he was, whilst he lay at Ease. In the Time of his Hardship and Afflictions, we know he had
somewhat else to do, than to admit of what he did at a Time of Idleness and Plenty, when he wallowed in the Mire of the Good Things of This World. Thus the Earth, which lyes Idle, is presently over-run with Weeds; whilst the Heavens, which ever move, still keep their Purity. Just as Waters, standing still, are very easily corrupted; whilst Those that run, and run swiftly, keep themselves pure and unpolluted. § 14. Again the Goods of this World, the more they labour to fill the Appetite, the more they dilate it, and make it empty. They are apt to make a thirsty, hydropick Soul. As the Poor man does labour, to grow less poor; so the Rich does lay up, to grow more rich. And though 'tis hard to make a Rule which will not admit of some Ex∣ceptions, yet 'tis generally observable, that a poor man's care is how to keep out of want; whereas the care of the Rich is how to get into Superfluity. A man of mediocrity, who is but well enough to live, is aptest to think himself well enough; nor aims so much at the Increase, as at the meer Praeservation of his Possessions. Whereas Abundance of
Riches makes a Plethory in the Heart, which breaks out into an Itch, without due Purg∣ings, and Evacuations. By how much the fuller he is of Wealth, by so much the more his Heart is set upon the raising of his Fami∣ly, and the leaving to his Children a great deal more than he was left. He loves to be joyning House to House, and to be layingIsa. 5. 8. Field to Field, and to be placed alone in the midst of the Earth; supposing that his dwelling place shall indure for ever, and his Land be called by his Name from Generation to Generati∣on:Psal. 49. 12. Thus do the Riches of men conduce to many Diseases in the Soul; a Plethory, an Itch, a Lientery, a Dropsy, a Boulimia. These are the Maladies of the mind, which abundance of Riches do breed and cherish. The reason of it is chiefly This; That what appears very Great to them who want and desire it, does, to them who do embrace it, almost totally disappear. What Hope and Hunger present as bigg, Possession makes to seem little, even because it does not stand at a due Distance from the Appetite. For an Object may be too near (as well as too far) to be truly seen; witness the Letters of any
Book, which if we place too near our Eyes, we are as little able to read, as if they stood a mile off. For which reason it is, we over∣look what we possess, and even want what we have, whilst we covet more. § 15. Other Reasons may be given, but these I take to be the chief. And as I think they are enough, so I am not at leisure to point at more. For now 'tis time that I apply, and so improve what I have said, by adding several Considerations, whereof the one will very fitly become a step unto the other. And until we grasp All, the Appli∣cation will not be perfect. § 16. First then let us consider; That if the World's Good things are commonly made the Devil's Lime-twigs, laid before us as our Food, but only intended for our Fetters; It concerns us that our Souls be night and day kept on wing, and incessant∣ly flying over these Snares of Satan. Which to accomplish the more effectually, we must be careful not to stand upon exceeding high Mountains, nor take too much of this World within our Prospect. The Bowels of St. PaulPhilip. 3.
were so turn'd within him, when he consi der'd the Earthy-mindedness of many Profes∣sors in his time, as that he could not hold from weeping, in reflecting on the Miseries he saw them in. Whilst he was writing to his Philippians, in a very cheerful stile, touch∣ing the Glory to be reveal'd, and of his pressing towards the Mark, for the price of theVerse 14. high Calling of God in Christ Iesus, his Soul was suddenly overcast with a gloomy Cloud, and his cheerfulness in a moment was done away with a fit of mourning. For towards the midst of his Epistle, his thoughts were occasionally diverted by such a melancholy remembrance, as put a sudden stop to his Meditations, and made him break out into a Parenthesis of Tears. Many walk (saith the Apostle) of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are Ene∣mies to the Cross of Christ, whose end is destru∣ction, whose God is their Belly, and whose Glo∣ryVerse 18. 19. is their Shame, who mind Earthly things. They liv'd in Plenty and Prosperity, comply∣ed with the Persecuting Jews, were very in∣dulgent to their Appetites, and even boasted of their Lusts; that is, their Happiness was
as great as this World could make it, and for this, which is the object of most mens En∣vy, or Ambition, they were exceedingly be∣moan'd by that compassionate Apostle. That their Souls, like silly Birds, should be so caught and intangl'd with Satan's Lime-twigs, as to be groveling on the Earth, and render'd utterly unable to give a Spring towards Hea∣ven, This was his Corrosive and Cordolium. 'Twas this that turn'd his Head into a Foun∣tain of Tears, and made him to mingle his Ink with weeping. This was That that made him write with an Ellipsis in a Parenthesis, and one Parenthesis in another; No sooner had he said [for many walk] but there he presently brake off; as if the rest of his words had been suddenly swallow'd up with his Commiseration. The Royal Prophet had been caught, but had been happily disin∣tangl'd, and was so very much afraid to be caught again, that he earnestly fell a wishing for the wings of a Dove, whereby to be able to fly away, not only from the Injuries, but from the Vanities of the World. One would have thought that such a Potentate might have been satisfied with the World, who had its
Glories at his Devotion; yet even Those were some of the things which made King David so weary of it; And drew upon him That Envy, with those malicious Calumniators, which made his Life to seem long, and his King∣dom tedious: Woe is me (saith he in pity to himself) that I am constrain'd to dwell with Mesech, and to have mine habitation in the Tents of Kedar. So when Moses was but a youth, he towred up like an Eagle above the stratagems of the Fowler, and could se∣curely look down with an holy derision upon his Nets. He was so far from desiring, that he refused to be a Prince. So far from court∣ing the Top of Honour, as to have turn'd his back upon it, when strongly courted to its Acceptance: Choosing rather to suffer Af∣flictionHeb. 11. 24, 25. with the People of God, than to injoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. Such Eagles, now a days, are grown a rare sort of Crea∣tures; there being few who (like Moses) do so value and revere the reproach of Christ, as to esteem it greater Riches than all the Trea∣suresVerse 26. of Egypt. It is ordinarily counted a spice of Madness, for men to suffer any great Hardships in point of Conscience. So long as
thou dost well unto thy self, men will speak good of thee, Psal. 49. 18. But He who will not be caught in the Devil's Net, and flies the Favours of the World which cannot ho∣nestly be injoy'd, However the greatness of his Soul does speak him no less than a lofty Eagle, yet he shall commonly be contemn'd as an arrant Goose. But this should teach us to loath the World so much the more, and the wisdom of the World, which is not Ear∣thy only, and Sensual, but Devillish too,James▪ 3. 15. Iames 3. 15. Alas the Wisdom of the Serpent is a very foolish thing, wheresoever there is the Sting, and the Poyson too. And to have the Dove's Innocence, we need the Wings al∣so. For as whilst we are glued in our Affe∣ctions to the things here below, we think the World to be a Great, and a Glorious thing, so the higher we fly above it, the more con∣temptibly Little 'tis natural for it to appear. And therefore § 17. Secondly let us consider, That as the way whereby to escape the glorious Dangers of which I speak, is to sequester our Affections from the Things of this World, and to take wing towards a Better; so, that our Flight
may be the higher, we are to take some rea∣dy Course whereby to make our selves light. For however it is natural for Birds to fly, yet the most they can do is but to flutter, if they are laden with thick Clay; a Phrase by which the Prophet Habakkuk describeth Mony, and denounceth a Woe to them thatHabak. 2. 6. load themselves with it. The reason of which is very obvious. For notwithstanding it is natural for the spirit of man to fly upwards, yet what in one Case is natural, may be im∣possible in an other. A man may fly just as soon with a weight of Lead at his Feet, as with a Burden of Silver upon his Back. The lightest Birds commonly do fly the highest. And considering 'tis a Duty, for a man so to buy, as if he were never to possess; To de∣ny his dear self, and to take up Christ's Cross,1 Cor. 7. 30, 31. and to follow Him; it seems to follow there∣upon, that He who hath least of this World, and the least to do in it, is probably the fittest for That great Duty. Though 'twas not meerly for being poor, that Lazarus was carried to Abraham's Bosom, yet 'twas That that his Poverty dispos'd him for. And St. Peter said fitly (touching Himself and his
Condisciples,) Lo we have left All, and fol∣lowedLuke 18. 28. Thee. Because they could not fol∣low Christ, and carry all they had with them. For every Follower of Christ has a very narrow way wherein to walk, and a ve∣ry strait Gate whereat to enter. So that the Body of a Christian is Load enough unto the Soul; and therefore many more Impedi∣ments may well be spar'd. Our Bodies (saith St. Paul) are but Earthen Vessels; but1 Cor. 4. 7. Dust and Ashes, (saith Abraham) Gen. 20. 27. And sure the way to keep our selves unspotted from the World, is not to bury our selves a∣live, even by adding Earth to Earth, Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust. That being the way of our being buried, not in sure and certain Hope, but in sure and certain Fear of a Re∣surrection. For when the Minions of this World who are dead whilst they live, shall (by the just Judgment of God) live again when they are dead too, and shall be sum∣mon'd out of their Graves, as Malefactors out of a Dungeon; they will say to the Mountains fall on us, and to the Hills, cover us; that is, they will desire to be once more buried. Now to prevent so sad a Rising, we
are to Rise whilst we are here; from the Death (I mean) of Sin, and from the Grave of Carnality. And that we may rise the more nimbly, we must be Levis Armaturae; must not lay upon our selves too great a load of thick Clay, which commonly brings with it another load, whether it be of world∣ly Cares, or of Carnal Pleasures. Whatso∣ever most Christians may think of This, 'twas sadly consider'd by many Heathens, of which I shall but instance in four or five., &c. Maxim. Tyr. Dissert. 20. p. 197. Diogenes was a poor, but yet a very great Man, because his Poverty was his choice; and he was one who did not want, but contemn the Gayeties of the World. How did he fly above the Vices and Follies of it, by stripping himself of its Impediments, and by imping the wings of his brave Ambition? 'Twas his Ambition to be at Liberty, not to give Hostages to Fortune, to live a life disin∣gaged from things below him. He found that one Tub was enough to lye in, and one wooden. Dish enough to drink in, and was re∣solved that his Housholdstuff should hold pro∣portion with his House. Yea even That he thought too much, for its being somewhat
more than was strictly needful. And there∣fore—, &c. Id. ibid. p. 201. he brake his wooden Dish, upon his first consideration, That the Hollow of his Hand had made it needless. Now I the rather choose to instance in this remarkable Philosopher, be∣cause I know him very much censur'd, and think him as little—. Arrian. Epict. l. 3. c. 22. understood. For that which is taken by a Proverb to be the Cynicalness and sowrness, was thought by diverse ancient Authors the lovely Nobleness of his Temper. His choice of Poverty was the result of his ve∣ry deep Knowledge, and Contemplation. Na∣ture and Industry had both conspir'd to his Perfections; of which it was not the least, that he knew the whole World, and always had it under his Feet too; as having weigh'd it in a Ballance, and found its lightness. HeQualis fuerit Diogenes, Quantusque, quantò homine major, quàm Dei similis, con∣stat apud Aria∣ni Epictetum , à capite ad cal∣cem istius Dis∣sertationis. E∣tiam apud Se∣nec. de Tran∣quil. animi c. 7. had been sued to, and courted, by the Great Potentates of the Earth, whose Prosperities stoop't down to receive the Honour of his Acceptance. But what Solomon, out of his Wisdom, both infused, and acquired, (acquir'd both by joious and sad experience,) the same Diogenes concluded, (I shall not dare to say how,) That All is vanity under the Sun. Now we all know that Vanity is of extremely little
weight, if put in the Ballance of Diseretion; and in the Ballance of the Sanctuary, ofPsal. 39. 11. none at all. Nay the Psalmist concludes, that Man himself is but Vanity, who yet is very much the noblest of any Creature under the Sun. And sure if every man is Vanity, and the greater he is, the greater Vanity, andEccles. 1. 14. not only Vanity, but Vexation of Spirit; how could Godfrey Duke of Bulloin have done more prudently for himself, than in refusing to accept a Crown of Gold, where Christ Him∣self wore one of Thorns? or why should a∣ny of Christ's Followers buy the Friendship of a Prince, when Xenocrates an Heathen wouldRex Philosophi Amicitiam e∣mere voluit; Philosophus Re∣gi fuam vende∣re noluit. Val. Max. l. 4. c. 3. not deign to sell His, no not to Alexander Himself who would fain have bought it? Why should a Christian affect Dominion, when Rubori non fuit, eburneo scipione deposi∣to, agrestem sti∣vam aratri repetere. Id. ib. c. 4. Cic. Offic. l. 3. Atilius an Heathen made choice to leave it? why should one of Christ's Disciples court and covet That Plenty, which was despis'd by Fabricius, an arrant Heathen? Why should a Christian set his Heart upon the getting and leaving a vast Revenue to his Posterity, when the Heathen man Socrates thought it a Cha∣rity to his Children, to leave them none? Not that he thought it a Breach of Chari∣ty,
to make Provision for his Family; but that he durst not betray them to great Temp∣tations. As He himself had refused half the Kingdom of Samos when offer'd to him, so was he willing that his Children should inhe∣rit his Temper, and Frame of Mind. He knew the Providence of God was the surest Patrimony; And had been taught by his experience, that Friends well got were the next great Treasure. 'Twas his Duty, as a Father, to leave his Children very well, and by consequence in a condition (not the richest, but) the most suitable, and safest for them; and therefore under a Necessity of taking pains. Conceiving it infinitely dif∣ficult for any man to live a strict and a ver∣tuous life, who is not bless'd with some Cal∣ling wherein to labour. Ask't he was in∣deed by Xenophon, and other Friends, why of so many great Offers he would not ac∣cept at least of some; if not in his own, yet in his Childrens consideration. But still He answer'd, [Objicienti, , respondet Socrates, , &c. Socrat. E∣pist. 2. ex Edit. Leon. Allat. p. 15, 16, 17, &c. Confer Arrian. Epict. l. 3. c. ult. p. 433. If they live as they ought, they cannot want Blessings; and if they live otherwise, I cannot wish that they may have them. If they are dutiful to their God, they will find him an
indulgent and loving Father. And if they re∣bel against their Maker, what have I to do with them?] Now consider how these Heathens who liv'd before Christ, had more of Christi∣an Self-denyal, than most of Them that come after. They were many of them plac'd upon exceeding high Mountains; shew'd the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the glory of them; Yea though they were proffer'd those Injoyments, and strongly tempted to accept them; yet so great was their courage, they did not yield. Men, who if they are not fit for our imitation, are fit to shame us at least for our imitating no more of the Life of Christ. Who, as it were in opposition to this Temptation of the Devil, drawn from the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them, made choice ofMatth. 8. 20. Poverty and Despised∣ness for his external Qualifications. For though, by reason of his Divinity, he could not possibly be obnoxious to the unworthi∣ness of Sin, yet by reason of his Humanity, he was capable of suffering the most un∣worthy Solicitations. And even those Solici∣tations disturb'd his Ease, although they had not the power to hurt his Safety. Some∣thing
therefore there was in it for our Edifi∣cation, That when it pleased the God of Heaven to take upon him our Nature, who had it in his own choice, both of whom he would be born, and in what Quality he would live, He did not choose the greatest, but rather the meanest and the most abject of all Conditions. Now whoever he is that chooseth, (be he wise, or foolish,) ever choo∣seth what is Best, either really, or in shew; either best in it self, or best to his imagina tion. From whence it follows that our Sa∣viour, being the Wisdom of the Father, (as God the Son,) could not choose but choose wisely, and what was really the best, when he made choice to be so meanly both born, and bred. As for his Birth, sure a Carpenter's Spouse was a very mean Parent; The Stable of an Inn was an exceeding mean Place; wherein an Oxe and an Ass were as mean At∣tendants. And then for his Breeding, It was in Galilee, yea in Nazareth, the meanest part of all Palestine; In the House of Goodman Ioseph, one of the meanest men of Nazareth; And in the way of a Carpenter, as mean a Trade as could well be chosen.
Our Saviour shall not choose for us, if he chooses no better for Himself, (will the men of this World be apt to say.) We would choose (had we our choice) to be born of Princes; to be bred in stately Palaces, and brought up at Court. None should be great∣er, if we could help it, nor any richer than our selves. We would choose the very Things, wherewith the Devil here tempted Christ, All the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them. Would not be so poorly spi∣rited, as to refuse a frank offer for want of a little Complaisance, an act of Worship, and Veneration. A Beast indeed will rest content∣ed, when his Belly is full; and looks no higher, when he is Empty, than to That which grows up from the Ground he treads on. But Man is made of another Metal, and He is scarce fit to live who has no Ambition, but sits him down (like a Beast) completely sa∣tisfied with a sufficience. Conscience and Con∣tentment are fit for persecuted Churchmen, (or well-bred Quakers,) or else for men whose Wits are lost in their Studies, and whose overmuch Learning has made them as mad as any Paul; a Man who talks of Contentment
in All Conditions; and would have us look no farther (as to the Goods of this World) than Food and Rayment. Is it not Pity that such as These should be the Reasonings of the Followers and Friends of Christ, who followed the things which They eschew, and eschewed those things which They contend for? His choice (I say) was to be poorer, and more despised than other men. And because, being a Man, he was to be of some Calling, he pitch'd on That that was lyable to least Temptations; and so was registred at Nazareth, not in the Quality of a Freeholder, but of an Handicraft-Man. He was but Faber Lignarius, a Wooden Smith. Had he been a Freeholder, he had had (though not a Kingdom, yet) a small Pit∣tance of this World. He might have trod his own Ground, and have breath'd his own Air, and have eaten his own Bread, without depending upon the Charity of any other man's hands, or on the Labour of his own. But he was on the contrary so poor and de∣stitute, that he had neither Food, nor Ray∣ment, but what he earn'd, or had given him, or got by Miracle. As long as from his
Twelfth to his Thirtieth year of Age, diverse Fathers are of opinion, that he wrought for his Living in his Father in Law's Shop. Nor is there any Church-Writer who gives ano∣ther Accompt of him. And from thence until his Death he obtain'd his Bread, either by Teaching, as a Prophet, or doing good, as a Physician; Both gratuitously, and freely,Luke 8. 3. although by some he was rewarded. Now that our Saviour's way of choosing may have some Influence upon ours, and this our second Consideration may be as useful, as it is long, § 18. Let us consider, in the Third place, how God and Satan are two Competitors for our choice. Satan tempts us to joyn with Him, in his Attempts against God; God so∣licits us on the contrary, to side with Him against Satan. Satan tempts us to Rebellion, with the Things that are seen, which are but Temporal; God solicits us to Obedience, with the Things that are not seen, which are Eternal. Satan's Proposals are to the Flesh; God's especially to the Spirit. Satan takes us up to an exceeding high Mountain, and dis∣covers to us from thence, all the Kingdoms
of the Earth, and the Glory of them; God, on the other side, takes us up to Mount Si∣on, or at least takes us down to the Valley of Achor, and discovers to us from thence, the Kingdom of Heaven, and Glory of it, and saith to us in effect, (as the Devil to Christ,) All This will I give you, if falling down ye will worship me. Now it remains that we consi∣der, to which Proposal of the two our Affe∣ctions and Appetites have the most reason to incline. Let's put them Both into the Scales, and then choose That that shall weigh the heaviest. As for the Things of this present World, the best we can say of them is This, They all are to perish in the using. The World it self is but a Thing, whose Fashion passeth a∣way. But 'tis the saddest consideration, that the World's Good things are much more dangerous than they are frail. It being a Duty extremely difficult, to use this World as not abusing it; And yet if we omit to per∣form this Duty, The richest Possessions up∣on Earth will but serve to purchase for us the largest Interest in Hell. So that the Devil's Liberality amounts to This only, That
if we will but Idolize him, he will give us whatsoever may do us Harm. He will sup∣ply us with the means of being damn'd so much the deeper. Was it (think we) for nothing, or a thing by meer chance, that as our Saviour chose Poverty (rather than Plen∣ty) for himself, so he chose such as were poor, (as well in Fortune, as in Spirit,) to be inrich'd by his Grace, and made Inheritors of his Kingdom? Was there not (think we) something in it, that the Primitive Excel∣lency consisted in selling all that they had, and laying it down at the Apostles Feet? The least we can gather from it is This, (And be it spoken as impartially to the due comfort of the Poor, as to the needful Humiliation of such amongst us as are Rich,) That Poverty, though it is not exempt from All, is yet ob∣noxious unto fewer, and lesser Dangers. For Riches commonly do inable us to do things to be repented; whereas Poverty helps to fit us to repent of things done. Indeed 'tis best of the two, to have Food convenient, (as Agur words it;) to be in such a mediocrity 'twixt Poverty, and Plenty, as not to be pinched with the former, nor too much load∣ed
with the later. Agur prayed against Both; but for different reasons. He prayed a∣gainst Poverty, as apt to make him turn Thief; But he prayed against Riches, as apt to make him turn Atheist. Now by how much it is worse to be an Atheist, than a Thief, by so much Riches should make a sadder, and a more formidable Condition. And 'twas perhaps for this reason, (amongst some o∣thers,) that the most Learned of all our Kings thought Him the happiest man in Eng∣land, who by his Quality and Estate had a middle Station, betwixt an High Constable, and a Iustice of Peace. For such a man is neither held to be Poor nor Rich. He has not the Indigence of the one, nor the Vexati∣on of the other. Is freer from Contempt, and from Envy too. Has weaker Temp∣tations, and fewer Troubles. This is to be fed with Food convenient. And This is the Condition which Agur pray'd for. But that Scarceness in it self is safer for us (of the two) than Superfluity, we may in∣fer from That Method which the Devil here used against our Saviour: who, accord∣ing as his Prosperities did fall, or rise, did
ever find his Temptations to ebb, or flow. And we know the lowest ebb can but leave us dry, whereas the Tyde of Prosperity is apt to drown us. So frail, and so worthless, yea and so dangerous are the Things, by which the Rival of our Maker most strongly tempts us. Weigh we next the Good Things, not only of This, but a better World, where∣with the God who may despise, vouchsafes to court us. He does not only court us with the Promise of a Deliverance, from a Bottomless Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the Worm dyeth not, and where the Fire is not quenched; Nor seek to win us only by Promises of a Crown immarcescible, of Ioys unspeakable, and endless, such as our Hearts cannot hold, nor our Tongues ut∣ter, nor our Reasons comprehend, nor our Fansies reach; But farther obliges and indears us with a world of Bounties whilst we are Here. For Every man in the World has all the World in Epitome; and that not only as to the sight, but injoyment also, until he forfeits his Birthright by the High Treason of his Debauches. Till then (I say) he has a world, both to possess, and
to injoy, not only within, but without him al∣so. The world within him is so evident, and so very much resembling the world without him, (far beyond what the Romans had made its Hieroglyphick, or Embleme,) that there is hardly any thing namable, either in Heaven, or in Earth, to which there is not something analogous, either in the Body, or Soul of Man. The Truth of which saying will soon appear, to whosoever will take the pains (as Augustine Mascardus has somewhere done) to draw a Pa∣rallel of Particulars. And then for the world without his Person, 'tis plain that That is within his Power. For all the Earth is his walk, if he please to use it. He has Regions of Air wherein to Breathe: Many Rivers of Water to quench his Thirst: And an Element of Fire to keep him warm. So that if he has an House which will but hold him, and Meat as much as he can hold, and as much Ray∣ment as he can carry, he has certainly as much as a man undebauch't knows what to do with; and what a madness is it for him to co∣vet more? For how much worse than a Bruta∣lity must we needs have exchanged our hu∣man Nature, when nothing can please us
but what's forbidden? and when nothing is forbidden, but what 'twill mischief us to in∣joy? How many Pleasures and Recreations has God been bountifully pleas'd to make lawful for us? freely giving us the Liberty, to choose as much as will do us good? Mu∣sick is allow'd us to please our Ears; Per∣fumes to gratifie our Smelling; the beau∣tiful Structure of the Universe to feed our Eyes with Admiration. Rich Variety of Meats to treat our Palates with, when we are hungry; the most desirable Felicity of quenching our Thirst, when we are dry; the great and innocent Sensuality of warm∣ing our Selves when we are cold. And see∣ing the old Rule in Logick is indisputably True, That the whole Nature of every Species is in each single Individual: God has made it both a needless and sensless Thing, for any man to covet his Neighbour's Wife, by ha∣ving graciously allow'd him the happy So∣ciety of his own. Now since Every man in particular does as really injoy the whole In∣fluence of the Heavens, as if It were shed upon Him alone, in so much that his injoy∣ment of Heat and Light would be no great∣er,
in case he were Monarch of all the world; Can it be other than an irrational and an ab∣surd kind of wickedness, if, whilst we law∣fully injoy the whole benefit of the Sun, we shall esteem it a want of Happiness, that ano∣ther man injoys it as well as we? if, whilst our own Cisterns are running over, we shall not be able to be satisfied, unless with stoln Waters? Is there nothing will stay our Sto∣machs, but the Bread of Dishonesty? Will nothing content us throughout our Iourney, (for which God has given us so plain an High-way wherein to walk,) but the removing of signal Land-Marks, and the breaking up of Hedges, and leaping over God's Mounds? and this at a time whilst we are told, that as our Iourney is long, so our Time is little, and yet Eternity depends on the usage of it? Must we needs be still coveting another's House, another's Land, another's Servant, another's Wife, or somewhat else which is anothers, and that at the Instant of our a∣bounding in two whole worlds which are our own? No, let us rather bespeak our Temp∣ter, as Ioseph did his kind Mistress, How can we do so great a wickedness? which way shallGen. 39. 8, 9.
we be able to set about it? Had Potiphar been a jealous man, or a cruel Master, Ioseph might have done much, at the frequent In∣treaties of a Mistress. But He, considering how his Master had withheld nothing from him, besides his Wife, and intrusted him too with Her, as well as with his whole Substance, could not in Gratitude to his Master accept the Favour of his Mistress. He could not sin against so manifold and great a Trust. So, if God had been a Wilderness to any of us, tyed us up from All Comforts, or left but few things lawful for us, we might then have sin'd against him with more excuse. But considering his Bounty, and Goodness towards us, his leaving it in our power to pick and choose our Contentments in great Variety, and his withholding nothing from us, but what will hurt us in the Possession; we ought to stir up his Grace, as well as our own good Nature in us, to an effectual Resi∣stance of the most powerful Temptations, which shall at any time indeavour to de∣bauch us into Rebellion; and say with Io∣seph, How can we do so great a wickedness a∣gainst a Deity so obliging? How can we possibly be so ingrateful?
§ 19. Having therefore briefly weigh'd the Rival-objects of our choice; and seen the very vast Difference between the Things of this praesent, and future world; yea between the same Things of this present world, as they are differently offer'd, by God, and Satan; by God on the one side, as they are sanctified into Blessings; and on the other side by Sa∣tan, as they are turn'd into a Curse; by God, as of Right, and by Satan, as of Suf∣ferance; by God in such a Measure, as has a Tendency to our Good, and by Satan in such an extravagance, as is in order to our undoing; by God, to satisfie our Appetites, and by Satan, to inlarge them; by God, as obligations to Love and Gratitude, and by Satan, as excitements to Pride and Luxury; By God, as Directives to the great End of our Creation, and by Satan, as Amusements to keep us from it; we cannot take a better course, when Satan tempts us (as he did Christ) with the Greatness of the World, and the Glory of it, than to reflect upon our Solemn Baptismal Vow, and by consequence to fight against the Prince of this World, and utterly to forsake its Pomps and Vanities;
Not to walk according to the Course of this world; to fear its Friendship; to hate its Wisdom; to suspect its Power, and to scorn its Glory; to crucifie the world unto our selves, and our selves unto the world; to keep our selves unspotted and undefiled from the world; And, whilst our vile Bodies are here on Earth, to have our Conversations at least in Hea∣ven. § 20. These are the Lessons we are to learn, from the First observable in the Text, and such as prompt me to proceed to the consi∣deration of the Second. For of the many and cogent Arguments whereby to make our selves think meanly of the Things which we admire, This is none of the least, That they are not only in God's Gift, (by a natu∣ral Right,) But many times (by His leave) in the Devil's also. For thus rnn the words of The next Particular in the Division, That all the Goods of This world, howeverThe second Proposition. lovely they may appear to the misty Eye of Carnality, are yet by God's Patience, and wise Permission, (at least successively, though not at once,) in the Devil's Proffer, and Disposal.
First I must evidence that so it Is. Next I must guess at the Reasons why. And last of all I must proceed, to shew the manifold Advantage and Use of Both. § 1. That so it is may be evinced moreIts Truth pro∣ved. ways than one; From Scripture, from Rea∣son, and from Experience. It is so evident from Scripture, (wherein our Saviour calls Satan John 12. 31. & Ch. 16. V. 11. Eph. 6. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 4. The Prince of this World, St. Paul the Ruler, and the God too,) that the Devil in one sense said not amiss unto our Saviour, , the power of this world is deli∣ver'dLuke 4. 6. to me, as That does signifie by an He∣braism, that God does suffer or permit him to rob the Innocent, and to heap Riches upon the Guilty, and so to dispose of whole King∣doms to the Sons of Violence and Oppressi∣on, who call their strength the Law of Iustice.Wisd. 1. 11. 'Tis true, the words of the Devil, (as St. Luke sets them down) are clearly spoken as by a Sophister; who, (according to his Custom) being aequivocal or homonymous in what he says, does cunningly mix a little Truth with the greatest falshood to be imagin'd. For if he means that God Almighty has put the world into his hands, and intrusted him, (as
a Deputy) to pass a Right of Possession on whom He pleaseth, there is nothing more false than his ; (which will be made to ap∣pear in its proper place.) But if his mean∣ing is only This, That God is pleas'd to let him alone in his Course of wickedness for a Time, and permits him to be mischievous as far as his Fetters and Chain will reach, nothing is truer than That Assertion from the Father of Lyes. And nothing can shew its Truth better, than such a Scriptural Example as That of Iob. § 2. He (we know) was a perfect, and up∣rightJob 1. 1. man: A man fearing God, and eschewing Evil. As to the purity of his Life, he had not his Equal in all the Earth. In so muchVerse 8. that God upbraided and vexed Satan with his Integrity. Yet even All that Iob had (and we know he had a world) was left by God in the Devil's Power. For no sooner had Sa∣tan said, Put forth thine Hand now, andVerse 11. touch all he hath, And he will curse thee to thy face; but God return'd him this Answer, All that he hath is in thy Power: only uponVerse 12. Himself do not put thine Hand forth. 'Tis plain the Devil is God's Pris'ner; for there
we have the length of the Chain that holds him. It did not reach to Iob's Person, but only to his Possessions. And to Them so uni∣versally, that the Devil dispos'd of All to his prime Instruments upon Earth; The Sabae∣ans, the Chaldaeans, the Fire, and the Whirl∣wind. He sent his Journey-men, the Sabae∣ans, to plunder Iob of his Oxen, to take hisVers. 14, 15. Asses into Possession, and slay his Servants with the edge of the Sword. Employed theVerse 16. Fire to kill his Sheep and his Shepherds. To the Chaldaeans he bequeathed Iob's stock ofVerse 17. Camels, together with the Lives of those that kept them. And then for his Children, both Sons and Daughters, the Devil gaveVerse 19. them all up unto the Wind out of the Wilder∣ness, which blew down the House (wherein they were met) upon their Heads. After This the bassl'd Tempter was thus insulted over by God; Hast thou consider'd my Servant Job,Chap. 2. v. 3. who holdeth fast his Integrity, although thou movedst me against him to swallow him up without a Cause? Satan therefore ask't Suf∣ferance5. to tempt him farther; to smite the Body of Iob with Byles; and to smite him6. Cap a Pe too, from Head to Foot. His chain,Verse 7.
Before, was very long; It reach't as far as Iob's All, besides his Person. In so much that of the Richest, he became the very Poorest of all the People: For 'tis a Proverb, and an Hyperbole, to say a man is as poor as Iob. But now the Chain is made longer by one considerable Link. For having nothing left to him, except a Body and a Soul, and (what was much worse than nothing) a vex∣ing Wife, (a Wife whom the Devil had leave enough to take from him, but would not use it,) now at last his Body too is in the power of the Destroyer, who disposed of his Flesh to the very Bone; Nor is there any thing ex∣empted, besides his Soul. § 3. Thus we see by Example, how great a stroak the Devil carrys, (by God's long Sufferance, and Permission,) in the outward management of the World. That is to say, in the Disposal of all Those Things, which do pass amongst men for great and glorious. How was Satan permitted to harden Pha∣raoh, to inrage Sennacherib, to excite Nebu∣chadnezzar, against the Israel of God? and to dispose of all they had, according to his own Lust? Should I produce as many Ex∣amples
as are producible out of Scripture, and dwell on each as I have done in the Case of Iob, I should be in some danger of being Endless. It shall therefore suffice me to say in brief, That whensoever one man invades another man's Right, or whensoever one Nation usurps Dominion over another, against that Precept of God and Nature writ in eve∣ry man's Heart, [What thou▪wouldest that no man should do to thee, do Thou to no man,] or against those other Precepts, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not covet, Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbour's House, (much less his House with all his Land too,) nay Thou shalt not covet any thing (much less All) that is thy Neighbours; 'tis not God, but the Devil, who is the Author of That Inju∣stice. God does patiently permit, and invi∣sibly over-rule, and wisely order such Perpe∣trations, to many most worthy and righte∣ous Ends, which in part we well know, and in part we know not, (touching which I shall speak in their proper place;) But still the Robberies and Invasions are the Contri∣vances of the Devil. Now in every such Invasion there are two Parties tempted; one
with loss, and another with Acquisition. They that suffer the Injustice are strongly tempted with Affliction; And They that do it are tempted worse, because with the Bait of a Prosperity which in such case is irresisti∣ble. The Devil trys with one Action to mur∣der two Souls at once. Two at once, in case the Robbery does only lye betwixt Man and Man. But many Thousands of them at once, when betwixt the two Parts of an Armed Na∣tion. For then the Devil at the same time provokes the stronger Party to Pride, as well as the weaker to Impatience; The Injurious side to Insolence, and the oppressed to Despair. This I take to be the Reason, why when the Devil will do a Mischief of most considera∣ble Importance, he does not content him∣self with Brutish or Inanimate Instruments; but rather prefers the use of such, as ought to be rational, and religious, and so are to render a sad Accompt of what is done in the Body; That by dashing many Thousands (as when whole Armies meet) against each other, and getting Victory for the Oppressors, he may (in one kind or other) destroy them All. To wit the Bodies of some, and the Souls of o∣thers.
Had the Devil (for Example) infest∣ed Iob with nothing worse than the Fire, and Whirlwind, or only tormented his Flesh with Byles, he had in vain spread his Net to catch no more than one Bird, (for though Iob was a Job 2. 3. Phoenix, he was but one;) Had fought to plunder Iob alone of his Faith and Patience. Whereas by stirring up the Sa∣baeans and the Chaldaeans to do him Mischief, he cunningly caught at one Draught as great a Multitude of Souls, as he had prosperously employ'd in so foul a Riot. § 4. Now 'tis plain by this Instance of Satan's Power to take away, He has a power to bestow too, by God's permission; and that in order to an end, not as bad only, but worse, propos'd by Satan unto Himself. For when he takes from the Innocent, how liberal is he to the Guilty? It may be said of his Instruments, They do not always serve him for naught. He often caresses them whilst they are here, that so hereafter he may have liberty to glut his Malice on them the more. What he snatches (as 'twere with one hand) from the Innocent Party, he commonly gives (as with the other) to the Kennel of Robbers
whom He employs. Look what Camels and other Cattle he deprived Iob of, he did con∣fer at the same Instant on Such as drove them out of his Fields. And thus I hope my Pro∣position is clear from Scripture. § 5. Secondly from Reason 'twill be as easy to evince it. For if the Goods of this world were not suffer'd by God to be disposed of by the Devil, our Leviathan would have had reason for his Denial of any Difference 'twixt Right and Wrong. If God alone does still dispose of all Possessions under the Sun, (as prosperous Rebels and Usurpers are wont to urge,) and the Devil of none at all by God's permission, All things then must needs be right, except the Laws and the Statutes which forbid men to steal upon pain of Death. They would not only be irrational, but cruel things. For why should any man be censur'd, (much less certainly should he be punish't,) for taking That which God gives him? Shall not God, without offence, dis∣pose of things as He pleaseth? why then are we so wicked, so void of all Ingenuity, as to prosecute a Man who is call'd a Thief, in case he breaks up our Houses, takes our Cash out
of our Coffers, drives our Cattle out of our Grounds, or carries our Corn out of our Barns, if God has made him His Messen∣ger, and (by his absolute Decree, or by his All-working Providence,) disposed of our Sub∣stance to That man's use? Or why did God himself say, Thou shalt not steal, if a man can have nothing, but what God gives him? For whatsoever God gives him, becomes his own. No propriety of man can exclude that of God, or be equal to it. And in Con∣veyances of Title amongst our selves, still (we know) a Deed of Gift, confers as abso∣lute a Right, as a Deed of Purchase. If then we may have any thing which by right is not ours, we have it certainly from Satan, and not from God. For one of These Members fol∣lowing (that I may make my work short) must needs be granted. Either that Rob∣bery, and Theft, Extorsion, and Oppressi∣on, and all sorts of Cousenage, are names, and words, and nothing else; (invented only by Politicians, Ecclesiastical and Civil,) or that if they are Things, they are very Good, as being derived from God the Author; or that God is the Author of what is morally evil;
or that at least they are the works, not of God, but of the Devil. The First of these cannot be; for then it would follow, That Theft is no Sin. Much less the Second; for then it would follow, that Sin is Good. Much less the Third; for then it would follow, that God is Evil. Each of which being false, and blasphemous too; 'Tis plain the Fourth, by way of Refuge, must needs be granted, (seeing no fifth Member can either be, or be imagin'd,) That All our Robberies and Frauds are not of God, but of the Devil. § 6. Now this becomes a sure Medium to prove the Point we have in hand; because the Things of this world (I mean the Wealth and Glory of it) are wont to be bandied up and down, from one Possessor to another, by secret Fraud, or by open Force. How ve∣ry few (in comparison) are contented with the Portion which God has given them? and have no more in their Possession than can be properly call'd Theirs? How much is got∣ten by daily cousenage, in Fairs, or Markets? How much by filtching, and purloyning, in private Families, and Common Fields? How much by Bribery, and Corruption, in
Courts of Justice, (as we call them,) and Ju∣risdiction? (I do not mean so much in This, as in foreign Kingdoms and Common∣wealths.) How much by Cutpurses and Cutthroats, in publick Meetings, and High∣ways? How much by Preaching, and length of Praying, when Pharisaical Negotiators do pray and preach for a Pretence, that they may swallow down Orphans and Widows Houses? How much by Riots and Depredations of un∣disciplin'd Armies, through the Spirit whichEph. 2. 2. is still working in the Children of Disobedience? In a word, I am not qualified to name the several ways and methods, by which Inju∣stice is promoted, and Equity trodden into the Dust. Now whatsoever is ill-acquired cannot possibly be our own, however call'd by our Names. For Right and Possession are many times at such Distance, that they can never once meet, or be reconcil'd. Yea by how much the nearer Possession is, Right may stand the farther off. Ill got Possession gives right to nothing, unless to Hell, and the Gib∣bet; or to Repentance, and Restitution. A∣hab got a full Possession of Naboth's Vineyard; But 'twas by Murder, and Perjury, and Su∣borning
Sons of Belial to bear false witness, And so by doing That to Satan which Satan tempted our Saviour to. Things so far from giving him Right unto another man's Goods, that they betray'd him into a Forfeiture of what had otherwise been his own. For by a complicated Treason against the Majesty of God, his very Soul (as well as Body) became consiscate to the Devil. Indeed it implys a Contradiction, that a man should get Right, by doing Wrong. There is a Man in the world (says the inspir'd Prophet Habakkuk)Habak. 2. 6, 7, &c. who does inlarge his Desire as Hell, and is as greedy as the Grave, and cannot be satisfied; But gathereth together all Nations, and heap∣eth to himself all People. But mark what follows. Woe to him who increaseth what is notVerse 7. His. Woe to him who coveteth an evil Covetous∣nessVerse 9. to his House, that he may set his Nest on high, that he may be delivered from the Power of Evil. For the Stone shall cry out of the Wall,Verse 11. and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer it. Woe to him that buildeth a Town with Blood, andVerse 12. stablisheth a City by Iniquity. Now what is the Reason of all These Woes, but that he increaseth what is not His? If 'tis His, let him
shew how. Did he buy it? or was it given him? Or did he inherit it by Nature? Or was it so made over to him, as Canaan by God to the People Israel? If this later, Let us hear it made good by a Voice from Hea∣ven; and that attested too by Miracle. So as Moses and Aaron did prove the Principle and Power by which They acted. If he cannot do This, it is not His. Therefore he hadit not from God; Therefore he had it from the Devil. And thus we have the Proposition made good by Reason. Nor by solitary Reason, but in con∣junction with Scripture, and grounded on it. § 7. Thirdly we may prove it by known Experience. By other mens Experience, and by our own. First by other mens Experience, and that attested as well by Sacred, as by Secu∣lar Story. David was taught by his Experi∣ence, that Prosperity was Then the usual Por∣tion of the ungodly. For so he tells us at large in the Seventy third Psalm; I was grie∣vedPsal. 73. from v. 3. to v. 14. at the wicked, I saw the ungodly in such Prosperity. They are in no peril of Death, but are lusty and strong. Their Eyes swell with Fatness, and they do even what they list. They come in no misfortune like other folk, neither
are they plagued like other men. Therefore fall the People unto them, and thereout suck they no small advantage. Tush, say they, how shall God see? Is there knowledge in the most High? Loe these are the ungodly, these prosper in the Land, these have Riches in Possession. But I, on the contrary, Who have cleansed my heart,Verse 12. and have washed mine hands in Innocence; I who have lived in the fear of God, and made a conscience of my ways, All the day long have I been punished, and been chastened13. every Morning. The Prophet Ieremy tells usJer. 12. 1, 2, 3. too, from his own Experience, That the way of the wicked was wont to prosper; and that they who dealt treacherously were happy men. They were planted, took root, they grew, they multiply'd; yet God was not near in their Mouth, and far from their Reins. The Prophet Ma∣lachi, after Him, had the like Experience, That the Proud were happy, and the Workers ofMal. 3. 15. wickedness were set up; yea they who tempted God were even delivered. So as it seem'd (to the Eye of Flesh) a very vain thing to serve the Lord. And the same was observed by the Prophet Habakkuk. That the wicked (inHabak. 1. 4, 15, 16. his Time) did even compass about the Righte∣ous;
they gather'd them in their Net; their Portion was fat, and their Meat plenteous. § 8. If we pass out of Sacred into Secu∣lar Story, we may discover the same Experi∣ence running through every Age of Man, from the one end unto the other. (Although my little time allow'd will not permit me to exemplifie, unless in here and there one.) That will certifie how Ninus first founded Empire in Iniquity. How the Assyrians and Chaldaeans continued That. How the Medes and the Persians invaded These. How Philip of Macedon usurped All Greece; And his in∣satiable Son the Eastern Empire. How the Romans made All bow down to Italy. How the Goths and the Vandals subdued the Ro∣mans; and ravag'd the greatest part of Chri∣stendom, as far as from Poland to Mauritania. How Mahomed the First subdued the Saracens, And Profaneness became possess't of the Holy Land. How the Ottoman Empire prospers against the Purity of the Gospel, and the Profession of Christianity, and so has done from Age to Age, and that by the Practice of all Impiety. How very clear a thing is it, (a thing of which the world is witness,) that
the Great Sultan (as they call him) is the greatest Monarch under Heaven? the great∣est Enemy to Christ, the most abandon'd and given up to work Iniquity even with Greediness, the most incapable of Mercy, ei∣ther to Men in his Rage, or to Women in his Lust, and yet the fullest of Prosperity of a∣ny Potentate upon Earth. How many Millions of Christian Souls are there now groaning under his Tyranny? How many Princes within our Christendom are fain to buy their Peace of him, or pay him Tribute? How many Centuries of years have those Ma∣homedans still prosper'd, more than any sort of Christians that can be nam'd? Shall we now joyn in consort with all those Infidels, and aver, that though Christ was a great Prophet indeed, yet Mahomed was a Greater? Shall we infer that Those Turks are the speci∣al Favorites of Heaven? That God, in love to their Alchoran, has signally favour'd them with the greatest and fairest Quarters of the World? has made a Decision of the Contro∣versie betwixt the Worshippers of Mahomed, and Those of Christ, even by yielding to the former his Approbation? There are who
talk at this rate, and know not how to talk otherwise, whilst they reason from the Prin∣ciples which They are led by. But God be thanked we are led by a clearer light. As having learnt from St. Paul to say of such Thrivers in their Impiety, (not that God has indowed, with much delight, but) That God has indured, with much long-suffering, theRom. 9. 22. Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction. And again with St. Paul we have learnt to say, That God did SUFFER those Nations to walkActs 14. 18. in their own ways. Had they walk't in God's ways, God had been said to have made them do it. But as they walked in their own, God only suffer'd them. We say (as Abra∣hamLuke 16. to Dives) God permits them to have their Good things, Here. And Here the Devil is permitted to have a very wide Scope; to use a large kind of Freedom. For however he is held in Chains of Darkness, yet his ChainsJude. are so long, and many times so much inlarg∣ed, as that he goes to and fro upon the face ofJob 2. 2. the Earth. And not only so; but, by the Patience of which I spake, and the long-suffer∣ing of the Almighty, bestows the Kingdoms of the World on such as serve him. (All the
Kingdoms, I do not say, but as many as God permits, who yet at one time or other, though not at once, may be said with great Truth to permit them All.) The Ottoman Emperours in their Successions have been placed by the Devil upon exceeding high Mountains; have seen the Kingdoms of the world, and the Glory of them; And the Devil in effect has said to Them, as here to Christ, All these things will I give you, if yee will fall down and worship me. Those Emperours have been suffer'd to do the one, And the Devil has been permitted to give the other. I shall but name the wicked Phocas, who (of a very mean Soldier) did by his complicated Im∣pieties usurp the Empire of Mauritius, a pious Prince. And then for Him nearer Home, who by his Practice and his Success drew That Phocas to the Life, I think I need not so much as name him. Nor is there any thing more acknowledged, (at least by the so∣ber Rank of Men, who are not yet asham'd to believe the Scriptures,) than that Witch∣es, and Wizards, Magicians, and Sorcerers, have made their Contracts with the Devil, as with a Bountiful Disposer of worldly Goods.
§ 9. So that if we consult our own Expe∣rience, if we ask our own Eyes, and call our Memories to Accompt, how very frequent a thing it is for the hand of wickedness to pre∣vail, for the stool of wickedness to prosper, in devouring the man that is more righteous thanHabak. 1. 13. He; And if we consider at the same time, That (excepting some few, and extraordina∣ry Examples, such as the Israelites of old who were commanded by God himself to spoilExod. 12. 35. the Egyptians of their Iewels, and take the Canaanites Land for their own Possession,)Chap. 13. 5. It has been meerly the Sin of Robbery, in all the Ages of the World, for any one or more men to seize upon That which is anothers, by private Fraud, or by publick Violence; we cannot choose but subscribe to the Sense of our Saviour and St. Paul, That the Devil (under God, and by God's permission,) is One Dispenser of Preferment, if not the Chiefest. And therefore not without Rea∣son is said by our Lord, and his Apostle, to be the Ruler, and the Prince, and even the God of this World. Experience has made it a kind of Proverb, That He who cannot dissemble, can hardly live. And Conscience
is so commonly the Beggar's Vertue, that That is grown too to a kind of Proverb. As if the high way to Wealth, were to serve Mammon, rather than God, Pluto was made the proper Name for the God of Wealth. And 'twas an Aphorism of State in the late ill Times, He who will have something, must do any thing to acquire it. Like that of the Poet in Time of Yore, Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris, & Carcere dignum, Sivis esse aliquid— He who will rise to high Promotion, and purchase the Friendship of the World, must bravely dare to do something, worthy the Gibbet, or the Iayl. But if a man will serve God, he is to do it at his Peril, of being a Confessor perhaps, perhaps a Martyr. 'Twas from the Topick of this Experience, that the Devil here argued against our Saviour. (And my Text, as I conceive, does well admit of This Paraphrase.) If thou wilt violate God's Law, in an adhaerence unto mine; If thou wilt lay aside thy Conscience, and stick at nothing which I command thee; , &c. I will
give thee whatsoever thine Eye can see, or thine Heart desire. Thou may'st arrive a great deal sooner at Wealth and Greatness, by taking those Courses which I suggest, than by relying upon the Providence, or on the Promises of God. For do but look round about thee, and trust thine Eyes. Thou seest it goes best with the worst of men; and that the men of nice Conscience are quite undone by their Integrity. Weigh the Successes of Evil doers with the Calami∣ties of the Righteous, and thou wilt find Them the wisest who worship Me. This does seem to be the Scope of the Devil's reasoning to our Saviour. And my Discourse added to His may serve to evince the Proposition which lyes before us, That all the Goods of this World (at least successively, though not at once,) are, by the Sufferance of the Almigh∣ty, in the Devil's Proffer and Disposal. § 10. I have but one Topick left from whence to make it yet clearer, or past Dis∣pute; And that must needs be by way of An∣swer to an Objection. For if These Things are so, (some may say within Themselves, Men will be in great danger of becoming E∣picuraeans;An Objection. looking on God as without regard
of what is done upon the Earth, and as consining his Providence to things transacted within the Heavens. And if they once come to That, they will Sin securely, and tumble down with great merriment into the Bottom∣less Asphaltites which gapes to have them. So far from Scruple or Regret in their words or actions, that they will rather use the lan∣guage of those Contemners in the Psalmist; Tush, how shall God see? Is there knowledgePsal. 73. 10. in the most high? Or say with Eliphaz un∣justly accusing Iob, How doth God know? canJob 22. 13. he judge through the dark Cloud? Or else with the Braves in the Book of Wisdom; Let us lyeWisd. 2: 12. & 18. in wait for the righteous man. If he is the Son of God, He will help him, and deliver him from the hand of his Enemies. Besides, the Do∣ctrine we have in hand does seem to clash with those Scriptures, wherein God is said to Rule in the Kingdoms of men. He giveth it (saith Daniel) to whomsoever he pleaseth, andDan. 4. 17. setteth up over it the basest of men. And Christ is said to be the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1. 5. How then comes the Devil to have the very same Titles bestowed upon him?
§ 11. To this Objection I answer, andAnswer'd. to the later part first, as being That that ad∣mitteth of most Dispatch. What God and Christ are call'd properly, in regard of their Natural and Soveraign Right, The Devil is tropically Intitl'd, and by an usual Catachresis, in regard of That Possession which God per∣mitteth him to usurp. The Vineyard which was Ahab's, was Naboth's too; de facto That, and de jure This. (That is,) the one was pos∣sess't of what the other had a right to. So when we speak of Laban's Teraphims, we mean the Teraphims belonging of right to Laban. But when we call them Rebecca's Teraphims, we mean the Teraphims which she hid, and had stoln from Laban. The Kings of Spain are call'd by Thousands, Kings of Portugal; The Kings of France, of Navarr; the Kings of England, of France; All pretending to have a Right, where others have gotten the whole Possession. But now with a greater force of reason may the Devil be call'd the Ruler, and the God of this world; not only because the world does (for the greatest part) adore him, and do him service, but because they do it too by His forbearance
and permission, whose Creatures they are, and whose right It is; and who, in respect of his Omnipotence, cannot possibly be resisted. For (that I may pass from the later to the former part of the Objection:) § 12. So far is God from forsaking or slighting the Government of the World, that (as I said once before, but did not so prove it as now I must,) Satan himself is but his Pris'ner, however his Prison is somewhat wide. Not at all his Vicegerent, to rule the World in his stead, or with any degree of his Approbation. In the Twentieth Chapter of the Apocalypse, we find the Devil laidRev. 20. 2, 3. hold on, and bound in a Chain, and cast into a Pit, shut up and seal'd for a thousand years, and again let loose for a little season. And what is all This, but the Hypotyposis of a Pris'ner? And though his Chain, for a time, is left by God very long (as I said before) yet all the while 'tis but a Chain, yea and such a Chain too, as is not loose, any more than endless. We know the Sea is God's Pris'∣ner, though not a very close Pris'ner, as o∣thers are. The Wind it self is not at Liberty, however we cannot discern its Bounds. It
seems indeed to be the freest of all God's Pris'ners; And therefore God is said to ride upon the wings of the Wind, by the high flownPsal. 18. 10. & 104. 3. Wit of the Royal Poet. Yet, as He said unto the Sea, Thus far, and no farther, shallJob 38. 10. thy proud Waves go; so he checks the very Wind too, as with a Bridle, and saith unto it, Peace,Mark 4. 39. be still. Now we find that when our Savi∣our was but pleas'd to say the word, not the Wind, and Sea only, but the Devils also o∣bey'd him. When he bid them come out of the poor Daemoniack, They durst not stay (or they could not) one minute longer. Yea they were forced to petition him, and ask his leave, before they could enter an Herd of Swine. It was indeed a great power which Satan had over Iob, as I shew'd before; but I shew'd too how it was limited. First to his Goods, with an exemption of his Body; and then at last to his Body, with an exemption of his Soul. It was indeed a great power which Satan had over the Christians in the purest Ages of Christianity, for no less than Three hundred and thirty years, inflicting Ten Persecutions, from Christ to Constantine the Great. And another great power during the Arian Perse∣cution,
under the Tyranny of Constantius. Another great power, although a short one, in Iulian's Time. Another in the Time of the Emperour Valens. Another more uni∣versal, in the fifth Century after Christ, when (at the very same Instant) Anastasius the Em∣perour was an Eutychian; the Kings of Italy, Spain, and Africa, Arians; The Kings of England, France, and Germany, Heathens. A greater power than all these the Devil seem∣eth to have had in the Tenth Century after Christ, when Hell is said to have broken loose, and the Prosperity of the Church did much more threaten her utter Ruin, than all her Persecutions, when put together. Yet all this while it was a limited, and stinted pow∣er. Christianity thriv'd under its Sufferings, and had a Being (though a poor one) in the Excesses of its Injoyments. The Gates of Hell did not Then so fully prevail against the Church, as not to confess it to be a Truth, That she was founded upon a Rock. What our Lord said to Pilate, Thou couldst have no pow∣er against me, were it not given thee from above,John 19. 11. we (with a little alteration) may say as pro∣perly to the Devil, and religiously defy him
to do his worst. Or we may say in some sense upon this occasion, (as St. Paul to the Romans upon another,) There is no power butRom. 13. 1. of God. God ordaining it, if it is right; or God permitting it, if it is wrong. Here then lyes our Comfort, as Men, and Christians, that the Devil can no longer continue power∣ful, than God is pleas'd to be patient of him. The roaring Lyon can no more hurt us, with∣out God's leave, than the hungry Lyons could hurt Daniel, or than hunger it self could hurt Elias, or than the burning fiery Furnace couldDan. 3. 27. hurt the Three Loyal Iews who were cast into it. Nay upon such as serve God, the secondRev. 20. 6. Death has no power; which yet is known to be so strong, as to have power over the Devil. For the time will one day come, when God will tye him up close in his Chains of Darkness, and will not suffer him any longer to dispose of any thing in the World, (much less of the Kingdoms, and Glories of it,) But will sink him into the Depth (for I cannot say the Bottom) of the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone. Nay though the Devil was so impudent, as to tempt our blessed Lord to the committing of Idolatry, yet in saying
[All things are delivered to me] he was seem∣inglyLuke 4. 16. so modest, (or else so weak,) as to con∣fess that he has nothing; which he has not recei∣ved; And that as great as he is, he has one above him; one to whom he is a Pris'ner; one who, as he can freely give, so he can easily take away too; one who does suffer but for a time, what he will certainly revenge un∣to all Eternity. In a word he does confess, that all he has to dispose of is but derivative, and precarious. 'Tis at the most but , (if his own word were to be taken,) deliver'd to him by his Iudge, the proper Owner of all the World, to whom at last he is to render a sad and terrible Ac∣compt. § 13. Thus we see the Devil's words (Luke 4. 6.) have but a little Truth mixt with a world of Falshood. Nothing is True in them but This, That God does suffer or permit him to be many times liberal to such as serve him. But now with This little Truth which is but sufficiently imply'd, we have Three or Four Falshoods which are sufficient∣ly express'd. For first 'tis false what he saith, (if it be literally taken,) That the Things of
this World are Deliver'd to him. For not to hinder or to permit, or to suffer him to take and dispose of Things, is very much less than to deliver, or put them to him to dis∣pose of; even as much as to be passive, must needs be less than to be active, in whatsoever thing it is which is brought to pass. 'Tis true, the Devil was permitted to Matth. 4. 5, 8. take our Saviour, not only once, but again; and to carry him whither he pleas'd too; as first in∣to The City, and after That unto The Moun∣tain. But 'tis false to say, our Saviour was deliver'd up to Satan by God the Father. Next 'tis but figuratively true, and therefore literally false, That he gives the World's King∣doms to such as serve him. For being no more than an Usurper, and therefore void of all right, he is not properly said to Give, but ra∣ther to procure them to all Usurpers. Third∣ly 'tis false that he procures them to whomsoe∣ver he pleaseth, (which yet he confidently adds,) for he procures them no farther, than God sees good to permit, or suffer. Last of all he saith falsly, That ALL the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them are so much as permitted to his Disposal, (if he
means all at once.) For God disposeth of many Kingdoms, wherein he suffers not the Devil to have the least thing to do. 'Twas God alone who gave his People the Land of Canaan, although the Devil took it from Them, and helpt to procure it for the As∣syrians. 'Twas God alone who gave Iob his store of Cattle, although the Devil prompted his Labourers, (the Chaldaeans and Sabaeans,) to take them from him. 'Twas God alone who gave Naboth a pleasant Vineyard, al∣though the Devil (by God's permission) helpt Ahab to it. 'Twas God alone who gave a Kingdom, (or rather Three Kingdoms which made a World,) together with all the Glory of it, to our late Martyr'd Soveraign of Glori∣ous Memory, although the Devil was per∣mitted (by the help of his Tools) to bereave him of it. In a word, if it is true, what is proverbially asserted, (and upon very good Grounds,) That half the World, at the least, does live by cheating all the rest, and by imposing on one another; Then is it easy to discern and to state the Difference, betwixt the Right, and the Possession of things on Earth; betwixt the Blessings, and the Curses
convey'd to men by their Prosperities; be∣twixt the Instruments, or Bounties, of God, and Satan. § 14. Having hitherto shew'd the TruthSome Reasons offer'd. of my Proposition, and withal clear'd it from the Objection; I am next to give the Reasons, (at least as many as I can think of, or can fairly conjecture at,) why God is pleas'd, in this World, to indure with so much patience so great a confusion upon the Earth, and leaves to the Devil so great a power in the perverting and debauching the ways of men. For whilst we look at nothing else but what is present, and before us, we seem to see nothing but Disorder, in most Events under the Sun. If none but good men did prosper, and none but evil men miscarry, A method then would be acknowledg'd, and men would probably be better than now they are. Of if all that are good were in Affliction, and all that are evil in Prosperity, still there would be some method, however men in pro∣bability would be very much the worse for the knowledge of it. But as now the world goes, There seems to be no method at all. Things fall out in such a blended promiscu∣ous
manner. For though the wicked are found to prosper a great deal more than the righteous, (as has been shew'd,) yet 'tis as clear that many righteous do also prosper with the wicked, and many wicked ones, even here, are as much afflicted as the righ∣teous. In which respect it was said by the Royal Preacher, That all things come alikeEccles. 9. 2, 3, 11. to all. There is one event to the wicked, and to the righteous; to the clean, and to the un∣clean, to him that sacrificeth, and him that sa∣crificeth not. As is the good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an Oath. The Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, neither Bread to the Wise, nor Riches to men of Understanding, nor yet Favour to men of Skill, but Time and Chance happeneth to them all. In so much that some are tempt∣ed by the seeming Confusion of Events, the Prosperities of the worst men, and the Calami∣ties of the Best, to distrust the very Provi∣dence, yea to suspect the very Iustice, yea to deny the very Being of God Himself. They think they, are born at all adventure, and that they shall dye as they are born. That their spirits shall vanish into the Air, and be as if theyWisd. 2. 23. had never been.
§ 15. Now to preserve our selves from falling into the very same Snare, let us reflect upon the Reasons of this Confusion, at which so many are falling headlong into the bot∣tomless Abyss of Eternal Misery. Not in∣sisting upon the Reasons in such a measure as they deserve, But rather pointing at the chief Topicks from which the Reasons are to be fetch't. One chief Reason is to be taken from the natural Freedom of the Will, in e∣very rational Agent which is subjected to a Law, and by consequence made worthy ei∣ther of Punishment or Reward. God's way of working upon the Will is exactly suitable to its Nature, and therefore agreeable to its Freedom; tending to rectifie, but not destroy it; and by consequence to incline, but not compell it. Were All the workings of the Almighty in full proportion to his Almighti∣ness, and therefore always, on all occasions, as irresistible, as they are Good, I cannot see how it were possible for any Creature to do amiss; or how an Action could be other∣wise, than God would have it. Nor can I see how 'twould be possible to give a tolera∣ble reason, why several men at the same time,
and the same men at several times, are either better, or worse, than Themselves, or others. Why Iohn was better than Iudas, or Paul better than Himself. Better (I mean) when he asserted, than when he persecuted the Church. It follows therefore that the man∣ner of God's Impression upon the Will can∣not be cogent, and irresistible, but so congru∣ous rather and suitable, as still to let it re∣main a Will. And therefore he works upon it otherwise, than he works upon irrational and sensless Creatures; to wit by Promises, and Threats, by Exhortations, and Praecepts, and these in conjunction with a competent measure of his Grace; which Agents natural, and involuntary (such as Vegetables, and Brutes,) are not susceptible of. Now God determin'd from all Eternity not to hinder from being done, what he eternally foreknew the congruous means I now mention'd would not prevail with wilful Creatures, so as to hinder them from doing. For why should He by his Omnipotence controul the Wills of those Creatures, whom both his Promises, and his Threats, his Miracles, and his Laws, and a competent measure of his Grace, have been
so thanklesly and vainly bestow'd upon? When he cannot restrain our Wills by means agreeable to our Natures, or by any lesser means than what are destructive to our Wills, and by consequence to our Natures, (which he eternally determined he would not violate,) How very justly must he needs suffer the worst of Actions, which withal he does direct to the best of Ends? § 16. Another Reason is to be taken from the corrigible Condition of some Evil Doers, whom God is pleased to bless and prosper with many Temporal Injoyments, thereby to mollifie, and indear, and as it were over∣come them with so much kindness. A great deal of Love and Longanimity will be e∣nough to melt the Heart of the hardest Ene∣my, if there is any Wax left in his Compo∣sition; if there is any good nature abiding in him. And such was the Method touching which St. Paul speaks in his Epistle to the Romans; Despisest thou the Riches of his Good∣ness and Forbearance and Long-suffering, not knowing that the Goodness of God leadeth thee to Repentance? When God is pleas'd to plantIsa. 5. 2, 4. his Vineyard upon a very fruitful Hill, to
make a strong fence about it, to gather out the stones, to build a Tower in the midst, and to make a Wine-press, what can he mean but to ingage it, to yield him Grapes in proportion to all his Culture? And he appeals to the Inhabitants of Ierusalem and Iudah, whether more could be done than he had done unto his Vineyard, what could he signifie but his Indeavours, to overcome evil with doing good? Thus God draws near to us in Mercies, that we may also draw near to Him, in the Amend∣ment of our Lives and our Conversations. § 17. A Third Reason is to be taken from the Incorrigible Condition of another sort of Evil Doers, whom God is pleas'd to give over, as Physicians use to do their de∣sperate Patients. They being a sort of Peo∣ple, who are in love with their Diseases, and cannot indure to be reform'd, and therefore kick at the means of Cure. God leaves such as these to their own Hearts Lust, and lets them wallow (like so many Swine) in the Mire of Temporal Felicities. For as Those very Swine are ever suffer'd to fare the best, that is, to injoy the richest feeding, which are most of all designed for Sale and Slaughter; so
God indures with much long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath, to wax fat with all their Contentments and Sensualities, because by such their Injoyments they fit themselves for Destruction. To allow them the benefit of his Rod, were to deal with them as Sons; which why should he do, whilst they only deal with him as rebellious Servants? Suppose our Sheep and our Oxen were able to reason amongst themselves, and understood the re∣al End for which they are turn'd into their Pastures, would they not macerate their Bo∣dies, and bring their Flesh into Subjection, by a great deal of Fasting and Self-denial, and be afraid of faring well, at least in this consideration, that the fatter they grow, they grow the fitter for the Shambles, and that the leaner they are, they are suffer'd to live so much the longer? Much the same is Their Case, who defile themselves as brute Beasts, (to use the Comparison of St. Iude.) A Comparison not odious, because 'tis made by the Holy Ghost: who saith of Them that are permitted to live and prosper in their Im∣pieties, That they are Rom. 9. 22. fitted for Destruction; and prepar'd, like Jer. 12. 3. Sheep, for the day of
slaughter. Like Sheep the rather, because as void of understanding, (in respect of those things which must be spiritually discern'd,) as little mov'd as any Sheep with the Sense of Duty, and as far from considering their la∣ter end. The terriblest Speeches in all the Scriptures are such as These; Let him thatRev. 22. 11. will be filthy be filthy still. Ye shall not beEzek. 24. 13. purged from your filthiness any more. Make the Heart of this People fat, and their Ears heavy,Isa. 6. 10. and shut up their Eyes, left they convert and be healed. Why should ye be smitten any more?Chap. 1. vers. 5. ye will revolt more and more. Why should I cast away my kindness in Chastising you a∣ny longer, when ye still grow the worse by all that is done to make you better? In vain have I smitten your Children; they have recei∣vedJer. 2. 30. no Correction. From all which Scrip∣tures we may infer, That God is never so angry, as when he leaves the Reins loose up∣on the Neck of a Brutish People. When he lets them grow wealthy to their undoing, and ruin themselves with their Injoyments. When he permits them to be as happy as the Devil himself would have them; to have as much of this World, as the Serpent is able to
tempt them with. What Solomon saith of a Temporal Father, [He that spareth his Rod, hateth his Child,] is often true of the Eter∣nal; who intends to disinherit those Incor∣rigible Children, whom he does not in mer∣cy vouchsafe to strike. And in consequence of This, § 18. A Fourth Reason is to be taken from the obligingness of the Severity of the Heavenly Father towards his Children, whom he disciplines in This World, that he may not condemn them in the Next. For whom heHeb. 12. 6, 7, 8. loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every Son whom he receiveth. We have had Fathers of our Flesh who corrected us, and we gave them Reverence, (saith the same Holy Author ofVerse 9, & 10. the Epistle to the Hebrews,) though they cha∣stised us for their pleasure. Whereas the Fa∣ther of Spirits does only chastise us for our profit: And for our profit many ways; To wit for the exercise of our Faith; for the proof of our Patience; for the Improve∣ment of our Humility; for the begetting in all our Hearts both a Contempt of This World, and a Desire of That to come; for the convincing us of his Iustice, which is so
far from partiality, that he does hate and punish Sin where e're he finds it, as well in his Friends, as in his Enemies. As he causeth the Sun to shine, so he lays his Rod too, both on the just and the unjust. For even they that are poenitent do feel its smart for a Time And They that abide in their Impoenitence, shall feel it infinitely more to all Eternity Again▪ He chastiseth us for our Profit, be∣cause for the hight'ning of our Reward; per∣haps in This present life; perhaps in That which is to come; perhaps in This and That too. And of This we have Iob for a new Example. For had not He been more Af∣flicted, as well as more Righteous than other men, He had not been so Proverbial, as now he is, as well for his Patience, as his Integrity. In the first Chapter of Iob, God permitted the Devil to take all from him. But in the last Chapter of Iob, God gave him twice asJob 42. 10. much as he had before. Nay the Almighty had so mollified the Marble-hearts of his Ac∣quaintance, that every man gave him a piece of money, and every one an ear-ring of Gold. His later end (saith the Text) was more blessedVers. 11. 12. 13. 15. than his beginning. He regain'd his seven
Sons, and his Daughters were the fairest amongst the Children of men. Yea that nothing might be wanting to make him amends for his Adversity, He liv'd and prosper'd after This, no less than an hundred and forty years;Vers. 16. seeing his Sons, and Son's Sons, even to four Ge∣nerations. Such was his Reward in the pre∣sent life. But infinitely more in the life to come. Such as none can conceive, much less describe, but He who is himself as Infinite, as That Reward is Inexpressible. To sum up all in a word, (and in the word of the same Apostle,) God corrects us for our profit, to make us partakers with him in Holiness, and that to no lesser end, than to make us also sharers with Him in Heaven. § 19. The very mention of which does prompt me to give a fifth and last Reason. A Reason to be fetch't from the Life after Death, and the Day of Iudgment: Without which Topick, all the rest are worth no∣thing; and were there no other than This, it would be equal to a Thousand. If in this life only we had hope, we should be (saith St. Paul) of all men the most miserable. From whence I gather, That having an Hope in the
life to come, we are of All sorts of men by much the happiest. The Psalmist sweetned all his Sorrows with this single Consideration, That the Rod of the wicked shall not evermore rest upon the Back of the Righteous. For verily (saith He) there is a Reward for the Righte∣ous, doubtless there is a God that judgeth the Earth. The Devils may very well be said to believe and tremble. For they do tacit∣ly acknowledge, by that their Question put to Christ, [Art thou come to torment us before the Time?] That however they are permitted their time of Pleasure, yet they tremblingly expect their time of pain too. Whatsoever things are taken from Good men here, St. Peter tells us, There is a Time of Restitution.Acts 3. 21. Whatsoever Good men do suffer here in the Body, the Prophet Hosea puts our thoughtsHos. 9. 7. upon Days of Recompence. Isaiah calls it TheIsa. 34. 8. year of Recompence, and the Day of the Lord's Vengeance. How could Moses have preferred the Reproach of Christ, as much greater Riches than the Treasures in Egypt, if he had not had respect unto the Recompence of Reward? HowHeb. 11. 26. could David himself have been kept fromPsal. fainting, if he had not thus expected to see the
Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living? Wherefore lift up the hands that hang down,Heb. 12. 12, 13. and the feeble knees. In every shock of Temp∣tation from suffering wrongs, let us take up the words of the Prophet Ieremy for our sup∣port;Jer. 51. 56. The Lord God of Recompences shall sure∣ly requite. Words most worthy of our daily, if not of hourly Consideration, that we may not faint in well-doing, or in suffer∣ing: for doing well. It is indeed a great Temptation, and apt to make ones feet slip▪ to see the Possessions of the World in the De∣vil's Power and Disposal. But our Remedy is at hand, if we shall constantly bear in mind the other part of my Proposition, That 'tis All by God's Patience and wise Permission; And that there will a Day come, when God will make up his Iewels, putting a very signalMal. 3. 17, 18. difference between the wicked and the righteous; between the men that serve God, and Them that persecute their Brethren for having serv'd him. Here the Tares and the Wheat grow up together till the Harvest: yea the Tares do o∣vergrow and bear down the Wheat; and ma∣ny times do choak it up too. That grand Leviathan, the Devil, is suffer'd here even to
swim in the Tears of the Righteous; to bathe himself in That Brine; and many times in their very Blood too. But 'tis a Corrosive to the former, no less than a Cordial to the later, That God is said to have a Book of Re∣membrance;Mal. 3. 16. That the Devourers of the Righ∣teousHabak. 1. 13. are established for Iudgment. And that they who wax fat with the Spoils of Inno∣cence,Jer. 12. 4. are prepar'd like Sheep for the day of slaughter. And that He who at present goeth onPsal. 126. 7. his way weeping, whilst he beareth forth good Seed, shall doubtless come again with Ioy, and bring his Sheafs with him. And that in dueGal. 6. 9. time we shall reap, if we faint not. Add we to this our due Reflexions, on the Pati∣ence of Iob, and the Afflictions of Ioseph. Take we the Prophets for an Example; and HimJames 5. 11. expecially who indured such Contradictions ofHeb. 12. 3. Sinners against himself, lest we be wearied and faint in our minds. I say, let us but read such parts of Scripture, and but remember what we read, and but believe what we re∣member, And then we shall not be in danger to fret our selves at the ungodly, or to be en∣vious against the Evil doers. § 20. But now, besides these several Rea∣sons
of the seeming Disorder and Confusi∣on in the promiscuous Distribution of all Possessions under the Sun, There may be o∣ther Reasons given by considering men, and there are doubtless many others which are known to God only: and which cannot be better collected than from the Example of our Saviour, on whom the Devil and his In∣struments were permitted to have so great a Power. We know they put him to a pain∣ful and shameful Death. And why were they suffer'd by God to do it? Even for quite other reasons than They were able to con∣ceive, and for contrary ends to what They were led by: To wit, the Satisfying his Iustice; the Exhibition of his Mercy; the Declaration of his Wisdom; the Manifestation of his Ho∣liness; the Illustration of his Power; the Ex∣altation of his Glory; And (as worthily sub∣ordinate to each of These,) the Reformation and the Safety of all our Souls. All which if we compare with the five Reasons going be∣fore, we shall not wonder at the Truth of This Proposition, That all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, (at least successively, though not at once,) are by God's
Patience, and wise Permission, in the Devil's Power and Disposal. § 21. After the Truth, and the Reason,The Applicati∣on. let us observe the special Uses which may be made of his Doctrin. First it teacheth us how to value the beggarly Greatness of this World. Over-value it we may, and very commonly we do too; but undervalue it we cannot, do what we can. For what more despicable than That, which the Devil can both procure, and deprive us of? What more worthy of our Contempt, than what is so un∣dervalued by Him that made it, as by Him to be often left in the Devil's Power and Dis∣posal? The Devil can give us great Posses∣sions, just as he gave them to the Chaldae∣ans; And can take them away, as he did from Iob. For both which reasons we ought to scorn them, and to behave our selves towards them as things below us; fit for nothing but to be matter, whereby to exercise a Bounty to such as want them. First (I say) 'tis a disparagement to the Wealth and Glory of the World, that they are left so much by God in the Devil's Power,
that Satan is suffer'd to bestow them on such as serve him. For the Gifts of the De∣vil are never Good, nor consistent with Good∣ness in such as have them. They are disho∣nourable, and dangerous, and Hostages gi∣ven to Destruction. The Devil can give Riches, (in the sense before mention'd,) but not Contentment, and a right use, which are the ends for which we crave them. And for want of which ends, they increase our Po∣verty. For as, when the Body of man is Aguish, no Addition of Clothes can make him warm; So when the Soul of man is vitious, no Addition of Treasure can make him rich. The reason of which Paradox may thus be illustrated, and clear'd. We know that though the Clothes defend the Body from outward Cold, yet 'tis the Body's inward Heat which does warm the Clothes: For else a Coffin and a Coverlid would warm a man when he is dead. Which being evidently impossible, 'Tis plain that the Body must warm the Clothes, before the Clothes can warm the Body. And thence a Child is much warmer in a very thin Suit, than his old decrepit Father when wrapt about with
a Wardrope. In like manner 'tis the Soul which makes the Possession become sufficient, not at all the Possession which gives content∣ment unto the Soul. And as the way where∣by to cure the cold Access of an Ague, is to cleanse the Body from peccant humours, not to bring it to a great Fire; so the way to be happy as well as full, is to purge an over pas∣sionate and sickly Soul, not to rake up a great Estate. There are indeed who have Abundance in conjunction with Satisfaction; But 'tis clear their Satisfaction does not arise from That Abundance. For if Content∣ment could grow from Plenty, The Man of Macedon had been satisfied in his Acquist of all Asia; and had not wept for another World. Nor would They who at first do take up Arms for meer Liberty▪ continue the keeping of them up for meer Dominion, (when they have got their own Liberty, they would not take it from other men.) From whence it fol∣lows, That no man living is contented, meer∣ly because he has enough, But that many men have enough, meerly because they are con∣tented. And as a man in a Boat, when he would pull the Bank to him, finds it impos∣sible
for him to do it, but by pulling Him∣self upon the Bank; so the only way possible to fit our Condition to our minds, is by bringing our minds to our Condition. For if a man shall inlarge his Desires as Hell, and is as greedy as the Grave, All the Possessions in the World will not fill one of his Eyes. 'Twas very shrewdly said by Socrates to Ar∣chelaus,Socrat. Epist. 1. p. 6. That the Cities of Greece were found to prosper, which asked Counsel of the De∣vil (in his Oracle at Delphi,) whilst Those that did not, were still afflicted. But though mad men and fools inferr'd the Devil (from That Success) to be the only true God, yet wise men knew him to be no better, than the most bountiful kind of Cheat, and that he made men to prosper to their undoing. .Id. Epist. 6. p. 19. Socrates challenged all Histo∣rians from the beginning of the World to the day he writ in, to name a man who had been the better for any Possessions of Sa∣tan's giving. Meaning that none had pro∣fited by them in the Day of their Prosperity; And so little can they profit in the Great Day of Wrath, (as the Wise man calls it) that
then they disprofit in extremity, because they purchase for their Owners a place in Hell. So little reason have we to boast, that we abound in those things, which the Devil (by God's Sufferance) can help us to, who neither can nor will help us, to use them wisely to our Advantage. Much less reason have we to boast, in what the Devil can take away too; in being Te∣nants at Will to so vile a Landlord. There is nothing more usual with the Prince of this World, than to set Pilate against Herod, as well as Both against Christ. He employs one Robber in offering violence to another. And who would care for those Riches which on∣ly make him the Devil's Sumpter? Can we think it a noble thing, to be laden with thick Clay at the Devil's Pleasure, and again unla∣den at his Command? To have Wealth be∣stow'd on us by our Complyance with the Tempter, and taken from us by other men's? 'Twas wisely done of Aristippus, the learn∣edSocrat. Epist. 27. p. 58. Stoick, when he commanded his Daugh∣ter Areta, to give her Son Wisdom for his Patrimony, in stead of Wealth; because the Tyrants of Cyrene could never plunder him
of his Philosophy, That Inaccessible Treasure which was within him; who yet would be the sole Masters of all his Wealth, those obnoxi∣ous Possessions which were without him▪ Which Advice of Aristippus was much like That of our Lord himself, Lay not up for your selves Treasure on Earth, where Plunder∣ers and Thieves break through and steal. From whence 'tis obvious to collect, that we are not so much obliged to Them who give us our Estates, as to Them who do teach us to use them safely. The Devil and his Agents, are often permitted to do the former; But God alone, and his Embassa∣dours, will oblige us so far as to do the later. § 22. Secondly let us consider, That since we find God Himself bestowing Riches upon some, as upon Abraham, and Iob, or whosoever has a right to the several things which he possesseth; whilst the Devil gives to others, (by God's Permission) as to the Sabaeans, and the Chaldaeans, who plunder'd Iob of his Substance; to Achan, and Ahab, or whosoever has Possession without a right; It concerns us to examin the exact Derivati∣on of our Estates; and to have it well stated,
whether we receive them from God, or Sa∣tan. For if honestly acquir'd, and so from God, (by his Appointment, and Approbati∣on,) Then we may honestly injoy them, to the Glory of God, and our private Comfort. Always bearing This in mind, That we are but God's Almoners, or Usufructuaries; and must dispense to His Members who is Pro∣prietary in chief. But if dishonestly attain'd to, and so from Satan, (by God's permission only, and sufferance,) we cannot honestly possess, much less injoy them, and therefore ought to do neither to God's Dishonour, and our Damnation. But as our Saviour hath said of the Eye, and Hand, That if at any time they offend us, we must pluck out the one, and cut off the other; so must we say of our Possessions, That if they offend us in the like sense, by making us stumble into Sin, we must pluck them out of our Treasury, (like the Emperour Sigismund,) and (like Him too) cast them from us; because 'tis bet∣ter for us to enter as Poor as Lazarus into Heaven, than remaining Rich as Dives, to be cast into Hell. Always keeping This in memory, That Ill-gotten Goods may pur∣chase
matter for Repentance, But Repentance it self they can never purchase. § 23. Thirdly let us consider, That if the Devil himself is suffer'd to have more of This world at his Devotion and Disposal, than The Great Cham, or the Great Mogul, or whosoever of earthly Potentates is wor∣thily thought to be the Greatest; Then are our Shares of this world the things the most to be suspected, and of which we should least be proud. Nor should we rashly take it for granted, that they are evermore the Bles∣sings and Gifts of God, because we learn by sad Experience, that they are many times the Curses and Snares of Satan. If to have Riches in Possession were still a sign of God's Favour; This great Absurdity would follow, That the Devil himself would be God's chief Favorite. The Apostle's Rule is, That whomHeb. 12. he loveth he chasteneth; not that whom he loveth, he maketh Rich. That He scourgeth every Son whom he receiveth; not that eve∣ry one whom he receiveth, he makes to wallow in Prosperity. And 'twas a thing so very rare, when Times were better than now they are, to see the same man both Good and Prosperous,
That men did scandalously complain in the Days of Malachi, It is vain to serve God;Mal. 3. 14, 15. And what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances? and that we have walked mourn∣fully before the Lord of Hosts? when the Proud are happy, and the Workers of wickedness are set up? Nor was it otherwise in the Days of the Prophet Ieremy; They are waxen fat,Jer. 5. 28. they shine, They overpass the Deeds of the wick∣ed; They judge not the Cause of the Fatherless, yet They prosper. See and consider how the Devil inrich't and prosper'd those Idolaters, whom he made to burn Incense unto the Moon,Jer. 44. 17, 18, 19. which they commonly then called The Queen of Heaven, in the Four and fourtieth Chap∣ter of Ieremy. Whilst they committed That Idol-worship, [Their women lying with strange men in their Husbands Presence, v. 19.] All was well with them, they saw no evil. But when they ceased from that Idolatry, they were consumed with Sword and Famin, (v. 18.) Whence we see the great Folly of those mens reasonings, who reckon Prosperity as a mark of the best Religion, and Adversity of the worst. Inferring Herod and Pontius Pilate to be more the Favorites of God, than
the Innocent Iesus whom they slew, and hanged on a Tree. For the former still liv'd in Peace, and Plenty, in Ease, and Honour; whereas the later was Vir Dolorum, a Man whose life was full of Sorrows. Let not any man therefore say, (in pretence of Gratitude,) when he hath gotten an Estate by Fraud or Violence, [I thank God for it, I have a com∣petent Fortune; These are the Blessings of the Lord upon my Labours; or God hath given these things unto me;] for what is this but a fair∣spoken Blasphemy, intitling God to the Inju∣stice, by which a man is made Rich? Where∣as to ascribe it to the Devil, and his own heart's Lust, is to lay the ugly Brat at its Fa∣ther's Door; And to justifie God, whilst he dishonours and disobeys him. We must ac∣cordingly distinguish between the things that we possess, by distinguishing the Means whereby we have them, and proportiona∣bly resolve on our usage of them. What is honestly come by, and we can prove so to be, we must not fail to be thankful for, and may injoy them as well with Gladness, as with Singleness of Heart. But for our ill-gotten Goods, (the Gifts of Satan, and not of God,)
we must part with them as greedily into their true Master's Hands, as ever we got them into our own. § 24. Last of all let us consider, That if the Things of this world (commonly call'd the Goods of Fortune,) are often suffered by God to be in the power of the Devil, and often given by the Devil to such as serve him; And if Both must give accompt at the Day of Judgment, for whatsoever is so gi∣ven, and so receiv'd; we learn from hence not to repine at the Prosperities of the wick∣ed,. Plotin. Enn. 1. l. 4. p. 38. but together with their ways, to have respect unto their End. For why should any man be envied for being the Favorite of Hell? for accepting that Proffer which here the Devil made our Saviour, (upon condition of Idolatry,) and which, for that very reason, our Saviour rejected with great Disdain? Again we learn not to be sorry as men without hope, when we find it goes worst with the best of men. It being enough to reconcile the greatest Prosperity of the Unjust, and the greatest Adversity of the Righteous, both with the Mercy and the Iu∣stice of God Almighty, That the Lord of the
Harvest, when the Harvest-Time is come, will gather the Wheat into his Garner, and burn up the Chaff with Fire unquenchable. If the Flesh asks the Quaestion, Why does the way of the wicked prosper? Why are they happy who deal treacherously? Why has the Devil so great a Power upon Earth? Why does the wicked devour the man who is more righteous than He? Let the Spirit make Answer in the2 Cor. 4. 17. words of the Apostle, That this light Affli∣ction which is but for a moment, worketh for us (afterwards) a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Whensoever we are tempt∣ed by either effect of the Devil's Power, (be it Prosperity, or Affliction,) let us look up un∣to our Saviour upon the Top of two Moun∣tains; to wit the Mountain we are upon, where he was tempted by the Devil, with all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them; And the famous Mount Calvary, whereon he was tempted by the Devil, with all the Torments in the Earth, and Dis∣graces of them. Thence we may see the perfect Purity of that Immaculate Lamb, who rather would suffer Those Torments, than accept That Offer. He had refus'd so ma∣ny
Kingdoms, but would not refuse to re∣ceive a Cross: Refus'd the Glory of the world, but not The Shame too. He had refus'd long before to be made a King, But would not afterwards refuse to be vex't and disgrac'd with a Crown of Thorns. The meanest things in this world he would by no means despise, But he despis'd the Pomps and Vanities, which ordinarily pass for the Greatness of it. And therefore as often as the Devil shall use his Power against us, as here he did against Christ, let us relieve our selves with the me∣mory of This one Thing, That the Servant is not above his Lord. And that we are foo∣lishly unreasonable, if we expect to fare better than an Innocent Iesus, in the midst of our manifold and hainous Guilts. And that as He, so we too, may easily suffer ma∣ny things, by duly weighing how they dispose us for an Entrance into his Glory. § 25. Now having evidenced the Truth of my second Doctrin, (with greater care of Perspicuity, than of not being tedious,) both from Scripture, from Reason, and from Experience; from Aphorisms of Scripture, and from Scriptural Examples; from Solita∣ry
Reason, and Reason grounded upon Scrip∣ture; from other mens Experience, and from our own; and all attested as well by Sacred, as by Secular Story; And having clear'd it yet farther by way of Answer to an Objection; offer'd also at the Causes of this seemingly-strange oeconomy in God's disposal of Affairs; and directed to the Lessons it ought to teach us; I think it Time to pass forwards to the Third Observable I propos'd; To wit, That the whole Scope and Drift of all the Do∣nativesThe third Pro∣position. of the Tempter, is to turn our A∣doration out of its true and proper Channel; to steal it from God, and to divert it upon Himself. He seldom or never Proffers, but with a Treacherous Proviso. He does it liberally indeed, [All these things will I give thee,] But with this covetous Re∣serve, [If thou wilt fall down and wor∣ship me.]. § 1. To demonstrate the Proposition with the greater Force and Perspicuity, I am to imitate those men, who go a step or two
back that they may leap so much the far∣ther. And premise two or three words con∣cerning the Bounty of God and Man, before I come to That of Satan. It was a very smart saying of Learned Philo . &c. p. 99. Philo, (and as true, as it was smart,) . God alone does give freely to all his Creatures, whilst all his Creatures to one another are no better at the best than In∣genuous Hucksters. The best of his Creatures under Heaven, which are confessedly Men and Women, yea the best of those best, which are the liberal and the munificent, when they do most seem to give, they do but seem so. For if they sell not their courtesies for Land, or Mony, yet commonly they sell. Idem u∣bi supra. them for praise, and honour, or at least for acknowledgments, and humble thanks; or if for nothing in the Earth, yet at least for the hope of being rewarded for them in Heaven. It is but a generous way of Trading, for one rich man to send Presents unto another, be∣cause there is commonly on the one side some expectation of Requital, arising from the knowledge of Wealth and Gratitude on the other. And this I take to be the reason, why
the most Covetous even of Worldlings will be liberal to a Person of Power, and Plenty; be∣cause they hope He will do them as good a Turn. Nor can it truly and properly be call'd a Gift, which is meant for a Decoy to some great Advantage, whether a step to Preferment in Times of Safety, or else a Bribe for Protection in Times of Danger. The very clearest of our Gifts are those we give to Men in want, and who for that very rea∣son are the least able to requite us; And yet even Those are a kind of Bargains. For whilst we make a fair shew of giving any thing to the Poor, the Scripture tells us that (in Rea∣lity) we are but* lending to the Lord. And far∣therProv. 19. 17. adds (for our Incouragement,) that what∣soever we thus impart, shall be repaid to us again. So true is that which I noted from learned Philo, That God alone is a perfect Giver, whilst the freest of Men are but liberal Hucksters. Our profusest favours to one another are but a Mercenary Munificence, as our largest Offer∣tories to God are but a Mercenary Devotion. § 2. Hereupon we are to argue à minori ad majus. If the best Mens Gifts are so Im∣perfect, what then are Satan's, who (be∣sides
that He has not a right to give,) does sell his Gifts for Mens Souls? Things so in∣finitely precious, that Christ Himself could not buy them, but with his Blood. When our Souls were to be purchas't from Sin and Hell, the Son of God being Incarnate could not have given enough for them, if He had not vouchsafed to give Himself. Now 'tis the Avarice of Satan, (and his Ambition at the same instant,) to buy our Souls back un∣to Sin and Misery, although he bids no more for them, than the pitiful Allectives of Wealth, and Greatness; The Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them. And well it were, if it were no worse. For, besides that he offers a great deal more than he can give, (he being ever God's Pris'ner, as hath been shewn,) the saddest part of it is, that however his biddings are on the Earth, his general Payments are still in Hell. All his Gifts do still flow from his Desire of such Gain. He reacheth his offers to us with one hand, that he may plunder us with the other. His liberality to us, is like the Fisherman's to the River; who in Case he does cast in a worthless Fly, 'tis that the
River may requite Him with some good Fish. When Satan offers us any favours, we must immediately consider he is but Ang∣ling after our Souls. He baits his Hook with worldly Greatness, that whilst we catch at the one, we may be caught with the other; and, like silly Fishes indeed, may greedily swallow our own Destruction. § 3. Thus the Things which we call the Gifts of Satan, we find by experience we do but call so. They are , Gifts and no Gifts. Munera inescata, Baits of Bounty. Such a Condition is interpos'd betwixt the Proffer, and the Performance, as makes the Donative far worse than Nothing. His Con∣dition does evacuate and null his Offer. For what he said unto our Saviour, (without a Proxy,) he saith (by his Instruments) to each of us, All these things will I give thee, if falling down thou wilt worship me. Which is as much as to say, all shall be thine with this Proviso, that thou wilt take a sure Course to be no whit the better, but much the worse for their Injoyment. Thou shalt be Rich at this present, if for the future thou wilt be ruin'd. Thou shalt have all the World at
will, but thou shalt have it upon Condition, that thou turn Idolater, and be damn'd. And what is this better than to say, I will give Thee very freely a great Estate, upon Condi∣tion thou wilt pay me a thousand times more than it is worth, and also make thy self inca∣pable of its Injoyment. I will shew thee the ready way, not to Liberty only, but Empire, upon Condition thou wilt serve me, and be a Slave. I will lift thee up, if thou wilt cast thy self down. Thus does the Devil speak Contradictions; And the Proviso with which he proffers does make the proffer of none ef∣fect. Like those Beasts in the Apologue, which offer'd the Lyon to be their King, if he would but permit them to cut his Claws. They would admit Him to Reign, and to triumph over them, if he would do them the favour to disable himself for the Prefer∣ment. Thus the Devil either presents us with empty Proffers rather than Gifts, with flattering Hopes, not true Possessions; or if He really indows us, he does it only to our undoing. If he helps us to Wit, 'tis that we may wickedly lay it out in speaking jest∣inglyMatth. 4. 9. of Scripture, and merrily drolling upon
Religion to make Men laugh. If he helps us to Beauty, it is to raise up Self-love; that we may use it, like wanton Iezebel, for a Snare, and a Temptation, and that to di∣vers most foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown the Soul in Misery and Perdition. If to Secular Greatness, it is to betray us to Self-Relyance; and break our Necks from that Ladder by which we mounted▪ If he helps us with Mony by any means, it is but just as old Gamesters do lend their cash to young Heirs, that they may lose it with them at play. Or as Harlots lend Mony unto their prodigal Gallants, that when they have spent it upon their Lusts, They with whom they have spent it, may Sue the Bond. Or as some supply Madmen with Knives and Halters, that either they may strangle, or stab themselves. How sweet soever the Gifts of Satan may seem to be at the beginning, yet their end and design∣ment is still as bitter as Destruction. When he carried up our Saviour unto a Pinnacle of the Temple, (an high Preferment,) v. 5. it was to this end, that he might cast himself head∣long, (v. 6.) When he took him up again unto a very high Mountain, (v. 8.) it was to this
end, that he might presently fall down, (v. 9.) Just as when an Eagle has found an Oyster, he takes it up into the Clouds, that he may give it by so much the greater fall, and that by breaking the Shell, he may eat the Fish. In a word, we may resemble the Gifts of Satan, to the monstrous Locusts from out the bottomless Pit; which thoughRev. 9. 2, 7, 8, 18. they had on their Heads (as it were) Crowns of Gold, and Faces like those of Men, and goodly Hair like that of Women, yet their Teeth all the while were as the Teeth of Ly∣ons, and the Stings in their Tails like those of Scorpions. § 4. Mark now the Lessons which ThisThe Applicati∣on. does teach us. First it teacheth us to be∣ware of the treacherous Bounty of all our Tempters, whether those Tempters are Men, or Devils. Whose very profusest Li∣berality is an effect of base Avarice; and who do therefore only give, because they covet. If the Men of the Sanedrim do offer Iudas aMatth. 26. 15. Sum of Mony, it is not out of any good∣will to Iudas, (for they that most love the Treason, do hate the Traitor,) but because they do covet the Blood of Christ. They
were not true and real Givers of their Thirty pieces of Silver, but only parted with them to Iudas to buy his Loyalty; that having once sold That, he might sell his Lord too. Again, after this, they gave largeMatth. 28. 12. mony unto the Souldiers, whom they had set on full purpose to watch the Sepulcher of Christ. Yet did they not do it in generosity, or with any design of the Soldiers good, but only brib'd them to tell a Lye: To wit thatVerse 18. whilst they were sleeping, Christ was stoln out of his Grave. Queen Iezebel (no doubt) did send a Present very considerable to the two Sons of Belial; but it does not thence fol∣low that she was liberally-minded; for she only meant to hire them to bear false witness, and thereby to requite her with Naboth's1 Kings 21. 18. Vineyard. So we know that Simon Magus was very free of his Mony, but 'twas to buy the famous Gift of the Holy Ghost; and thisActs 8. 18, 19, 20. to the end that he might sell it to whomso∣ever he should please. We must be there∣fore very wary, when any offers are made us by any Emissaries of Satan, both what is offer'd, and by whom, and to what Intent it is directed. We must beware of their offers,
who shall offer us That which is none of Theirs, (as the Devil here did,) and we must mark the Condition on which the offer is made. As whether it is not to ingage us in Schism, or Sacrilege; whether it is not to make us Partners in any Conspiracy, or Faction, that we may worship and fall down to something else besides God. Suppose a Man shall take thee up (whosoever thou art who now dost read what I am writing) unto some Pinnacle of the Temple, or some exceeding high Mountain, and shall discover to thee (from thence) some very excellent Seat which is none of his, to wit a noble Pile of Building, with a great deal of Land round about it, beautiful Gardens, and Fish-ponds, and as well wooded as thou canst wish, and shall say unto thee, as Satan here unto our Saviour, All this will I give thee; or thou shalt have it for a Song; (thou shalt not pay above half the value,) if thou wilt promise me to keep out the proper Owner. What wilt thou do in such a Case? If thou acceptest of the proffer, thou dost rebel against God, and worship Sa∣tan. For if thou dost but covet thy Neigh∣bour's Goods, (which is less than to seize
upon them,) thou transgressest God's Law; and in transgressing God's Law, thou keep∣est Satan's; And to keep Satan's Law, is to fall down to him, and worship him. And if thou wilt not do This, thou must refuse the man's Proffer, as Christ did Satan's; and that with the like indignation, express'd by an , Get thee behind me. Get thee behind me, as for other, so for this great Reason, because thou offerest to me That, which is none of Thine. We must carefully distinguish 'twixt Power, and Right. It may be much in thy Power, though more in Sa∣tan's. But neither Satan nor thy self can have a colour of Right to it. Wer't thou as liberal of thine own, as of another man's Goods, thou would'st have offer'd me the one at as cheap a Rate as the other. Some∣thing therefore there must be in it, that being a Great Lover of Wealth, thou yet canst part with it so easily. It plainly shews that thou tak'st it for none of Thine; for else thou hadst stood upon other Terms. And therefore , Get thee behind me. Which, as it ends the first Lesson we are to take from This Doctrin, so at the very
same instant it prompts us also to a second. And therefore § 5. Secondly let us consider, what kind of Recompence, or Return, we are to make unto the Devil for all his offers. What Da∣vid said in another case, to the end he might not be unthankful, [Quid retribuam, WhatPsal. 116. 12. shall I render unto the Lord for all his bene∣fits bestow'd upon me,] we are as well to say here, to the end we may not be unreveng'd; Quid retribuemus, What shall we render unto the Devil for all his mischievous Bounties be∣stow'd upon us? The fittest Requital we can make him, is to fling back his Favours into his Face; and to bespeak him in such a stile, as was used by St. Peter to Simon Magus, , Thy mony perish with thee.Acts 8. 20. When any Tempter shall make us dishonest Proffers, as Potiphar's Wife did once to Io∣seph, And shall press us to an Acceptance, as She did Him; we must repel such a Tempter, as He did Her; who knew she did but offer, what she had no right to give. And cer∣tainly all of that Nature we ought to look upon, as forbidden Fruit. For such God made it by the last Praecept in the Deca∣logue,
Non concupisces, Thou shalt not covet. And therefore as often as the Devil (by what Instrument soever,) shall frankly offer us a Portion of Wealth, or Greatness, which he may easily have a power, but not a right to bestow upon us, Let us rebuke him with such an Answer, as Ioseph made unto his Mistress. Or let us expostulate with our selves, as Mo∣sesDeut. 32. 6. did with the People Israel, Do we thus re∣quite the Lord, O foolish People, and unwise? Is not He our Father which bought us? Hath not he made us, and established us? Shall we kick at him like Iesurun, and quite forget theVers. 15. & 18. Rock out of which we were hewn? Or let us say with our Saviour, (whose words are writ for our learning,) , Get thee hence Satan. For it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve. Again it is written, Thou shalt not covet or desire thy Neighbour's Goods, much less, by Violence, or by Fraud, shalt thou take them into Possession. § 6. Again we learn from this Doctrin, to suspect our own Treasures, as well as to be spotless from other mens. For Satan tempts us to Idolize him, as well by making us abu∣sive
of what we have, as by making us co∣vetous of what we have not. Agur pray'd a∣gainstProv. 30. 8. Riches of God's own giving, not a∣gainst such alone as are given by Satan. For he did not say thus, Suffer not the Devil to give me Riches; But Give me not Riches, lest I be full and deny thee. Thereby intimating unto us, That Riches are Temptations, though never so honestly acquir'd. And however they are Blessings, as given by God; yet, con∣sider'd even as such, they are dangerous Bles∣sings; for by the artifice of Satan, and the suggestions of the Flesh, they may be easily perverted to God's Dishonour, and so prove matter of Execration. Indeed it is not our Fault, to be as rich as God made us. But to sacrifice our Thoughts, and to devote our Affections to what we have, is flatly and plain∣ly to Idolize it. To bestow the very Riches which God hath given us, upon our Coffers, by Avarice, or on our Pride, by Prodigality, (which is another kind of Avarice, to wit a coveting of Fame,) is neither better, nor worse, than to fall down to them, and worship them. All the wickedness in the World does seem to have enter'd at these Three Doors,
Beauty, Riches, and Reputation. The first of which does give Fodder to the Lust of the Flesh, as does the second to the Lust of the Eye, and the third to the Pride of Life. Now what Danger soever there is in Beauty▪ will be found to be in Riches, and Reputation. They are Idols all Three, very eminently great; But Riches, if either, are much the greatest. Te facimus Fortuna Deam, was said by the Poet . The Greatest For∣tunes have more Adorers, than the greatest Beauties in all the World. Besides that Those are the most constant, as well as the fondest, and the most passionate. And 'tis a rational Conjecture, that there is more sleep broken for love of Riches, in a year, than there is in many Ages, for love of Beauty. We may judge by one Sigismund how it fares with all worldlings. When the worldly man should sleep, he will be thinking upon his Treasure; But when he should pray, he will fall asleep. And which is likeliest to be his Deity? That God of Heaven, on whom he cannot think for sleeping, or That white and red Earth, for his thinking upon which he can seldom sleep? We see how Avarice is Ido∣latry,
and so a spiritual Fornication, and so an absolute Divorce of our Souls from God. Nor can the Sin of Prodigality be one whit less, as being a Sacrifice to the Lust of the Flesh, perhaps to many of those Lusts, per∣haps to all. And look how many Lusts he trys to satisfie, so many Idols he does adore. Admit the Prodigal spends nothing but what is properly his own, and does some Good with it by accident; yet it is but by accident that good is done; for which not He him∣self, but his Ambition is to be thank't. Let the man be what he will who abounds in Riches, whether a Prodigal, or a Niggard, or hardly Either, they are apt to ingender a flat forgetfulness of God, (as before I noted,) which in Iesurun, and Nabal, and in David himself may be clearly seen. The first, wax∣ing fat, did even kick against his Maker. When the second was drunk, he valued not God, any more than David. The third has humbly recorded his own Experience, Psal. 30. 6, 7. And also That of the Generality of God's own People: Psal. 78. from v. 24. to v. 35. When God rain'd Manna, and sent them meat to the full, and gave them all that they
desir'd, Then (saith he) they were not estrang∣ed from their Lusts. But when he slew them, they sought him, and inquired early after God. Then they remembred that God was their strength, and that the high God was their Redeemer. So that Prosperity was the thing which made them forgetful of their God, and heavy Affliction was the Instrument which brought him back to their Remembrance. When Riches do interpose between God and the Soul, they are apt to intercept the Attractive Vertue, whereby God is wont to draw the Soul unto Himself; As an Adamant interve∣ning between the Iron and the Loadstone, does intercept the magnetique force, wherewith the Loadstone allures the Iron. But as, if we take away the Adamant, the Iron will leap unto the Loadstone; so take away Riches (as in the abovenam'd Experiment;) and the Soul will be the apter to fly towards God. It is so natural for Mortals to be trans∣ported with Prosperity, that it extorted from Moses an extraordinary Caveat, before heDeut. 8. 10. to v. 18. thought he could with safety admit the Is∣raelites to taste of the Sweets of Canaan. Now if Prosperity is so dangerous, even
when God Himself gives it, how great a Curse must it be, when the Gift of Satan? If Riches honestly gotten are such a Clog un∣to the Soul, as does oftentimes hinder her flight to Heaven; How shall she hope to mount thither, when both her Wings and herVide Plotin. Enn. 5. l. 9. Talons are full of Prey? Prosperity sure is such a Weapon, as none but They who can contemn it, can safely use. And too much Ease to which it tempts us is wont to prove a sadder Curse, than what at first was denoun∣ced by God to Adam, That in the sweat of his Brows he should eat his Bread. § 7. Again we learn from this Doctrin, as to suspect our own Treasures when present with us, so not to seek them being absent with too much fervour. For the Son of SirachEcclus. 3. 26. tells us, that He who seeketh Danger shall pe∣rish in it. And that Riches are Dangers, has not only already been made apparent, but may be farther made clear by our common Experience of its Effects. For notwithstand∣ing there are some who do make themselves Friends with the unrighteous Mammon, (that is, by giving it to the Poor, do truly lend it unto the Lord, and lay it out upon Life Eter∣nal,)
yet we find it too general, that the greater mens Qualities and Fortunes are, by so much the greater are their Vanities, and Vices too. And That War of their Lusts, which is a very great Plague, they are so strongly wedded to, as to call it Peace, Wisd. 14. 22. And I suppose it was Experience which taught the Italians to use those Pro∣verbs,Alta Fortuna alto travaglio apporta. That a great deal of Wealth brings a great deal of Woe, And the greater the Happi∣ness,A maggior fe∣licita, minor fede. 'tis to be trusted so much the less. Pro∣verbs so wholsom, as well as True, (were they as diligently consider'd, as they are easi∣ly understood,) that they deserve the next place to those of Solomon. For if our Riches are from God, we are by so much the more ob∣liged; And if from Satan, the more indan∣ger'd. If from God, they are intrusted with us as Talents, of which we must give an ex∣act accompt. And he that sits at the highest Rent, has by so much an higher Accompt to render. If from Satan, they are but well∣baited Hooks, wherewith to catch our Hearts from us; and, with Them, our Adoration. How apt they are to prove mischievous, the Devil himself discovers to us by his parting
with them so easily. We may have them for no more than an Act of Worship; And, that Condition being premis'd, they go a begging for our Acceptance. Thus at once they are the cheapest and dearest things to be imagin'd: The cheapest, in regard they are so easily come by, (for a man may be damn'd with a wet finger;) and the dearest, in regard we part with our Innocence to acquire them. Adam did not eat gratis of the fruit that was forbidden, though the Serpent ask'd nothing, but let him have it for taking up. 'Tis easy to steal, and to be caught, And as easy to be hang'd, as it is to turn round, and to make Gri∣maces. But sure the man would not be thank'd, who should commend the thing to us for its Facility. This I know to be the sub∣ject of the last Observable in the Text, of which I shall take no further notice, than by shewing how it is useful to poor, and rich. 'Tis matter of comfort to the Poor, (such I mean as God himself has made such,) that they want not the Riches they are without; and that their Poverty is their Option, as well as Lot. For 'tis evident, if they would, they might be easily as rich as the Devil can make them.
'Tis matter of sorrow to the Rich, and of great reproach too, that they should take so vast pains for things so easily to be compass'd: Or think they get by those things, which are purchas'd at the price of so rich a Iewel as a man's Soul: Or put their Trust in those things, to which the Title of uncertain is fix'd in Scripture: (As when St. Paul ex∣horts Timothy to charge the Rich, not to trust1 Tim. 6. 17. in uncertain Riches) Or make their Boast of those things, which 'tis in every Fool's pow∣er, to get, or part with; But not in the pow∣er of one in a Thousand, rightly to use, or to injoy. To find Darius dying with Thirst, whilst he was owner of many Rivers; and Alexander frozen up with cold, even then when he had master'd the Eastern Sun; and Midas beggar'd by his Wealth, when every finger of his was turn'd to a Philosopher's Stone; is of it self enough to teach us, that none have ever been more in want, than They into whose Bosoms the Tempter has empti∣ed his Cormicopiae. § 8. But now besides these several Lessons which the Devil's large offer is apt to teach us, there is a Lesson to be drawn out of all
these Lessons; and such as the whole Dis∣course premised has an aptness in it self to dispose us for. This is a Season not more proper for private Austerities to the Rich, than for a bountiful Contribution to the Neces∣sities of the Poor. These should Injoy our Self-denials, and be fill'd by our Fastings in Time of Lent. Nor can we better be ex∣horted, (seeing the Tenor of the Text does suggest it to us,) than to beat the Devil with his own Weapon. To make our selves FriendsLuke 16. 9. of the Mammon of Unrighteousness. To wor∣ship God with those things, for which we are tempted to worship Satan. Not to be ho∣nest only and just, but also merciful and mu∣nificent, even in spite to That Devil, who is so earnestly desirous to make us Worldlings. If the Devil shall say to us, [All this will I give you, if falling down ye will worship me,] lay we back again to the Devil, [This we give unto the Poor, because we fall down to, and wor∣ship God.] We do not sanctifie the Day, though we do never so much observe it, if to all our Acts of Sacrifice (in Prayer and Ser∣mon,) we add not Works of Mercy too. As we hope that our Prayers shall fly to Heaven,
we must lend them our Charity to imp their Wings. For what said the Angel to Corneli∣us, though but a Proselyte of the Gates, (half a Gentile, and half a Jew,) Thy Prayers and thine Alms are come up for a memorial be∣foreActs 10. 4. the Lord. Mark the Copulative [And] betwixt Prayers and Alms, implying the E∣nergy of the former, by help and vertue of the later. Not his Prayers without his Alms. For God heareth not Sinners, who draw near with their Lips, when their Hearts are far from him. And such are their Hearts which break not out into their Hands. There are but Three Courses imaginable to be taken with our Riches, in case we have them. Our being liberal to our Coffers, in the lay∣ing up Riches, and this for no-body-knows∣whom; or very bountiful to our Lusts, in laying them out upon our Vanities, and costly Vices, which we solemnly have vow'd the forsaking of; or being merciful to our Sa∣viour, who takes our Charity to his Mem∣bers, as freely bestow'd upon Himself. InMatth. 25. 40. so much that the Question is now but This, Whether we choose to be the Children of God, or Belial. I make no doubt but I am
speaking to an intelligent sort of People, and that rightly understanding our great∣est Interest, we need the less to be perswa∣ded that we will do our selves Good, by ma∣king others to partake of the good we do. Should any here be full as sinful as was Ne∣buchadnezzar, I might adventure That to Them, which Daniel said unto the King, [Let my Counsel be acceptable to you; Break offDan. 4. 27. your sins by righteousness, and your Iniquities by shewing mercy to the Poor. If we desire a good Provision against the Winter of Ad∣versity, and to find out our Bread after ma∣ny days, Let us cast it (with Solomon) upon the Waters. If we will settle our Estates, either in whole, or in part, so as to free them from Plunder, or Sequestration, Let us put them into Bags which wax not old, in∣to the Treasury of Heaven which faileth not, where neither Moths can corrupt, nor any Thieves break through and steal. The poor righteous man must needs be one of God's Treasuries; wherein whatsoever is laid up by us, shall be repaid to us again with im∣mense advantage. Especially when the Worms which feed on the Body after Death,
shall give it all up at the Day of Iudg∣ment. This is a pious Frand indeed, without ei∣ther Ironie, or Oxymoron. For 'tis honestly to beguile the Grand Deceiver of Mankind; and to make the Devil's Malice propitious to us. 'Tis to extract the greatest Good out of the Evil of his Temptations; (to wit a So∣veraign Praeservative from the great Instru∣ment of Death;) as skilful Chymists are wont to draw the most healthful Medicines, out of those which in themselves are the hurtfull'st Minerals. Thus the skin of a Scorpion be∣comes an Antidote to his Teeth. And thus the Block at which we stumble, may be used as a step for our Rise to Heaven.. Thus the Ocean may be as modest, in the keeping of its Bounds, as the smallest Rivulet. And the man of greatest Wealth, as poor in Spirit as any Lazar. Thus a Ioseph and a Moses may be Favorites of God in the Court of Pharaoh. And thus, if the more we have of lading to press our Vessel into the Sea, the more we al∣so have of Sails to give it motion; or if the larger our Revenues and Fortunes are, we have the larger Elevation of Heart and Soul
to Liberality, and pay the larger Taxes of Charity, laid upon us by a Law from the King of Kings; we convert our poorest Beadsmen into our richest Benefactors, and reap by far the greater good from the good we do them. Yea we make our selves such Friends of our greatest Enemies, (which our Saviour expresses fitly by the Mammon of Unrighte∣ousness,)Luke 16. 9. as will receive us, when we fail, into eternal Habitations. Whither God of his Mercy conduct us All, for the Glory of his Name, and for the Worthiness of his Son, to whom be Glory, both now, and for ever.
AN AMULET OR PRAESERVATIVE Against the Prurigo of Ambition.
THE DANGER Of Seeking Great Things FOR ONES SELF. JER. XLV. 5. And seekest Thou Great Things for thy self? Seek them not. § 1. BEtween the Prophecies of Ieremy in all the Chapters going be∣fore, (All belonging to the Iews,) And other Prophecies coming after, (concerning Nine other Na∣tions,) from hence-forwards unto the end, This before us appertains unto Baruch only. Baruch the Scribe of Ieremiah, and a Servant
of the most High, one who had faithfully served Both at the utmost peril of his Life, and yet at last became liable to great Ex∣ception. Therefore God by Ieremiah re∣bukes the man for his Anxiety, for the dis∣quietness of his Spirit, and discontented∣ness in his Condition; for his distrust of God's Providence, and his dissatisfaction in God's oeconomy; for being querulous and complaining, that Grief was added to hisVerse 3. Sorrow, and Tears to Sighing, and that af∣ter all his labour, (when he thought to be rewarded,) he found no Rest; for be∣ing afflicted, and perplex't, he could not reach to those Talents his Master had, as Io∣shua did to those of Moses, and Elisha to those of the Great Elijah; last of all God re∣bukes him, for not sufficiently resenting the most deplorable Estate of the King and Kingdom, with the Calamities then impen∣dent on God's own House, and the Publick Worship; and for having no prospect be∣yond Himself, his private Liberty and Safe∣ty, his Ability like Ionas to sleep securely in a Tempest, and sensless of Danger in a Shipwrack; his getting a quiet Habitation
in Peace, and Plenty, when he saw All round about him, as it were upon the Borders and Brink of Ruin. § 2. Now to Baruch thus flinching in Times of Trial and Temptation, reserving an Angle in his Heart for secret Avarice, and Ambition, and a particular design on his private Interest, (as if he thought it not sufficient, to have his Life for a Prey in allVerse 5. places whither he went, or not an Happiness great enough, to serve and suffer for his Creator, to fare no worse than his Soveraign, to live in Loyalty and Honour, and dye in Innocence;) God sends his Prophet Ieremi∣ah with a most vehement Dehortation, or (to speak more exactly) with a most forci∣ble Prohibition, sitting close upon the Neck of a sharp Reproof; And seekest Thou (Ba∣ruch) Great Things for thy self? Seek them not. An Exprobration, and a Reproof, e∣nough to stab him into the Heart, as being very sharply pointed in four respects. In re∣spect of the Person, vext and disquieted with his Condition; In respect of the Things, he seeks to mend his Condition by; In respect of the Selfishness, wherewith the Things are
sought after by such a Person; and in re∣spect of the Times, wherein to be Selfish, is most absurd; yea wherein to be Selfish, is little less than Sacrilegious. I shall but touch on these four, and dwell on that which I take to be most material. § 3. Who should the Seeker be but Ba∣ruch? a man professing the true Religion, yes and a zealous Assertor of it; The Prophet Ie∣remy's own Disciple, and his exact Amanuen∣sis; his individual Companion, his faithful Friend and Fellow-labourer, who writ and read the Roll of Prophecies against Ierusa∣lemJer. 36. 10, 15. and Iudah, in the Ears of all the People, and all the Great men at Court, and that with the most apparent hazard both of his Liberty and his Life. And yet, as good a man as he was, (or had been once in his Time,) the Things he now did seek after were not spiritual, but carnal; not belong∣ing to the future, but present life; not Great in themselves, but , and , Great in the Speakers Phraseology, or the rude Vulgar's Estimation; or only Great by way of comparison with things much less; or Great in reference to the Season, wherein it was a
Great thing, for any Servant of God to have Food and Rayment; for a Ieremy, or a Ba∣ruch, not to be cast into the Jer. 38. 6, 7, 26. Dungeon; not to be cut with the same Jer. 36. 23. Penknife, or not to perish in the same Fire, together with the dreadful Roll, or Book of Prophecies which They had written. Nor was it a little ag∣gravation of Baruch's Guilt, that he became a Self-seeker; when being a man of a pub∣lick Character, he should have been of a pub∣lick Mind; he should have sacrificed his Pri∣vate to Publick Interesses and Ends. When he foresaw that King Iehoiakim (the Son of Good King Iosiah) was not only to be kill'd, but cruelly cast into the Streets, ex∣posedVerse 30. there as a Prey to Birds and Beasts without Burial; when he foresaw that Zede∣kiah (another Son of Good Iosiah) should shortly after become the last King of Iudah; That the Conquering King of Babylon should butcher his Sons before his Eyes, andJer. 39. pluck his Eyes out of his Head, and lastly binding him in Chains, should carry him cap∣tive out of Ierusalem, as an Hissing to his Enemies, and an Astonishment to his Friends; Then for Baruch to be seeking, and to be
seeking Great Things, and to be seeking them for Himself too; not for his Country-men, or Country, not for the Worship and House of God, but for his despicable diminutive in∣considerable Self, (a little Drop of the Bucket) a single Atom of the great Heap of Dust and Ashes in Iudaea, (for Men we know are no better,) This was the Acme and the Top of the Prophet Ieremy's Exprobration. The Heathen Cato in Lucan was much more generous, in his Sidera quis Mundúmq, velit spectare cadentem, Expers Ipse Metûs?— The Turkish Caab of Arabia, who rather chose to dye of Thirst, than to drink of That Water which his Compatriots all wanted, was of much a more brave, and a more noble Disposition. Such were the gallant , in Alexander ab Alexandro, who would never once indure to fare any better than their King. Had the King lost a Limb by any accident whatsoever? They would resolvedly lose the same. Did the King hap∣pen to want an Eye? They would pluck
out one of their own. And when the King came to dye, They scorn'd to live; but at the time of his Funeral, threw themselves in∣to the Fire. Baruch in reason should have argued, like brave Uriah, and Eleazar, who did abhor being at rest, when better men than themselves were expos'd to Hardships; They hated Self-praeservation in a kind of universal and general Deluge of Afflictions. Shall such a man as I Baruch, and in such a Season as This, be seeking any thing for myself? Shall I be guilty of being safe, when 'tis disloy∣alty to prosper? Shall I be seeking Great Things, when to be Great, is a Dishonour? a shameful thing, to live at Ease? and little less than a Sin, to live? Thus he ought to have rea∣son'd, thô thus he did not. And see how God (by way of Sarcasm) does as good as bid Baruch put Himself into one Scale, and all the publick Concerns of King and King∣dom into the other, as it were asking if he looks to outweigh them All; if his Life is more precious, than Church and State; if he expects as great a Privilege as was granted only by Miracle to Gideon's Fleece; to be blessed and enrich't with the Dew of Hea∣ven,
when all round about lyes dry, and barren. If he alone will be exempt from a compleat , from a National, a Pub∣lick, a Common Destruction and Desolation. Behold (says God to Baruch) I will bring e∣vil upon all Flesh, even upon this whole Land. And seekest Thou Great Things for thy self? Seek them not. § 4. Thus we see how the Reproof or the Exprobration (being whetted into a Sharp∣ness by four Respects) does give a Vehemence and Force to the Prohibition. I shall not add any thing more to what I have said touch∣ing the First; but apply my self wholly to the Consideration of the Second; which of it self will be sufficient to take up more Time than is now allow'd. And in the Prosecu∣ting of This, 'tis not my purpose to re∣flect upon any mens Persons of either Sort. Not on Them who seek Greatness they can∣not find; much less on Them, who have been raised up to Greatness they never sought; least of all upon Them, who do inhe∣rit that Greatness they cannot help; (such as They never could have prevented, nor can easily escape.) All I intend is a Dissuasive
from That which I take to be the Ground of all our Seditions, and Separations, and Fermentations of Blood in the Body Poli∣tick; from that Malignity and Envy, where∣with the Men of low degree are wont to pro∣secute those above them: from the Self∣seeking, and the Self-love, attended com∣monly with the love of Revenge on others, which makes a world of men careless of Publick Safety: Careless of perishing Them∣selves, (like Nero with his ) if all the Objects of their Envy may pe∣rish with them: from that Avarice and Am∣bition, and Malecontentedness in their Sta∣tions, wherein Divine Providence is pleas'd to fix them. From every one of These Plagues my present Dehortative or Dissua∣sive (suggested to me by the Text) is now intended; thô most especially from the last, as from the Root of those Factions, and Schisms, and Heresies, which do at any time indanger the Common Peace; yes and occasion the greatest Miseries which can pos∣sibly ever fall upon Church or State. In order to the framing of This Dissuasive, and for the making it effectual to such as
need it, I must consider those things which the World calls Great (and are in one word expressed by Worldly Greatness) in their ge∣nuine, or native, and proper Colours; strip't of that Vizard and Disguise, which the Phantasies of People (by a too vulgar Errour) have put upon them. For hence will arise as many Reasons, why in every State or Station, it is every mans Advantage, as well as Duty, to study and con St. Paul's Lesson, How to want and to abound. How toPhil. 4. 11, 12. want without Envy, and how to abound without Arrogance; how to want without Stealth, and how to abound without Oppres∣sion; how to want with Submission, and how to abound with Self-denial; how to want with real Comfort, and how to abound with Moderation; how to want with Thanksgiving, as it is an Act of Sacrifice; and how to a∣bound with Liberality, as it is a Work of Mer∣cy. In a word, how 'tis his Interest, to rest contented with his Condition of either sort; and not to disquiet himself in vain, by so∣licitously seeking Greater Things for himself than his God allows him. A point of Do∣ctrin so momentous, of such Necessity to
be taught, and as well of such Publick, as Private Consequence to be learn't; that 'tis not easy to be imagin'd, how such a mon∣strous Sin as Schism, Contempt of Government and Order, and the Voluptuousness of heading or leading Parties, should continue one day in the Christian World, if every man were convinced of This Great Truth, (a Truth as legible, and as bright, as if 'twere writ∣ten with a Sun-beam,) that God allows not of his Ambition, but disapproves of his A∣varice, strictly prohibits and forbids the Car∣nality of his seeking Great Things for himself; has made Obedience to Authority to be of the Essence of Christianity; one of the Two special Vitals of all Religion; The Blood and Life of the Second Table, clearly running in a Great Vein throughout the Body of the Gospel. Nor only so, But that (in reference to the present, as well as to the future, and better life,) it is every man's Interest, and special Advantage, not to be Great; that He is the happiest Man on Earth, whom Horace has seated in the middle, betwixt his Maenius, and Nomentanus: that 'tis easier to be satisfied with what is but competent and
enough, than with any thing beyond it, whether inherited, or acquir'd: and that 'tis better to have a little with God's Allow∣ance and Approbation, than the Greatest Things on Earth by his bare Permission. The World is now at such a pass, (and 'tis a Duty not to forget it on This Occasi∣on,) that we do sometimes stand in need to make Apologies for God; to assert and justifie his Methods; to alledge sufficient Reasons for some of his Precepts and Prohibitions; especially for such as now we have under Consideration. Nor can we expect to be believ'd in such a Paradox as This, [That 'tis a man's Interest not to be Great in this loathsom World,] any farther than our Reasons shall force Assent. I shall but urge four or five, whereof the one will rise in order above the other: That if the former cannot affect us, the later may. § 5. The first of the Reasons I pretend to, for the Dissuasive I am upon, from any man's seeking Great Things for Himself, and for God's Prohibition, Seek them not, may be derived from the Fickleness of all Great Things on This side Heaven. Their having
nothing in them of Permanence, nothing of Certainty, or Firmness, which a man of any Prudence knows how to trust. From whence it follows ex abundanti, that they have nothing in them of lovely, for which they should be coveted or courted by us. And This is a Reason suggested to me from the very next words before my Text. Be∣hold (says God to Baruch by the Mouth of Ieremiah) That which I have built will I break down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up, even This whole Land. He does not Thus argue, There is a Flaw in the Building, which I will Therefore break down; or a Barrenness in the Plant, which I will Therefore pluck up. But I will do it pro Imperio, because I will. For I have built, and I have planted. The whole Land is mine, and I will order it as I please. He needs not argue from its Inhabitants whereby to justifie its Destruction, because He is not only the Owner, but the Author of it. His having once built, is reason enough for his breaking down. And his having once planted, is reason enough for his plucking up. Nor may the Isa. 45. 9. Clay say to the Potter,
Why hast Thou made, or unmade me? why hast Thou used me Thus, or Thus? 'Tis true in God's distribution of endless Punishments and Rewards to the Sons of Men, He declares Himself to act as a Righteous Iudge, a Judge with whom there is not Respect of Per∣sons, a Judge who renders unto every man ac∣cording to his Deeds, and according to the Law He is bound to live by. But the Case is quite Another, (and stands upon quite another Ground,) in his dealing out the Things of This dying life, the Things which perish in the using, the Things whose Fashi∣on passeth away, such as All the things are which the World calls Great. In things of Temporary Concernment, (such as those I now speak of,) it pleaseth God to act and argue as an Absolute Soveraign; to make his peremptory Will his sufficient Reason; to prove the Rectitude of his Actions from his right of Dominion, and his Omnipotence. Not only Mary in her Magnificat observes and celebrates God's Pleasure, in his putting down the Mighty, and in his raising up the Meek, But even Hesiod does the same as an Heathen Poet.
.— We may English it out of our Bibles from Daniel's words to Nebuchadnezzar; 'Tis theDan. 2. 21. & Chap. 4. v. 17. most High alone that ruleth in the Kingdom of Men: 'Tis he that giveth it at his plea∣sure to whomsoever he will; and that setteth up over It (either the Best, or) the Basest of Men. There can be nothing more pleasant to a man of low Station, or more profitable and useful to men of Grandeur, than to contem∣plate as well as read the wise oeconomy of God in the words of David; and the Truth of those words in their own Experience: To wit, that Promotion cometh neither from the East,Psal. 75. 6, 7. nor from the West, not from the North, nor from the South; But God is the Iudge, who putteth down one, and setteth up Another; or permits the , The Prince of This World, The Devil to do it. For so we needs must distinguish, if we intend to speak Sense
touching the Providence of God in the pre∣sent Case. The taking away what he has given, the breaking in pieces what he has built, the rooting up what he has planted, is That which happens many times by his blessed Order; but many times too by his bare Permission. To mention Ioseph, and Iob, the good King Iofiah, the glorious Emperour Mauritius, and the more glori∣ous Martyr Charles the First of these Realms, and to parallel in our minds the Events of those Best with the Worst of men, is the short∣est way imaginable (the shortest at least I can imagin,) to give a satisfactory Reason for That Distinction; and to discourage men from seeking Great Things for Themselves. For thus I argue: If it happens so ill to Them who are born to Greatness, and are Above it, who have a Right to great Things by God's Appointment, and yet are deprived of them All by God's Permission; (yet one step far∣ther,) If it happens so ill to Them who are as Good as they are Great, and whose Greatness coupl'd with Grace is the least thing in them, far surpassed by their Humility, and gene∣rous Meekness, by their Compassion towards
others, and by their Empire over Themselves; what then shall we say of those wretched Great ones, who owe their Greatness to the Great Dragon? who owe it (next under Satan) to their own Avarice, and Ambition, their Oppression, and Extortion, their Fraud, and Rapine? who possess their Great Things by God's meer Sufferance, and at last are stript of them by his Appointment? Such Usurpers of Greatness, as do at their best but injoy God's Anger, who only sacrifice to their Net, (as the Prophet speaks,) and wholly re∣ly upon Themselves, upon their Industry, or their Wit, their Strength, or Prowess, or their any thing besides which they are wont to call Theirs, God does oftentimes crush by the chief means of their support; whilst he makes their very Anchor become their Rock, and turns their Harbour into a Quicksand; sometimes splits them upon their Pollcy, and sometimes upon their Power. And This the Royal Psalmist does seem to mean, when he speaks of Gods laughing such men to scorn, and of his having them in derision, (Psal. 2. 4.) Much what Solomon saith of Wisdom, That she will laugh at their Calamity, and will mock
when their fear cometh, (Prov. 1. 26.) Thus my First Reason ariseth from the Fickleness of the Things which the World calls Great, whether as righteously attain'd by God's Appointment, or as injuriously in∣vaded by God's meer Sufferance. § 6. A Second Reason for my Dissuasive from any man's seeking Great Things for Himself, and for God's Prohibition, Seek them not, is to be taken from the yet sadder and more important Consideration, That the Worlds Great Things are not fickle on∣ly, but treacherous; not only transitory, but false, and fallacious things. Such arrant Snares to their Possessors, as are not more courted by men of Folly and Unadvisedness, than they are fear'd and suspected by men of mature Deliberation. For the more like a Meteor a Man is rais'd out of the Earth, the apter he is to return in Tears. The higher any one is exalted, his Head becomes so much the giddier, and the sooner his Feet will fail him, and the lower his Fall will be. 'Twas Apuleius his Conceipt, that an over-large Fortune is like an over-long Coat, ever trip∣ping up the Heels of him that wears It.
Briefly, The greater any Man is, the more he is expos'd as the Butt of Envy; he is by so much the fairer Mark, to be singled out and shot at, with Darts of Mischievousness, and Malice, as well as Envy. A Truth so experimented and known throughout the An∣nals of all the World, that the Great Em∣perours of the East were almost All murder'd; nor were there many of the West, who were not cut off by Fraud, or Fury. A Flayl, a∣gainst which it is so almost impossible to get a Fence, that thô Henry the Great of France had as fair warning from the young Merchant, as ever any Prince had to secure himself, yet it was not long after, when Ravilliac did convince him by plain Experience, that the basest Creature living who can despise his own life, can make himself Master of other mens. In This and other Considerations, How ma∣ny born to Great Things have not been able to indure them? How many have rejected the offers of them? How many have been courted, and even compell'd to an Acceptance? How many have cast away their Crowns, for sitting too heavy upon their Heads, and for the overplus of Cares they were lined with?
'Twere easy to prove by an Induction, (were This a Time, or Place for it,) that Worldly Greatness has something in it extreamly dread∣ful to a wise and considering man. That there are great Diseases in it, and the greatest of all in the greatest Governments, (even there where the Governours are the most Absolute and Successful,) is clearly seen by the Com∣plaints of the greatest men living when mostArrian. Epict. l. 3 c. 22. p. 342. Sen. de Brevit. vitae c. 4. & 5. at ease. It is not only Arrian's, but also Seneca's Observation, and best expressed in his own words. Potentissimis & in altum sublatis hominibus excidere voces videbis, qui∣bus otium optant, laudant, omnibus bonis suis praeferunt. Cupiunt interim ex illo fastigio suo, si tutò liceat, descendere. Nam ut nihil lacessat autquatiat, in se ipsa fortuna ruet. It was a thing Augustus Caesar did often wish, but could never reach, that he might one day be so happy, as to be freed from his Cares and his Crown of Thorns; that he might put off his Greatness, and live at last unto himself, which in the Top of all his Glories he had never yet done. Certainly His, if ever any, was a prosperous Reign; and yet his very Conquests were bitter to
him. For when from all parts abroad he had perfect Peace, he had none at home. In his own City, in his own Court, and if not in his own Bosom, yet at least in his ownSueton. l. 2. c. 19. Bedchamber, there were Plots, and Conspi∣racies, and Designs upon his Life, carried on by some of the basest, and the most pro∣fligate of his Subjects. Not the Swords on∣ly of Caepio, Murena, of Lepidus, and Egna∣tius, and Plautius Rufus were whet against him; But even Telephus, and Audasius, and a vile Skullion out of his Kitchin, with Knives and Daggers conspir'd his Ruin. And he would many times have left his Im∣perial Dignity, had not his Enemies been such, and of such a frame, as that he could not descend, but by falling headlong. Yet he descended in his Desires, (says Lucius Ubi supra p. 563. Hoc votum erat ejus, qui voti compotes facere poterat. Seneca,) and was a private Person in wish, employing still his chief Labours and Thoughts about it; thô still his Circumstan∣ces were such, as to confine him to the Majesty, and by consequence to the Thral∣dom, in which he dyed. But This is cer∣tain, That as if Greatness had oppress'd him, and cast him down, He would never once
admit of the least Increase. So far was heSueton. in vit. Octav. c. 52, 53. p. 87, 88. from suffering Temples, that he would not have Statues erected to him. To call him Master, was as the breaking of his Head. And how did he deprecate A Dictatorship, the highest Honour upon Earth, (when his People by force would have cast it on him,) as one would deprecate a shameful and painful Death, with a naked Breast, and a bended Knee? If ever any crown'd Head ex∣ceeded Augustus in Prosperity, Polycrates ofHorodot. in Thalia. c. 39, 40, &c. p. 177. Samos was sure the man. Who yet was so far from being the happier for his felicities, that his felicities did afflict him, more than any thing else could. It did not trouble him a little, That he had nothing to vex him; and that the Goods he would part with, he could not lose. Nor was it strange, or without reason, that his Felicities were so irksom and grievous to him; For his Friend Amasis King of Aegypt had told him the dan∣ger of his Successes, and that he took them for the Prognosticks of he-knew-not-what-Miseries in time to come. He told Polycra∣tes in Effect, the same that Solon told Croesus, (and what is now a By-word in our Ethick
Systemes,) Ante obitum nemo, supremáque fu∣nera felix, None can be certain of his Hap∣piness, before his Death. He said, he ne∣ver knew any so over-fortunate in his life, who did not come to some dismal End. And as he chose for himself an wholsom Mixture of Adversity with good Success, so he durst not continue Friendship with one condemn'd to have his Portion of Good things Here; with one who was doom'd to a praeprope∣rous, untimely Bliss. . Ib. p. 178. He having a dread, and an abhorrence of too much Happiness upon Earth, as that which he thought pro∣vok'd the Anger, and the Iealousy of Hea∣ven, if not the Envy. Now 'tis observable in Herodotus (who gives us the History of it at large,) That what was prophesy'd by Amasis, was by Oraetes made good. For all the Felicities of Polycrates did justly end in his Cap. 125. p. 210. Crucifixion. So true is That of the Philosopher (however most persons may think it strange,) Res inquieta felicitas est, ip∣sa se exagitat, movet Cerebrum non uno gene∣re, alios in Cultum irritat, alios in potentiam, alios inflat, alios mollit. If English can ex∣press it, perhaps it may be thus rendred.
Worldly Greatness is a restless, unquiet thing; a Plague and Affliction unto it self, and to all that own it; It exagitates the Heads and Hearts of men several ways; some it intoxi∣cates with Cruelty, and some with Pride; some it stirs up to Luxury, and some to Lust; some it swells up, and some it softens. As the Sun at the same time does harden Clay, and melt Wax, some it makes so ob∣durate as to turn them into a Rock, and some it dissolves into arrant loosness. § 7. Which by the way suggests to us a Third Reason for the Dissuasive from any man's seeking Great Things for himself, and for God's Prohibition, Seek them not. They being treacherous, and deceiptful, not on∣ly to the outward, but inward man; not on∣ly in a Secular, but moral Sense; not only to the Bodies, but Souls of men. They are corruptive even of Principles; as making their owners to imagin, that Honour Intitles them to Ambition; that Pride belongs to men of Power; that Greatness gives them a Right to Arrogance. From which Corruption of Judgment it comes to pass, that many o∣thers, as well as Baldwin, (That most fa∣mously▪
devout Cistercian Monk,) have been observ'd by Historians to lose their Sanctity with their Obscureness, and after the mea∣sure of growing Greater, to grow in all kinds the worse. In so much that Pope Ur∣ban directed his Letters very fitly to Bald∣win Thus: Monacho ferventissimo, Abbati ca∣lido, Episcopo tepido, Archiepiscopo remisso, Sa∣lutem plurimam impertimus. It is so com∣mon for men to change from good to bad, or from bad to worse, with the change of their Conditions from bad to good, or from good to better, and when they are lifted up in Honour, to be elevated in Mind too, that Titus Vespasian is the one Emperour (at least within my present memory) who was moulded by his Empire from bad to better; from having been both a proud and a cruel Subject, to his being both a mild and an hum∣ble Soveraign. Of most other Emperours it may be said, (as 'twas by Tacitus but of one,) Imperio digni, nisi imperâssent. They might have been worthy of their Empires, if they never had been Emperours. Tem∣poral Happiness having This of malignant in it, (in the Judgment of Agur the Son of
Iakeh, that it makes men forgetful of Him that made them, (Deut. 32. 15, 18.) It breeds ingratitude, disaffection, and at last a disbelief of their Soveraign Good, (Prov. 30. 8, 9.) 'Twas the Opinion of St. Chrysostom, (upon. Chrys. in c. 4. ad Ephes. Hom. 11. p. 960. St. Paul to the Ephesians,) that as nothing can so highly provoke the Wrath of the Almighty, as the Sin of breeding Factions in Church and State, So there is nothing that can so easily beget such Factions in either of them, as the Seeking of Preferments and Great∣ness in it. For where the most of men are seeking Great Things for Themselves, there are Few to take care of the Common Good, either in relation to Church, or State. And the way to Advancement, through such an ex∣cess of Self-seeking, becomes too Narrow, which 'tis the Interest of the Publick to make as Broad as it is possible; that so the Candidates going towards it may not tread on one another, for want of Room to go by; or at least for want of Room to go by qui∣etly, and without jostling. Lord, what Ar∣mies have been defeated, if not destroy'd too, by the chief Officers great Envy and malig∣nant Aemulations of one another? We need
not go far abroad for Examples of it, if we are not utter Strangers to things which have happen'd here at Home. And Christians (one would think) should All take warning by Christ's Disciples, who were impertinently disputing which of Them should be the greatest, when nothing but Pains, and Persecutions and Death it self did await them All. There was a Time when great Numbers did take fair warning by That Example. But not to spend time in the Enumeration of Parti∣culars, (for the enumerating of which my time would fail me,) it shall suffice me to say in general, and by the Authority of St. Austin, that most of the better sort of menAug. Ep. 204. who had the Happiness to live in those bet∣ter Times, did suffer violence and force inS. Ambros. Ep. 82. their vast Promotions. For being exceed∣ingly afraid of the great Dignities they were offer'd, and much more ready to quit their Country, than to run the great risque ofSozom. Hist. Ec∣cl. l. 6. c. 30. Advancement in it, they were fain to be press'd and kept in Prison, 'till they couldSocrat. Hist. Ec∣cl. l. 4. c. 18. bring their Wills down to admit of Great∣ness. Thus the most Modern of our GreatGreg. Presb. in vitâ Nazianze∣ni. Doctors, of the most Primitive Simplicity,
a man as wise, as he was learned, and as good as good Nature by Grace could make him, was truly afraid to live so long, as to see the happy Day he had daily pray'd for; partly for his own sake, lest the bettering of the Times should possibly make him grow worse than he was before; and lest Advancement should corrupt him, whom the contrary Con∣dition had kept Intire; partly for the sake of the Publick also, lest a Deluge of Prosperity, overflowing all the Borders of Church and State, might beget as great a Deluge of Epi∣demical Provocations; to wit of downright Irreligion, and Immoralities of Life. Thence came his Censure of the bold Hermites in the Time of the Emperour Theodosius the young∣er, who left their Privacies and Retirements, to study Perfection in the King's Palace, because (forsooth) there were stronger and more Temptations to be subdued. For what was This but to presume (as St. Peter once did) on their Ghostly strength? and so to tempt God himself to withdraw his Grace from them, (as he did for a time from St. Peter also,) to make them know their own Weakness without his Succours?
The greatest Luminaries on Earth being fit∣ly by him compar'd to those famous Lamps, of which 'tis said by Licetus, that they con∣tinued under Ground no less than Sixteen Hun∣dred years, but went out, and were extinguish't, as soon as brought into the Air. And truly considering what Examples we have in Hi∣story of men, who by the Tenure of their Privacy did hold their Innocence, but be∣coming Publick Persons were straight undone by their Advancements, and had their for∣mer light of Conscience extinguish't in them; we have as little reason as Baruch, to be anxiously seeking Great Things for our selves, but as great reason as Dr. Hammond, to be religiously afraid of being taken out of our Privacies, and drawn too far into Publick Air, lest (like the Lamps before mentioned) our present Light should be darkned with too much Lustre. § 8. There is yet a fourth Reason for the Dissuasive I am upon, from any man's seeking Great Things for himself, and for God's Prohibition, Seek them not, which is to be taken from a less obvious, and more surpri∣sing Consideration; to wit that the greater
any man is, the greater is his obligation to the discharge of one duty, which, thô it is not quite impossible, is yet extreamly diffi∣cult, and most uneasy to be perform'd. For still the more a man abounds in the Worlds Great Things, (such as Riches, and Honour, and Reputation,) the more he is bound up∣on all Accompts, to lay Himself and Them too at the Feet of Christ. Still the more Ta∣lents he has receiv'd, the more he has to rec∣kon for, at the General Audit; and 'tis still the harder for him, to make up a satisfactory Accompt; and still the Sense of This Bur∣den both of Difficulty and Danger, should cast him down under That Greatness, which is the aptest to puff him up. And why should any man be seeking Those things for Himself, which do but aggrandize his Du∣ty, and lessen his Faculty to discharge it? 'Tis (I suppose) from a Conjunction of These two things, that The Friendship of the World is said to be Enmity with God. That 'tis hard (if not impossible) for a Rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. That 'tis a thing extreamly difficult, for a man to have his portion of Good Things Twice; Here,
with Dives; and with Lazarus, hereafter. Nor can I imagin a better reason, why The Rich (rather than others) should be forewarned by St. Iames, to weep and howl,James 5. 1. for the miseries that shall come upon them, than that the same Talents of Greatness which are but lent and intrusted by God to men, to make them more and more affectionate and thankful to him, are wont to make them most forgetful and careless of him. That which obliges them to Humility, is made to extimulate their Pride. Why then should we be seeking Greater Things for our selves than will do us Good? Great enough to make it necessary to do a very important Du∣ty, which at the very same Time (speaking in a Moral sense) they make impossible to be done? There can be no sadder Case for any poor Creature to be in, than when he is loaded with Obligations which serve but to aggravate his Guilt. Yet This is common∣ly the upshot of as many Great Things as are got by Seeking. Lord, what Comfort should This admi∣nister to men of mean and low Stations, to men of slender and small Estates? How
should they learn from These Reasons for this Reproof and Prohibition of God to Baruch, not to Envy any man's Greatness, and not to covet it for Themselves? Not to wish it were their own, much less to seek it, much less yet to seize upon it? Is there any man here present at what has hitherto been deli∣ver'd, as Poor as Iob upon the Dunghil, or as miserable as Lazarus at Dives his Door, as ambitious of the Crumbs which happen to fall under his Table, (and perhaps as full of Sores too?) Let him lift up the Hands that hang down, and the feeble Knees. Let him cheer himself up with this most ratio∣nal, most useful, and most obvious Consi∣deration, That the less it pleaseth God to let him have his Proportion of Good ThingsLuke 16. 20, 21, 25. here, the likelier he is to have his Good Things hereafter. The less a man is overflowing with Wealth and Honour, or with any thing else which the World calls Great, by so much the less he is expos'd as the Butt of En∣vy; by so much the less he has to lose; the less he has to leave behind him, the less he is in danger to stand amaz'd and confound∣ed, and to tremble for fear in the Day of
Wrath. The fewer Talents he has received of Worldly Greatness, the fewer he has to answer for, in the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of men by Iesus Christ. Besides that for the present, by so much the fewer are his Temptations to Pride and Arrogance, to Cruelty and Oppression, to Lust and Luxury. Or (to express it with St. Paul,) by so much the fewer are his Temptations unto Rioting, and Drunkenness, to Chamber∣ing, and Wantonness, to Strife, and Envy. To sum up all in a word, the more a Christian is obnoxious to the Ridiculousness of Po∣verty, and the Contempt of Great men, the more conformable he is to the Life of Christ, in whom the LInes of human Misery did All concenter. We see how many and great Comforts a man may raise out of his Misery, if he can make a truly Christian and Philoso∣phical use of it. And if These Considerati∣ons cannot induce a Poor man even to pity and compassionate any Great man's Conditi∣on, yet at least they should be sufficient to make him contented with his own. Which is all I aim at in my present Reason∣ing.
But before I am aware, (for want of due heed to my General Method, thô not for want of good will to the most Destitute and Dissatisfied of Those that hear me,) I anti∣cipate one of The Uses I am to make of that Doctrin this Text affords, althô I have not quite done with the Reasons of it. And yet I cannot well proceed, without occurring to an objection; first by owning its Force, (so far forth as it has reason,) and then by shewing its Insufficience. 'Tis true I cannot but acknowledge, (nor am I willing to stretch a Doctrin, how True soever, beyond the just Line of its due Extension, which yet we all are apt to do, through the hatred we use to have of any Error which we oppose, the , as St. Basil calls it; I therefore say I must ac∣knowledge,) and I do it without Regret, that what an old Author has said of Phidias,Seneca Epist. 85. sub finem. may be truly enough apply'd to every wise and good man in a Moral sense. If Phidias wanted Ivory out of which to make a Statue, he could make one of Brass. If Marble were wanting, he could make one of Wood. If the best Wood were wanting, he could make
one of the worst. And still how course so∣ever his Materials happen'd to be, the Sta∣tue should be as good, as the Stuff would bear. Just so a wise and good man will make the best use he can of any Condition he can be in. All his wants will be with Comfort; All his Advancements with Humili∣ty; All his Injoyments with Moderation. He will equally stand affected to Death, and Ho∣nour; neither of which is to be courted, thô they are Both to be indured (when laid up∣on him unsought) without impatience. But yet, as Phidias could work the better, the fitter Materials were allow'd him, and some were fitter for his purpose than others were; so a wise and good man is able to make a better use, of one Condition, than of ano∣ther; and therefore ought to choose That, which he can manage with the most ease, to the best Advantage. Now what Condition That is, hath been sufficiently imply'd in the four Reasons going before, [of God's severe Prohibition, Seek them not;] and may yet more expresly be made out to us in That which follows. For § 9. If all Secular Greatness is less condu∣cible
to a man's Happiness, or his Content∣ment here on Earth, and carries with it more Impediments in the Narrow way to Hea∣ven, (which our Lord and his Apostles af∣firm expresly,) than That other State of life which is low, and little; It cannot but fol∣low on the contrary, (for Contrariorum con∣traria est ratio,) that the inferiour State of life is much the Best, and the most Retired the most desirable Condition. Indeed 'tis pity that Superfluities should enlarge a man's Appetite, yet so they do. Pity 'tis that a man's Avarice should ever be widened by his Possessions, yet so it is. And therefore the Scythians did very fitly thus expostulate with the Great Emperour, who conquer'd all he ever fought with, except Himself; Quid ti∣bi divitiis opus est, quae Te cogunt esurire? What hast Thou to do with Meat, which does but serve to increase thy hunger? or what need hast Thou of Riches, which make thee still the more needy? for they observ'd the more he had, the more he wanted what he had not. And the degrees of a man's Want do (by ve∣ry sound Ethicks) define his Poverty. We know 'tis customary for Parents, to make
and leave (if they can) a great Provision for their Children, (or for their Nephews, if they have none.) And still the greater E∣state they leave them, the better they think they have done their Duty; because they take it for a thing granted, that men are as Happy, as they are Rich. But when we reflect upon the Character and the Choice of those men, who either were sick of great Plenty, and therefore left it as a Disease; or were afraid of its Infection, and therefore refused the Offers of it, 'tis plain Experience, and Pra∣ctice, and the Best mens Examples, as well as Reason, yes and abundance of Scripture too, will make us quite of another mind. For though Contentment cannot arise from any Proportion of Estate, be it great, or little, (because it grows to us from within, and not from any thing without us;) yet I con∣ceive a mean Estate does most contribute to its Attainment; and with the men who have but Little, the Greatest Contentments are seen to dwell. The reason of which is very evi∣dent; For 'tis easy to have a little, and to be below Envy; whilst 'tis absolutely impossi∣ble to be above it. And therefore That of
Claudian has apparent Truth in it, Est ubi de∣spectus nimius juvat: There is a Time when a man prospers by being slighted. When a man's Poverty is his Protection: when too much contempt secures his liberty and his life. 'Tis ever best, because safest, because least troublesom, least perillous, least invidi∣ous, Not to be Great. Again, Ad manum est quod satis est; As 'tis easy to have a little, so a little is sufficient for Food and Rayment: and St. Paul infers strongly, that Food and Ray∣ment are enough: (the upshot of all we can want or pray for:) and 'tis enough that breeds Happiness, because Contentment, meeting with a Mind that is fitted for it: And a man's Mind is sooner fitted to find enough in a Little, than to meet with it in great Abundance. For, Sudatur ad Supervacua, (says the Roman Philosopher,) what is more than just enough, begins to have somewhat of Excess; and All excess is superfluous, which for that very reason will cost us sweat; if not the Sweat of the Brow, yet the Anxiety of the Brain; not only in the Solicitude how to get, or to improve, but in that easier Con∣cernment, How to manage, and to praeserve
it. In each of which Cases, Sudatur ad Su∣pervacua. The meaner man even in This is so much happier than the greater, by how much 'tis better not to have, than to lose Abun∣dance: which, sooner or later, the Great man must, and the Mean man cannot. Angustanda certè sunt Pa∣trimonia, ut mi∣nus ad injurias Fortunae simus expositi. Sen. Still the Greater any one is, the more he is ob∣noxious to Chance, and Fortune, by which 'tis better not to be favour'd, than forsaken at last. And therefore the Baleares (of whom we read in Diodorus) did so reflect upon theDiod. Sic. l. 5. Misery which Geryon's great Treasures be∣tray'd him to, (for he had never else been visited and kill'd by Hercules,) that they durst not have Plenty, for fear of Thieves; for fear of providing for their Enemies, as Geryon did. Which comparing with That of David, [He heapeth up Riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them,] and with the Counsel of Christ himself, Take no thought for the Mor∣row, and lay not up Treasure upon Earth, (Matth. 6.) I do the less think it strange, thô strange enough, that Maximus Tyrius and other Antients admir'd the Wisdom of Diogenes, in that he made it his choice, toMax. Tyr. Dis∣sert. 20. p. 192. ad finem. be as unfurnished as an Angel; as free from
all Earthly Goods, as the Spirits of Heaven.Arrian. Epict. l. 3. c. 22. p. 346. &c. Sen. de Tran∣quil. animi c. 8. Res cogendae sunt in arctum; ut tela Invidiae in vanum ca∣dunt. For they consider'd within Themselves, that to have Riches, and Honours, as well as Children, is to give Hostages to Fortune. And that 'tis here, as in an Army; the great∣er the Bulk, the more it is expos'd to Wounds and Slaughter. § 10. But thô the Saying of Epicurus is most evidently true, Honesta res est Pauper∣tas laeta, that he who does not only bear, but injoy his Poverty, is not only an happy, but an honourable man, and in this respect a rich one, that what he has not, he does not want, whilst he regulates his Appetite, and makes it adequate to his Condition; yet because 'tis not so easy, for a man and his Poverty to be agreed, in case his Poverty is so importunate, as incessantly to pinch him with Cold and Hunger; I therefore put a wide difference between not seeking Great Things for our selves, and not providing what is enough. 'Tis not absolute Poverty I re∣commend from This Text, (such as Discal∣ceats and Mendicants pretend to love,) but only Poverty in comparison; That which ei∣ther borders on, or dwells within some few
Doors of It. I speak of Poverty as oppos'd to those Great Things, from the Seeking of which we are here dehorted. For This does seem a more safe, and more secure way to Happiness, than Great Abundance; be∣cause the less any one has above Food and Rayment, the less he roves beyond the li∣mits of what is competent, and enough, (as I said before;) the less he has to care for, and to give accompt of at the general Audit; briefly the less he has to lose, and to leave behind him; not infallibly to his Friends, but peradventure to his worst Enemies; Not certainly to his Sons, but perhaps to his Se∣questrators; nor for certain to his Daughters, but possibly to the Artificers, who shall make a Prey of them. I say 'tis a state of Medio∣crity, A Competency of Fortune, attended still with a decent Thriftiness, and Frugality, (as being That without which no Riches can be Great, or if Great, not sufficient,) which I commend from this Text, as a Soveraign Medicine against the Itch. And that the worst kind of Itch to be imagin'd; to wit the Itch of a man's Seeking Great Things for him∣self; or very much Greater than are al∣lotted
him by the wise Providence of his Creator. Auream quisquis Mediocritatem Diligit tutus, caret obsoletiHor. Carm. 2. 10. Sordibus Tecti, caret invidendâ Sobrius Aulâ. Of all the Secular Great Things from the Seeking of which we are here dehorted, the least desirable I am sure, if not the most tre∣mendous, are the Great and Rich Offices of Publick Government and Trust; because They are the greatest Obstacles to That which does the most import us, to wit The Government of our selves. A Work so incumbent upon our selves, (next and immediately under God,) as that it cannot be wholly managed by a∣ny other man's Prudence, how much soever it may be greater, and more to be trusted than our own. Besides that the Government of a man's Family, althô not Great, and the Government of his Estate, althô but Little, will take up more of his Time (on which his Eternity does depend) than he can very well part with from better Objects. And
for the governing of a man's Self, All his Time is too little; whether we look upon the hardness or profit of it. To keep our Thoughts, and our Affections, our Appetites, and our Wills, within their due Bounds and Compass, and well employ'd on those Objects to which of right they do belong, is so difficult in the doing, and yet so pleasant when it is done, that I know not whether the Work, or the Re∣ward it brings with It is more important. Hence an Overplus of Advancement is as distastful and as surfeiting to a moderate Mind, as is an Excess of Meat and Drink, either to a well-satisfi'd, or tender Stomach. And therefore as a man of a sober Appetite will expect to be excus'd by abler Drinkers than himself, from taking in more than will do him good, or more than his Body can well abide; so we must pray to be excus'd, (or be contented if we are not) by men of larg∣er Appetites and stronger Ambitions than our own, if we shall choose to be no great∣er, in Wealth, and Honour, than in Desires; to lessen our Burden (if already lying upon us) in proportion to the strength we have to bear it; to have our Meat and our Drink,
as well as our Hunger, and our Thirst, exact∣ly fitted to our Digestions. § 11. 'Tis true indeed there is a time, when the Worlds Great Things (such as Riches and Honour) come uninvited, and even grow upon their owners, who neither seek, nor care for them. In which case 'tis to be said, Non in rebus vitium est, sed in ani∣mis Possidentium. Riches are innocent in their Increase, if we set not our hearts upon them; if we look upon them as things which are false and flying; if we carry our selves towards them with so much Carelesness and Contempt, as to be really poor in Spirit; reap∣ing the Benefit and the Blessing which any Lazarus can injoy, without the Sting, and the Disgrace, without the Leprosie, and the Ridiculousness, which an ugly French Pro∣verb, and vitious men have found in it, and none but They. It was a very gross Er∣ror in the ancient Apostolici, (as they were. Epipha. Haer. 60. 507. pleas'd to call Themselves) to think it ut∣terly unlawful for men to have Estates pecu∣liar to them, and that forsooth for this Reason, because the Apostles, and their first Followers had all things in common, except
their Wives. 'Twas to put Vertue upon the Rack, and stretch her out (like Procru∣stes) beyond her just and full Stature, to wit, the Extremity of her Mean; and there∣fore 'twas with good reason, that Epiphani∣us and others esteem'd Them Hereticks. For as a man of great Age may receive the Kingdom of God, as a little Child; so may one of great Wealth, as a very poor one. It being the inward Disposition, not the want of outward Affluence, which makes a man poor enough to be regarded (like The Virgin) by God Himself. Our Self-denials, if we are Rich, will make us voluntarily Poor, and still the Richer for being such. Nor only the Richer, but Greater too. For Magnus Ille est qui in divitiis est pauper, says Lucius Seneca. He is generous, and great, who keeps the Modesty and the Meekness of a very poor man in the midst of Plenty. The like to which may be said on the other side. He is indeed a great man, who is as if he were Rich in the deepest Poverty: as Rich in Comforts and Contentments, and Sereni∣ties of Mind, as if he were Owner of Both the Indies. If our Riches decrease, and our
Desires decrease too, still our Condition is the same, and we must needs be as well as ever. For Beatus est Ille qui vivit ut vult; He who has all that he desires, cannot be happier than he is, whatever else may be ad∣ded to him. And This is that frame of Mind which the Text suggests to us; This we are all to pant after, and labour for, with a com∣parative Contempt of the World without us. And to This the smallest things are more conducible than the Greatest. A little with acquiescence, which was the Portion of A∣glaus the poor Arcadian, will not only make us happier, but even Richer than * UmidiusHor. . 1. Serm. Sat. 1. with all his Plenty. For thô 'tis a Postulate, or a Principle, not to be question'd in Geo∣metry, That the Whole must needs be more than any Part of it self, yet in Morality 'tis to be question'd for several Reasons. For such may be the blessed Frame and Constitution of a man's mind, as may enable him to con∣fute, or elude the Maxim. And That diffi∣cult Hemistichion which Hesiod sent his Bro∣ther Perses, (by whom it seems he had been cheated of the one half of his Estate,) , Half is more than the whole, may
have its Proof and Exposition from the Ex∣perience of a moderate and prudent man. For the one half of his Possessions may be more to him than the whole, five or six several ways; in that it may (without a Miracle) be more conducing unto his Happiness, and more in order to his Designs, and e∣ven in reference unto the present, as well as to the future and better Life; and that by being (for Example) more consistent with his Privacy, and more conservative of his Time; more propitious to his Sobriety, and more agreeable to his Vocation; more in a tendency to his Contentment, and more by consequence to his Health. Many ways it may be more, both in a Moral, and Theologi∣cal, (which is the best,) althô it cannot in a Physical, or Mathematical Acception, (which is the worst.) For sure the former significa∣tion of the word More, is as much better than the later, as Quality and Goodness is better than Quantity and Bulk; or as the Injoyment of worldly things, than the bare Possession. For the happiest man living, and the most noble Apolaustick, cannot possibly be He who does own the most things, but
evidently He who does want the fewest. And as the strengthning of a man's Back is of greater use to him, than the meer lessen∣ing of his Burden, so is the shortning of his Appetite of more advantage to his well-being,Quid mihi vo∣luptatem nomi∣nas? Hominis Bonum quaero, non Ventris, qui pecudibus ac belluis laxior est. Seneca. than any lengthning of his Titles, or any in∣larging of his Estate. Else a Cormorant, or a Gulon, (supposing them to have Food in full Proportion to their Appetites) would be much happier than a Man. And a man with such a Disease as Physicians call a Boulimis, or Boulimia, (supposing him also to have Food in full Proportion to his Appetite,) would be happier than a man of the soundest Health. A thing so void of all reason, and so impossible to be True, that the Belly-Gods of the Earth who still are satisfying their Ap∣petites, and the Glorified Saints of Heaven who have the Happiness to have None, do so far differ, (as to the Comforts and Satisfacti∣ons which they injoy,) that the Pleasures of the first are much the lesser, but the more gross; whilst the Pleasures of the second are vastly greater, but more refin'd. § 12. From All that has hitherto been deli∣ver'd, that is from the Doctrin which has been
laid, and from the Reasons which have been gi∣ven, why men should not be Seekers of Great Things for themselves, (a Doctrin drawn from the Reproof, and from the strict Prohibition of God himself, and Reasons arising from as good Topicks as I have been able to argue from,) some good Lessons are to be taken, some good Uses to be made, some good Means to be suggested, and some good Mo∣tives to be consider'd, as well by Private, as Publick Persons; by Poor, and Rich; by the Least and by the Greatest, without Exception. § 13. First, Inferiour men must learn from this whole Message of God to Baruch, Not to advance themselves by levelling; not to seek Greatness for It self, nor yet to seek it for Themselves, much less for Themselves by lessening others; Not to be Troublers of the Waters wherein they are desirous to fish for Greatness; Not to aim at Great Things by heading Parties, and Factions, by nou∣rishing Schisms and Separations, and (what of it self is a great thing,) by having the Managements of Sedition in Church and State; Not to promote a Fifth Monarchy, by pretending nothing more than a Common∣wealth;
Not to imagin that Dominion must needs be founded only in Grace; and that the use of the Creature belongs to none but The Elect; to many others indeed de facto, but de jure only to Them; They must learn not to be Selfish under colour of Self-denial, meerly forsooth in Zeal to the Publick Good, and that Right may take place; (not for∣sooth that they care for Wealth, or Honour, or have any true love to the Creature-Com∣forts, as they are such, but) that Goodness (as they call it) may be rewarded, and that Religion may have its due, and that the bles∣sed Apostle Paul (whose words they take by the wrong handle) may be justified in his Saying, whilst Godliness is found to be profi∣table for All things, having Promise as well of1 Tim. 4. 8. the Life that now is, as of that which is to come. This is the first and prime Lesson which every private Poor man, and every man under Authority, althô not poor, is to learn from the Dehortative, and from the bitter Exprobration of God to Baruch. He must not make himself the Moral of Aesop's Toad, which had an Ambition to swell it self into the Bigness of an Ox. He must not make
himself obnoxious to the reproach of That Proverb, Scarabaeus contra Aquilam; being but a Beetle, or but a Butterfly, he must not aemulate an Eagle, much less indeavour, ei∣ther to lure her, or pluck her down. He must not make himself lyable to the Wo, which God denounced heretofore by his Prophet Isaiah; must not say tacitly to hisIsa. 45. 9, 10. Father, what begettest thou? or to the Woman, what hast Thou brought forth? He must not mutiny and grumble against God's Providence and his Will, or seek to aggrandize himself, whether his Maker will or no. Being (as He is) but an Earthern Pitcher, he must not contend with a Brass Pot, or strive to equal (much less to master) the Golden Cistern. But he must labour on the contrary to reckon himself (as he is) in his proper Ele∣ment, and by consequence not to be capa∣ble of Gravitation or Levitation, from which the Elements are exempt in their native pla∣ces. He must make it his whole Indeavour, his whole Ambition, and Delight, to ac∣quiesce as Things do which attain their Cen∣ter. Not to turn Seeker how he may raise, or disturb himself; But to esteem it his pri∣vate
Interest, to contribute all he can to the Publick Good; to prove he loves the pub∣lick Peace, by his following after the things that do make for Peace; as by making his Reason to reign within him over his Passions; and his Will over his Appetite; by submitting his more deceivable and private Judgment, unto the less erring Judgment of Publick Rea∣son; by seeking one great thing for himself, which is the Glory of Obedience (as Tacitus calls it) to human Laws and Lawgivers, to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; and by esteeming it as glorious for a Subject to be loyal, and obedient unto his Soveraign, as for a Soveraign to command, and protect his Sub∣ject. It is every man's Duty, as well as Honour, and every man's Advantage, as well as Duty, to do in this case as he would be done by; to pay as much Reverence and Submission to such as are over him in Au∣thority, as he expects from his own Servants, his Wife, and Children. It being pity that any Subject who is a Rebel to his Prince, should meet with any thing but Rebellion, from All that owe Service or Duty to him. For why should any man expect to have a
dutiful Wife, an obedient Son, or a faith∣ful Servant, who is neither of the Three to his Native Soveraign? but is undutiful and false to his Publick Parent? not to the Peo∣ple's, but God's Vicegerent? There can be nothing more apposite, than that a Boute∣feux, a Kindle-coal, a Make-bate in the City, should have his House full of Tumults: that He who is hissing at publick Govern∣ment, should carry a Serpent in his own Bosom: that as he Sows, so he should Reap:Gal. 6. 6. 7. that his own Wickedness should correct him: that he should suffer what he has done: and that with the measure he metes to others who are exceedingly above him, others ex∣ceedingly below him should duly measure to him again. Nor should it otherwise be of pleasant, but as 'tis of profitable Remarque, that Women did never here in England so af∣fect Mastery over their Husbands; Never were Children here in England so disaffected, so disobedient, so quite unnatural towards their Parents; Never were Servants here in Eng∣land so false and treacherous towards their Masters, as since our English-mens Revolt from The God of Order; since their being too
proud to be under God: or at least no farther willing that God himself should reign over them, than upon This Condition only, that he will do it Their way: either without any Vicegerent, or with one of Their choo∣sing. What I now have said last, I should have taken for a Digression, had not the Evils now mentioned been all the Fruit of the same Plant, which had taken some Root in the Heart of Baruch; I mean The Itch of a man's seeking Greater Things for himself, than God sees fit, or has been pleased to allow to such as seek them. § 14. Now in order to the learning so great and good a Lesson as This, which I have been hitherto describing, we must at∣tend to those Things which are the Means of, and the Motives to it. In order to the former, we must not only addict our selves to all the usual Means of Grace, such as Pray∣er, and Giving of Alms, Reading, and Hear∣ing the Word of God, frequent Perceptions of the Lord's Supper, private Conferences with Casuists, or Ghostly Fathers, and the like; But we must use our best Wit, and our
soundest Reason, and (as St. Paul exhorts Timothy) we must duly stir up the Gift of God which is in us, whereby to find out such Means as are perhaps the least thought of, thô perhaps the most effectual to reach the End we aim at. We know an Archer, not to be short of the Mark before him, will use his indeavour to shoot beyond it. As De∣mosthenes, of a Stammerer, attain'd to an excellent Pronunciation, by speaking with Pebbles in his Mouth; and so He facilitated his Conquest of a Natural Impediment, by adding and subduing an Artificial one. Have we sincerely a Desire to be the better for being Rational? to make a right use of the Light within us? to free our selves from a Disease the most tormenting in all the World? to be as happy as is possible in a Valley of Tears? we must not only not seek Great Things for our selves, but must not suffer Great Things to grow upon us in Ex∣cess. We must never once indure to have as much of this World, as we are able; nor yet as much as is lawful for us; but only as much as is expedient. We must not dare to make Trials (as too many are wont to
do, through a most sinful Curiosity,) what store of Riches may be attain'd to within the Compass of one Man's Life. There being nothing more inhuman, more unbecoming, or more unworthy of a Rational Agent, than for a man to be condemn'd, by his own Consent, to be digging all his days in the Mine, or Quarry; to be so much below a Bruit, as not to know when he has enough. E∣nough to make use of, enough to keep, e∣nough to care for, enough to lose, enough to leave behind him, enough to give accompt of in the day of Judgment. There can be nothing more disgraceful to a man's Reason and Understanding, than not to know when he has enough in these six Points I now have mentioned. Not only Christ, and his Apo∣stles, but Horace himself, and his Oppidius, and many other Heathen Writers, have taught us a Lesson of human Prudence, which men as men must needs confess 'tis a Shame and Misery not to learn.Tu cave, ne ma∣jus facias id quod satis esse putat Pater, & Natura coërcet. Servius Oppi∣dius apud Ho∣rat. l. 2. Sat. 3. Denique sit finis quaerendi.—& finite Laborem Incipias, parto quod avebas.—
We ought to fix on a Proportion of World∣ly Goods, to which our Industry and Pru∣dence (with due regard to our Quality, and the Necessities of our Family) may safely and innocently reach. And having once attain'd That, must say as resolvedly to our Appetites, and by consequence to our Indeavours, as God once said to the Swelling Waters of the Sea; Thus far shall ye go, and no farther: We are at an end of our Desires. We will not be troubled with any more. We will not be evermore adding to the dead weight of our Possessions, but only to the right use and injoyment of Them. As for Surplasages of Fortune, if any happen, we will employ them in Christian Projects, and (not in Philosophical, but) Theologi∣cal Experiments, (suggested to us by God himself in several parts of his holy Word, as) How we may draw Bills of Credit upon Him, who inhabits the New Ierusalem. How we may Prov. 19. 7. lend unto The Lord, thô The Pro∣prietary of All; and be paid by Him again an Matth. 19. 29. hundred sold for the forbearance. How we may Matth. 25. 37, 38. feed and cloath our Saviour, thô in his State of Glorification; How redeem
our very Redeemer, by contributing what we can to the Redemption of Christian Cap∣tives from the Tyranny of the Turks; and lay up in store a good Foundation for our selves,1 Tim. 6. 17, 18, 19. upon a Project of attaining Eternal Life. Thus to stint all our Appetites, and to limit our Desires, is to antedate the Happiness we hope and pray for. 'Tis to create unto our selves (by the help of God's Grace) an humble Degree of Self-sufficience on this side Heaven. It was the Saying of a wise Heathen, which no wise Christian will scorn to learn, Nihil Nos magis ab animi fluctibus vindicaverit, quàm aliquem semper figere incre∣mentis Terminum. There is nothing can more exempt us from all inquietudes of Mind, (from the Rack of Expectation, and the Strappado of Disappointments,) than our putting a certain period to our In∣crease; a certain Boundary or Butt to our Ac∣quisitions. Our best Successes being so slip∣pery, and our Appetites so strong, that for Both we need Bridles to hold them fast. § 15. It may perhaps be one Motive to mo∣deration of Mind, and to a Christian's not seeking Great Things for himself, that Iesus
Christ, our great Exemplar, did for Him∣self seek the least; was pleas'd to empty him∣self of Glory, became of no Reputation; made it his choice to be so poor, as Matth. 8. 20. not to have where to lay his head; and thô he was born of the Blood Royal, the House of David, did choose to take upon him the Form of a very mean Subject, and to live on Their Charity who administred to him of their Sub∣stance, Luke 8. 3. Nor was This only the option of God Incarnate, the blessed Redeem∣er of the World, our Lord Jesus Christ, whose coming was to destroy the Works of the Devil, the Pomps and Vanities of the World, with the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, as well by his Practice and Example, as by his Praecepts; But All the Wisest and the Best even of meer moral men, thô they had no Light to go by, but that of Nature and Education, had yet such a Mastery over themselves, such a right Apprehension of human Conditions and Affairs, had such an Insight into the Things which the World calls Great, and did so seriously depretiate the Pomps and Vanities of the World, (coveting Poverty ra∣ther than Wealth, and courting obscurity ra∣ther
than Honour,) that most Professors of Christianity may be provoked by them to jealousy, if not prevailed upon effectually unto a generous aemulation. Such as the famous Abdolonymus, who, however he wasQ. Curt. l. 4. Justin. l. 11. by Birth of Royal Family and Extraction, was yet by Breeding but a poor Gardiner in the Suburbs of Sidon, where he work't out all his Bread at his fingers ends, and so ac∣cordingly did eat it in the Sweat of his Brows. A Condition so duly fitted to the Humility of his Desires, that when, created King of Sidon, by Alexander the Great, he was ask't with what Patience he could indure his late Poverty; I would to God (answer'd He) I could as well indure a Kingdom. Hae manus suffecêre desiderio meo; nihil habui, nihil defu∣it. He said his Hands had been sufficient to administer to his Necessities; and that the Things which he had not, he did not want. The choice he made of his Employ∣ment, brings Democritus into my memory, who made the same. For having travell'd through the World, whereby to gain a full Experience and Knowledge of it, he chose at last a deep Poverty, and a confinement to
his Garden; wherein he satisfied his Body with the Productions of the Earth, and feasted his Soul with Contemplation. The Pomps and Vanities of the World (at the Miseries of which Heraclitus wept) He daily laugh't at. And thô the Vulgar thought him a Madman for his Recess from all Com∣pany, yet Hippocrates, who was sent to cure him of it as a Physician, was compell'd by his Discourse to admire his Wisdom; and pro∣nounced Them mad who had so esteem'd him. And truly Crates of Thebes may with Some∣body's profit be here remember'd; who be∣ing both Rich, and a Philosopher, turn'd his Land into Mony, and put his Mony to the Banker on this Condition, That if his Sons did prove Fools, he should supply their Wants with it; but if Philosophers, he should deal out all his Treasure to the most indigent of the City. It having been really his opinion, that Fools want Mony, however Rich; whilst Wise-men, thô Poor, are in need of no∣thing. Now whether This is the true Hi∣story, or That which is told us by Philostra∣tus, [That Crates threw his whole Estate into the Sea, as having found it a great Impediment
to the Prosperity of his Studies, and the Tran∣quillity of his Life,] it matters not much; because his Judgment does appear by Both Accompts of his Practice to have been This, that in very much of the World, there's very much Trouble, and Solicitude; and that the more any man has, the more he has of disturbance and interruption; the more he has to be carking and caring for; whether as to its Use, or its Conservation. The Emperour Sigismund (I am sure) did find it so to some purpose, when having brought him out of Hungary a Chest of Gold ready coyn'd, he could never sleep well till he parted with it. For he could not (saith Cuspinian) but still be thinking, either whereEcce crudelissi∣mi hi hostes ac Carnifices, Tor∣tores illi qui me miserè flagella∣verunt. Accipi∣te, ac inter vos dividite, ut mihi tranquillè dormire liceat. Cusp. in vitâ Sigism. p. 4. he might keep it with greatest safety, or how lay it out to the most Advantage. There∣fore calling to him his Counsellors, with the chief Officers of his Army, and all his Lifeguard more especially, he caus'd his Chest to be laid open, and his Forty thousand Pieces (a great Treasure Then,) thrown out amongst them. Those he call'd his Tor∣mentors, his Murderers, his cruell'st Enemies, and his Lictors, which would not suffer him
to rest, by reason of the lashes they laid up∣on him all Night, without remorse, or inter∣mission. This ('tis plain) is not impertinent to the Discourse I am upon, thô imperti∣nent in comparison with all those Emperours and Kings, and other Persons more signal, whom I might reckon (if I had Time) upon This occasion. But desirous to comply with the Time allow'd, I shall not Instance in as many, but in as few as I am able of most Remarque. Such as are the Three Scipio's, in whom the Roman Historians (and the best of the Greek ones) do justly tri∣umph. The chief of These was Africanus, the glorious Downfall of Carthage, and Staff of Rome, as his Paternal Name Scipio does well import. One who grew to such an Highth of Worldly Happiness and Renown, that there was nothing now left to make him Higher, but his Humility. He did not only refuse the Offer, of having his StatueVal. Max. l. 4. c. . signaliz'd in the highest Places, but that of Consulship during Life, and that of perpe∣tual. Po∣lyb. l. 10. p. 110, 111. Dictator also. Yea if Polybius may be credited, (who had most reason to know,) both in Asia, and Europe, as well as Africa,
he did many times refuse to be made a King. And This Polybius calls often, not the Po∣verty, or the Lowness, (as the men of this Age would be apt to call it,) but, as it was in good earnest, the Highth and Greatness of Scipio's Spirit. I am perswaded (says LuciusSen. in Epist. 86. Seneca) that Scipio's Soul went up to Hea∣ven, not because as a Commander he led so ma∣ny and great Armies, but because of That Piety by which he triumph't over Himself. Not so much because he saved, as because having saved, he LEFT his Country. Nor because he left the Service, but the Honours, and the Wealth, and Injoyments of it. It was the Littleness and Obscurity of his House at Linternum, which made that Philosopher admire his Greatness. It was his lying close hid in a little Corner, turning his Spear into a Plough-share, and his Sword into a Pruning∣hook, and labouring with his own hands in dressing and cultivating the Earth, which made this Great man who transcended All others, at the last to exceed and transcend Himself. 'Twas in his Cloud he shin'd brightest. 'Twas the Foil of a Retirement, by which This Iewel was most set off. 'Twas
his Contempt of This World, which made him able to command it; Et Rerum Dominus Nil cupiendo fuit. Such an Example of Self-denial, or (to speak more exactly) Moderation of Mind, (it being no Self-denial, for any Great man to injoy his Wish, and to be as 'twere preferr'd to a private Life,) was the most excellent Cassiodorus; A man of so very great Au∣thority with the Gothic Kings of Italy, (whom he had bless'd a long time as their Principal Minister of State,) that he was reckon'd the very Soul of their Publick Business, and one who ever gave Life to their Great Affairs. Yet being humbled by all his Honours, and so quite tired out with his Secular Greatness, as to betake himself for Refuge unto a Con∣traryFranciscus Ba∣conus in Hist. Vitae & Mor∣tis, p. 267. condition, he spent the Residue of his Time in such Monastical Contentments and Contemplations, as drew out his Life to the Hundredth year. § 16. These and very many others, as well in Ancient as Modern Story, may beVal. Max. l. 7. c. 3. n. 3. extern. sufficient to perswade us to be of Bias his o∣pinion:
That a man's Riches are to be car∣ried, not on his Shoulders, but in his Breast; (and by consequence to be kept, not in his Coffers, but in his Brain;) They are to be such aswill attend him to what place soever he takes his Flight; and such as will stick to him at last in the day of Wrath. These men knew as well, as Apollo's Oracle could tell them; that Aglaus was happier in his Cottage, than King Gyges upon his Throne.Id. ib. n. 9. . Cic. Paradox. And were convinced with Anaxagoras, that publick Honours and vast Revenues can ve∣ry hardly and very seldom consist with Bliss: but that every man's Happiness is to be sought for in his Recess. § 17. If it shall now be imputed to me, that I have spent too much time in second∣ing Reason with Example, I have This to al∣ledge in my justification; That Example up∣on many works more than Reason. Sure I am that it did upon The Emperour CharlesStrad. de Bell. Belgic. l. 1. p. 22. Nec deerant Exempla—quae in eâ deli∣beratione hae∣renti occurre∣bant. Thuan. l. 10 p. 506, 507. the Fifth, if either Strada, or Thuanus, or Both together may be believ'd. For their Accompt of him is This: That as one man's Example taught him to make his Resolution of laying all his Crowns down at the Feet
of Christ, so the Examples of many more didHis & aliis ex∣emplis confir∣matus Caesar, se Imperio ac omnibus Regnis abdicavit, tranquille & pacatè quod vi∣tae supererat transacturiis. Idem. ibid. confirm him in it: But with this great and signal Difference, that the Example which suggested his Purpose to him, was taken from a Poor and a Private man; whereas the ma∣ny more Examples which brought That Pur∣pose to Execution, were of those Emperours and Monarchs of equal Dignity with Him∣self: To wit the Emperour Dioclesian a∣mongst the Heathen; and amongst our Christian Emperours, Anastasius the Second, Theodosius the Third, Isacius Comnenus, Micha∣el Rangabe, Michael the Son of Ducas, Nice∣phorus Botoniates, Manuel Comnenus, Iohannes Cantacuzenus, and the no less Religious than Great Lotharius. Some of which Emperours (he observ'd) had beaten their Scepters in∣to Spades, wherewith they dug their own Graves in their several Gardens. Others thought it their safest course, to leave the Pleasures of the Court for the Severities of the Cloyster. All preferring an obscure and a silent Life, before the splendid'st Injoyments this World could yield them. Now All I pretend to in This first Lesson I am upon, and in arguing as I have argued à majori ad
minus, is not immodestly to contend with any Great man, to seek his lessening; espe∣cially if his Case is such, as that he cannot descend at all, without his falling quite head∣long; But I pretend unto a Prevalence with men of inferiour and low Degree, to acquiesce in that Station which God does see is best for them; to acquiesce in His Will, whose Will is Wisdom; and not to be so excentrical in the Motions of their Souls, as to be crossing God's Providence with their Indeavours or Designs; Nor to oppose their Will to His, by the Carnality of their seeking Greater Things for themselves than their God allows. I aim at teaching inferiour men who do not exceed mine own Size, to reason and argue within themselves à majori ad minus. For why should little men be seeking Great Things for themselves, when many Inheri∣tors of Greatness have been exceedingly sick of it, and therefore have left it as a Disease; whilst others, afraid of its Infection, have perseveringly rejected the offers of it? § 18. But there is another Lesson for Great men also; who may learn (if they please) as well from the Reproof, as from the Prohibiti∣on
of God to Baruch, if not to part with their Greatness, (as the best of the greatest have often done,) at least to know when they are well; or if they patiently accept, yet at least not to seek an Increase of Greatness; much less to seek it for themselves, their pri∣vate Interest and Advantage, without a due respect to the Publick Good; Not to be guilty of so much Levity, as still to soar higher and higher, (as all light things are wont to do,) but to prescribe unto them∣selves a Ne plus ultra; a certain Term be∣yond which they will never tend. The Emperour Pertinax, of a Grammarian, was. Hero∣dian. l. 3. p. 34. well enough contented to become a Great man; and to indure as much Envy as he knew what to do with, or how to bear: But did not like to be the Object of All mens Envy: and therefore 'twas with great Re∣luctance that He accepted of the Empire; or rather he did not so much accept it, as 'twas by Force impos'd upon him. Glabrio was not discontented with his being at the Top of the Roman Senate; But knowing That to be e∣nough, he durst not rise a Step higher, and so refus'd the same Empire with the same ear∣nestness
and vehemence, wherewith Perti∣naxId. ibid. Himself would have thrown it on him. Maximinus was not unwilling, from a very low Birth, and from the Breeding of a Shep∣herd, to be advanced by degrees to be the General of an Army: But yet he knew his full measure; and was really so afraid of being rais'd a step higher, that he did obstinately, is Herodian's Ex∣pression of it. L. 6. p. 140, 141 refuse to accept the Empire, till being com∣pell'd by a Great Army with their Swords drawn about him, he was fain to take it up in his own Defence, and only as somewhat a lesser Evil, than to be murder'd for his Hu∣mility. The like judicious apprehension had the incomparable Decius of Worldly Great∣ness. An . Zosi∣mus l. 1. p. 12. Emperour could no more per∣suade him to take the Government of the Army, than the Army could make him wil∣ling to take the Government of the Em∣pire. And thô at last he discharged Both, yet he did Both against his Will, and by meer Coaction. For Zosimus tells of him ex∣presly, .Ib. p. 13. Such an Aversion to Advancement (above what was enough) had the EmperourVopiscus in vi∣tâ Taciti. p. 409. ad p. 412. Tacitus; who to escape the Danger of it,
hid Himself for two Months from all Dis∣covery. Out of which Hiding-hole when he was drawn, as out of a Dungeon into a Throne, how did he plead against Himself his Inability to ascend it? How many Infir∣mities did he pretend to, (which in truth and by right he could never own,) to excuse his rejection of so much Glory? Nor▪ was it any fault of His, that his Rejection was re∣jected. The Noble Perdiccas had an Ambi∣tion to be a Great man at Court, but not the Greatest. He extended it as far as was a∣greeable with his Subjection; But there it left him. For Curtius tells us, He refus'd theQ. Curt. l. 10. c. 6. absolute Empire of the World, when after A∣lexander's Death it was offer'd to him. So did Xenophon more than once the Honour ofXenoph. in Ex∣ped. Cyri. l. 6. p. 291, 292▪ being Generalissimo, when all the Army of the Greeks would have cast it on him. So did Quintus Fabius Maximus the highest Ma∣gistracyLiv. l. 10. c. 12. p. 368. in Rome, alledging his Age, and his Infirmities, till both the Senators and the People were fain to compel him to an Acceptance. So did Manlius Torquatus ob∣jectIdem l. 26. c. 22. p. 603. the Illness of his Eyes against his being created Consul. And when That could not
excuse him, his chiding did. Nec vestros mo∣res Consul ferre potero, nec vos Imperium meum. Were I Consul (said He) I should no more indure your looser lives, than you my strict and severer Discipline. They were obstinate in their Choice, But so was He in his Refusal. Thus the Consulship of Rome was ambitious of him; That which other men Coveted, to Him went begging. And Honour it self had a Repulse in being the Candidate of Manli∣us; whom Greatness earnestly, and with Zeal, but vainly courted for his Consent. So Vipsanius Agrippa, to whom Augustus ow'd the most for the full Settlement of his Em∣pire, refus'd a Triumph which was decreed him for his conquering and quieting the Asian Rebels. So Fabricius once refus'd toF lor. l. 1. c. 18. have his Partnership in a Kingdom, when by a King it was offer'd to him. Marcius Ru∣tilus Censorinus, and Fabius Maximus, didVal. Max. l. 4. c. 1 n. 3, 4, &c. not only content themselves with a Refusal of the Honours conferr'd upon them, but chid the Romans very severely for the Ex∣cess of such Favours so misapply'd. So Mar∣cus Marcellus, thô the first who made it evi∣dent that Syracuse might be taken, and even
Hanibal subdued, refus'd the Government of Sicily, and shifted it off on his Collegue. So the Seven Wise men of Greece were in no∣thing more thought to have shewn their Wis∣dom, than in shifting off a Treasure from the one unto the other, as men are wont to do Burdens they hate to bear. Cn. Marcus Coriolanus, thô of Princely Family and De∣scent, affected rather to fall, than rise; and rather Poverty, than Wealth. In so much that in reward of all his Services in the Wars, (which were vastly great,) he would not accept of Land, or Mony, (when Land andId. l. 4. c. 3. n. 4. &c. Mony were offer'd to him,) as thinking it Happiness enough to have deserv'd them. Curius also, thô a Commander who con∣quer'd Kings, and subdued Kingdoms, was yet so delighted to live a frugal and pri∣vate Life, that neither the Samnites, nor the Senate could by any Offers shake, much less alter his Resolution. Exactly such another was Fabricius Luscinus, the Noblest Roman of his time in point of Honour, and Authori∣ty, and yet by choice one of the Poorest, in point of Fortune: His desiring very little, did pass with him for a Great Possession: His
Contempt of all Riches He did esteem the Noblest Treasure: and found it more pretious, than Gold, or Silver, that he would not be tempted by either of them to an Acceptance. Such another was Aelius Tubero, surnamed Catus, who rejected the Richest Plate that could be sent him out of Aetolia; and, thô of Consulary Rank, made choice of being served in Earthen Vessels. Aemilius Paulus was a man, who having conquer'd K. Perses, and en∣rich'd all the Romans with the Spoils of Mace∣donia, did most magnanimously refuse to be the richer for them himself; as thinking it Re∣compence enough for his utmost Labours, that his Country had the Emolument, and Him∣self the satisfaction of doing well. Such was the generous Self-denial of Fabius Gurges, and Ogulnius, and of the Fabij Pictores, when sent Embassadours into Aegypt, they were opulently Presented by the Munificent King Ptolemy; and however all was meant for their private use only, yet they sent it Home intirely into the Treasury and Bank of the Commonwealth. Conceiving it dishonourable, if not unjust, that Publick Ministers should admit of any other Compensation, than the
Publick Commendation of their Performance. Such were also Portius Cato, and Marcus Cato Uticensis, men so proverbial for the Blame∣lesness and Integrity of their Lives, for their Enmity to Pleasures, and Severity towards themselves, that I need no more than Name them. Xenocrates was as free from Lust, and Avarice, and Ambition, as if he had been in good earnest (what Phryne call'd him)L. 4. c. 3. an arrant Statue. Alexander the Great would have bought his Friendship, would he have sold it at any Rate. And the Talents which were sent him would have made him ex∣treamly Rich, but that he thought his Best Talent was his Ability to despise them. A∣lexander found it an easier Task to conquer Darius with his Army, than this Philosopher with his Wealth: So that Xenocrates, rather than He, might have been with some rea∣son surnam'd The Great. Omnia habet qui nihil concupiscit, was the Saying of Cornelia, the famous Mother of the Gracchi. And if That has truth in it, certainly Solon, rather than Croesus, might have passed into a Pro∣verb for Riches too. Valerius Poplicola wasL. 4. c. 4. four times Consul; But it was for his Wisdom,
not at all for his Wealth. For contenting himself to have done Great Things for the Commonwealth, and esteeming it his Hap∣piness to do them gratis, he had Estate e∣nough only to live and dye with, But far from enough to pay the Expences of his Bu∣rial. Of all he had or was besides, he had been prodigally free; But his Poverty was a Treasure, he would never once part with for all the World. Agrippa Menenius made it his Choice, to be as deserving, and as poor too, if that can be a man's Poverty, which is his Choice. If'tis, 'tis such a Poverty as makes its Owner most truly Great. And if Agrippa had not been such, he had not sure been made a Iudge between the Senators of Rome and the Common People. But they who differ'd most fiercely in other Matters, could not choose but agree in This, that poor Agrippa Menenius was both the worthiest, and the fittest, and by much the most likely to reconcile them. Attilius Regulus with an Estate of no more than Seven Acres, was yet a Great and a Noble Roman; But de∣lighting in a poor and a private Life, he was taken from his Husbandry, to sit at the
Helm of the Roman Empire. And how unwillingly so advanc'd, did appear by This; That having subdued the Publick Enemies, and settled full Peace in the Commonwealth, he very gladly hast'ned back to That his old way of living by Plough and Harrow, which he had left for some time with an heavy heart. A Consolation to the Poor, and an Instruction to the Rich, how unnecessary to great and glorious Actions meer Riches are. I speak of Riches unattended with Frugality and Prudence, with a Contempt of mean Pleasures, and Moderation, as well as with Conduct and Magnanimity. Lucius Quin∣tus Cincinnatus was just as Rich, or as Poor, as Attilius Regulus: to wit a Lord of Seven Acres, and very busy at his Plough, when the Dictatorship of Rome was presented to him. A glorious Dignity he receiv'd, but not en∣rich'd himself by. For it appears that his Seven Acres were at last shrunk to Four; he having lost the other Three, by being a Surety for his Friend. Lord! the vastly wide difference 'twixt Those Times, and These! or 'twixt Their Grandees, and Ours! Ours are thought to live narrowly, if their
Houses do not stand on as many Acres, as made up all This renowned Dictator's Means. Valerius tells us of a King he names not,L. 7. c. 2. n. 5. (but describes to have been of a subtil Judg∣ment) who said of a Diadem deliver'd to him, that if a man did well consider, to∣gether with the outside, the inside of it, (meaning the Troubles, and the Dangers, and the Anxieties it is lin'd with,) he would not have it for taking up. And if GenusiusL. 5. c. 6. n. 4. had not been of the same opinion, (by knowing the linings of a Crown at the Cost of others,) he would not sure have left Rome in a voluntary exchange for perpetu∣al Banishment, meerly to escape the Possession of it; meerly to be free from a Coronation. And however Theopompus did not plainly run away from the Crown of Sparta, yet he in∣stituted the Ephori, whereby to make it the less significant, and so as to sit upon his Head with less disease. § 19. These and multitudes of the like (whom to mention even with Brevity, were to be tedious,) thô they were Persons in Themselves of very Great Honour, and Re∣nown, were yet exceedingly much the Great∣er,
for their having had such limited and stinted Appetites; for their knowing what was necessary, and what expedient; what was sufficient for their great Purposes, and when they had innocently enough. They did not only not seek Greater Things for themselves than they had already, But either unwilling∣ly did admit them, and with Reluctance; or else did obstinately refuse them, and cast them off. Nay so far they were from seek∣ing Great Things for themselves, that they sought their lessening. They thought there was nothing truly Great, or great enough to be sought, but the Publick Good. And for This very reason They were the Glory of their Times; The Pride and Pleasure of their Historians; and (which is more to their ad∣vantage) they were the Blessings, and the Supports, and the great Ornaments of the Countries wherein they liv'd. But when a man, having arriv'd at Great Things alrea∣dy, is ever casting about for Greater, and has an Ambition like the Fire, which ever craves the more fewel, the more it has; when his Appetite after Honour is as inordinate and as endless, as was That of Albert Wallestein,
whom nothing less would ever satisfie, than the being above his Maker; Then a man's Greatness is his Disease, and his Disease of the worst sort too. 'Tis his Hydrops, his Bou∣limis, his intolerable Prurigo, worse than the Furor Uterinus, which made the Great Em∣press Barbara the vilest Thing in the whole Empire. Even He, whose Abundance of Meat makes him hungry, and He whose Su∣perfluity of Drink makes him dry, is not quite so sad a Creature, nor quite so much to be deplor'd, as He whose Honour makes him Am∣bitious, and whose overmuch Wealth excitesHabak. 2. 5. his Avarice. That such there are in This World, who do enlarge their Desires as Hell, and are as greedy as the Grave, who like the two Daugh∣ters of Solomon's Horsleech, have still enough, and too much, yet still too little; are often full, and often weary, yet never satisfied, with seeking Great Things for Themselves, (I say that such Things there are,) I need not take pains to convince my Hearers. For All the Miseries we have read of, and all the Miseries we have seen in our own Civil Wars, (not now to mention all the Miseries we
have felt,) have been especially the Effects of That Disease I now speak of; If I may not rather call it a Complication of Diseases, which is commonly made up of four Ingre∣dients; to wit a boundless Ambition, an un∣stinted Avarice, a restless Envy, and an in∣satiable Concupiscence after the Pleasure of Revenge. § 20. Now in order to the Prevention, or to the Cure, (that is to say, to the killing) of such a complicated Disease, every Great man must choose so fit a Condition for Himself, and such an wholsom Proportion of this present World, as may be aptest in it self to secure his Interest in the Next. Woolsey wish't he had done it, (and Walle∣stein too,) when 'twas too late. But Sir Thomas Moor did it, and that in Time. This incomparable Person, (whom Lud. Vives in August. de Civ. Dei, l. 2. c. 7. Ludovicus Vives thought it dangerous to commend, for fear of doing him great wrong by fal∣ling short of his Perfections,) having been raised by his own Merits, and without his own seeking, from a very low Estate to the High Chancellorship of England, became so satiated and cloy'd, as well with the Ho∣nour,
as with the Cares of his glorious Of∣fice,Mortalium ha∣rum rerum sa∣tur, quam rem à puero penè sem∣per optaveram, ut ultimos ali∣quot vitae meae annos obtinerem liberos, quibus hujus vitae ne∣gotiis paulatim me subducens, futurae possem immortalita∣tem meditari, eam rem tan∣dem indulgen∣tissimi Princi∣pis incompara∣bili beneficio, (resignatis Ho∣noribus) impe∣travi. Tho. Morus de se in suo ipsius Epi∣taphio à se conscripto. that he gladly laid it down, (out of the love he had to Privacy and Tranquillity of Life,) as any other man's Avarice, help∣ed on by his Ambition, could take it up. And this he did whilst yet a Favourite, far from being under the Cloud (which he af∣terwards was in) of his King's Displeasure. Yea he esteem'd it an higher Favour to be permitted by his Prince to ease himself of such Grandeur, than That wherewith at first it was laid upon him. It being the Thing which from a Child he had wish'd and pray'd for, That God would give him such a Vacation from the Affairs of This Life, as might suffice him to contemplate the Im∣mortality of the Next, and fit himself for its Injoyment. Which his Prayer having been granted, both by God, and the King, he was so exceedingly Thankful for, as to carry his Gratitude to his Grave, and so as to order its being written upon his Grave∣stone. From whence being transferr'd to his Publick Works, 'tis likely now to live as long as the Art of Printing. So when the famous William of Wainflet (as Molestiarum pertaesus quas Cancellarij munus afferre solet, simulque rerum huma∣narum satur, quicquid vitae supererat totum Deo consecra∣vit. Buddenus in Wainfleti vitâ, p. 61. Budden tells
us) made it his choice to devest himself of the High Chancellorship of England, and gave the King immortal Thanks for giving him liberty so to do, He did it not only as be∣ing weary of the Cares which That Office had fill'd him with, (thô That perhaps was one reason,) nor did he it only as being glutted with the Things of This World, to wit with the Riches and Honours of it; (thô that was also another reason;) But it was chiefly that he might mind the greater things of the Next with the less Distracti∣on; that he might not as before, serve God by Snatches, but that the Residue of his Time might be wholly God's. Many others might here be nam'd (Seven at least I am sure,) who eas'd themselves (as being weary) of the Great Seal of England, in or∣der to their advancement unto far greater things in a World to come. And thô it cannot be deny'd, but that being Persons of most incorruptible Integrity, they might safely have continued in their Great Iudica∣tures on Earth, without the danger of be∣ing cast in the Court of Heaven, yet they re∣solv'd to take the Way which they thought
the surest; as knowing it better to make it easy, than meerly possible to be sav'd. For they consider'd what they well knew, as well by Scripture, as by Reason, as well by Histo∣ry, as by Experience, as well by other men's Experience, as by their own, that thô it is not quite impossible, yet'tis a difficult thing on Earth, for the very same man to be Great, and Innocent; to be a Favourite both of This, and the other World; to fare as de∣liciously as Dives all his Days here below, and yet at last to lye with Lazarus in Abra∣ham's Bosom. I am sure Sir Thomas Randolph thought it a thing so rare and difficult, toPaulò ante Mor∣tem literis quas vidi seriò ad∣monuit, quàm dignum quàm necessarium, ut Ille Secretarii, Ipse Legati Technis jam tandem valedi∣ceret; uterque coelestem Patri∣am cogitâret, et poenitendo di∣vinam implo∣rarent Miseri∣cordiam. Camb∣denus in Eliz. Annal. Tom. 2. seu parte quar∣tâ, p. 26. be a man of much Publick and Secular Bu∣siness, and at the same Time to be fit to dye, that by Letters he exhorted his intimate Friend Sir Francis Walsingham, to bid adieu to all the Wiles of a Principal Secretary of State, as He himself had newly done to all the Frauds or an Embassadour, (for the Num∣ber of his Embassies had been no less than Eighteen,) and to prepare himself by a pe∣nitent and private life, for the life to come. An Admonition very seasonable in regard of Both Persons concerned in it; Walsing∣ham,
to whom; and Randolph himself, by whom 'twas given. For they had long liv'd together as eminent Ministers of State; and neither of them liv'd long from after the time of This Advice; Nor did the one outlive the other above a Month or two at most. What induced Queen Mary (the Royal Sister of Charles the Fifth) to quit her Go∣vernment of Belgium in Exchange for a private and quiet Life, 'tis very easy to con∣jecture, but hard to tell. Perhaps 'twas chiefly out of Reverence to the Example of her Brother, as 'twas done the same Day, wherein He laid down his Empire, and Crown of Spain; and even wept out of Compassion to his poor Brother, and his Son Philip, whose feeble Shoulders were now to sink under two such Loads, to wit the Kingdom of Spain, and the German Empire. I say, whatever was Her Inducement to do a thing above the Rate of her Sex and Breed∣ing; sure we are, that Queen Etheldred wasGodwin. de Praesulibus An∣glicanis, p. 198. wholly induced by her Devotion to forsake the Pomps and Pleasures she might have liv'd in all her days, (as the Daughter of
one King, the Widow of another, and the Wife of a Third,) had she not thought it an happier choice to live retiredly in an Abby, which she had built, and indow'd, and was the Abbess of till her Death. And not to mention Queen Christina of Sweden, or Bambas of Spain, (unless it be thus by a Paralipsis) no fewer than Nine of our own Saxon Kings, within the Space of Two hun∣dred years, did freely relinquish their Crowns and Kingdoms. To which I add; That when Ionadab impos'd That strictJer. 35. 6, 7. Command upon his Sons, to drink no Wine, to build no House, to sow no Seed, to plant no Vineyard, and all their days to dwell in Tents; (in little despicable Huts by the River Iordan,) He did not only so command them to shew his Dominion, and his Will, or only to exercise their Obedience, and Self-denial; But because he did esteem it the safest state and condition, to help enable them for an Innocent, and Pious Life. § 21. Another Use of This Text is with a Distinction to contradict it. We must not seek Great Things for our selves, because we must. Not Great Things, because the
Greatest. For what can be Greater than a Kingdom? and what so Great Kingdom, as the Kingdom of God, to the seeking of which our Lord excites us? (Matth. 6. 33.) So by St. Paul we are commanded, to seek those things that are above, (Col. 3. 1.) Not above us here on Earth, but above every thing that is Earthy. Nor are we only to seek God's Kingdom, thô vastly Great, But (what is infinitely Greater) we are to seek God himself, who is The Great Rewarder of Them that diligently seek him, and The Re∣warder of None besides, (Heb. 11. 6.) Thus the Dehortative, Seek not, is strongly infor∣ced and urged on by a vehement Exhortati∣on, Seek Those Things that are Above. Seek the Greatest Things imaginable, and Seek them for your selves too. Ye have not here a continuing City, and therefore Seek one to come. For what says the Author of the E∣pistle to the Hebrews? The life we have isHeb. 13. worth Nothing, compar'd with That we hope for. Which, being yet hid with Christ in God, we must seek, and seek on, till we find it out. Some things are Great which are not Good, and some are Good but
not Great; But These are the Good and Great Things, which alone are worth seek∣ing; and which we are not only allow'd, but bid and bound to seek after. In compari∣son with These, [The Life which is hid with Christ in God, The Kingdom of God, and God Himself.] we ought to slight the ar∣rant Isa. 40. 17. Nothingness of the Things here be∣low, which by a pitiful Catachresis the World calls Great; and as devoutly seeks after, as after an Heaven upon Earth. So every Hil∣lock is a Great thing with a Community of Emmets wherewith 'tis Peopled, thô 'tis not determin'd by Philosophers, whether (like Bees) they are a Kingdom, or (like some other Insects) a Commonwealth. But yet as Great as That Hillock does seem to Them, we know 'tis no bigger in respect of all the Earth, than All the Earth in respect of Hea∣ven. And yet so it is, notwithstanding their littleness, and their contemptibility, we do no more excel Them in point of Quantity, and Strength, than they do us in the good Qualities of Peace, and Pru∣dence. For all Communities of Emmets are still at Agreement among Themselves;
are never indanger'd, much less destroy'd, by any Intestine, or Homebred, either Di∣visions, or Insurrections. Whereas We have a Kingdom so sadly divided against It self, that wicked men hope, and wise men fear,) (and there is ground for a suspicion,) it cannot long stand. § 22. Now to shew the Real Littleness (the Prophet Esa calls it the Nothingness) of the Great Things below, being weighed in the Ballance with Those Above, It will not probably be amiss, to put them Both into the Scales; that so we may see how much the later weigh down the former. First the Great Things below are but figuratively such, and secundum quid; somewhat Great in Appearance, but not indeed; or only Great in their relation to what is very much less; and so an Emmet-hill is as great in com∣parison with its Inhabitants, as the whole Globe of Earth in respect of us. Whereas the Great Things above are Great simplici∣ter, and in Themselves; They are absolute∣ly Great, and without a figure. In compa∣rison with Them, all the Great Things be∣low do presently dwindle into a Point. The
very Orb the Sun moves in is 100000 times bigger than all the Earth; But in relation to the Circumference of the Coelum Empy∣raeum, or but of That which is called the Primum Mobile, All the Dimensions of the Earth do immediately vanish, and lose themselves into a Center. Next the Great Things Below will sooner or later be sure to fail us, and so with very great reason they have the Title of Uncertain affixt un∣to them in Holy Writ; whereas the Great Things Above will abide for ever; There the Crown is immarcescible; nor is there only an exceeding, but an eternal weight of Glory. Again, the Great Things Below are mixt with Troubles and Solicitudes; the Stream of their Injoyment does never run clear; but what with Crosses, or Cares, is always muddy; whereas the Great Things Above do flow with such Rivers of Delight, as cannot be mingled with the least Drop ei∣ther of Sorrow, or Interruption; in the Pre∣sence of God is Life, and most sincere plea∣sures for evermore. Again, the Great Things Below do only exercise our Thirst, if not increase it; Superfluity it self, does
but inlarge a man's Appetite, and every man's Avarice is only wid'ned by his Posses∣sions: whereas the Great Things Above will give us a plenary Satisfaction. There 'twill be one of our Injoyments, not to be able to Desire; All our Longings and Ambiti∣ons will be wholly swallowed up into meer Fruition. Besides, the Great Things Below are very often by God's Permission, in the Disposal of the Devil; as is evident in the two Cases of Holy Iob, and the Sabaeans; of the Israelites, and Pharaoh; of Iesus Christ, and Pontius Pilate; of the Greek Christians, and the Great Turk; of Innocent Travel∣lers, and Highway Thieves. By which and many other Cases there can be no∣thing more clear, than that the Great Things Below are by the Sufferance of God in the Devil's Disposal. Whereas the Great Things Above are above his Reach: His Chain of Darkness, which is his Tedder, fal∣ling short of That Region from whence He fell. Lastly, the Great Things Above do all legitimate our seeking, and make it gracious; whereas the Great Things Be∣low do increase its Guilt. And thence the
Great Things Above are strictly commanded to be sought; whereas the Great Things Below are under as strict a Prohibition. Those we must seek, with Baruch; But These, with Baruch, we must forbear. These I think are All the Uses we are to make of This Message of God to Baruch; (besides the Use I made of it by way of Anticipation on this Day Sennight;) and with These I dismiss its full and final Con∣sideration. FINIS.
THE TABLE. A ABstinence. A notable Instance of it, p. 620. Advantageous to a man's well-being, 662 Aeternal life the Prime object of our search, 265, 266, &c. how described in holy Writers, 305, 306, 307, &c. what meant by the words of Eternal life, 325, 326, 373, 374, &c. Afflictions. Extreamly beneficial, and to be prayed for, 185, 186, &c. 191, 192. for them a Time of Re∣compence. 569, 570 Almsgiving necessary to life, 391, 392. a Necessary Concomitant of Prayer, 607, 608. incouragements thereto, 609, 610 Ambition. How to be regulated, 303, 304. wherein a Duty, 311, 312. &c. It's Itch antidoted, 467, 468, &c. unto the end. The danger of it, 615, 616, &c. Incident to Good men, 618
Antinomians. See Solifidianism. Apostates. Too general. p. 389, 390 Assurance of Salvation, how and when to be attained, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 202, 203, 259, 260 Atheists. Reason'd with, 180, 181, 182, &c. Avarice. How a Duty of the first magnitude, 311, 312, &c. how a Vice of the same, 490, 491, &c. Idolatry and Fornication, 600, 601. increased by pos∣sessions, 650 Authority. Obedience to it of the Essence of Christia∣nity, 625 B. BElievers. Seldom truly Christian, yet seldom doubt of their being such, 177, 178, 179, &c. many ways Believers without true Faith, 250, 251, &c. Brutes. How didactical to men, 399, 400 C. CAution. Needful to the Wisest and Best of men, 148 to 155, 161, 162 Christ. A Master, a Lord, a Legislator, a King, a Prince, a Judge, and whatsoever may oblige us to do him service, 10, 16, 17, 341, 342, &c. A stone of stumbling to Solifidians and Antinomians, 6, 7. His false and true Followers, 18, 19, 20, &c. 27, 28, &c. An easier Taskmaster than Moses, 37, &c. His Service profitable and pleasant, 39, 40, &c. 47, 48, &c. His End in coming hither, and Business
when he was here, 115, 116, &c. 125, 126. our only Oracle to be consulted, 327, 328, &c. His Exam∣ple to be followed, 584, 585 Christianity. Wherein it consists, 196, 197, 200, &c. 315, 316, &c. the hardest parts of it, 351, 352. how made easy, 354, 355, &c. to 366. How divi∣ded, 434, 435 Commandments. How to keep them is the whole du∣ty of a Christian, 11, 12. In what Respects not grievous, 50, 51, 52, &c. 47, 48, 49, &c. 57, 58, &c. How made possible and pleasant, 356, 357, 358, 359, &c. to 380. Competition for our choice 'twixt God and Satan, 518, 519. to 527 Confession as necessary as Faith, 222, 223 Consideration. Of what Importance, 182, 183, &c. 191, 195, 196, 198 Contentment. Its true Rise, not from Abundance but the Mind, 575. the way to attain it, 576. Reasons for it, 624, 651. The Benefit of it, 660 Cross. Easy, whether laid on us by others, or freely taken upon our selves, 64 to 77. Curiosity. How to be profitably objected, 304, 305, &c. D. DAmnation. The most elaborately sought, 176, 177 Decrees of God how both Absolute and Conditional 157, 158 Devil. How the God of this World, 50, 51. How hard a Taskmaster, 368, 369. wherein his chiefest
strength lyes, 448, 449. &c. to the end. How much of the World in his Disposal, and why, 528 to 569. How limited, 551, 552, &c. A Re∣medy against his Temptations, 570, 571. his Gifts improfitable, 576. and hurtful, 577. not to be boasted of, and why, ibid. His Scope and End in bestowing them, 586, 589, 590, 591, 592, 593. what Return we are to make him, 597, 598. How to beat him with his own Weapon, 607 Diogenes. Miserably misunderstood, 509, 510, &c. Disciples of Christ how to Catechise themselves, 28, 29, 30, 113, 114 Disputes. What the only safe end of them, 310. a∣mong Christians a stumbling-block to the Jews, 430, 431, &c. Divisions of Christians scandalous, 429, 430, 431, &c. Dives. Why the Representative of the Damned, 487, 488 E. ELection unconditional how dangerous to be be∣lieved, 157 England. How much happier than other Nations, 437, 438, &c. Englishmen the worse the more Ingrateful, 439, 440. their Degeneracy, 667 Example. More cogent with some men than Reason, 680, 681 Experience of the Worst and Best men compared, 50, 51, 52. A Proof of the Pleasure the Law of Christ yields us, 58, 59, 60, 61
F. FAith. Seldom Truly Christian, 85, 86. of the greatest Consequence that it be True, 86, 87, 102. a special Instance of Obedience, 108, 109. Never True but when the Mother of Obedience, 110, 111. how a Telescope, 181, 182, 256, 257. how and when Salvifick, 223, 224, &c. Its seve∣ral Sorts and Significations, 229, 230, &c. Its my∣sterious Definition, 239, 240. how the Pandect of Christian Duties, 241, 242, &c. to be found in very few, 418, &c. what Faith Salvifick, 441 to 449 Fear. How requir'd to true Faith, 96, 97. Fear and Trembling of a threefold Importance, 131, 132, 133, &c. Nothing more forbidden, or more com∣manded in Scripture, 135, 136, 137. the Recon∣cilement, 138, 139, &c. a Religious passion, 152, 154, 161, 162 Fiduciaries represented, 104, 105, 106, &c. 113, 114. Antidoted and humbled, 219, 220, &c. 250, 251, &c. 319, 320 G. GIfts. Of men Imperfect, 587, 588. of God only Compleat, ibid. of the Devil, dangerous, 589, 590, &c. 592. described, 593. to be bewared, 594, 595, 596 God. How a comfortable Light, and consuming Fire, 111, 112. how his Omnipotence should oblige us
to Obedience, 398, 399. his Permissions of Evil accounted for, 560, 561. &c. 583, 584. Other Reasons, 572. The Uses to be made of it, 573, 574, &c. The Difference 'twixt his Distribution of Endless Torments, and present Goods and E∣vils, unto men, 628, 629, 630. Evils happen to Good men, by his Order, or Permission, ibid. Goodness of Christ as a Legislator, 349, 350, &c. Gospel. A Rule, not a meer Dispensation, 119. Its Summary preached by Paul and Silas, 245, 246, &c. how a refuge from the Law, 329, 330. why to be called the New Law, 341, 342 Government. Of a mans self difficult, 657 Grace. In All is sufficient, 47, 48. How it signifies the Gospel, 92, 93, 94. Resembled by Manna, 404, 405. how it exceeds the state of Innocence, 406. The freeness of it, 407, 408, &c. H. HAppiness upon Earth wherein it lies, 259, 260, 305, 306, &c. 368, 369, 370, &c. Heaven. See Aeternal life. Hell made for the Use of All, 156. an Hell to think of, 183, 184. Humility. Necessary in the working out Salvation 131, 132, &c. 141, &c. the Proper vertue of the Greatest, 287, 288, 289, &c. The great Motive to it, 406, 407, &c. Hypocrisy. In what Professors most seen, 346, 347
I. IDleness. Its miserable Effects, 498, 499, &c. Iews parallel'd with Christians and less obliged, 127. less unexcusable, 429, 430 Impunity the severest punishment, 565, 566, &c. Infidelity. How to be proved, 441, 442, &c. Infirmities. How beneficial, 404, 405, 406 Injuries. How beneficial to the injured, 67, 68 Inquiries. How to be made, 302, 303, &c. to 315. what sort to be avoided, 316, 317. &c. a Touch∣stone to try of what sort we are, 321, 322, &c. Interest governs the World, 83, 84, 85 Iob. His case at large, 529 to 535. and 567, 568. Iustice. Its wants in the World, 436, 437, &c. Iustification. From Eternity a dangerous Doctrin, 7, 8. to what kind of Faith it is ascribed, 233, 234, &c. K. KIngdoms. The littleness of them on Earth, 311, 312, &c. Kings next to God, most capable of Injuries, 66, 67. most accomptable to God, because not at all to man, 297. L. LAw of the Gospel, 42, 43, &c. of Faith, 121. of Mo∣ses, how it drives us to Christ, 328, 329, 330, 350. Christ a Legislator as well as Moses, 341, 342, &c. Liberality. In whom the Effect of Avarice, 593, 594. Libertines. How made, and why so many, 6. like the
old Gnosticks, 44, 45. described, 103, 104 Liberty of a Christian wherein it stands, 95, 96, 100, 166 Love. How it casteth out fear, and carries fear along with it, 138, 139, 161, 162. How the greatest of Vertues, 312, 313. how seldom True, 433, 434. How it fulfils the whole Law, 445, 446 M. MAhomedans. Better than many Christians, 425, 426 Man. How much more obliged than other Creatures, 385, 386. yet of All the most ingrateful, 387, 388. How to learn of the Brutes, 399, 400, &c. Martyrdom. The Reasonableness of it, 28, 29, &c. Moderation of mind how attain'd, 673. Motives to it, 673 to 700. Money. Its danger and Description, 507, 508. Moses. How he leads men to Christ, 328, 329, &c. as a lesser Paedagogue to a greater, 342, 343, &c. 350, 351. How he escaped the Devils Lime-twigs in his youth, 505 N. NIggard. His largess and folly equal, 490, 491. to 495 Nobility. Wherein it consists, 288, 289, &c. its proper duties, 296, 297 O. OBedience, Its necessity to Salvation, 2 to 34. It must be Passive as well as Active, 27, 28, 29, 30. its own Reward, 60, 61, 62, &c. Indispensably neces∣sary
under the Gospel, 92, 93, &c. All one with Sa∣ving Faith, 235, 236. The All in All to a Christian, 344, 345, 346, &c. if not Servile, but ingenuous, 377, 378, &c. 395, 396, 400. the Condition, not the Cause of Salvation, 410, 411, &c. Opinions. Why to be well examin'd, 8, 9 Oracles many and deceitful, 331, 332 Orthodoxie not enough, 198, 199, &c. P. PErfection. Evangelical what, 364, 365 Persecution. Consisting with Pleasure, 71, 72, 73 Perseverance. Necessary to life, 146, 147, 149, 150, 152, 153, 390 Poverty. Preferred by many Heathens, 509, 510, &c. Sanctified by Christ, and recommended, 513, 514, &c. 519. a Comfort, 605, 645, 646, 647, 652, 653, 654. of what sort intended, 654, &c. Practice. The life of Christianity, 195, 196, &c. 200, &c. follows Principles, 441, 442, &c. Prayer. Worthless without Perseverance, 418, 419, &c. 462 Presumption. More dangerous than Despair, 144, 145, 147. oft mistaken for Faith, 421 Pride. In the poorest, 294, 295. the Sin of Sodom, 497 Principles. To be known by Practice, 442, 443, &c. Prodigality. Hardly avoidable even by Niggards, 494, 495. no less Sin than Avarice, 601 Prognostick of the Coming of Christ to Judgment, 417 to 463. Promises of the Gospel still clog'd with Precepts, 123, 124. yet confer a Right on All Performances of the Condition, 150, 151, 154, 159, 160 Prosperity. The hardest Weapon to wield, 184, 185, &c.
No mark of Goodness, 436. tho, often its Reward, 437. the Common Portion of the worst, 539, 540, &c. Not to be envied, 583 accompanied with trouble, 676 Puritans. Modern Catharists, 388, 389 Pythagoreans. Their exact Conformity to their Ma∣ster, 19, 20. wherein to be aemulated by Christians, 177 Poverty. Wherein it truly consists, 659. the Good Ef∣fect of it, ibid. & 660, 661. Consolation from it, 691 R. REconcilement 'twixt Calvinists and Remonstrants, 158, 159. 'twixt St. Paul and St. Iames, 248, 249 by whom indeavour'd, 431. by whom abhor'd, ib. & 432 Redemption. At what rate procured, and wherein it chiefly consists, 12, 13, 14, &c. Rather from Sin than Hell, 115, 116, &c. Religion. Its life lyes in Action, 32, 33 Repentance. How much is meant by it, 25 Reverence. Compounded of Love and Fear, 94, 95, 96 Reward and Punishment the Inforcements of Duty, 94, 95 Rich mens Lesson, 285, 286. their Dangers most and greatest, 500, 501, &c. Riches. Impediments to Eternal life, 485. Enemies to all that's good, 486, 487. the Devil's Lime twigs, 502, 503, &c. Inquiry to be made how we come by them, 578. and accordingly to be injoy'd or acquitted, 579. Not always a sign of God's favour, and why, 580, 581, 582. always Temptations, 599, 600. The greatest Idol of the world, ibid. Separate us from God, 602 not to be sought by us, and why, 603, 604.
thô to be well employ'd when lawfully acquir'd, ib. The dearest and cheapest things in the world, 605. Matter of Sorrow to the owners, 606. to be account∣ed for, 644, 645. how to be injoy'd with Innocence, 658, 659, 671, 680 S. SAlvation. To whom alone it belongs, 21, 22, 23, &c. 32, 33, &c. what the Condition on which 'tis given, 112, 113, &c. to be worked out by us, 129, &c. hard to have an Assurance of, 147, 148 to 155. the only thing to be searched after, 169, 170, &c. yet the least labour'd for, 175, 176 Satan. Why his Harvest more than Christ's, 176. his Master-piece, 468, 469, &c. Scandal. To whom given by Christians, 434, 435, &c. Sedition. Dissuasives from it, 438, 439, &c. Self-denial and Self-revenge the Root of all Goodness, 453, 454, &c. Exemplified in the Heathens, 509, 510, &c. but in Christ above all, 513, 514, &c. Self-love. How the Root of All Evil, 450, 451, 452, &c. attended with Revenge, and Carelesness, of others, 623 Service of God how mistaken, 107, 108 Sins. Some not to be Named, 110 Sloath. A Sin of Sodom as great as any, 498, 499, &c. Socrates. How like a real Christian, 512, 513 Solifidianism. Its danger, 7, 31, 33, 45, 46. Confuted by Arguments ad Absurdum, 55, 56, 128. Its venom laid open, 212, 213, &c. 228, 229, 319, 320 Sufferings. Peculiar to Great and Good men, 65, 66 T. TEmptations. How to be encounter'd, 75, 76. what the greatest in All the world, 468, 469, &c. to the end. How to resist them, 524, 525, 597, 598.
their Benefit, 481, 482, 483, why to be rejoiced in, and when, ibid. Terrors. Of the Lord of wholsom force, 156, 157, 169, 174, &c. 190, 191, &c. 193, 194. How Instrumen∣tal to Christianity, 350, 351, &c. Truth. Hurtful when but partially delivered, 9, 10. and when tack'd on to as great a Falshood, 47. Exempli∣fied in Satan, 555, 556, &c. U. UNity, among the Jews, 429. a Mark of Truth, 430, &c. W. WAtchfulness. A necessary Duty, 459, 460, &c. Wickedness. At what doors it enter'd the world, 599, 600 World how turned upside down by the Apostles, 167, 168. How made an Antidote to its own Venom, 188, 189, &c. How universally depraved, 456, 457, &c. Worldlings. Their Misery, 600, 601 Worldly Greatness. Its dangers, 449, 450, &c. to the End. Why it is beggarly, and can't be undervalued, 573, 574, 575. the want of it our Advantage, 625, 626, &c. Reasons not to seek it, 630, 631, 632, &c. to 646, 650. which the least desirable, 656 to 663. wholsom Les∣sons to Poor and Rich concerning it, 663, 664, 665. the means and motives to the learning of them, 668, 669, &c. 682, 683, &c. from the Examples of Great men, 684, &c. Works. Good ones Absolutely Necessary to Salvation, 23, 24, 31, 32, &c. How Salvation to be worked out, 129, 130, &c. Y. YOung mens Lesson, 277, 278
Books lately printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's Church-yard. A Perfect Copy of all the Summons of the Nobi∣lity to the Great Councils and Parliaments of this Realm, from the Forty ninth of King Henry the Third, until these present Times: With Catalogues of such Noblemen as have been summoned to Parliament in Right of their Wives; and of such other Noblemen as derive their Titles of Honour from the Heirs Female from whom they are descended, and of such Noblemens Eldest Sons as have been summoned to Parliament by some of their Fathers Titles. Extracted from Publick Records, by Sir William Dugdate Knight, Garter, Princi∣pal King at Arms. The Order of the Installation of Henry Duke of Nor∣folk, Henry Earl of Peterborough, and Laurence Earl of Rochester, Knights and Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter, in the Royal Chappel of St. George at Windsor, Iuly 22. 1685. An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes, from Scripture, Reason, and the Opinion and Practice of Iews, Gentiles, and Christians in all Ages. Designed to supply the Omissions, answer the Obje∣ctions, and rectifie the Mistakes of Mr. Selden's Histo∣ry of Tythes. Part I. The second Edition corrected and amended. By Thomas Comber DD. Proecentor of York. An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes; which is further proved by Scripture and
Antiquity, and illustrated by the Solemn Consecrati∣on and great Convenience of them: With an Answer to the Objections of other Authors against them. Part II. To which is added, A Discourse concerning Excommunication. By Thomas Comber D. D. Proecentor of York. A Treatise of Spousals, and Matrimonial Contracts: Wherein all the Questions relating to that Subject are ingeniously Debated and Resolved. By Mr. Henry Swinburne, Author of the Treatise of Wills and Testa∣ments. The Excellency of Monarchical Government, espe∣cially of the English Monarchy: Wherein is largely treated of the several Benefits of Kingly Government, and the Inconvenience of Commonwealths. Also of the several Badges of Soveraignty in general, and parti∣cularly according to the Constitution of our Laws. Likewise, of the Duty of Subjects, and the Mischiefs of Faction, Sedition, and Rebellion. In all which, the Principles and Practices of our late Commonwealths men are considered. By Nathaniel Iohnston Doctor in Physick. Dr. Stern Archbishop of York, his Book of Logick. In Octavo. Dean of Durham his Counsel and Directions, Moral and Divine, to a young Gent.
