P486A 99825096 29469
A REVINDICATION Set forth by William Parker, In the behalfe of Dr. Drayton deceased, and himself: Of the Possibility of a Total mortification of Sin in this life: And, Of the Saints perfect obedience to the Law of God: To be the Orthodox Protestant Doctrine, and no Innovations (as they are falsly charged to be) of Dr. DRAYTON and W. PARKER; In an ILLOGICALL VINDICATION, Wherein the necessity of sins remaining in the best Saints as long as they live, and the impossibility of perfect obedience to the Law of God, is ignorantly and perversly avouched to to be the Orthodox Protestant Doctrine; by one who subscribeth his name JOHN TENDRING. The Anagram whereof is, 'GINNE TO HINDER. What! 'Ginne to hinder doctrines so divine, Which teach in heavenly purity the Trine? Would have the man to live without the sin, The blessed state he was created in; Under pretence of innovations late Taught by truths Lovers whom your soul doth hate Witness your tongue in flamed with hels fire, Calling us Jesuits acting for Romes hire. What! must Jehovah nil he will he dwel With sin, while Saints retain their earthly cell? What! did not Abraham drive the sowles away, Gen. 15.11. Which came upon the Sacrifice to prey? Was he compell'd to let them there abide? No, thence he forc'd them ere the evening-tide: And must best Saints keep sin, (that soul disease,) Without their will, till death bring their release? Fie John! Tendering this Vindication You settle sin (Gods abomination) I'th soul foretold of desolation; Matth. 24.15. Which we remove: but you cry out and say, We teach to hell! The clean contrary way! London, Printed by W.G. and are to be sold, with the Examen to the late Synods Confession of Faith, by Nathaniel Brook at the sign of the Angel in Cornhill, and John Orme in Pellican-Court in Little Britain, M.DC.LVIII.
The Vindicator (before he entreth upon the prosecution of his sinful business in plain terms) doth present a Preface to his be∣loved friends, in Scripture-phrase, like to a Pharisaical Saint, with a specious saluta∣tion in the front of it. A true Paraphrase of both which (as they must intend in reference to his Position) we shall offer the impartial and intelligent Reader, in manner and form following. TO all Lovers of Gods truth, which I call Gods truth, namely, to live in sin and disobedience as long as we precious Saints live in houses of clay: grace I wish to you; yea, so much grace, as to be content to live in sin and diso∣bedience to Gods law, without hearkening to our enemies con∣trary doctrines: and also peace I wish you, even as much peace, as you can expect by living all your life long in sinne; for there is no peace to the wicked, saith my God, Isa. 57.21. through Jesus Christ. Who is no minister, nor allower of sin, but a faithful redeemer of his eminent Saints from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14.
The Vindicators first paragraph of his Preface beginneth thus: Beloved friends, (for so I may call you who stick as close to my sinful cause as my skin doth to my sinful flesh;) These are the times foretold, wherein there shall be a falling away from our sinful positions, and defection from the faith, of our sin∣ful doctrine hereafter to be named, as a forerunner of the great and terrible day, to the man of sinne, 2 Thes. 2.8. and of the losse of our credit with all sober and wise people, for our main∣taining that sin will remain in the best of Saints as long as they live in houses of the clay that Adam our first parent was made out of. There are many false prophets (that is, to us and our sinful cause) whose study and labour is to undeceive poor souls, (though I say to deceive them) if it were possible the very elect and choice ones, who yet fight and contend for sin to remain in the best Saints as long as they live, that so they may not be esteemed for better Saints then our selves are who live (as it is well known to our neighbours) we do. I call them men confident in an arm of flesh (Goliah-like) to terrifie our weak ones (who know not the depths of Satan, Rev. 2.24.) from hearkning to them, because to say so it maketh a great noise in the eares of our friends by reason that Jeremiah saith, cap. 17.5. Cursed be he that maketh flesh his arm; though the truth is, we our selves are the men confident in an arm of flesh; because that sin is called flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20 21. and therefore to be confident for sins remaining in the best of Saints untill death, is to be confident in the arm of flesh, Goliah-like, which signifieth (as one saith) fleeting away, as indeed we are like to be, for they defie the whole Israel of God, that is, all the prevailers of the God of this world, who blindeth the mindes of unbelievers (2 Cor. 4.4.) to make them the more hardy in a sinful cause, as who more bold then blind bayard? And Goliah-like we are like to be, when little David (the lovely servant of God) with some pebble-stones (1 Sam. 17.4.) out of the stony law (Deut. 4.13.) doth hit the champion in the fore noddle, and throw him down to the earth from whence he came, Rev. 3.11. But as long as I can stand to it, I shall not (as I tell you
in my next paragraph) be daunted by the foresaid Prophets, who oppose our falshood, however I am esteemed among them; so that you my friends hug me and love me for ingaging in this sinful quarrel, to maintain that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live, I tell them in the said paragraph, that applause (I mean from them) shall not swell us; for we are not like to have much from them: and their dispraise shall not deject us, so that you my beloved friends continue to applaud us; but if you do not, we shall be dead in the nest. I tell them their greatnesse shall not affright us, because they are but yet few; for we are as yet the greatest in number, of what rank soever: and my hopes are we shall continue so, if I can but cunningly abuse them with swelling word of vanity, as you see I do my utmost in this my Preface, to keep them unto us, which (I doubt) I shall not long do, but untill they lay bare the nakednesse of my Vindication. Yet (as I tell you in my next paragraph) I am resolved when the glory of the God of this world lyeth at the stake, as it did when the Goddesse Diana (Act. 19.26, 27.) was preach∣ed against, and her crafts-men were like to lose all their gain; because her magn ficence was neer pulling down: And therefore beloved friends (being such a people as we are) we must not (when such Prophets do so openly endeavour to un∣deceive our choice ones, that they may live no longer in a per∣swasion that they must sinne while they live here) we must not (I say) stand by with a guilty silence, as if we were a∣shamed (being past shame) to maintain our sinful-positions: but as we are bound by many obligations of credit, profit and pleasure, (as I may whisper to you in private) to defend for truth our re∣nents, and withstand the gain-sayers of them, or we are undone as a man should undo an oyster. Yet (as I tell you in my next paragraph) I am neither worthy of note, since I left my wife at Burston neere Nor∣wich above twelve years since, and became a vgabond upon the face of our English earth; nor yet noted the unworthiest, since I came among you at Wilton my beloved friends; no nor noted the unworthiest among the thousands of Levi, be∣cause
I preach and appear in Print for the same-sinful doctrine which they own and maintain. But though I be the meanest of Gods servants for so doing, yet my witnesse is in Heaven that I have endeavoured to do the worst service to Gods Church I can, even to perswade men to a security in sin, and never to strive to mortifie all sinne in them, because I tell them in Print (though I cannot prove it by Scripture) that sin will remain in the choice Saints as long as they live. And therefore this part of my simple and sinful stuff (as I tell you in my next paragraph) I presume to present to those who fear the Lord (as they did, 2 Kings 17.41. which feared God and served their idols) not begging pa∣tronage from such great ones as I know like not our sin∣ful doctrines (though the world do not like them for it) of a necessity of continuing in sin as long as we live. But I hope I shall receive your patronage (my endeared friends) for the same: And wherein I erre in not doing my utmost to maintain that our sinnes must remain with us while we live here, I desire your pardon, not defence, if I do not as I say: though, when I have done my utmost, I can but perswade weak capacities to beleeve, that the best Saints are (where it is without controversie we are still) in sinne. The occasion (as I tell you in my next paragraph) of this published Vindication (which will prove, I doubt, dismall to us in the end,) was, a dispute, or a contest ra∣ther (as I call it) on our pars) betwixt Doctor Drayton and Parker on the one party, and my selfe and many of my dear friends on the other party, in Wilton Church, where they had preached for a possibility of a total mortification of sin in this life; and in the said contest they did openly deny for truth (as justly they may) the positions which we main∣tain, and have placed in Capitall letters with boldnesse at the beginning of our senselesse Vindication. Now although (as I tell you in my next paragraph) our points in controversie (concerning the remaining of sinne in the best of Saints as long as they live) have been so fully and plainly asserted in dark times, when men could not (though
they looked wistly) see wood for trees, yea swallowed down by the credulous people, who have been over-perswaded to believe our foresaid positions for Gospel, by reason we pretend the Worthies (ever since the Apostles with their Apostolical do∣ctrine fell asleep) of the dark times have held out our positions; for which I call them men of blessed memory, to us for, counte∣nancing (as I endeavour to make the people believe) what I and the reverend Clergy of our mind maintain; though the Prophets aforesaid are ready to call them irreverend for so doing: But yet we say to these opposites unto our tenents that they are men puft up with pride in our sense, (though not in their own) for correcting Magnificat, and going about to untrusse our points, which have been so fully declared to be sound and or∣thodox; that if these fatal Prophets did not contradict them, ad∣mission of addition to maintain our sinful doctrine (worthy to be confuted) might seem superfluous and unnecessary for me, unlessel could speak more sense them I do. But although the proverb (as I tell you in my next pa∣ragraph) will be fulfilled in me (undertaking this task) Ni∣hil dictum quod non dictum priùs, I can speak nothing for our sinful cause (having only learned it from others, and my own long practise) which hath not been said already; yet in regard there are many people well-willers to us, and our sinne-maintaining cause (which do depend on me a sufficient bold follow to lead them wrong) who of late have been disturbed and unsetled from our positions, by reason of the resoluti∣ons of our gain-sayers to oppose our ensuing falshoods, (which we call truths;) and also many of the said people are not able to buy great volumes (because they are not to be had) of such nonsenfical and sinful stuffe as we vent in our Vindication: And likewise by reason (as I tell you in my next para∣graph) of the weakness of the capacity of our friends, who cannot easily apprehend (unless they open their eyes) the perspicuity and plainness of their truths, of a possibility of a total mortification of sinne in this life, from our contrary falshead; nor yet can distinguish (unless they be willing to hearken to our opponents) betwixt their truth and our falshood, by reason we
have vailed our falshood under the feigned testimonies (as truths vizard) of Scriptures and Fathers, which (I be∣lieve) they will at last charge me to have abused (both Scriptures and Fathers) most notoriously: Yet for the satisfaction of our well-willers, and confirmation of them in falshood, (instead of truth) I have (as I tell you in my next paragraph) presented to the publick (because I would have them the more taking with shallow capacities, who are ready (out of their carnal and blind affections to me for main∣taining sin, as aforesaid) to believe what I say, right or wrong, (I have presented a few collections pumpt out of our addle brain) which (not being seriouslly digested nor weighed) will (I doubt not) disenable the meanest capacities (being willing to be one still with us in our conclusions) to discover the truth according to godliness, Tit. 1.1. from the deceitfulness of sin, which we maintain will remain with us as long as we live. That which others (as I tell you in my next paragraph) have done in maintaining our tenents, namely, that sin will remain in us as aforesaid, &c. I must bless the God of this world for; by reason the God of the true Israel commandeth them who are desirous to shew themselves his Saints, to hate the garment spot∣ted of the flesh, v. 23. of Judes Epistle. And if that which I have now done shall be any way serviceable to weak capacities (which is all we can expect) to keep them where they are, in a sinful life, and to stir them up to do against our Autagonists, as they did, Acts 17.5. and 19.20, 29, &c. it hath obtained its ends (ex fiue rei) though I do not blad abroad in plain terms my (finem intentionis) who am willing to be spent in all impudency for the Israel of the God of this world, (spoken of 2 Cor. 4.4.) to be prevailers in maintaining that sin and disobedience to: the law of the righteous and just God will remain in the best Saints (if they be no better then our selves are yet by confession and practise) as long as they live. That being the end for which we are what we are, in all reviling and slandering the said Doctor Drayton and Parker under the horrid names of Jesults, and Factors for Rome, (even for such Saints at Rome who were most eminent above o∣thers in Neroe's house when Paul was there, Phil. 4.22.)
I say even for to make them more odious to our sin-maintaining party, I am not unwilling to spend my lungs to reproch Jesuits, and Factors for Rome; as all can witness that heard my scurrulous invective at Wisfoord near Wilton against the said Parker, for preaching such poysonful doctrine at Wil∣ton, of a possibility of a total mortification of sin in this life; of which doctrine I wished the people of Wilton who flocked to heare me, to take heed of and not endure to heare the said Parker preach any such doctrine; for I told them, spreading my paper on the Pulpit-cushion like Rabsicaes letter, that the said do∣ctrine will sink himselfe and his hearers to hed, if our doctrine for sinne remaining in us as long as we live, do at any time advance and lift us up to heaven. Your selves, my fellow Levites (like Simeon and Levi, brethren to maintain ini∣quity) are now upon the stage (as I tell you in my next paragraph) to act your parts: Therefore it doth concern you to joyn hand in hand with me in maintaining our positions, for they are begun (as I told you) to be spoken against in publ que by our enemies, whom I could not disswade nor terrifie from so doing, though I told them openly before a cloud of witnesses that if they did publish such doctrines to the people against the necessity of sin remaining in the best Saints as long as they live, they would pull all the Ministers of my mind (which are too too many) in the countrey about their ears; His words spo∣ken in Wilton Church. because if it should be so (as our enemies affirm) the people would soon charge their Ministers with preaching (a long time) many lies to them, for telling them so frequently that sinne will re∣main in the best Saints as long as they live; as an Alderman of Milton told my selfe (presently after Doctor Drayton had preached the Sermon now in Print on 2 Cor. 7.1. for cleansing away all fil hinesse of the flesh and spirit,) that if the said doctrine were true which Doctor Drayton had delivered. I my self had taught (at Milton) many lies; which wound∣ed me to the heart (though it were so) to be told it to my face; and the people in short time will say (my fel∣low-Levites) as much to your faces as I was told if the doctrines of our enemies to sins continuance in best Saints come to be received more generally among all sorts of people.
Therefore arm up you courage my indeared fellow-brethren for s cause, and muster up the forsee you seem to have, and fight (as I bid you in the said paragraph) (being likewise upon the stage while our enemies yet stand below) this boon sight of our traditional faith, That sin will remain in us as long as we live, by reason of the want of faith to beleeve the contrary, for it is said Mat. 13.58. where it is said Christ could do no great works there because of their unbelief. Now if thus you do, my united brethren, I assure my self and you (as I tell you in my last paragraph) that our victo∣ry (if we can overcome our enemies, though it be but by Club∣law, as they did, Rev. 11.17.) will be glorious among all lovers of sinful pleasures and profits more then lovers of God and his holinesse: for then we may as they did, (Rev. 11.10.) rejoyce and be merry, if we can still per∣swade weak capacities to be confident that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live, because then we our selves shall still be accounted for such Saints among the people; and also e∣very man whose teeth continuall water after the apples of Sodom, will then think his own beloved sin (how worthy soever it be to be hated) is the only innate corruption and infirmity that will and must remain in him as long as he liveth. Thus you see friends how glorious our victory is like to be (if we can prevaile) in the eyes of all Epicures and lovers of sin∣full profits and pleasures. But indeed we do but dissemble and lye when we say it will be glorious through Jesus Christ: for Christ is not (saith the Apostle Gal. 2.17.) the Minister of sin; for he came to redeem all his Saints from all iniquity, Tit, 2.14. and purifie to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works; there∣fore to him belongeth better glory for ever and ever to be given to him from such as those, Ephes. 5.27, 28. who are sanctified and washed in water by the word, then can ac∣crue to him by our best Saints who plead to have sin remain in them as long as they live; to which all truly enlightened Saints say Amen, namely, that Christ may have more glory from his eminent Saints by their being purged from all sin, then can redound to him from the constant cleaving of sin to them as long as they live, which is contrary to God
and Christ and the holy Spirit, yea so contrary to the Saints pure happiness as nothing can be more opposite thereunto. This is the Paraphrase that Mr. John Tendering must have made himself of his preface, if required to explain it, as consonant and in reference to his positions, that sin and disobedience to Gods law will remain in the best of Saints as long as they live; therefore we could give no other paraphrase upon his preface (consideratis considerandis) then what we have (for substance) delivered to Mr. John's friends; whereby they may see his naked mind under the covert of Scripture-phrases by which he would deceive the hearts of simple and well-meaning people: and there∣fore we hope his friends will not say that we have abu∣sed him, and wrested his words in his preface from his own design. Because we are perswaded his friends will not have him speak in his preface heterogeneals to the po∣sitions in his Vindication; for then he doth abuse them, and make them believe that in his book to be one of his beloved truths which he doth contradict in his preface, if he mean not according to our paraphrse, and so with coloured words deceiveth the hearts of his many allies which relie upon his lying oracles. Again, if men do not mean their prefaces to be re∣spectively in reference to their subsequent designs, then their preface and their book will not be consentanies, but disparates, and the author of them a dissentany (altornis vicibus) to them both: therefore Mr. John Tendrings friends must acknowledge (if he be not alwayes a jugler) that he meant this preface (though varnished with Scri∣pture-phrases) should relate (as consentanies) toge∣ther; and also he would be found a consentany to them both in reference to his ultimate end, namely, (to main∣tain though he cannot do it) that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live. Hence (when he saith in the front of his salutes, To all lovers of Gods truth) we ask all unbiassed and understan∣ding men, whether he can mean (if he intend the main∣taining his positions) any others but such that love his
sinful positions, and love that sin will remain in them (as Gods truth) as long as they live. When he wisheth grace to them, what grace doth he wish them, but grace to keep themselves in a sinful life? for he saith, it is the Orthodox Protestant doctrine, that sin will re∣main in the best Saints at long as they live. When he wisheth them peace, what can he wish, but that they may be quiet & not disturbed by endeavouring to mor∣tifie all their sinnes in this mortal life, because he affirms to his friends that sin will remain in them as long as they live? When he saith grace and peace through Jesus Christ, what can those words (through Jesus Christ) intend, if consider∣ed in reference to his positions, but that he would fain have Christ and sin dwell and be yoked together in him and his friends, (though it be contrary to the Apostles dehor∣tation, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.) and so to have peace in a way quite contrary to that, Ephes. 2.14, 15. where is hinted that the partition-wall of sin is to be broken down; what is it but a plain mocking of Christ (absit blasphemia dicto) to call him the faithful redeemer of all his Saints, and yet he doth not (by the Vindicators doctrine) redeem them from all sin in this life? as if Christ either cannot or will not redeem them from all sins, that they may serve the Lord without blame, in righteousness and holiness all the dayes of their lives, Luk. 1.74 75. Ephes. 1.4. And whom can he call (in his first paragraph) his beloved friends (if he mind his positions) but such as stick to him in maintaining that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live ? and also will be ready to do us all the en∣vious mischief they can for opposing them in teaching the contrary truths ? for none that read his book, and have heard his scandalizing of us, can believe that he accounteth us and them of our mind, beloved friends. What times can he mean, when he saith, these are the times foretold &c. must not he mean (if he will have his sinful po∣sitions still maintained) the times wherein there is a falling away from (this positions) & a defectiō from believing them? Must not he mean (when he saith, as a forerunner of
the great and terrible day) even the forerunner of the great and terrible day to the man of sin (2 Thes. 2.8.) by the the downfall of his positions? when Jannes (which sig∣nifieth, as an Onomastick saith) one to be brought under, and Jambres (one who hath a sea in his head) (accor∣ding to that Isa. 57.20.) shall proceed and prevail no further, 2 Tim. 3.8, 9. so that our Vindicator is more then bodily afraid he and his party shall be put out of credit if our doctrines of a possibility of a total mortification of sin in this life be once resenned and received. Must not he mean (when he saith, there are many false Pro∣phets among us) such as prophesie and evidence the Scripture against his tenents aforesaid? wherefore they are to him and his friends like Michajah to Abah, who said that Mi∣chaah never (in his sense of goodness) spake good to him who sold himsellf to do wickedness. Must not he mean by such false Prophets, whose study is to deceive poor souls, even the very elect, those whose study and labour is (if he mind his positions) to unde∣ceive poor souls, by perswading them that sin shall pot (if they will be baptized into Christs death, Rom. 6.2.4 5.) remain in them as long as they live? and must not he mean by his elect (if he mind what he saith of his positions) such as are ordained and chosen (let himself name by whom) to remain in sin? for his posion is, that sinne will remain in the best Saints as long as they live. When he calleth them men confident in an arme of flesh: can any wise man who mindeth and understandeth his position, think that those words can reach us; who perswade all men to be∣lieve a possibility of mortifying all sin in them through the grace and help of Christ; but that they reach only such men, who like himself teach and maintain with bold con∣fidence, that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live, because that sin is called flesh, as aforesaid? And therefore to maintain sin, as the Vindicator and his friends do, is to be confident in an arm of flesh. And can a wise man believe his words do reach us, where he saith Goliah.-like (the great Giant against little David) when
as the Veterator doth boast they are a hundred to one or two of us, who said with him in his opinion, and also such as were ready to joyn with him in petition to the higher pow∣ers against us, with confidence they shall prevail, though we know it will not be with dint of arguments, but by dint of sword, if they do prevaile against us; and if so, surely the Ve∣terator and his complices are Goliah-like, men confident in an arme of flesh, when they would be willing to take such conses against us. But let us have but our liberty to preach in their Pulpits our doctrines of a possibility of a total mortifica tion of sin in this life through the grace and help of Christ, then (as the Prophet said 1 King. 18.24.) Let the God which answereth by fire, to purge away the filthinesse of Jerusalem by the spirit of judgment and burning, (Isai. 4.4.) be God: and therefore if the doctrine of a possibili∣ty of a total mortification in this life be of God, it will stand, Act. 15.38, 39. if not, let Baal plead for himself, Judg. 6.31, 32, 33. But to proceed; what can the Vindicator mean in the next words of his preface, of which number we have to deal with, but with them (as our selves do) who plead against Baal, and against the necessity of sins remaining in the best Saints as long as they live? for that is his assertion in his Vindication, that sinne will remain, as aforesaid, and there∣fore they are such as contradict his positions that he will deal with: for he professeth that he will maintain them to the utmost of his little wit. What can he mean where he saith (in his next pargraph) he regardeth not how he is esteemed of in this world for ingaging in this quarrel, but that he regardeth not what contrary-minded men to himself say? being resolved to quarrel with all that do oppose him in his sinful position (a comforta∣ble businesse we wiss to quarrel for) that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live: yea to main∣tain sinns quarrel he telleth us, no applause from us, be∣cause we do not intend to give it him, but to blame him for his impudency, shall swell him, nor dispraise (he mean∣eth, from such great men as he knoweth disown his positions)
shall deject him; so far is he from leaving his audaciousness to maintain sinne will remain in the best Saints as long as they live: especially when the interest of the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. lyeth at the stake, ever since that we perswade men that they may through the help of Christ destroy all sinne in them while they live in houses of clay. What truth is opposed by us, but his sinful doctrine, which he calleth truth, though it come from the father of lies? for all sin is of the devill, 1 Joh. 3.8. who is a lyar from the beginning; for where is there one testimony in Scrip∣ture which declareth that sin wil remain in the best Saints as long as they live? or one testimony in Scripture which evidenceth that no Saint ever died to all sinne until he put off his mortal body? it is one thing what Saints are in this life for the most part, and another what the doctrine of the Sriptures doth attest and teach what Saints ought to be in all holy and spotlesse conversation. What people can he mean in the said paragraph, which must not stand by with a guilty silence, but such as are like him∣selfe, and are ingaged by a confederacy to defend (as long as they can) that sin will remain in the best Saints while they live? which we hope will not be long, if we who are contrary-minded may have liberty granted to teach Gods contrary and saving truths unto the people of the nation, where ever we may have opportunity to come. And what can the obligation be by which (he saith) they are bound to maintain that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live, but their sinful profits and pleasures; which men must part with (as they did Act. 9.18, 19.) if our doctrines be received? otherwise they must go no longer for any other Saints in the world but such as are like Ne∣buchadnezzars image, Dan, 2.32, 33. And what can he mean by those words in the said para∣graph, and withstand gain-sayers, but that he and his friends will withstand us to the utmost, yea with fire and fagot if they might obtain their vote (for we have heard of their vi∣olence) to stir up the Magistrates against us, and it is suf∣ficiently
known that some have lamented and condoled their want of power as yet not granted them, to chastise He∣reticks and heresie (in their sense,) as the Jews would do Paul for his heresie, Act. 24.14. though they confess that Synods and Councels may erre, and so do they in their late Confession of Faith. What can the Vindicator mean by his words in his next paragraph, where he acknowledgeth that he is not noted the unworthiest among the thousands of Levites (as he stileth them of his mind to maintain sin as aforesaid;) but that he is of no smal esteem (how notorious and vile soever his life and conversation is known and proved to be for above twenty years) among the said Levites, because he doth maintain his positions with more audaciousness and impu∣dency then other Levites of his mind (though with as little sense) can do. What can he mean when he saith in his next paragraph, that he doth presume to present this part to those that desire to fear God, but that (in presumption) he will present it to those, and such like as are spoken of, 2 Kings 17.41. who feared the Lord, and served their Idols? for it is the thing he contendeth to maintain, that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live: and therefore he must needs mean by them whom he saith fear the Lord, such as are content that sin will remain in them as well as grace, and not resist unto blood, striving against sin, (Heb. 12.4.) that it may all be destroyed by the grace and help of Christ; that so God may be all in all in them, according to that, 1 Cor. 15.28. Whom can he mean when he further saith in that Para∣graph, that he will beg no patronage of great ones, but that he will not beg a patronage of such great ones who dislike his sinful positions, because he knoweth full well they dis∣own him for them, and likewise for his impious and pro∣fligate life? Besides, he thinketh it so advantagious to plead for the continuance of sin, that it will gain the acceptation of all that be of his mind, and have with Ahab, sold themselves
wickedly) without begging their patronage: and therefore he addeth further, if he erre in the management of his sinful business, he desires pardon, that he cannot maintain it better; for his will is (you may see) to do his utmost to main∣tain his positions, though his will and abilities are not suf∣ficient to do Satan the service he desireth to do, in main∣taining that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live; for if men be perswaded to believe that position, then the least of Saints may well be quiet in their sins with∣out disturbing themselves for what they cannot (as this Veterator saith) hinder and remove by the grace and help of Christ to boot. What can he mean when he saith also, that he desireth not defence, but that he doth not desire nor deserve to be de∣fended himself, if he do not his utmost endeavour to de∣fend (if he mind his position) that sin will remain in the best Saints so long as they live? What can he mean by those words in his next paragraph, where he speaketh of a contest with Dr. Drayton and Parker, but that he is vext at the heart, and did contest with us, be∣cause we stand to beat down all sin? some (or the most part) of which he would have remain (as his position doth witness) in the best Saints as long as they live; other∣wise they are no company for him, because he neither can, nor desires to come up to such Saints. And whom can he call men of blessed memory, but such (if he mind his position) who maintain (so desirable is a sinful life to him) that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live? And doth not he intend them by his reverend Clergy (in the said paragraph) who preach as he doth, to maintain that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live? otherwise he would have honoured the late Dr. Drayton of the reverend Clergy for his pious Sermons on 2 Cor. 7.1. What volumes can he mean by his words in his next pa∣ragraph, which he saith many are not able to buy, but vo∣lumes of such abused and unwarrantable testimonies as he produceth to confirm his position with, that sin will remain
as aforesaid? and because they cannot be had, therefore he offers them his pamplet of non-sense to delude them with who are hasty to believe him. And whom can he mean by weak capacities, but such as he is afraid are not stoutly resolved to stand to his positions, but that he doubts they will be drawn off (if they search the Scriptures) from believing such pernicious doctrine to their souls, as that sin will remain in the best Saints so long as they live? What can he mean (by those words in his next para∣graph) where he saith that he doth endeavour their satis∣faction and confirmation; but that he desireth to confirm sinne to remain in them as long as they live, that so they may be satisfied with it? And therefore he saith, he present; them with some few collections (if he had presented none it would have been more for his credit and comfort in the end) to perswade them that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live; and that without dispute, if they will take his word for it, who is most frequent in lying. What can he mean by those words (his collections se∣riously to be weighed and digested by them) but that he would have them so setled & rivetted in weak capacities, as that they may never forget his tenents, that they, and the best Saints, must live in sin while they live among men? and that up∣on all occasions (when the enemies to his doctrine talke of mortifying all sin in this life) they may reply, and say as the Lady Abbesse did to her wanton daughter (both justified by the Vindicators positions) By Saint Peter and Saint Paul, Daughter, sinners are we all: for so this Vetera∣tor doth impudently maintain, that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they lve; and therefore needs must it remain in the Lady Abbesse and her daughter, even to live a wanton life, as their excusable infirmities; because the best Saints must have their failings. What can he mean when he saith (in the same para∣graph) these collections may by the blessing of God enable the meanest capacities, &c. but that he desireth God may bless them so as to remain where they are, and to live in sinne (if
he mind his position) while they live a mortal life▪ What can he mean (in his next paragraph) where he saith, I desire to blesse God for what others have done; but that it is his prayer and thanksgiving to God, for such men who preach up sinne (if he mind his position) and maintain that it will remain in the best Saints as long as they live? else he resolveth to be none of the best, if any Saint at all. What can he mean by his next words (in the same pa∣ragraph) if that which I have now done be any thing service∣able, it hath obtained its end; but that he had no other end in his eye and thoughts in writing this pernicious Vindi∣cation, and destructive to a good life, but to petswade men to live quietly in sinne, and not to trouble themselves, and grieve for that they cannot help, because (as he saith) sinne will remain in the best Saints as long as they live? What can he mean when he further saith, I am willing to spend and to be spent for the Israel of God; but that they are the Israel of his God who prevail (if he mind his position) against the grace of Christ, for to remain in sinne as long as they live? for Christ came to redeem his Saints from all ini∣quity, Ti. 2.14. and to purifie to himself a peculiar people zea∣lous of good works: and for whom will he spend and be spent, but for such prevailers who can prevail (if he mind his tenents) against all gain-sayers, that sin will remain in the best Saints as long they live? For these and with these he will spend his patrimony, and all he can get besides by his practise as an Emperick at large. What can he mean when he addeth further, that he will be spent, but that he expecteth at last to be spent in a sinful life himself? for he saith in his Vindication, that death onely putteth an end to a sinful life. And what can be the sense of those words (in the same paragraph) that being the end for which we are what we are; but that he looketh on himself and those of his mind and way to be appointed by some, let him name by whom (if he mind his positions) to maintain that sin will remain in all Saints so long as they live? and that is the end for which he is become what he is in shamlesness to maintain that sin
will remain in the best Saints as long as they live. What can he mean by those words (in his next paragraph) where he saith to his allies and Levites, you are now upon the stage, fight the good fight of faith, but that (if he mind his position) to remain in sin and disobedience is the object of his faith, and that he doth understand Saint Jude? when he biddeth them to contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, (v. 3. of that Epistle) that he biddeth them contend (for so this Veterator doth) that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as thy live, as the faith which was once delivered to the Saints, if any do deny it and contradict the same? What can he mean by his words be couragious & fight &c. but he would have them to fight for it, (if he do mind his position) that sinne wil remain in the best Saints as long as they live? that so he and his friends may go for eminent Saints as long as they are in this world, whatever they are accounted to be in the world to come. When he telleth them they are upon the stage, what can he mean (in reference to his position) but to put them in mind that they are above, and Doctor Drayton must stand below to hear thi forsworn Veterator make oath to a senselesse article, namely, that Doctor Drayton should say, that when we have fulfilled the Law then Christ would be as a bridg to carry us over to Heaven: which is too senselesse to come from Doctor Drayton, who knew (I say once again) more divine truth then all the contra∣ry-minded Divines in Wiltshire; besides, I do attest it to to be falsely laid to Doctor Draytons charge, for I was pre∣sent at the same time when and where it is said the same or like words were spoken by him. What can he mean also by those words sight the good fight of faith, but that it is good for them (if he mind his positi∣on) to fight against us who plead for a possibility of a total mortification of sin in this life, and do deny their rash as∣sertion of sinns necessary remaining in the best Saints as long as they live? Was there ever Veterator that abused Scripture-phrase more then this one doth in a Preface that must relate to
his positions, or else he himself overthroweth his own positions by his Preface? I say was there ever varlet abu∣sed Scripture-phrase as this Veterator doth, when he bid∣deth his Lovites fight the good fight of faith, in reference to his position, that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live? for they are the words of St. Paul to Timothy, 1 Tim. 6.12. and do you think that Paul bid Ti∣mothy to fight (as a good fight of faith) against those who deny that sinne will remain in the best Saints as long as they live? What did Paul intend by his words, when he said, I have fought the good fight of faith, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, from honceforth is laid up for me the crown of righ∣teousnesse? 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. I say, did Paul mean any of these words in reference to the Vindicators position, who bid∣deth his Levites fight the good fight of faith? which must be in reference to, and for his sinful position, else he saith nothing to them that is to his purpose. Now if St. Paul had been (which God forbid) of the Vindicators and his Levites mind, then if any should have contradicted him, as we do the Veterator, what stuff had Paul (absit blasphemia dicto) couched under the said words, if thus or in a like manner, they had been explained in re∣ference to the Vindicators position; O you who deny that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live, I have fought the good fight of faith, (as the Veterator ex∣horteth his Levites to do) against such as deny that sin will remain in me as long as I live: I have finished my course in sin, to be in me as long as I live; I have kept the faith or belief of the doctrine, that sin will remain in me (and in all Saints) as long as I live; from hence (for so beleeving my continuing in sin, and contending for it as truth, like as this Vindicator doth) is laid up for me the crown of righ∣teousnesse, for contending for an unrighteous life? As if it were a righteous work to contend for sinne (if any deny it) to remain in the best Saints as long as they live; which is the thing this Veterator aimeth at. What can the Vindicat or mean by these words (in his
last paragraph) where he saith, I assure my self and you that our victory shall be glorious, but that he doth count it a glo∣ry (if he mind his position) that sin will remain in him and his friends as long as they live? though the Apostle saith Phil. 3.18, 19. of such, their glory is their shame, that mind earthly things: and what more earthly then sin? according to that Coloss. 3.4. What can he mean when he saith, it shall be glorious through Christ, but that he would perswade them that Christ will (if he mind his position) countenance and honour them for contending that sinne will remain in the best Saints as long as they live? Yea, when he saith glorious through Christ, what can he mean but that he would perswade them that Christ will plead also for sin to remain in his best Saints as long as they live? by reason that to say their vi∣ctory shall be glorious through Jesus Christ, is to make them believe that Christ will own sinne to be there (accord∣ing to his positions) by his concurrence and assistance, be∣fides allowance; for then its through Jesus Christ, when he is a partial, chief, procreant and conservant cause of it: whereas indeed the Apostle saith the contrary, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. What fellowship is there betwixt Christ and Belial, betwixt righteousnesse and unrightcousnesse? wherefore God saith to his Saints, come out from among them, and touch no unclean thing, and then I will be your God, and you shall be my people. What can he mean by those words (in his last paragraph) to whom be glory, but that he and his friends (if his positions be minded) think they ought to give glory to Christ for such doctrines, that sinne will remain in the best Saints as long as they live? And his adding of Amen as in reference to Christ (in the close of all he saith) can argue no other thing, but that he hopeth, wisheth, and prayeth, (if he remember his position) that it may be so granted from Christ that sin may remain in himself, and his friends and in as many as he can perswade to believe him, as long as they live? for the word Amen signi∣fies as much and more of that kind then we have attested it to compreheud.
We say again, let the impartial Reader but mind his positions aforesaid, which he contendeth for us{que} ad vires, and he will not deny but we have hinted the true (though not the full) meaning of his preface in reference to his positions, which are the terminus ad quem where all the ex∣presses in the said preface must centre. Besides, the substance of his preface is a condolement of sad times coming on, and of false prophets risen up; and must not that relate to his positions? so that he must count them the false prophets which he crieth out against, for teaching a possibility of a total mortification of sin (through the help of Christ) in this life; otherwise himself and his specified Levites must be the false prophets, for maintaining that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live. And the sad times must be the times wherein there is a fal∣ling away from his positions, and from them who stand and plead as he and his fellow-Levites do, that sin will remain, &c. maugre the grace of Christ inclining to the contrary. Secondly, his arguments laid down in his preface to his friends and Levites, also his exhortations to them, and prayers for them, do all shew that the expresses in his pre∣face must be so explained as we have done in reference to his positions. And therefore if he or his friends do understand that all things in a preface and a book ought to look towards one another as face answers to face, for to justifie and main∣tain each other, then they will acknowledge that his pre∣face and book must in like manner reflect upon each other; and so be forced to yield (upon this account) that our pa∣raphrase hath expressed (though not fully) the genuine (though mischievous) intent of his preface respectively considered. The Vindicator doth subscribe himself an obedient Son of the Church; but he doth not tell us of what Charch: yet let any disingaged person to his principles confider his positions fronted in his Vindication, and he must of neces∣sity bear testimony (if he be desired) that he is an obe∣dient Son onely of the malignant Church of Satan; for he
that committeth sinne is of the Devil, John 3.8. and therefore he who pleads for the remaining of sin to be of necessity (while Saints live, notwithstanding the promised help and grace of Christ) doth offer his devotions in Satans congre∣gation, for he is a disobedient Son of the true Church of Christ, rending it with divisions and contentions for the sins cause, to maintain that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live: And thus rending the true Church by maintaining such division, Joh. Tendring doth verifie another Anagram of his name Hot in rending. Some men are fervent that no sin remain; Some are more hot its being to maintain: Those with tongue John Tendring's hot in rending, These for his Saints hotter in defending. You see his name suites with his Anagram, Hence sins abetter he may say I am; Hence sinners Champion you may call his name To plead for sin hence John doth take no shame. Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes. Prov. 26.15.
A Confutation of the two subse∣quent Positions. 1. That sinne will remain in the best Saints as long as they live in houses of clay. 2. That it is impossible for the best Saints to obey the Law of God per∣fectly in this life. HAving paraphrased the Vindicators preface, and demonstrated the same paraphrase to be apt and genuine in a Relative sense to the Vindicators positions; we come next to speake of the said positions laid down in the Pamphlet it selfe; which is so full of digressions, and perverted Texts of Scripture, of Tautologies, contradicti∣ons, nonsense, and other absurdities, besides the error and impiety of his propositions, that we doubted not, but in a short time quin mole sua rueret, but that it would ruinate it selfe: Yet lest the Princock by our silence should grow proud of his borrowed feathers, and others either be misled or confirmed in their error by what he hath written, we thought good to put forth this short answer, wherein we follow him , to discover his errors; howbeit the Reader must not expect the formall word Answer, in our
replies to this vindication; for this we usually doe, either by the adversitive word (but,) or the interposition of a pa∣senthesis,) a connter-question or limitation, in the close, or some such like opposition, and qualification, to correct what he saith; which when we have done in an anasceuastical and confutatory way, we will catascustically establish what we have undertaken to maintain. But first, let us take a view of the positions themselves; the first of which is this, as he hath stared it, [That sin will have a being in the best of men, so long as their souls have a being in the houses of clay.] Whence these absurdities will follow; First, that sin comes originally from Jehovah, in that it is said to have a being; for nothing is said to have a being of essence, or existence but what first comes from the Being of beings, Jehovah himselfe. Secondly, he here makes sin to be a supreme, if not an almighty commander, in that he saith sin will have such a being. Thirdly, herein he makes little difference between grown men, and babes in Christ; for sin, saith he, will have a being in the best of them till death. Fourthly, he doth not here exempt Christ himselfe as he was man. Fifthly, he makes our bodies or houses of clay, to be the proper domicil and seat of sin: and then neither Adam in his innocency, nor Christ as man, were free from sin, for both dwelt originally in hou∣ses of clay. The second position is this; [That no man can by grace in this life perform such perfect obedience to the Law of God, as not to offend against the same, or to be thereby justified, otherwise then by Christ of Orace given.] From whence you may observe these things likewise; First, that this man whose name Iohn imports the grace of God, is called so per Antiphrasin; for he is an enemy to, and with Herod, an imprisoner of the grace of God. Secondly, he que∣stions not what men do de facto, but what men can do in this life with the utmost helpe of grace. Thirdly, he makes the Law simply unlawfull, because it is impossible, as he saith, to observe it, both to nature and grace. Fourthly, he doth not here reserve a place of possibility for Christ him∣selfe
as man to fulfill it. Fifthly, it appears here that the Vin∣dex is a great lover of forbidden fruit; for whereas Doctor Drayton told him at the first that he would not in this con∣troversie have any thing to do with the worke of justificati∣on, this man will needs bring in that by hook or by crook. Sixthly, that he is yet caught in the same snare which he laid for another; for he tacitly saith, that we cannot be justified by such a perfect obedience to the Law of God, otherwise then by Christ of grace given; and so say we: yea, if he grants us this, he yields the other question also; for he that can be justified by such a fulfilling of the Law through the grace of Christ, hath no sin unsubdued left in him. And if he runs into so many absurdities as he lancheth forth, what will he doe when he comes into the maine? His first and grand impertinency is this, that he spends the first ten pages in a Common-place about sin, wherein he is so intangled that he can scarcely find the way out a∣gain; of which take this short account: Pag. 1. He tells us [that to the intent his ensuing discourse may be proper & profitable for the informing of the weak, & establishing them in the faith of the truth, which next af∣ter the glory of God (which is not much glorified by our continuance in sin, which is that he pleads for;) and the ad∣vancement of the truth, (which he directly here represseth,) is the onely thing here by him intended, he shal observe this method there following.] But ere we come to that, what difference is there betwixt the establishment of men in the faith of the truth, & the advancement of the truth; which he makes two distinct things? But what is his intended me∣thod? First, saith he, I shall define what sin is in the gene∣rall; which he may the better doe because of his long ac∣quaintance with it, which by his calculation of his age was twenty foure yeares before his Mother bare him, and perhaps some years before her birth also. Secondly, he will shew what the first sin was. Thirdly, what were the cau∣ses of it. Fourthly, the effects of it: (Thus he loves still to ramble about from his right station.) And lastly, what ori∣ginal sin is. But what difference is there between the first
sin, and original sin, which here he makes two things? He tells us here also, that the Hebrew word translated sin sig∣nifies properly misdoing, or missing of the marke, as if the Hebrews had not many words to denote sin, though he can name none of them. This learned Linguist tels us page 26. that the Apostle doth usually distinguish betwixt peccatum and crimen, as if the Apostles writ unto the Churches in Latine. Pag. 66. he shews also what a Logician he is, ma∣king the efficient and formall causes of justification to be passive as well as active: And page 48 in his differencing of gratia gratis data, and gratia gratum faciens, you will find him as excellent a Schoolman, or schoolboy rather. Page 2. he saith, that in Religion the Law is our marke or way from which if we swerve we sin. But is not the Gos∣pel our way therein also? and that in a speciall manner of our Christian Faith and Religion? That defect is the general nature of sin; but is not excess, which is the other extreme sinfull also? That this defect is an inclination or action re∣pugnant to the Law; But what thinks he of evill words, as false accusation, lying, cursing, and swearing, (such as he frequently useth,) are not they sinfull also? [That there is in sin a double formality, repugnancy to the Law, and guilt. But guilt] is the effect, and not the form of sin. [That the former of these two is a comparison with the Law,] but it is a disparison or dissimilitude therewith [that the first fin of man was the disobedience of our first Parents in eating the forbidden fruit.] But if he under∣stands it of their actuall eating of that fruit, he is much mistaken; for as the womans actual eating thereof did go before the mans, so many gradual evils did precede them both; as first, diffidence & incredulitie to Gods word, who had expresly said, in the day that thou shalt eat there∣of, dying thou shalt dye. Secondly, too much eare and cre∣dence given to the devils lying promise, who said, ye shall not die, but be as gods, knowing good and evill. Third∣ly the too much liking and approbation of the forbidden fruit. Fourthly, the hungring or thirsting after it. Fifthly,
contempt of Gods justice. Sixthly, ingratitude towards him for all his former goodnesse. And lastly, their con∣senting to Satan, and resolution to eat of that fruit. [That in the generall, all our corruption and misery is sprung from that first sin of the first Adam.] Contrary to what the Lord saith, Hosea 13.9. O Israel, thou hast de∣stroyed thy selfe, but in me is thine helpe. But here he saith more particularly, that eternall death came upon all their posterity by that first sin. Contrary to Gods express Law, Deut. 24.16. where God will not have the son to suffer a temporall death, and much lesse an eternal, for the fathers sin; and directly contrary to Gods oath, Ezek. 18.3, 4. As I live, saith the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel. Behold, all souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die. So ver. 20. The son shall not be are the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son; the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickednesse of the wicked shall be upon him. Num. 16.22. Shall one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with all the Congregation? [That the corruption & aversnesse of our nature came from that fall aforesaid, Pag, 3. that all our actuall sins doe spring from thence.] See to the contrary, Eccles. 7.29. [That the first sin of man is the cause of all other sins and punish∣ments; which is true of each mans personal fall and disobe∣dience, and not of the other.] [That the Spirit by the Law entitles us to Adams sin. He means the first Adams, as a derivation from the root to the branches; as poyson is carried from the fountain to the ci∣stern; and as the children of traitors have their blood tainted with the treason of their fathers; and as the children of bondslaves are under their parents conditions. But all these similitudes are but shaws to catch woodcocks; for neither was the first Adam either the root or fountain of our soules, which are Gods immediate workmanship, Isai. 57.16. for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made: nor are our bodies unclean by birth, being created to be
Temples for the Holy Ghost; nor are traytors children u∣sually tainted with their fathers treason, though by the ci∣vil Law of some Countreys, (in proditionis terrorem,) they are ignobled in their blood and dignity: nor was Adam him∣selfe a bond-slave to sin, but by the grace of regeneration Gods free-man, Rom. 6.18. before he begat any children; nor doth the sinful corruption of our parents pass to us more then the graces and virtues of those that are or were righteous; for both these are spiritual things which nature cannot convey: but he seeks to prove what he saith by some Scriptures long since worn thred-bare by allegation to that effect, Joh. 3.5. Rom. 5.12, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49. Ephes. 2.3. Iob 4.4. Psal. 51.5. Isai. 48.8. Gen. 8.21. To all which we will give answer in the order set down with what brevity we can, having answered the same at large in our Examen. As for that Ioh. 3.5. Whatsoever is born of the flesh is flesh; it is true of the wisedome of the flesh, and of the righteousnesse of the flesh, as well as of the open sin; but Christ speaks not here of the naturall birth of men, but of a spiritual, be it true or false. As for Rom. 5.12, 13, 20. the Apostle speaks there thus; Therefore as by one man sin en∣tred into the world, and death by sin; so death went over all men, , so far as all have sinned; (for so Chryso∣stome and Erasmus, and others, read those words:) for untill the Law sin was in the world, but where there is no Law sin is not imputed, or reputed for sin: Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, who is the figure of him that is to come. But not as the offence so is the free gift; for the judgment was of one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offences unto justification: for if by one mans offence death reigned by one, much more they which receive an abundance of grace and of the gift of Righteousnesse, shall reign in life by one, Iesus Christ. Therefore as by the offence of one judgement came upon all to condemnation; even so by the righteousnesse of one the free gift came upon all men to the justification of life: for as by one mans disobedience many were made sinners; so by the obedi∣ence of one shall many be made righteous. Unto which long Text
we give this short answer; First, that it is a parallel and opposition betwixt Adams mischief and Christs remedy and cure, but few in these days of supposed (rather then true) light, understand either the one or the other aright; for besides the first Adam or man, whom the Vindicator with many more, for want of a true Judicator, here understands, there are foure Adams mentioned both in the Scriptures and other writers. The first is our natural or earthly man, which is the creature of this world; of whom our Apostle saith 1 Cor. 15, 41. The first man is of the earth earthly. The second is an inward portraiture of righteousnesse, a glimpse of the heavenly man, yet earthy, naturall and mu∣table; which we all beare at the first, and so are said to have born the image of the earthly, 1 Cor. 15.49. This is op∣posed verse the 14 of this 5 chapter of the Rom. to Moses, another inward state or work of the Law, discovering the deadlinesse of sin unto us, with lightnings, thunderings, and terrors, Heb. 12.18, 19. The third Adam is the old man of sin. The fourth is the last Adam, the Lord from Heaven, who is not as the first was, with his weak image of Righteousnesse a living soul, but a quickning Spi∣rit, 1 Cor. 15.45. It's the first then of those soure, the Adam of our earthly or naturall man, who yet with the help of the second is the image of him that is yet to come to the beleevers, to wit the Lord from heaven, in whom we first sin and die by our personal fall, according to 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all die which doe die, so in Christ shall all be made alive who are quickned: for we proved before, that no man did or could dye by the first Adams sin, both by the Law, and Gods oath thereagainst. As for the first, 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49. we have shewn that it makes for us, and not against us. As for Ephes 2.3. Paul there confesseth that since his fall he and the fallen Jews as well as others were not children of God by love patience, and meeknesse, as in their first creation, but children by the nature of the wrath, for so the words run in the Greek, and consequent∣ly the children of the prince of the power of the air as well as o∣thers, according to Rom. 3.22, 23.
Unto the words of Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? We say, that since the mans personal fall and corruption, he can neither by his own strength, cleanse himselfe, nor bring forth any righteousnesse or holinesse that is in it selfe clean or pure. Unto Psal. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, or warm me: we answer, that David speaks here of his own first personal fall and disobedience, or his first concep∣tion and forming, not in his natural mothers belly, but in the womb of sin; accordingly as it is said of Eve, who was at the first created after the similitude of God, that when she fell , Tim. 2.14. But the woman being deceived was begotten in the trans∣gression. Thus the Jews speak to the blind man, Joh. 9.3, 4. Thou wastaltogether born insin, and dost thou teach us? And Da∣vid himselfe complaineth of some noted wicked ones, the wicked are strangers from the womb, they goe astray as soon as they be born, they speak lies, Psal. 58.3, 4, 5. If he had spo∣ken of their natural birth, he could not truly have said that they had either gone astray, or spoken lies, as soon as they were born: This mother that conceived David in sin, was his consent to the first Temptation, Jam. 1.15. Lust when it hath conceived, &c. Unto Esay 48.8. I knew that thou wouldest deal very trea∣cherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb: I say, that men could not from the natural womb deal treache∣rously; and therefore it is a spiritual womb of which the Lord speaketh here. And Hosea 9.11. As for Ephrains, their glory shall flee away like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception: to wit, in the sin, or in the false righteousness. Finally, unto Gen. 8.21. For the imaginations of mans heart are evil from his youth: I say that is true; for before that time men usually lose their innocency, and corrupt them∣selves. But what is that to innate corruption? And where∣as he brings in Augustine, saying, in uno vniversi; It is granted while we were in Adams loines we were all one, and so we are still in the natural Adam, at the first birth earthly;
but innocent, and in the old Adam of sin all one when we are fallen and depraved, that is, are corrupt and sinful; but are not all such in the same measure and degree? But his following positions are these, page 4. That we were all in the first Adam legally; No, but se∣minally onely. That there was a stipulation and Covenant between God and Adam for all mankind. That we were all parties with him to any such Covenant. That we were liable to the curse that belongeth to the breach of that Covenant.] All which are the meer figments of mans brain. That we had interest in the mercy promised in that pre∣tended Covenant.] Of all which there is no footstep to be found in the word. That being in him naturally we were unavoidably sub∣ject to all the bondage and burthen which he or the hu∣mane nature then contracted.] Not so, unless it were some temporal calamity, with which God might justly plague his posterity for his fall and sins. Yet he goes on in page 4. to prove that we are guilty of the first Adam's sin, but by false principles, or with true principles misapplied, as followeth. That every thing which is born carrieth with it the na∣ture of that which did bear it, as touching the substance and accidents proper to the special kind. This is a truth, and therefore the soul which is born and breathed from God must needs be pure; and the natural earthly man must needs be good in his kind, as all other natural living creatures are: that which is born of the Spirit in a way of regeneration is Spirit, but what is born of the Flesh is still Flesh, as this mans Wisdome and Do∣ctrine is, of which birth Christ speaks, John 3.6. as before. That we being all born of corrupt and guilty parents, do in our birth by nature draw their corruption and guilt.] Which is false, for guilt and corruption are not natural, but spiritual and adventitious things as is aforesaid. That by the death of Christ who is the second Adam,
(howbeit not as he was man, but as he is a quickning Spi∣rit, and the Lord from heaven,) 1 Cor. 15.45, 47. we re∣ceive a double grace, of Justification and Regeneration.] Wherein are two false grounds layed down; First, that justi∣fication and regeneration are two distinct things, which St. Paul makes but one and the self same thing, Titus 3.4, 5, 6, 7. But after that the kindness and love of God our Sa∣viour toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed abundantly on us through Jesus Christ our Saviour, that being justified by his grace we should be made heires according to the hope of eternal life. And 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justi∣fied in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. The second false ground is, that we receive those two gifts of justification and regeneration by the death of Christ; for though remission of sins is purchased thereby for the true beleevers, yet that is neither regeneration nor justi∣fication in the Apostles sense, nor is justification purchased thereby; for he that made us had power to regene∣rate without any such purchase: That therefore it follows, that out of the first Adam (to wit our first parent) there issued a double evil unto and upon us, to wit, guilt and corruption, we deny as false and inconsequent. That in this derivative the sin which he speaks of is an universal corruption, is false likewise, in which are two great evils, as he saith: Sed sublato sub, ecto tollitur ad unctum. [Pag. 5. That in it first there is a general defect of all righteousnesse in which we were at first created, to wit, in our first patents.] First, it is manifestly false; as also that any such defect is derived unto us, who are still created righteous and holy, and after the image of God, as these ensuing Texts doe clearely prove, besides many more that might be added, Gen. 9.6. Whoso sheddeth mans blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God created he man, to wit, him that is so killed; or else the argument is of no force, Jam. 3.9. Therewith, to wit, with the tongue,
bless we God, and therewith curse we man who is created after the similitude of God. Ecclesiast. 7.29. Lo, this have I found, that God made man righteous, but they have sought out many inventions. Jer. 2.21. Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed, how then art thou turned into the dege∣nerate plant of a wild vine unto me? [That this pretended derivative sin to be so conveyed from the first Adam to us is an inherent deordination, e∣vil disposition, disease, propension to all mischief, and an∣tipathy and aversation to all good, which the Scripture calls the flesh, the wisdome of the flesh, the body of sin, earthly members, the works of the Devil, the Hell that sets the whole course of nature on fire, Jam. 3.5, 6. Rom. 8.6, 7. Jam. 3.15. Eph. 4.22. Col. 3.5. Rom. 7.23. 1 John 3.8.] Unto which I say, that although all those names are justly given to the body of sin, especially when it is fully formed in men with all his members; yet first, there is no such thing found in children, of whom our Saviour saith, that the Kingdome of Heaven is of such; and that unlesse we be born again after our fall and corruption, and become like them in humility, righteousnesse, love and meeknesse, we cannot enter into the Kingdome of God, Matth. 18.3. Mar. 10.14, 15. Doth not Paul also give us this charge, 1 Cor. 14.20. Brethren, be ye not children in understanding, howbeit in malice or naughtiness be children: where he implyeth that children have no ma∣lice or naughtinesse in them; and if sin be the workman∣ship of the Devil, as he out of 1 John 3.8. confes∣seth, I would demand whether the Devil had an hand in the creation of children, which he must, if this sin be his workmanship. But that which follows there, that no man can be more sensible of the through-malignity of this derivative corrup∣tion then Paul was when he cryed out, Oh wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Is, first, the old mistake, and afterwards backed with this errour and peice of nonsense, untill his understanding was opened to conceive the spiritualness, penetration and compass of the holy Law, which measures the very bottome of every a∣ction:
for Paul could not be so sensible of his sins maligni∣ty till his understanding was so opened, nor till he had been scourged also for it by the work of the Law, as all men are whom God brings to be, and maketh his sons, Psal. 94.12. Heb. 12. That the Law condemns as well the original as the Acts of sin, is true of prohibition, but not of condemnation; for each sinful motion is by the Law discovered and prohi∣bited; but we are not condemned for the same till we ap∣prove or like of the temptation in some measure. Those ensuing positions are also false; First, that Paul Rom. 5.14. understands by Adam and Moses, our first pa∣rent, and him that was the Lawgiver; but two distinct estates in men, as was said before: which may appear out of the foregoing verse compared with this; For untill the Law sin was in the world, that is, before the inward Moses, Lawgiver or reprover cometh unto men; but where there is no Law sin is not reputed for sin, for so the word  is to be rendred. Secondly, because he saith, that death reigned from Adum, which is the natural man in his first defection, till Moses, or one that draweth out of the water of sin. That the men who sinned between the first Adam's age and the time of Moses, did not sin after the similitude of A∣dams transgression, against the clear revelation of Gods ho∣ly will, as Adam did.] Yet they did, for the same God that did forbid the eating of the forbidden fruit, doth ever since prohibit and forbid every sin in every mans soul that is a∣gainst the moral Law, Rom. 2.15. Which shews the work of the Law written in their hearts, their consciences bearing them witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excu∣sing one another. Was not Enoch a Prophet in his time? see Jude 1.14. and was not Noah the eight preacher of righte∣ousness? as the Apostle calls him 2 Pet. 2.5. were not the men of the old World destroyed for their known wicked∣ness, and shut into the infernal prison for their apparent disobedience? 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. so that the Vindicators mis∣apprehension of this place of mens sinning for want of such light as Adam had, is full of darkness.
As for those over whom death reigned from Adam to Mo∣ses, and who had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's trans∣gression, we say, that as Adam and Moses are two inward states, so may these be inward spiritual messengers of God represented by Abel and others, as well as the inward Adam and Moses of which he speaks; for such a generation of righteous ones which never sinned, we find slain by the wicked and incorrigible generation of men; Mat. 23.35. That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of the righteous Abel unto the blood of Za∣chariah the son of Barachiah: for though men usually in read∣ing this and other Scriptures look no further then the let∣ter; yet I demand of them, how in justice could all the righ∣teous blood shed from the beginning come upon that wicked and unbeleeving generation of the Jews, if they had not inwardly slain a spiritual Abel and other messengers of God, even to a spiritual Zachariah, that is, the Lord remembrancer; the son of Barachiah, that is, of the Lords benediction, as all his inward messengers are? yea it is true which Abraham answered to the rich man be∣ing in hell, I say it is true of all men, that they have Moses and the Prophets inwardly, whom they ought to hear, Luk. 16.29, 30, 31. To which adde that which is written Rev. 6.9, 10. And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw un∣der the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held; and they cryed with a loud voice, saying, how long, O Lord holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwel on the earth? And white robes were given to every one of them, and it was said unto them, that they should rest for a season, untill their fellow-servants also and their brethren that should be killed as they were should be fulfilled. Concerning which we may ob∣serve that they were no outward Prophets and Apostles, for such cry not for vengeance, but pray for their persecu∣tors, as Stephen did; and therefore they must needs be in∣ward and spiritual messengers of God who cry for venge∣ance against the earthly sins and lusts of men by whose means they had been killed, Qui capere possit capiat. Give
me leave here to observe two things more upon Rom. 5.14. First, that those persons are said here not to sin in Adams fall, but rather if they had sinned that it was after the similitude of Adams transgression; where the Apostle had fair occasion to speak of our guilt and fall through that sin, if he had known any such thing. Secondly, that Christ is yet to come, even to the beleevers, namely Christ as he is the second Adam, and the Lord from Heaven: so Heb. 10.36, 37. Jam. 4.21, 22. 1 Pet. 1.13. 1 Joh. 3.1, 2, 3. First, he saith, but untruly, pag. 6. that the sin of Adam and the lust which he contracted did reign over all men from the first Adam to that Moses the Lawgiver; so he means. Secondly, that not onely all men, but every part of man is shut up under the guilt of that first Adam's sin: (what infants? Christ and all?) Thirdly, that the Apostle proves this at large, Rom. 3.9, 19, 23. But what are those words to this pur∣pose which he produceth there? to wit, what then? are we better then they? no in no wise: for we have proved be∣fore that both Jewes and Gentiles are all under sin. But I say, first, that the Apostle here doth not go about to prove that the infants of either are so. Secondly, that this is not corruption descended from our first parents fall, but contracted by our own fall and disobedience. But he go∣eth on with the Apostles words, ver. 19. Now we know that what things soever the Law saith it saith it to them that are un∣der the Law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God. vers. 23. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God: and Rom. 11.32. For God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. But doth the Law speak any such thing to or of infants? No, we have shewed the contrary out of Genesis 9.6. Eccles. 7.29. Jer. 2.21. Mar. 10.14. 1 Cor. 14.20. Jam. 3.9. before quoted: to which adde Matth. 13.24, 25. and the parable of the Talents, Matth. 25. and that of the lost groat, or peece of silver; and that of the prodigal Son, who had a portion to spend, which he afterwards
wasted, as the said woman also had a peice of silver before she lost it, Luk. 15. All which prove that by creation still we have a talent, a measure, and a portion of innocency and righteousness born with us. After the universality of persons he goeth about to prove that sin defileth all the parts of man: which is true when men open a free passage and entrance unto the Devil, which all men do not. But the Scriptures which he cites, as Gen. 6.5. and 8.21. Rom. 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. do not fully prove it as he saith they do: but none of those de∣fects and defilements which he enumerates there and in the seventh page, were drawn down from the first Adam to us. [That the whole frame of a mans heart is evil continually: and pag. 7. he saith that our sin cleaves as close to our na∣ture as blackness to the skin of an Ethiopian, which cannot possibly be washed off.] Then Gods promises made Ezek. 36.26. and elsewhere, that he will pour clean water upon us, and cleanse us from all our filthiness and abominations, are to no purpose; and Christs design, Ephes. 5.25, 26, 27. is frustrated. [That it is an evil ever present with us:] Indeed the Apostle saith, Rom. 7.21. of himself and others, that were then or had been babes in Christ, that, when I would do good evil is present with me; that is too usually, but not alwayes; for at length he knew nothing by himself, 1 Cor. 4.4. and the Devil is at length cast out quite by those that wanre a∣right, Rev. 12.10. yea he is ofttime made to flee away: in the mean time, Jam. 4.7. resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. But he goeth on, and saith [pag. 8. That it will be ever present with us to derive a deadness, a damp, a dul∣ness and an indisposedness upon all our services.] How then is Gods oath made good? who sware unto Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without fear, cheer∣fully, in holiness and righteousness all the d yes of our lives. Luk. 7.73, 74, 75. or that fulfilled, Prov. 4.12. When thou goest thy steps shall not be straitned, and when thou runnest thou shalt not stumble. See the contrary Psal. 119.14, 16.24, 47.
[That this sin casts such iniquity upon our holiest things or duties, that we stand in need of a priest to bear, and expiate the same for us, because it is said, Exod. 28.38. that Aaron should bear the iniquity of the holy things which Is∣rael should offer to the Lord.] Which Scripture is perverted by him and others who understand it not; for the gifts of their hallowed things which Israel offered unto the Lord were to be perfect and complete in themselves, Lev. 22.21, 22, 23. if these were any way defective the priest was not to receive them, nor offer them. But that Aaron might offer those in an holy manner also after Gods pre∣script, he was to wear upon his Mitre a Golden plate, with this Inscription for a remembrancer, Holiness to the Lord; or else if he failed, not they, but he was to bear the iniquity of their holy or hallowed things. How doth this Text then serve his turn to that end for which he cites it? [That this Sin derives venome upon every action that cometh from us.] Why doth the Apostle Paul then charge Timothy thus? 1 Tim. 6.13, 14. I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, that thou keep this commandement without spot, unrebukable, till the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. So was also Pe∣ters charge to all the Saints, 2 Pet. 3.14. Wherefore beloved, seing ye looke for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. [That in our best works done by the contribution and concurrence of our own faculties such a perverseness doth adhere, and such stubborness of ours is superinduced, that God may justly charge us for defiling his grace.] But this is most absurdly spoken; for his grace cannot be defi∣led: and as for the evil which we mixe with them, if it may turn away his eyes from his own gifts in us, why doth the Lord say then, Psal. 32.2. that there are some in whose spi∣rit is no guile: and Psal. 119.1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way: and Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in the heart, if no such people can be found? [That our lust is the father of sin, and the Adulterer: for temptation is the father, and our desire, delight and consent is the mother.
That we may see this sin in our children, before they have hair or tooth shewing it self; to wit, vanity, pride, frowardness, self-love, and revenge, and the like; for which he voucheth the words of Augustine, saying, [I have seen a sucking infant that was not able to articulate a word, look with a countenance pale with envy upon his fellow-suckling that shared with him in the same milk.] But what will he say to those children that are born with hair and teeth, as some have been in our age? or what vanity or pride hath he seen in children; where the child of a Prince will consort with the brat of a beggar of his own age? or what frowardness (which sickness or pain hath not caused) or what self-love and anger but what is planted by God in every living animal? Wherefore Augustine's reason is truly childish, and contrary to the Apostles words, but in maliciousness or naughtiness be ye children, 1 Cor. 14.20. There and pag. 9. he brings in Augustine crying out, Ubi Domine? quando Domine? wherever was the place O Lord, when ever was the time O Lord that I have been an innocent creature? To this I answer, when he was first created; Eccles. 7.29. Lo, this have I found, that God made man righteous: before he went to be baptized; Quid festinat innocens aetas ad peccato∣rum remissionem? saith Tertullian lib. de bapt. and before the Devil even by the Law and word of God abused him, and led him into errour, and had made him wise in his own eyes, and holy [or righteous] with his own chosen wayes, as Paul speaks of himself in the like case, Rom. 7.9. For I was alive without the Law once, but when the commandement came, sin lived and I dyed. How came that to pass? vers. 11. for sin taking occasion by the commandement deceived me, that is, made me self-wise, self-holy, self-righteous, and by it slew me. Doth not Augustine himself as well as others call those infants whom Herod slew about Bethlehem, Innocents? lib. 3. de lib. arbit. Further, he saith pag. 19. [That this sin breaks forth un∣expectedly; witness Hazael, 2 Kin. 8.13. But what is thy servant a dog that he should do this great thing:] But was this original sin that thus breaks out? surely then he might have dis∣covered
in himself some inclinations thereunto long be∣fore, and then he needed not so much to have wondred at it now. May not proud, and wicked, and obstinate men be given up to heinous and inhumane sins brought upon them by Satans temptations, into whose hands they are de∣livered for their former rebellions and incorrigibleness? See Rom. 1.28, 29, 30. And even as they did not like to re∣tain God in their knowledge, so God gave them up to a repro∣bate mind, to do those things which are not convenient, being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate. He saith also, [Witness Peter, Matth. 26.33, 35.] Why, what did Peter but discover a great deal of good will to Christ, when he had as yet attained very little power to withstand so great a temptation as did lie in the fear of death, or some other great damage? yet both he and all his Fellow-Apostles were then alwayes ignorant and weak. But he goes on and saith, [Who would have expected or feared Adultery from such a man as David, after so much communion with God? or impatience from Jeremiah, after such revelations from God? or Idolatrie from Solo∣mon, after so much wisdome from God? or fretfulness or frowardness of spirit from Jonah, after such delive∣rance from God? or fearfulness in Abraham, after so much protection from God? or cursing from Job, after so much patience and experience from God?] yea, by the Vindicators doctrine we might have expected all these, and all other sins from any of these, because he saith that every man by original sin derived from Adam, (and which is not wholly to be subdued in this life) hath the seeds of all sins in him. But what if they had been as innocent as Adam before his fall? might they not have been tempted as he was, and overcome likewise for want of close depending upon God? yet behold how this Champion of corruption, to maintain his false doctrine, doth falsly and reproachfully charge some of the most eminent Saints with sin, where the Lord himself doth not; for Job and Jeremy might and did curse their nativity in sin, and not their first birth, as
some of the best Expositors speak, and that without sin, yea with a great deal of piety towards God. Nor are the Pro∣phets charged with impatience by the Lord himself, but commended as a pattern of patience to us, Jam. 5.10. and Abrahams concealing of his wife (if he failed therein, which may justly be questioned) it is not so bad as to leave his wife and child twelve or thirteen years together; nor did he use lying, or speaking of falshood to help himself, as this false son of Abraham doth. Howbeit he concludes with a good prayer, wishing [that we may all learn to know our selves:] to which we say Amen. But whereas each of the eleven Apostles said, Master is it I? this clear∣ly proves, not that they suspected themselves, as he would have it, but that they were not conscious to themselves of any such wicked intention or inclination. Therefore his paraphrase here is rather humanum commentum, then a com∣ment upon that Text: nor do all these instances prove any thing, but that men are liable, at leastwise for a time, to all manner of temptations; and that some in their infancy of grace may through humane infirmity be overcome by that temptation, which when they grow strong in Christ, they can easily by his grace and help overcome after∣wards; as Peter did his fear of death for Christs cause, when he suffered martyrdome for him: but this proves not that we must be alwayes babes, and like reeds shaken with every wind of temptation; yet should our former weakness and falings teach us to commiserate others, who yet through ignorance or infirmity sometime stumble and fall. Therefore it is false which he there by way of conclusion speaketh pag. 10. That strive we what we can our infir∣mities will incompass us, and our corruption will be a∣bout us so long as we carry flesh about us, as we may see in the forenamed instances: [for Job and others saw God face to face afterwards, Job 42.2. as did Abraham, Joh. 8.5, 6. and Moses, Deut. 34.10. [That this thorne of sin will be still in our flesh.] Did Pauls thorne continue alwayes? That our Canaanites will be still in our side.] Did not David subdue all the Canaanites in his time, by his sons con∣fession,
1 King. 5.3, 4. so that there was no adversary left? That our twins will still be in our womb:] What did Rebecah go alwayes big? That our counterfightings and our counterwillings will still remain.] Then Christ hath taught us in vain to pray, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. That though we be like unto Christ per primitias Spiritûs, (is he himself so?) yet we are unlike him per reliquias vetu∣statis.] but John saith, 1 Epist. 3.1, 3. that every one that hath a true hope to see Christ in his glory purifieth himself as he is pure: and Paul, Ephes. 6.13. and having done all stand fast. That not to sin is here our Law:] Which Law he makes to be impossible, and so void; but that in heaven it shall be our priviledge; (which heaven by grace some attain here at length) Psal. 32.2. and in whose Spirit there is no guile. And 119.23. Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart; they also do no iniquity, they walk in his wayes. That all our perfection here is imperfect.] True, in com∣parison of a greater, yet it may be without sin, and ade∣quate to the Law, Jam. 2.3, 8. If ye fulfill the royal Law ac∣cording to the Scriptures (thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self) ye do well. Chap. 3.2. If any man sin not in a word, the same is a perfect man, and able to bridle the whole body. 1 Joh. 2.5, 6. But whoso keepeth his word, in him Ʋerily is the love of God perfected; hereby know we that we are in him. 1 Joh. 4.17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is so are we in this present world. Doth this man read the Scriptures? yet saith he further, [that sin hath its deaths blow given it, yet like a fierce and implacable beast, it never lets its hold go till the last breath, animam{que} in vulnere ponit; it never ceaseth to infest us till it cease to be in us:] but that may fal out long before we die the natural death, as Paul confesseth, that old things were past away, and all things become new with him, 2 Cor. 5.16. and that he was crucified with Christ, Gal. 2.20. In the six next pages he hath a new digression about the four-fold state of man.
Pag. 19. by miscount be saith, [that in the state of inno∣cency the will was free to good or evil:] And so it is still while we remain in innocency. [That it might persist in good God preserving it.] So it may still. First, that it might fall into ill, God forsaking it] So it doth; but we forsake him first. That God did not confirm the first man against the fall, yet he did by his commande∣ment, warning, and threatning:] And so he doth still; but he never did, nor ever will confirm any man by force against his will. That he permitteth the first man to be seduced, and to fall into sin and death, that as many as were saved out of the common ruine might be saved by mercy alone.] But the common ruine is ours by personal fall, and not by our first parents, as we have shewed. That if in the world there had been no misery there had been no mercy;] Yea Gods mercy is over all his works, Psalm 115.9. yea his mercy is from everlasting.] We an∣swer it is true; for the object of mercy is a miserable crea∣ture; and there had been goodnesse and bounty to man if he had not sinned. That if there had been no misery there had been no need of Christ.] Yea, both to create and to preserve that which is created, Heb. 10.1, 2, 3. That if there been no sin, there had been no matter to shew his justice:] Yes, there is justice in rewarding the o∣bedient, as well as in punishing the disobedient; as we see in rewarding of the good and bad Angels. Pag 20. by miscount] That sin, or the fall, is necessary in regard of Gods decree:] Why did that necessitate man to sin? then God must be the first author of sin. That the Creator was not bound to the creature to pre∣serve him in his goodnesse. True, not by any outward Law, but by his own goodnesse he was: bonitatis enim est & creare bonum & conservare. That God willed the fall to be an occasion of bestowing his greater grace and benefits.] Then that Grace must be at leastwise as universal as the fall was.
That mercy ought not to fight with justice.] Nor doth it, if it be offered to all that need it. That it is most just that more regard should be had of the chief good then of the creatures.] Then we must not make him unjust in damning those which never offended him in their own persons, to uphold new blasphemous doctrines: yet the chief good is most far from all selfenesse and in∣justice. That man at his first creation had not power to will what he would do.] Yes, he had that power so to will, but was not forced thereunto, nor, being created a free agent, ought he to be forced to choose this or that. That God ows no creature any thing:] Yes, that which he was pleased to promise. Pag. 21. That man is fallen by being born of corrupt pa∣rents.] No, but by his own personal disobedience, Eccles. 7.29. Psal. 14.23. and 53.23. Hosea 13.9. and 14.1. as before. That mans will after the fall works freely, but is carried to evil only.] But doth not Paul allow a man both power to will and run after good, though not to be saved thereby, when he saith, So then it is not in him that willeth or that run∣neth, but in God that sheweth mercy? Rom. 9.16. That in this fallen state man can doe nothing but sin.] What will he say of the Gentiles spoken of Rom. 2.14. When the Gentiles which have not the Law, doe by nature the things contained in the Law, those (saith he) having not the Law are a Law unto themselves? and of Abimelesk? Genesis 20.6. who by Gods own testimony did something in the integrity of his heart. That after the fall of the first man ensued the privation of the knowledge of God.] But neither all at once; nor upon his posterity by that fall, Rom. 1.19, 20, 21. because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God hath shewed unto them. That there ensued likewise the want of inclination, yea and aversnesse to obey God in us all.] Contrary to what was spoken now by Paul Rom. 2.14. But he brings divers
Scriptures to plead for him; as first, Gen. 6.5. All the thoughts of man are evill; to wit, after his personal fall and own depravation, as the men of the old world were depra∣ved: but it is true which the Fathers have in their writings, neme repente fit turpissimus: Then saith he. [can the Ethiopian change his skin? Jerem. 13.23.] But this is spoken only of them who by long continuance had both contracted an e∣vill habit, and hardness; as it follows there, then may ye al∣so do good that are accustomed to do evil. It is possible also that the Vindicator may sometimes speak the truth though he hath long used lying. [Mat. 7.28. that a corrupt tree can∣not bring forth good fruit.] Yea, if it be corrupt but in part: as all men after the fall are but in part, and by degrees cor∣rupt at the first, and for some time afterwards; nor in all things at once, but specifically in one evil after another, and gradually in each. As for Ephes. 2.3. we shewed be∣fore what that imports: and 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not able of our selves to think, [imagine, or conceive] any thing as of our selves, to wit, in spiritual and heavenly mysteries, which must only be made known by revelation, as they were to him, 2 Cor. 12.7. Gal. 1.15, 16. Ephes. 3.3, 4 5. That we have no liberty and pronenesse of will to do that which is good.] Is there then no difference between willing and doing, liberty and pronenesse, pronenesse and power? That by nature we have no love of God, nor readinesse to obey him.] But by creation, and the word ingrafted, we have both before our fall; otherwise how can we seek God, which is the great end of our creation? Act. 17.26, 27. That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feele after him. Or why doth the Lord expect any such thing from the sons of men, if they have no faculty or ability to doe it? Psalm. 14.2. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there was any that did understand and seek after God. [Pag. 22. by the first miscount, he denyeth that God doth enable the will of it selfe to do good works if it please.] But to will is one thing, and really to do good is ano∣ther thing, and requires a further power. Rom. 7.18. To will is
present with me, but how to perform that which is good I know not. He saith also that Grace worketh in the will to please or choose;] Which is false, for if it determine or force the will it were not a free agent: voluntas trahitur, non cogitur, the will may be drawn, but not forced. That God doth not hang his work upon the suspended Ifs of our wils.] This is altogether against the Scri∣pture. Psalm 95.7, 8. If this day ye will heare his voice, har∣den not your hearts as in the provocation: or Isai. 1.19, 20. If ye be willing and obedient ye shall cat the good of the Land, but if ye refuse and be rebellious ye shall be devoured with the sword: or Rom. 11.22. Behold therefore the severity and good∣nesse of God; on them which fell severity, but toward thee good∣nesse, if thou continue in his goodnesse, otherwise thou shalt be cast off. But he cites Ezek. 36.17. to prove it, where the Lord saith, I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walke in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgements and doe them. To which we say, that this is a full en∣ablement to keep Gods Law, even in this life, contrary to his second position: yet will the Lord be sought unto for this to doe it for them. ver. 31 of that chap. He cites also the words of Augustine, but against his second position likewise, saying, we will indeed, but God worketh in us to will; that is, generally and habitually, but not in hypothesi, by a particular determination to this or that act: and so are Pauls words to be understood, not of our habitual doing, yet of our willing, Philip. 2.13. It is God that worketh in you not only to will but doe, of his good pleasure: for otherwise this verse should contradict the former in some sort, where the A∣postle chargeth us to work out our own salvation with feare and trembling; if we must be meerly passive in this busi∣ness, why doth he lay such a charge of working or co-work∣ing upon us, yea of working out our salvation to the end? [That the will is effectually moved to doe according to the new inclination which God hath put into the renew∣ed will and affections.] True, but this is done by motion, motive, or perswasion, not by determinating the will:
For those Scriptures which he cites page 23 by miscount, prove not any more then what we grant: Deut. 10.6. The Lord will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed: for that is only to remove the foreskin of the evill inclinations. Eze. 36.26. A new heart will I give: that is, new inclina∣tions, with an habituall power to choose, and an actuall power (when it is sought) to do good. Act. 16.14. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia; that is, her understanding. 2 Cor. 2.7. Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty; to wit, according to the measure, and working of that Spirit, which first opens the understanding, then puts incli∣nation into the will and affections, and lastly, giveth power. Page 23. he saith, that in this life the renewing of our nature is not perfectly done here as concerning our knowledge of God, or our inclinations to obey him.] But untruly; for relatively to what the Law requireth of us here, we know that it is only to love God above all, and our neighbour as our selves, Mat. 23.37, 38, 39, 40. which we may both know and doe also by grace in this life, as there it is made known, and power is promised to act according∣ly. Deut. 26.18. And the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that thou shouldst keep all his commandements: so also Deut. 30.6. which he lately cited; And the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayst live: but com∣paratively to the world to come; we grant it as we did be∣fore, that neither our knowledge, nor our inclination, nor yet our power, shall be so intensively full and great in this life as in the world to come. That the regenerate are not always ruled by the holy Spirit, but are sometimes forsaken of God, either to try them, that is, to make their own weakness without God known unto them, as he did to Peter; or to chastise and humble them.] This is true, if we understand it of the whole process of regeneration, but not of their finall estate, to which they doe or may attain by grace in this life; for Christ tels his Disciples, Joh. 16.16. that he will pray unto
the Father for them, and he shall send another comforter unto them, (which certainly is the holy Ghost,) and he (saith Christ) shall abide with you for ever. And those Scriptures which he produceth prove nothing to the contrary: Psal. 51.11. Take not thy holy Spirit from me; for that spirit was for a time withdrawn from him, for his great fall into a∣dultery and murder. Isai. 63.17. Lord why hast thou made us to erre from thy way, and hardned our heart from thy fear? return for thy servants sake, the tribe of thine inheritance: Where the Prophet in the name of the young Saints, and not in his own bebalfe, complains of an hardnesse con∣tracted by their own sinnes; as see 1 Kings 8.57. The Lord our God be with us as he was with our fathers, let him not leave us nor forsake us: it seemeth to witnesse against him that God did not leave or forsake their fathers. His conclusion from hence [that the regenerate in this life doe always goe forward or backward, and doe not at any time stand still, or continue in the same estate] is nei∣ther true, nor consequent from the premisses. Hosea 13.13. For he is an unwise son, otherwise he should not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children: did not the pillar of fire and the Arke often stand still, at which time Jsrael was not to move? Page 24 by the same miscount, That the righteousness of the regenerate in this life is not such as may stand be∣fore God:] Contrary to many Scriptures; Prov. 28.1. The wicked flee when no man pursueth, but the righteous is bold as a Lion. 1 Joh. 22. And now little children abide in him, that when he shall appear we may have confidence, and not be asha∣med before him at his coming. 1 Joh. 3.7. Little children, let no man deceive you, for he that doth righteousnesse is righte∣ous as he is righteous. 1 Joh. 4.17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldnesse in the day of judgement, be∣cause as he is so are we in this present world. That those who are converted can no further retain good inclinations, thoughts, affections or purposes to per∣severe or goe forward therein, then as the Holy Ghost worketh and preserveth these in them.] This is not true;
for the Holy Ghost doth in time beget not only inclinati∣ons, but habits in the understanding, memory, will and af∣fections: sometimes they need (indeed) the Spirits admo∣nitory and excitant grace, especially in time of temptati∣on, but not always, either then or at other times. See Rom. 15.14, 15. where the Apostle saith, That those Saints at Rome have no need of an outward admonisher or remembrancer at all times: and the same may be concluded of an inward commonefaction. Doth not Saint Paul charge Timothy to stir up the gift that was already in him? 2 Tim. 1.6. And Christ himselfe gives the like charge, Rev. 2.25. that which ye have already hold fast till I come. Further he saith, [that if the Spirit of God withdraw it selfe, the regenerate are blind, and wander, and slip and fall, yet so as they perish not.] He speaks very favourably of wanderers, if so be that they were ever truly converted: but as the former part of his assertion is not true as to their blinding, unless the Spirit of God wholly desert men; so the latter part is false, for some true converts may by their own default fall totally and finally, and perish; Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. Heb. 10.5, 8. for the just shall live by faith; but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. 1 Tim. 5.12. Having damnation because they have cast off their first faith. Nor do the Scriptures to which he refers us ratifie what he saith; 1 Cor. 4.7. What hast thou that thou hast not received? I say unto him again, what hast thou re∣ceived, that thou dost bring this and all other Scriptures which are silent to the point in hand? But 1 Cor. 1.8. seemeth to plead for him, where the Apostle saith, that God shall confirme you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Christ: and Phil. 1.6. Also being confi∣dent of this thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you will perform it till the day of Jesus Christ. But we answer, that God indeed is constant on his part, and will carry on the work which he hath begun, if we prove not inconstant in our belief, love and obedience to him; as the Apostle speaks, Rom. 11.12. goodness towards thee if thou continue in
his goodness, otherwise thou shalt be cut off: and Christ himself, Joh. 15.9, 10. As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my love: if ye obey my commandement sye shall abide in my love, as I have kept my Fathers commandements and abide in his love. So must Joh. 15.5. which he hath cited, be understood; He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: and Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your fal∣vation with fear and trembling, for it is God that worketh in you to will and to do of his good pleasure: and 1 Cor. 10.13. Who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able, but will with the temptation make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it: and that of 1 Pet. 1.5. remaineth true notwith∣standing, that ye are kept by the power of God through faith un∣to salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. Pag. 25. he saith, (but he saith without any ground of truth,) that the four-fold liberty of the will, an∣swerable to the four-fold estate of man before and after the fall, in regeneration and glory, may serve for one ground to confirme the point in hand.] That sin will have a being in the best of men while they are here, is false also; and no less then these which follow. That the regenerate estate of man is here but begun, and not to be perfected.] Clean contrary to the Scriptures even now by him cited, 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.6. 1 Pet. 1.5. That the estate of the regenerate here is but a growing in grace, and a perfecting more and more, and a prevailing in mortifying their corruptions; but not attaining in this mortal life to have grace consummate, nor corruption abo∣lished, but sin remaines, and will remain, till they lay down the body, and be completely sanctified in glory.] But is not this principium petere, to beg a principle? or idem per idem probare? But after a promise to confirme his position further by Scriptures, Fathers, and reasons, he goes on and tells us out of Rom. 8.1. That the Apostle there doth not say that there is no sin in them that are in Christ, but that there is no condemnation; yet he tels us in the latter end of the same verse that such as are in Christ, who are truly incor∣porated
first into his death, and then into the similitude of his resurrection, that they have no sin in them for they walke not after the flesh but after the spirit; that Paul re∣joyceth here that sin was not able to condemn him, though it was in him, as he had confessed in the former chapter, that the evil that he would not that he did, and that he saw a Law in the members rebelling against the Law of his mind: But this sin will condemn any man where it remaineth, as the Apostle saith Rom. 6.23. that the wages of sin is death, and that of corruption. Ephes. 4.22. that ye put off the old man which is corrupting (or destroying) with its deceitful lusts: for so the best Translators read the Greek word , it being the Apostles argument why he would have the old man put off. But he saith, that here he expects Cajetan's or Aquinas his false exposition: (and he shall have it, to do him a pleasure, out of his own book, pag. 23. by the former account: Ca∣jetan, one of their own fraternity saith, damnatum est pecca∣tum, non extinctum.). Yet the worst of these two Epositors here are and will be of better repute, even among the Pro∣testants, then the Vindicators glosses ever were or will be. He saith further, [that here he expects that of Mr. Par∣kers, that the Apostle spake this when he was a babe in grace.] But this is another of Mr. Tendring's lies, for he saith onely the contrary, and proveth it out of Rom. 8.2. 1 Cor. 4.4. Phil. 4.13. that Paul was not now in that weak and corrupt estate complained of Rom. 7.14, 24. and that therefore he speaks it not of his own condition (though fi∣guratively in his own person) but in the behalfe of such as were babes in Christ. Pag. 26. by the former account, he citing Pauls words 1 Tim. 1.15. that Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am cheif; bids us mark it, that Paul speaks it not in the preterperfect tense, of whom I have been chief; but in the present tense, of whom I am cheif; as if Paul at that time were the chief of sinners.] But did ever any man be∣sides himself (that was not besides himself) think or say so? Is there not such a figure in the Scripture as Enallage tempo∣rum,
the putting of one tense for another? Doth not Paul 1 Cor. 15.8, 9, 10. Ephos. 2.4, 5, 6. Titus 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. and even at the 13 vers. before set forth his corrupt estate of unbe∣lief as a condition that was past? But he goes on out of Paul his 2 Epist. to I know not whom or what Church (for none is named) chap. 1. from vers. 6. to the 13. to prove that Paul was not now a babe or child in Christ, but rather an old man; as he cals himself Paul the aged, in his Epistle to Philemon. Truly as old as the Vindicator would make himself, he shews himself very young and childish in that his reasoning: for we know none that affirms the thing that he goeth about to disprove, but he loves to fight with his own shadow. In conclusion he saith that these Jesuitical cavils (which yet are his own) are too well known, and never did, nor shall prevail against Gods truth. Then he goeth on from Rom. 8.1. to the se∣cond verse, upon which he makes as learned observations as he did formerly upon the first verse; for whereas the A∣postle saith that the Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus hath made us free from the Law of sin and death; Here, saith he, [we may observe that the Apostle saith not that we are fully freed from sin in this life, but from the Law of sin.] But, first, it is evident that Paul saith that he was made free from that Law of sin of which he had so much complained chap. 7.21, 22, 23. Secondly, that he cals it a Law of death; as he doth chap. 7.24. a body of death, because it hath death and condemnation appendant to it and involved in it. And thirdly, that he was now actually, even in this life, and for the present, freed therefrom. And lastly, that it was not the death of Christ that had thus freed him, to wit from guilt, leaving the pollution behind, (as this Champion of corruption speaks hereafter;) but it was the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus that had now freed him both from that Law of sin, and of death its conco∣mitant: so that he cannot possibly speak of his present condition in chap. 7. from ver. 14. to the 24. And whereas he adds in the close of that page, [that Christian experience shews that no sort of men are more troubled with tem∣ptations
then they whom God hath begun to deliver from the Law of sin.] Though this be true, yet what is this to his purpose, or the proposition which he would now maintain? for we speak not what befals regenerate men at their first conversion, but of that which they do, or may attain by grace in the end. Nor do all temptations arise from cor∣ruption, they may proceed immediately from Satan, and assault such as have no sin or corruption left in them; as they did our first parents in innocency, and Christ himself as he was man, Heb. 4.15. Pag. 19. by the latter account, he rols the old stone with Sysiphus, saying, [that our deliverance from sin is but begun, not perfected here, but that God is faithful by whom we are called] Then they are unfaithful that seek not to have the work finished, Phil. 1.6. And there he breaks out into a great rapture, saying, [blessed be the Lord, that whereas before we were captives to sin, now the case of the battel is alte∣red.] Why? what battel did we fight against sin before grace did convert us unto God? [That sin is become our cap∣tive through Christ.] Was it so with them in whose be∣half Paul complaineth, but I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into cap∣tivity to the Law of sin that is in my members? we trow not; sin was here too often the superiour. That it remaineth in us not as a commander, but as a captive of the Lord Jesus.] But doth it not till it be sub∣dued often circumvent us and prevail against us? and if so, then that of Peter is true, 2 Pet. 21.19. Of whom a man is overcome of the same is he brought into bondage; at leastwise for a time. He saith further, [that the bolts of sin are yet upon our hands, and are left to admonish us of our former miserable condition.] What are we under bolts and Irons, and yet no prisoners or captives? But Christ is sent to preach deliverance to the captives, and the opening of the prison to those that are bound, and to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to wit, against his e∣nemies, Esay 61.1, 2, 3. Luk. 4.18, 19, 20, yet contrary to this and other promises, he saith, that we draw the chains
of our sins after us, which make us move the more slowly. But it is the portion of the wicked to be in chains, 2 Pet. 2.4. Psal. 107.10, 11. and to be bound hand and foot, Matth. 23.13. There are some that draw iniquity with cords of vani∣ty, Esay 5.18. that is, with vain excuses and distinctions, or ungrounded promises; wo to such, saith the Prophet, Is. 5.18. wo, &c. [But these chains, saith he, are not able to draw us into the bondage that we were in before.] Yes, they have done too many, 2 Pet. 2.19, 20. That death which is the wages of sin is so changed, that it is not the death of the man but the death of the sin in the man.] What doth this babler say? the death that is the wages of sin is the second death in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone, Rev. 14.9, 10. and chap. 20.10, 15. Sin is the first death, and this is the second; how then can this be any thing else but the death of a sinner? There is another death indeed, that is the death of sin, and not of the man, which is a suffering out of all temptations, and a dying with Christ unto all evil, Psal. 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints: of which see Rom. 6.7, 8. Rev. 14.13. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. Of this death, and not of the corpo∣ral death, did Chrysostome and Ambrose, whom he cites, speak, or else they were as much mistaken as the Vindicator is in this matter, saying there [that the death which is brought out by sin (he should have said, by Christ,) doth at the last even destroy and consume it in the children of God, and that sin will remain, though not reign.] Yes, if its will may take place, it will reign also, and that for ever. But he goes on, and comments thus upon Rom. 8.13. If ye mortifie the deeds of the body: hereby, saith he, the Apostle shews, that after regeneration by grace, and before glorifi∣cation, grace is not consummate, nor is corruption wholly abolished.] But with what spectacles did he read this Text, when he found these things couchant in it? for out of the whole verse he might have learned these saving truths, for his better information, and reformation also; First, that God doth suspend his final purpose and promises of our salvation upon Ifs, or conditions on our parts to be perform∣ed:
For if ye live after the flesh, saith Saint Paul, ye shall dye; but if ye mortifie the deeds of the body by the spirit ye shall live. Secondly, that the remaining corruptions in the Saints such as these Romans were, have death and condemnation atten∣ding upon them. Thirdly, that therefore they are not to be wounded only, but mortified, that is, absolutely killed. And lastly, that this is not to be done by the death of the body, but by the power of the Spirit, which we are to seek by grace, and with which we are to cooperate in this life till the work be done. His conclusion then from hence pag. 19. and 20. by the new account is false:] That as long as we live in the body there is some life of sin remaining, which we had need to mortify and put off. [But not, as he doth, to put it off til our natural death.] But he addes Saint Augustine, saying, [that our life here is bellum, not triumphus, a warfare, not a tro∣phee of victory.] Yet may our warfare have an end here, and so to have our triumph and victory follow. Esay 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith our God; speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare is ended, that her iniquity is pardoned. Ephes. 6.13. Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day, and having done all to stand. 2 Tim. 4.6, 7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. But he contradicts himself in his next speech pag. 20. by the new account, saying, [that in this battel we must fight without intermission untill we have gotten the victory; for who can say that he hath in such sort cut off his superfluities, that he hath no need of reforming?] Yes, Paul could say it 2 Cor. 5.17. and the holy Apostle John 1 Ep. 4.17. and 5.5. with many thousands more; to whom Christ bears witness, Rev. 7.14, 15, 20. and 14.4, 5. That when sins and superfluities are unregarded they kindle again.] That it is true that the same spiritual temptations may return after the former are quenched; but at length the Devil is by Christ to be cast out with all his works. Rev.
12.10, 11. And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, now is come salvation and strength, and the kingdome of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, who accused them before God day and night. Yet he saith further, [That whosoever he be, unless he dissemble, he shall find within himself something that had need to be subdued.] But such a Pigmee in grace as he is (if he be under grace) must not measure the growth and mortification of Gods faithful and sanctified Saints by his pitch. But he brings in some sentences which he fathers upon Ambrose, as this, velis nolis infra sine; tuos habitabit (but he saith habitavit;) Jebusaeus subugari potest, exterminare (he should have said ex∣terminari) non potest; that will thou nill thou the Jesubite will dwel wit hin thy coasts and borders; he may be sub∣dued, but not rooted out. This is true of temptations, e∣specially for a time after our first conversion; but this con∣slict, if we bestir our selves aright, shall have an end here, as we have proved of late: some Jesubites are our sins and corruptions, which must be rooted out; again, some Jebu∣sites are our native faculties as they are corrupted, disor∣dered and poysoned with rebellion; These also may be sub∣dued and brought into obedience, but neither can be cast out, nor ought to be: howbeit we have sure promises that all our sins and corruptions shall be subdued, if we will sue out the benefit of the same. Mich. 7.19. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue all our iniquities, and thou will cast their sins into the depths of the sea. Insomuch as that there shall not be one Canaanite left in our soul which is the house and the temple of the Lord; So Zech. 14.21. And in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts. Yet he goes on saying, saying That the great deceitfulness of mans heart, of which the Lord complaineth Jer. 17.9. saying, the heart of man is de∣ceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? it is attributed to all men, good and bad indifferently, Christ onely excepted.] It is well he will except Christ himself here, for he did not in his positions. But he might have excepted all who were Christs truly unto the end.
Psal. 32.2. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputeth not ini∣quity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. Zephan. 3.13. The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies, nor shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth. See Rev. 14.5, 6. And in their mouth was found no guile, for they are without fault before the throne of God. Therefore all his affirmations that follow in that page are false, at leastwise in his sense and notion, as, [That all mens hearts are alike by nature.] True they are alike moul∣ded at the first, but not corrupt, as he would have it. That corruption is not from the instrument, but from the Author. Then God must be the Author of our corru∣ption by his doctrine. That men beget children as they are men, not as they are regenerate and holy men.] Yet the Apostle giveth the Saints some priviledge above others, saying, 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your children unclean, but now they are holy. That nature with its corruption is derived, but not grace, for that is supernatural.] And is not corruption a preter∣natural and an adventitious thing also? That grace makes no such change in this life, but the hearts of the best are in some sort deceitful.] Which he presently contradicteth, saying, though he gave Nathaniel that praise, that there was no guile in his heart. Yea David, saith he, doth the like to any justified man, Psa. 32.1, 2. how∣beit, saith he, this is onely true of the spirit or regenerate part, and not of the flesh of the old man, who by reason of his age is often too hard for the young man; where he contradicts himself in what he had said before, that sin is our captive, and doth not reign at any time, but onely re∣maineth in the regenerate: That it hath its deaths blow pag. 21. by the former account; so that the best Expositors, (he meaneth for his tooth and palate,) read this Text thus; the whole heart of the wicked is deceitful with a full, strong, and reigning deceitfulness, and but part of the heart of the godly, namely the unregenerate part, but in a weaker mea∣sure, as being discerned and stroven against. That the heart of the wicked shews it self such in the
whole course of their lives. And yet by and by he contra∣dicts himselfe, saying, that nevertheless the heart of the wicked may be upright in some particular actions, as Abi∣melech was in taking of Sarah, Gen. 20.6. That the heart of the godly is only deceitfull in some particular actions, as David was upright in all things save in the matter of Uriah.] But I demand, whether David might not have avoided even those sirs of bloodshed and murther by watchfulnesse and prayer, as well as other Saints should have done? if so, he might have overcome all sinne, and no doubt he did so in the end. He saith further, that every regenerate man is partly flesh and partly spirit. True, he is so at the first, but not always: Rom. 8.2. For the Law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Iesus hath made me free from the Law of sin and death, saith Paul; where was then the flesh? That hereupon ariseth the war in their hearts like the strugling in Rebecca's womb] But did that strugling last all her life long? That the regenerate here are but like the dawning of the day, wherein darknesse and light are mixed.] But Solomon saith Pro. 4.18. The path of the just is like the shining light that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. That the regenerate may be like a cup of wine mingled with water.] True both at the beginning of their new birth, and for a good space after, yea all their life long through their own default. [which vessel or cup, saith he, is not halfe water and halfe wine, but wholly wine and whol∣ly water] Doth the man understand what he saith? By this saying of his, and his similitude, the regenerate should be wholly renewed and wholly corrupt; which he contradicts with another comparison, saying [even as a vessel filled with equall proportions of hot and cold water (it would make a dog spue to heare him) it is not halfe cold and halfe hot (it is both) but wholly lukewarm, that is, partly hot and partly cold in all the parts of it.] If this be not a clear contradiction, or an absolute piece of nonsense, I know not what is such. And whereas he saith, [that a regenerate man
is partly holy and partly unholy in all the parts and powers of the body and soul (what is he so in the regenerate part also, of which he spake erewhile?) yet the denomination of a regenerate man is always given him in Scripture à parte praestantiore.] But he is mistaken, where it hath not the upper hand, it is otherwise: 1 Cor. 11.3, 13. And I, Bre∣thren, could not speak unto you as spiritual men, but as unto car∣nall, even as unto babes in Christ; I sed you with milk, and not with strong meat, for ye were not able to beare it, nor yet are ye a∣ble, for ye are yet carnal; for whereas there are among you en∣vying, strife and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? He saith that the Lord who made the heart, Pag. 22 by the new account, pronounceth us all guilty of sin, Gen. 6.5.] Doth he so to us? did we live in that age? But yet it is true of every fallen man in the generall; but that guilt doth not always lye upon the Saints for new sins: and there he heaps many Texts of Scripture (which speak of the state of the unregenerate) to prove that the regenerate are here always sinful; as Iob 5.2. Psalm 14.2, 3, 4, 5. Isai. 54.2. and 64.6. Rom. 3.3, 19. Gal. 2.16. yea though the godly have many failings in their babeship, and some in their growing up, in which regard they cannot justifie themselves, but must take guilt and shame to themselves, as Iob doth chap. 8.29, 30. and David, Psalm 130.3. and 43.2. and Solomon testifieth of all men till they be throughly purged, 1 Kings 8.46. That there is no man that sinneth not, or may not sin: yet none of those places lays upon us a necessity of continu∣ing in sin all our days, nor makes sin impossible to be subdu∣ed here by the grace and helpe of Christ; which is the point that he should prove. But he bids us mark what is written 2 Cor. 5.21. that Christ was made sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him. Which we admit, but not in his sense, saying, that the Apostle doth not say actively that we should make or work out our own righte∣ousnesse, but positively (he should have said passively) that we should be made the righteousnesse of God; and that not by our selves, lest we should glory in our own salvation, but by a∣nother
even Jesus Christ the righteous, blessed for ever∣more. But as the former part of his observation is false, that we should not actually work out our own righteousnesse by Je∣sus Christ, so it is evident that he understands not what he speaks in the latter words of his speech, about being made righteous by another, even Jesus Christ: for there is no o∣ther righteousnesse for men to seek after but that which is required in the moral Law. Deut. 6.25. And it shall be our reghteousnesse if we observe to doe all these commandements be∣fore the Lord our God as he hath commanded us: which yet is of two sorts or degrees; the one is the righteousnesse of grace and justification whereby sin is to be purged out; and the other is the righteousnesse of glorification: of the for∣mer the Apostle speaks thus, Rom. 5.17. Much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousnesse shall reign by one Jesus Christ: and of the latter of these David thus, Psalm 119. vers 142. Thy righteousnesse is an e∣verlasting righteousnesse, and thy Law is the truth: and vers. 144. The righteousnesse of thy testimonies is everlasting. This is that David hoped for in the end; Psalm 17.15. I will be∣hold thy face in righteousnesse, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likenesse. So Psalm 24.45. He shall receive the bles∣sing from the Lord, even righteousnesse from the God of his sal∣vation: and 69.27. Add iniquity to his iniquity, and let him not enter into thy righteousnesse: and Paul Gal. 5.5. For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousnesse by faith. 2 Tim. 4 8. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteous∣nesse. And as both those are attained by faith, so they are called the righteousnesse of faith, Rom. 1.17. For therein, to wit in the Gospel, is the righteousnesse of God revealed from faith to faith, vers 18. for the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodlinesse and unrighteousnesse of men. So circumcision, the signe of sanctification, is called the seal of the righteousnesse of faith, Rom. 4.11. and the Apostle ex∣plaining himselfe, Phil. 3.9, 10. what that righteousnesse of God is which he would attain by the faith of Christ, saith that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection,
and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to his death, if by any means I might attain to the resurrection of the dead. And both these are to be attained by Christ; in which regard he is called the end of the Law for Righteousnesse sake to every one that beleeveth, Rom. 10.4. And as he is gi∣ven by the Father that the righteousnesse of the Law might be fulfilled in us who walke not after the flesh but after the spirit, Rom. 8.4. so he is called the Lord our righteousnesse, Jer. 23.6. as is the holy Ghost, the heavenly Jerusalem also in its descention unto us called likewise Jehovah sidkena, the Lord our righteousnesse, Jerem. 34.16. which is that life the Saints hoped for Gal. 5.5. as was said before. If any man find any other righteousnesse of God unto salvation men∣tioned cleerly in the Scriptures, let him takn it for his la∣bour; for that one mans obedience whereby many shall be made righteous, Rom. 5.19. is the obedience of Christ within us to be attained by faith for the fulfilling of the Law, and the former of those two righteousnesses, and not his obedrence without us. Let every one take heed how he casts his own soul, or make the souls of others depend upon any other righteousnesse of God which hath no footing for it in the holy Scriptures; but though there is no outward obedience of Christ for us that is made our righteousnesse by the Lord, yet by his passive obedience Saints that forsake sin, and sub∣due it by his grace, are redemed from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. By which he also perfects or completes for salva∣tion those which are sanctified by faith in him, Acts 26.18. Heb. 10.14. These things thus being opened and premi∣sed, we shall appeal unto all that are godly-wise, whether those that are desirous to be saved are not to work out their own righteousnesse and salvation by faith and obedience in Jesus Christ. See Psalm 24.3, 4, 5, 6. Isai 51.1. Har∣ken unto me ye that follow after righteousnesse, ye that seek the Lord, chap. 56.1. Thus saith the Lord, keep ye judgement and doe justice, (or righteousnesse) for my salvation is neere, and my righteousnesse ready to be revealed. Phil. 2.12, 13. Where∣fore my beloved as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but much more in my absence, so work out your salvation
with fear and trembling; for it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. See 1 Tim. 6.11, 12. But thou O man of God, flee those things, and follow after righteous∣ness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness; fight the good sight of faith, lay hold of eternal life. David saith, Psal. 119.166. O Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and kept (or done) thy commandements; and so must all do in Christ that will be saved. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that keep his commandements, that they may have right to the tree of life, and enter through the gate into the city. But he goeth on, and saith out of Job, [Who can bring a clean thing out of an un∣clean? Not one.] Nor can this man bring any clean doctrine, or pure wisdome (unless by tradition from o∣thers) out of his impure vessel. Prov. 20.9. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? To which we answered before, that this interrogation im∣plieth paucity, but not a nullity of such men; witness that Text, Is. 55.3. Who hath beleeved our report? But he saith page 23 by the new account, [That if my friends could produce but one such man, and prove it, then I would yield the bucklers.] But if we cannot produce any such man in our corrupt, blind, and unbelieving age, shall our unbelief make the faith and promises of God of none effect? for though it is true à posse ad esse non valet consequen∣tia, so it is as true, that à non esse ad non posse fieri non est con∣cludendum, especially where we have Gods help ingaged by his promises, if we will seek it: But because we will now lay claim to the bucklers, and that upon his clear and immediate promise, we will shew him John with many his fellow-Apostles, 1 Joh. 4.17. as was shewed before; Here∣in is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is so are we in this present world: we can also shew him many thousands (as we have done be∣fore) of such perfect ones even in this life, Rev. 7.9, 17. and 14.4, 5, 6. But here he produceth by the help of some good neigh∣bours the testimonies of the Fathers, (for he never read them himself;) unto which when we have answered we
will pay him in his own coine: That it was the prerogative of Christ alone, among all grown men, to know no sin, and to be found solus in hominibus qualis quaerebatur in pecoribus, (not in peccoribus, as he hath it) alone such among men as was sought among the beasts, an unblamable lamb without spot. Here he having cited Isaiah 53.6. saying, we like sheep have gone astray: and Gal. 3.23. that the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, he might have spared Augustine contra Pelag. lib. 2. cap. 13. and Gregorie lib. 3. in Reg. cap. 6. saying, There is no man that hath not some corruption in him which he may and should lament: For take all this as spoken of the unre∣generate man, or the regenerate that hath not fulfilled his course with Paul, 2 Tim. 4.7. and we have often affirmed the same. But he brings Hieronymus contra Jovinian. lib. 2. saying, No man is clean from sin, though he live but one day upon the long earth:] Which is true of the sinful earth spoken of Collos. 3.5. mortifie therefore your members upon earth; although we know that in that saying Hierom and others suffered the Septuagints ill translation of Job to impose upon them. But we had almost lest out Lactantius whom contra Gentes lib. 6. cap. 13. he alledgeth, saying, No man can be without sin so as he is burthened with the garment of the flesh.] We say so like∣wise, if he understand it of that flesh which Saint Jude speaks of vers. 23. hating even the garment spotted by the flesh; if otherwise, he himself was Lactantick with Lactantius. Further, he brings Bernard upon Cant. serm. 2. saying, Non peccare Dei justitia est, not to sin is the justice and property of God, but remission of sin is the justice of man:] To which we say, that the former is but true in part, for the elect Angels never sinned; and the latter scarcely true at all, for remission of sins is one thing, and righteousness is another; And where the remission of sin follows, the righteousness of sanctification to purge them away must go before of ne∣cessity, Acts 26.18. Sed unus Bernardus non vidit omnia. And his own conclusions there are as false; for, saith he, [As the Ivy will not die untill the Oke be cut down; (but Experi∣ence shews that if you cut the Ivy at the root it will forth∣with
die; so our sins will not die as long as we live, (which is as false as the other;) neither will it ever be abolished until death ends the conflict between the flesh and Spirit.] Then death, which is but a privation, is stronger then the Spirit; And such Quacks as he is have a good warrant and pretence to kill many, yea were it many thousands; for by this means, according to his doctrine, they should put an end to this conflict of sin, and send men presently to be perfected in glory: Here not only souldiers, whose trade is to kill, but high-way-men, poysoners, and all murderers, especially of the Saints, might find a strong plea for their murders. But he brings us more of this Ambrosia out of Ambrose de Paenit. lib. 6. cap. 1. saying, [It is not the voice of thy family, I am whole, and need not a physician; but, heale me O Lord and I shall be healed.] But if it be the voice of his family, of what family is the Vindicator, who saith, that the Lord cannot or will not heal us? is it death that must do that work for us? is it not the voice of his family, first, to come to him for an absolute cure, and then with the woman who was cured of her bloody issue, and the clean∣sed leper, and many others, to come and give God thanks? But he goes on page 23, 24. with Ambrose, speaking thus to the Novatian hereticks of his time, [and saith, it may fitly be turned to the Jesuits of our time; Darest thou, O Jesuit, call thy self clean and holy? albeit thou wert clean in regard of thy workes, this one word were enough to make thee unclean.] To which I say, first, that the way wherein Paul worshipped the God of his Fathers was called Heresie, Acts 24.14. Se∣condly, we know no Jesuit that counts himself perfect, unless it be by his profession: But we hope that he will not henceforth, when it cometh to a trial at Law, deny that be called us Jesuits; which is no less then to accuse us of a capital crime, no better then treason; for which by Gods Law he ought to suffer death himself, unless he can prove it, Deut. 19.17, 18, 19. or to incurre a great mulct for his slander, above that the Jury awarded at Sarum, March 15. 1657. But lastly, this pretender to no less degree then of a Doctor of Divinity doth not see that there is a gross
absurdity, if not contradiction, in the words which he fa∣thers upon Ambrose, saying, albeit thou wert clean in regard of thy works, this one word, I am clean, (which in that case is but the truth) were enough to make thee unclean. We hope the Vindicator hereafter will not be too forward to speak the truth any more then he hath done heretofore, lest, as he saith out of Ambrose, it make him unclean. But he giveth us presently some Nectar to his Ambrosia, saying, with him agreeth Augustine Serm. 29. de verbis Apost. There are some like vessels that are blown up with wind, filled with an haughty spirit of election, not sollidly great but swel∣led with the humour of pride, who dare be bold to say that there are men found upon earth without sin.] Why, are there no pro∣mises of such persons? see Isai. 1.24.25. And I will turn mine hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin. See chap. 4.4. and 11, 19. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be fil∣led with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters that cover the sea. Eze. 36.25. I will pour clean water upon them, and from all their filthinesse and from all their jdols will I cleanse them. Zeph. 3.13. The house of Jsrael shall do no iniquity, nor speak lyes. But we know what sort of Protestants at this day are puffed up with the spirit of election: And it seemeth the Vindicator being conscious to himselfe or his party, did not English those words of Augustine, infla∣ti viri, spiritu electionis pleni, men puffed up, filled with the spirit of election, (though for him we do it.) But the Father de∣mands of such, How sayst thou that art just and holy this prayer, Forgive us our sins? Yes, such may say with Saint Math. chap. 6.12. forgive us our debts, to wit of love and thank∣fulnesse to God, yea and of love to men for his sake; which debt is so great that it can never to all eternity be paid. Rom. 13.6. Owe nothing to any man but to love one another: and with Saint Luk. chap. 11.9. they can say also, Forgive us our sins, not only where they pray for and with others in a mixt Congregation, but alone by themselves also, in regard of our innumerable sins formerly committed. But we would aske Augustine againe, doth Christ contradict himself in
that prayer, when he teacheth to pray, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven? But he interrogating saith, is this pray∣er to be said of Christ only, or of beleevers also? Yea, it is the prayer of the sons of God also, for they call God father all which is true, but nothing to the purpose. But he proceeds, saying, [what are ye that say ye have no sin? Lyars, saith the Apostle, 1 Iohn 1.] To which first we say, that men that say they have sin may be liars, and noto∣tious liars also; witnesse the Vindicator. And secondly, that some men may say they know no sin by themselves for the present, and yet speake the truth therein as Paul did 1 Cor. 4.4. but if any man saith he hath not sinned at all he is a liar; and so Saint Iohn explains that in the first Epist. chap. 1. ver. 10. which he had spoken more darkely, and e∣specially to the babes in Christ, ver. 8. as may further ap∣pear chap. 2. ver. 1. where he saith, My little children, thes things have I written unto you that ye sin not:] What doth he put them upon impossibilities then? No, he furnisheth them there and in the next verse with such a propitiator and hea∣ler of sin, as is able to cure and take away the sins of the whole world if they would seek unto him; for it is Jesus Christ the just or righteous. But whereas in the next place he cites against us, Luk 17.10. When ye shall have done all these things that are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable ser∣vants, we have done that which is our duty to do. But he is here like the man possessed, who cut himselfe with stones Mark 5.5. for this Text shews, that if we doe all those things that are commanded us, (which he implyeth that we may doe) yet we doe but our duty therein, and add nothing to the Lord, and in that regard are but unprofitable servants, and no d∣vantage to our Master. O how unprofitable are they then who neither will doe all those things that are commanded, nor suffer other men to be at quiet who indeavour to do, and teach others their duty therein. But he saith, that we have a silly subterfuge for conceal∣ing our perfection, or rather for saying we are unprofitable servants, that were we never so righteous, for humility sake we should say we are unprofitable servants. But he
answereth with Saint Augustine, proper humilitatem ergo mentiris, Therefore for humility sake thou lyest; but it is cer∣tain that Christ never taught men for humility to ly.] No, he did not, but Angustine and he are far from truth if they say that Christ hath not taught them who hath fulfilled the Law and Gods will to say that they are still unprofitable servants; for, can a man be profitable to God as he that is wise is profitable to himselfe? Iob 22.2. But he urgeth us again with Bernards words, first, in Anun∣ciatione Mariae, who is better then the prophet David, of whom the Lord said, I have found a man after mine own heart; and yet he need not to say, enter not into judgement with thy servant.] True, so hath every man, in regard of his manifold former sins, but not always in regard of sins newly com∣mitted, when he is throughly sanctified as they were, 1 Ioh. 4.17, 18. yet there is a time of greater grace and growth in grace promised then that which David had at∣tained. Zach. 12.18. In that day shall the Lord defend the in∣habitants of Jerusalem, and he that is fallen, or a feeble one among them at that day shall be as David, and the house of Da∣vid (thats of the beloved; or of the Princess) shall be as God, as the Angell of the Lord before them. Secondly, he alledgeth this saying out of Bernard 23. Serm. 25. upon Cantic. It sufficeth me for all righteousnesse to have him reconciled unto me whom I have only offended.] True, but he is not fully reconciled unto any man, nor any man fully reconciled unto him, until he be dead with Christ unto al known sin; Rom. 6.8. For if we be dead with Christ we beleeve that we shall also live with him: and this cannot come to passe without receiving of abundance of grace and of the gift of righ∣teousnesse, as the Apostle speaks Rom. 5.17. and being thus justified by faith we have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord, and no otherwise, Rom. 5.1. But he brings a third saying of his in Serm. 10 contra vi∣tium ingrati. To be without sin is Gods righteousnesse, but mans righteousnesse is Gods grace pardoning of sin] Which accords well with our doctrine if rightly understood: for : signifieth the putting away of sin, as well as the
pardon of sin. Luk. 1.74. to give the knowledge of salvation unto his people for the remission [or putting away] of their sin, to wit, by sanctification. Now this cannot be done but by the contrary goodness and righteousness: Rom. 12.21. Be not overcome of the evil, but overcome the evil with the good. But page 25 he saith, Wo to the miserable generation, in whom their own insufficiency seems sufficiency.] So say we, for our sufficiency is of God alone, 2 Cor. 3.5. and we also bewaile the miserable generation that shall die in their sins, because they believe not a sufficiency in Christ alone, but in and through weakness it self (a corporal death) to purge away the dross and filthiness oi sin, John 8.21, 24. which also is his unbeleife. But here, which is his third di∣gression, without any  (unless it be ) he cometh to distinguish of perfection and perfect men; and first askes [how Paul Phil. 3.12, 13. denyeth that he was perfect; and verse 15. ranks himself among those that are perfect. To which he answers out of Augustine Sermon 28, we suppose he means de temp. That he was perfect according to his intention, not according to prevention and attainment: and out of Bernard, saying, That great vessel Saint Paul grants per∣fection, that is a going forward; as  (saith he) is not only one that is come to the end, but signifieth him that moveth towards it: and out of Ambrose in Rom. 8.9. (which yet is known to be none of his comment,) That the Apostle speaketh unto Christians sometimes as unto them that are perfect, and o∣ther times as those who are to perfect that which is required of them. But this is one of his digressions and impertinences, for we plead not for such an absolute degree of perfection as is expected in the world to come, but a limited one, which is called perfection, viz. yet containeth a love of God a∣bove all, and of our neighbour as of our selves, which re∣moveth all contrary lusts and sins. In pursuit of this said digression he brings two arguments out of Augustine, to prove that Zachary, of whom he speaks chap. 1.6. did not perfectly walk in all the commandements of God. The first is this [because he was a Priest, and was bound as well
to offer for his own sins as for the sins of his people, Heb. 3.5.] Yet this he might do for his former sins, though he were now perfect for the present: so that this argument holds nor. But the second, which he hath page 26. of the new account, is more childish then the former; [That because he is said to walk in the commandements, he had not yet at∣tained to the mark; for they that are at their journies end sit still.] But it is not so in the kingdome of God, for though they rest from their labours, that is, from their conflict against sin and Satan, yet they walk in the perfection of Gods commandements for ever: and if he fancied any o∣ther eternal life to himself then the fulness of love and righteousness required by the Law, he was mistaken in the mark at which all true Saints aim. Psal. 133.3. For there he commanded the blessing and life for evermore. Ephes. 1.4. As he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. See Psal. 24.4, 5. Gal. 15.5. 2 Tim. 4.8. before cited: To which he adds a third argument of his own, [Because he was smitten with dumbness for not believing the Angels promise.] But as there is no moral precept for that, so it infringeth not what Luke hath said of him chap. 1.6. where he tells us as before [that the Apostle doth constant∣ly distinguish between peccatum and crimen, betwixt sin and crime, that is, saith he, some grievous offence which giveth slander, and is worthy of crimination.] Is not all sin then worthy of crimination? But he voucheth Augustine, say∣ing, [That the life of holy men may be said to be without crime. (yet he thought otherwise who said, nemo sine crimtne vivit;) but not without sin.] Which is true of a mans whole race or course, that it is, and hath been sinfull; but not of the Saints last and best attainments, or possibilities through grace, as we shall afterwards shew out of Augustines own confession, who is here again brought in saying [Men live well if they live without crime.] But they live better when by grace they live without sin. But that is egregiously false which follows [that he who thinks he can (to wit by the help of Christ) live without sin, he doth not thereby make
himself free from sin, (Yes, if he do not, he may do it in time.) but debars himself of the pardon of his sins.] But Saint John speaks otherwise, 1 John 1.7. But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin. Is not the forsaking of sin for the present the high way to pardon for our sins past? See Prov. 28.13. Ezek. 18.21, 22. But after that former digression he returneth again to his distin∣ctions about perfection and righteousness, wherein there is little of right, and less of perfection to be found; for, first, he saith out of his own cerebel, [that there is a two-fold perfection or righteousness, the first imputed, which is by way of relation, and doth perfectly justifie us before God: (for which you must take his word, for he brings no proofe to make it good;) the second is infused by way of inhe∣sion subjectively in us; [and this (saith he) is but inchoate and imperfect, and cannot justifie us before God.] But we have proved before out of Titus 3.4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 6.11. that justifi∣cation and sanctification are all one thing, and therefore if the righteousness of sanctification be onely inchoated, and not perfected in this life, then we cannot be fully justified before God; for there is no other righteousness to be at∣tained for our justification then that: hence it is Rom. 8.30. nothing interveneth between our calling and glorifica∣tion but justification, by which sanctification (as being all one thing) is to be understood: Moreover, those whom he foreknew those he called, and whom he called those he justified, and those he justified them he also glorified. Then secondly, he brings [a distinction of extrinsecal and intrinsecal righteousness out of Zanchie, of which the ex∣trinsecal (saith he) is the adventitious (he might have said the fictitious) is the perfection of condonation, where our imperfections are truly pardoned for the death and passion of Jesus Christ, according to that of Augustine; All the com∣mandements are reputed as done when that is remitted which is left undone.] But where had the Bishop of Hippo this Hip∣pomanes? for the holy Ghost saith transmutatis terminis the clean contrary; that when the cammandements are kept
and fulfilled for the present, then all that was amiss before becomes pardoned. Ezek. 18.21, 22, 23. If the wicked will return from all his sins which he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, and not die; all his transgressions which he hath committed they shall not be mentioned unto him, in the righteousness of that he hath done he shall live. Doth not Christ require an actual keeping and performance of the commandements of every one that will enter into life? Matth. 7.21. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heaven, but he that doth the will of my Father which is in heaven. 1 Cor. 7.19. Circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision, but the keeping of the commandements of God. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his commandements, that they may have right to the tree of life, as before. [And this righteousness, saith he, rather consisteth in the pardon of sins then in the perfection of vertue.] But where is the pardon of sins called righteous∣ness? for though the Apostle, Rom. 4.6, 7, 8. speaks of a bles∣sedness that lieth not in the imputing of sin, and the im∣puting of righteousness without works; yet that not im∣puting of sin is the purging away sin by Gods Spirit; as is evident out of Psal. 32.2, 3. which place should be thus rendred; O the blessedness of the man whose transgressions are taken away, and whose sins are covered! (to wit, by mor∣tification.) O the blessedness of the man to whom the Lord will not impute iniquity, (by letting it remain unpurged away) and in whose Spirit there is no guile! For the last words of the Text do evince that David speaks here of sanctification, as knowing no other justification: and the imputing of righteousness without works (that is, our own works) is the free bestowing of the righteousnesse of sanctification, and the perfection of vertue, which the vertuous Vindi∣cator here sets aside. The intrinsecal perfection or righte∣ousness which he speaks of out of Zanchy, is, saith he, the perfection of inhesion, and this is said to be either absolute or comparative. It is said to be absolute (saith he) when our hearts are sincere, and simply free from Hypocrisie and double-dealing with God. Thus Job was a perfect man, and
David a man after Gods own heart, because his heart was ever sincere towards him, and seeking after God.] Pardon a moi: it was so habitually, but not ever so, for then he had not fallen in the matter of Ʋriah. But where there is no guile at all there is no sin left, as we said before; for all sin is full of guile and deceitful lusts, Ephes. 4.21, 22. Secondly, [it is comparative (saith he) page 27. in respect of others, as Noah is said, Gen. 6.9. to be perfect in his generation.] But by his leave, those words are to be understood absolutely as well as comparatively; for his faith and obedience was so perfect that he not onely obtained to have himself and his family preserved, and to be made a seed or remnant for the new or second world, but he became thereby an heir of the righteousness which is by faith, Heb. 11.7. But it is the Vindicators practise to detract from the chosen Saints of God, to patronize corruption, and reserve it all his life long. [It is, saith he, of this perfection which Paul writeth, saying, 1 Cor. 2.1. But we speak wisdome amongst those that are perfect.] And why must it be so taken? for Paul spake those mysteries of Christ, which might and did pass for wisdome, not onely among the other Apostles and most perfect men, but among the Angels also, Ephes. 3.11. 1 Pet. 1.12. But he goes on in the 27 page, saying, As for any other absolute perfection, Paul is absolutely a∣gainst it.] But that is an absolute falshood; for though he modestly saith, Phil. 3.12, 13. Not as though I had attained, or were already perfect; yet he is so farre from being against it, that he presently addes, but I follow after, if I may appre∣hend that for which I am apprehended of Christ. And ver. 13, 14. But this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before, I press to∣ward the mark of the price of the high calling of God in Christ. We say he doth not only strive for it himself, and stirs up o∣thers thereunto, 2 Cor. 13.12. Colos. 3.14. but prayeth for the Churches that they may attain it, 2 Cor. 13.9. Ephes. 3.16. and 11.18, 19. Phil. 1.10, 11. 1 Thes. 5.23. Heb. 13.19, 21. That saying of Bernard, Sermon 50. super Cant. which he
there subjoyneth, was not advisedly uttered at the first, nor here recited by him, to wit, [Who dare arrogate that to him∣self which Paul denieth?] For, first, such as attain to perfecti∣on do rather conceal it then boast of it. Secondly, Paul doth not deny all perfection, but in that very Epistle ad∣mits that which we contend for, chap. 4.13. saying, I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthneth me. To say nothing of Rom. 8.2. and vers. 37, 38, 39. where he saith not onely that he was in Christ more then conquerour, but speaks of an immovable love which God through Christ had planted in him, therewith he stood fast. Then in conclusion he cometh to his last distinction of in∣trinsecal perfection, saying, it is either of parts, or degrees; say∣ing, the former is when a man hath a respect, as David speaks, to all the commandements of God, and allows not in his heart the breach of any. The second is, when a man performeth exactly all that the Law in its full rigour requireth.] But mark how he sets these two out by comparison: he that is perfect in the first sense (saith he) may fitly be resembled to a weak and feeble child who hath all the integral and perfect parts of a man, yet not integrally or perfectly; But he that is per∣fect in the second sense is like a strong and full-grown man, that hath all his parts in their perfection: And we confess, saith he, that the Saints of God in this life may have the perfection of parts, because that in some measure they may love every good, and hate every evill, though not continu∣ally, as touching the exactness of performance, yet habi∣tually as touching a constant resolution. But that a man should have the perfection of degrees we utterly deny, be∣cause we can neither love the good nor hate the evil as we should do.] From all which we may observe, that though he affects the highest degree in the Schools, to be called a Doctor of Divinity, yet he will have the regenerate in this life, for all their striving against sin, and labouring after perfection, which he often speaks of, to proceed no further, nor to grow to any higher stature then to be alwayes babes in this life: Whereas John writes unto three forms, ages, or degrees of Saints; to babes, to young men, and to old
men, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. and Saint Paul doth tell us, Ephes. 4.11, 12, 13. that Christ gave gifts unto men, some to be Apostles, some prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, or till we all come in the unity of the Spirit, and the acknowledgement of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the ful∣nesse of Christ. And the Apostle doth not only reprove those that remained babes and sucklings, Heb. 5.12. but exhorts all the Saints to become men perfect, or of a ripe age (as it is in the Greek) in understanding, and all concomitant graces, 1 Cor. 14.20. Is not this doctrine like the medicine which he gives to whelps to hinder their growth? Page 28. he first tels us [that the Jesuites, Bellarmine, Becanus, and others, do wrest divers Scriptures to prove the perfection of the Saints in this life.] But haply they may, and doe strain some testimonies of Scripture too far, yet they need not doe it, for there are as many cleare and full Scriptures to prove the possibility of attaining such a per∣fection in this life as we contend for, as there are to prove the Trinity in the Deity, or two natures united in Christs one person, or that there are ten commandements. Se∣condly, though he brings not one of those testimonies forth, yet he will needs answer them by whole-sale, or in the Lump; some of which answers he fathers upon Augu∣stine, as justly he may, for by fits he is against perfection, yet sometimes for it. The first whereof is this, that some of those testimonies are exhortations shewing us what we should do, not pro∣ving what we can doe; for admonitions doe not shew us, ut tantum praestari possit quantum suadetur, that so much can be performed as is injoyned; but shew us quous{que} conari oportet, how earnestly we should strive to perform them, though we be not able perfectly to observe them.] But this is false, and a meer subterfuge unworthy of a Doctor so cryed up as Augustine was, for although the Schools distinguished be∣tween counsells and commands, and all exhortations spo∣ken and pressed in the name of the Lord, and those in spe∣ciall which tend to the purging out of all sin, and the ful∣filling
of the Law in Christ; yet are not only precepts, but possible to the Saints, as the said Augustine elswhere con∣fesseth. The School also saith, and that truly, Ultra posse viri non vult Deus ulla requiri, God promiseth grace to fulfil all that he requireth. Secondly, he saith [that many of those places of Scripture do shew us not what we are now in via, in the way, but what we shall be hereafter in patria, at the end of our pilgrimage, when we shall be freed from the imperfe∣ction of our flesh, and clothed with the garment of perfect righteousnesse.] Yea they doe in a speciall manner shew us both what we are, and what we should be now in via, or here now, yet it cannot fully be set forth what we shall be hereafter; for as Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 2.9. But as it is written, eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entred into the heart of man to conceive the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. Thirdly, he saith, [that in many places the Scripture (but he cannot produce one such) terms them perfect and immaculate which have defiled their gar∣ments, and polluted their consciences; mark, saith he, not with no sins, which is impossible, but with no grosse sins, or damnable enormities; which, as is said before, is commen∣dable.] But first, we think the Vindicator alloweth no sin to be veniall, but all mortal and damnable, though not e∣qually such. Secondly, we say that while any man pollutes his conscience he is neither called or accounted either per∣fect or immaculate by the Lord, who is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, Haba. 1.13. And thirdly, what though all men have so defiled their garments for a time? yet it is not impossible at length through grace to keep our souls and consciences so unspotted; for so had Paul done, 2 Cor. 1.12. and knowing that the like grace was attainable for others, he prayed for it in their behalfe, Phil. 1.10, 11. that ye may be sincere and without offence till the day of Jesus Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousnesse. 1 Thes. 5.23. And the very God of peace sanctifie you wholly, that your whole spirit, soul and body, be preserved blameless until the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ. See also Heb. 13.19, 20. before cited. Fourthly, he saith [the Scripture pronounceth men perfect
blameless and blessed, not because they have no sins, but because their sins are not imputed unto them, Psal. 32.1, 2. But we have shewed before that this not imputing is a purging them away by sanctification as well as a remissi∣on. Further he saith [and therefore though the Saints are called righteous and perfect, not only in regard of the imputative righteousnesse which is wrought in them by the Spirit of Christ: but we must understand in what sense the Saints are inherently called righteous; for we must not think them to be so perfectly righteous as to be void of sin, or to be justified in the sight of God, because that together with the sanctification of the Saints there is still in them a remainder of original coruption, by the touch and stain of which their best works are corrupted and defiled; and therefore we say, that though the Saints and holy men of God may and have lived sine scandalo, with∣out offence, and page 29. sine querela, without reproof and com∣plaint on mans part, by or in the observance of all outward principles, yet it is impossible the best of them should live and die sine peccato, without sin. So he] Unto all which we briefly answer, that his distinction of imputative and inherent righteousnesse is vain; for they are all one, as we have shewed before. Secondly, the Saints are, or ought to be, so perfectly righteous by inherent righteousness, as to be thereby justified in the sight of God; whether the word be taken for a purging from sin, as it is Acts 13.39. or for a positive righteousnesse, as Titus 3.4, 5, 6. for there is no other way of justification in Christ unto eternal life spo∣ken of in the Scriptures. Thirdly, we have proved before that there is not, nor ought to be, such a remainder of original corruption always found in the best Saints, as to stain and corrupt their best works. Lastly, we have likewise asserted by clear Scriptures, that the Saints through Christ not only may but should live here at the length not alone sine scandalo and querela, but sine peccato, without sin as well as without scandal or just reproof, for to that end Christ gave himselfe, Ephes. 5.24, 25, 26. But he tels us in that 29 pag. [that Rom. 4.1, 2. is a remarkable place] So it is
indeed, but not for his purpose, to prove that Abraham lived and dyed an imperfect man, and with some remain∣ders of corruption in him: which words ought to be thus translated, as they lye in the Greek Text, What shall we say then, that Abraham our father hath found according to the flesh? (or in his unregenerate estate) for if Abraham were justified by works (to wit before, not after grace received) he hath whereof to glory, but not before God; as he proveth in the fol∣lowing verse: but of this more in another place. Then here he shews by a distinction that [the Saints whom he holds to be always imperfect in this life may be in a four-fold sense called perfect. First, in regard of their intention and aime at, and desire of perfection; for resting in a good condi∣tion, saith he, is contrary to grace: grow in grace.] But may not the Saints rest when they are at the end of their journey and race, which is the final mortification of sin through faith? according to Heb. 4.3. For we which have beleeved doe enter into rest. Let him here who is tantus temporum observator, such an observer of tenses before, mark the tenses here, for the work of beleeving is past, and the entring into rest is present, The Saints in heaven are doubt∣lesse in a good condition, is it against grace for them to rest in it? Secondly he saith [that the Saints are perfect inchoatively, and because they goe on more and more; but inchoation and consummation are two remote terms or stations, and progression may stand at a great distance from perfection and the end of the race, at leastwise in the beginning and the middle of it. Thirdly, he saith [they may be term'd so comparatively, or in respect of other mens unrighteousnesse] And fourthly, acceptatively, because God accepteth them, though not absolutely just, by the reason of manifold sins and defects, yet in Christ and for Christ his sake (through whom all our imperfections are pardon∣ed) as just and righteous men.] But by his leave God ac∣cepts no man, no not in Christ, otherwise then as he is ac∣cording to his present inward state and growth: hence it is that the Churches to whom the Apostle wrote, and those seven especially to whom Christ wrote, Rev. 2, 3, chap.
are either commended or rebuked, threatned, or encoura∣ged according to their obedience or disobedience, faith or unbeliefe, growth or decay in godlinesse; and no man is taken for perfect but he that was truly so in some kind or degree. Yet it is true that the Lord doth for a time, and with much long-sufferance, tendernesse and compassion beare the failings of his good-willing servants which pro∣ceed from ignorance and humane weaknesse, and not from neglect, and much lesse from presumption; yea while men are truly babes in Christ he accepts the will for the deed, and expects no more from any men then what they can do by grace attained, or which they might have done by grace at hand, if they had sought it: Howbeit nothing doth more displease him then wilful Apostasie after grace received, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6, 7. and 10.26, 27, 28. and unbelief in his grace and power for the subduing of our enemies, after we had experience already of the same in some measure. Heb. 3.17, 18, 19. But with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them that had sinned, whose carkasses fell in the wil∣dernesse? and to whom sware he that they should not enter into rest, but to them that beleeved not? so we see that they could not enter in because of unbeliefe. But he brings in Augustines saying [that the best perfe∣ction of man in this life is to confesse and acknowledge him∣selfe to be imperfect.] Which is a very rash and inconsi∣derate affirmation, as many other of his dictates are: in∣deed if he had said it had been the high way to perfecti∣on, first to know and acknowledge our own imperfecti∣ons, and then for cure to fly to Christ, this saying had not been so imperfect or dangerous. But they that are under the work of the Law, and not yet under the saving work of grace, do abundantly know and feel their imperfections: how can this then be mens greatest perfection to find and feel their imperfections? Such plausible sayings without truth are soft pillows under secure mens arms, inviting them to sleep in slothfulnesse and sin. But the Vindicator doth now promise to lay down some reasons for the con∣firmation of his first position; of which let us take a view.
The first is this, [That there is not any among the Saints of God mentioned in the Scripture that the Spirit of grace doth not charge with some sin; the most perfect in their generations were not without their failings, and that after their long walking with God; as Noah being drunk, Lot incestuous, Abraham diffident, when he consented to un∣lawful means in going in to Hagar, for bringing about Gods purpose; Sarah lyed and distrusted when she laughed at the promise of God; Moses and Aaron were barred out of Canaan for dishonouring God by diffidence and passion; Hezechiah was lifted up with pride; Job impatient, and humbled for it; David had foul and secret sins which he repented of and prayed against; Jehosaphat and Asa were reproved; Uzziah and Zachariah punished, one by untimely death, the other by dumbness; and yet these are reported in the Scripture to have served God with all their heart. To which we say, that this argument and reason hath little of reason in it; for, first, it is false that the Spirit of grace hath charged with some particular sin or other the most perfect men in their generation; for neither Abel nor any of the Patriarchs before the flood, nor after the flood to Abraham, are so charged, unless Noah for one act of drun∣kenness, wherein also he was surprized by the unknown strength and operation of the new wine. The like we may say of Eleazar, Ithamar, Joshuah, Caleb, Othniel, Ehud, Jephthah, Samuel, Nathan, Gad, and almost all the prophets; of John the Baptist and his mother, of the Virgin Mary and Joseph her husband, of Nathaniel, and almost all the Apostles, and thousands of other Saints mentioned in ge∣neral and particular in the Scriptures. Secondly, that there neither wants ignorance nor impudence in this his charge: For Abraham took Hagar by instinct of the Spirit, as is part∣ly hinted in Mala. 2.13. which verse, as Castellio hath for∣merly observed, should be thus rendred. If so be one did it who had abundance of the Spirit; (yet wherefore is that one alledged? to wit for the justification of Polyga∣mie) who sought a godly seed; therefore take heed to your spi∣rit, and let none of you deal treacherously against the wife of his
youth. Doth not Saint Paul also tell us that Sarah and Hagar were also an Allegorie or mystery of the two Covenants and Testaments? Gall. 4.24. But it was once the practise of the false Apostles to speak evil of those things which they understood not, Jude v. 10. yet this champion of corruption contents not himself to accuse the most absolute pattern of faith and obedience that was to be found among meer men, who is the father of all the faithful, and the friend of God, whom he first singled out to make him in a special manner the man of his covenant, and to charge him with unbe∣lief and disobedience, and that here the second time, in this his slanderous pamphlet: but he likewise challengeth and impeacheth Job of impatience, who is commended unto us, Jam. 5.11. for a rare pattern of patience, as indeed he was: It were well for him if he had the fourth part of Abraham's obedient faith, or Jobs patience. But let it be granted that not onely David, but others also had foul sins and secret sins for a time, had they such unto their dying dayes? we trow not; being he confesseth that he both bewailed them, prayed to have them discovered and removed: witness the Psalmist, Psal. 139.23, 24. saying, Search me O God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see if there be any sinful or wicked way in me, and lead me in the way ever∣lasting. And therefore to little purpose he cites [page 30 that passage of Augustine, who bids the Pelagians in a rhetorical flourish, ask all the Saints, and they will confess (is he sure of it?) that while they lived here they were not without sin.] But theirs is but one opinion; we shall anon shew him the contrary sense of some not inferiour to him, as we did of late out of 1 John 4.17, 18. The confession of John who was ten times more infallible then Augustine and all his African Bishops assembled together. But he goeth on, and saith [if any Saint on earth had to glory, it was with men, and not with God.] So say we also, yet had all the faithfull Saints cause to glory in the Lord for their victory in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57. And further he saith for his second argument [that we do not read of any Saints that did so stand, but that they fell into some sins.] Which
is not true of their final estate; and they also that had; as he saith, defects in their best performances; yes, the Lord testifieth of Joshuah and Caleb, that they had fully followed him, Numb. 14.24. Josh. 14.6. and we have proved the con∣trary out of many places; and therefore in his second rea∣son he wrongeth Nehemiah and the Text it self when he saith [that Nehemiah, chap. 13.22. prayed that his good services might be remembred with Gods reward, and also with his pardon or forgiveness;] for that implies a contradiction, for the ori∣ginal fignifieth to spare as well as to forgive; and so have our Translators rendred it in that place, and that very ge∣nuinely, Remember me O Lord concerning this, and spare me according to the greatness [or multitude] of thy mercies; That is, preserve me from mine enemies to do thee further ser∣vice. But to retain corruption to the last breath, the said Champion layeth aspersion upon the very grace of God, saying there that good works do not come from such a pure principle of grace as doth exactly fill the soul.] But the Lord saith, Psal. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. And Christ also Mat. 5.8. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness for they shall be satisfied. And again he saith expresly [that in the principle of grace there are some defects, and therefore the works flowing from thence are imperfect. Page 31 he saith in the same lying dialect, [that God reserves the consummation of grace, to wit, that whereby sin should be purged out, and the Law fulfilled by us, unto the state of glory.] True it is in the general which he speaks there, that grace is glory begun and glory is grace consummate; but not that grace which is called the laver of regeneration, and the renewing of the holy Ghost; for that must go before life and glory, Titus 3.4 5, 6, 7. And though the spirits of just men made perfect are in heaven, to wit, in the heaven of Gods holiness, of which the Prophet speaks Deut. 26.15. Is. 6.17. yet there is a first, a second, and a third heaven here besides the outward heaven, 2 Cor. 12.23. And that heaven is three-fold as well as the outward heaven, one of calling and conversion, another of justification or regeneration, and a third of glorification; and the Saints
may be made perfect in the second heaven, as to the final purging out of sins, and the renewing of Gods image, though in the third heaven we expect the perfection and transcendency of glory: Paul was caught up into the third heaven, but lived constantly in the second, Phil. 3.20. Yea he tels all the believing Saints that were come to have that fellowship in some measure and degree with the general assembly and Church of the first-born written in that heaven, and with the souls of the just men made perfect, to wit, some in grace, and some in glory; with the former they were upon the way in tendency unto the latter. His third argument is, [that all our graces here are imperfect in this life.] But doth not Saint James tell us, that there are perfect gifts that come down from the father of lights? chap. 1.17. and Paul tels us, that God will perfect his own work in us, 1 Cor. 1.8. Phil. 1.6. And whereas he saith [that these three divine graces, faith, hope, and charity, are so all our life long:] It is evident, that not onely his charity, but his faith and hope are truely such; for the Apostle saith, Jam. 2.22. that by workes Abrahams faith was made (or declared) to be perfect; and if true see John 1 Epist. 4.17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judg∣ment: and for hope, see Heb. 6.11. And we desire that eve∣ry one of you do shew forth the same diligence to the full assu∣rance of hope unto the end. The like we might shew of pa∣tience, Rev. 3.10. Because thou hast kept the word of my pa∣tience, I will also keep thee (preserve thee) in this life. But let us hear how he proves these three graces to remain al∣waies imperfect in us. [For faith (he saith) and that truly, must be grounded upon knowledge.] And we wish his had been so, we mean aright understanding. [But the Apostle tels us (saith he) that we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. so that our Saviour may well say to the best of us as he did to his Disciples, O ye of little faith, Matth. 8.26. and the best of us may say with him, Mark 9.24. Lord I believe, help my un∣belief.] But we have proved before that Abraham's faith, (whose steps we should follow, Rom. 4.12.) was perfect; and that the Apostle had kept (or fulfilled) the faith, 2 Tim. 4.7.
yea that the faith was an estate which they had passed through and left behind; Heb. 4.3. For we (saith he) who have believed do enter into rest. Nor is the knowledge of true believers concerning things to be sought for by faith imper∣fect, or in part onely; although the things that God had pre∣pared for those that love him, and which are to be enjoyed in the third heaven, or paradise, are here but known in part; for that which Christ spake to his disciples is made good to all true believers that seek it, John 14.4. Whither I go ye know, and the way ye know: How can faith be the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not yet seen, and not yet attained, if it have not a knowledge of them? See Heb. 11.1, 2. Secondly he saith, that which is perfect admits no in∣crease.] No more did the faith of Abraham, and of the A∣postles, and of many Saints more, Acts 11.24. Thirdly he saith, that our faith shall be perfected in hea∣ven.] But both it and patience must be finished ere we can arrive at the third heaven, Heb. 6.12. & 10.36. & 12.1, 2, 3. Fourthly he saith, that [fides est tam apparentium quàm non apparentium.] But Paul saith, Rom. 8.24, 25. For we are sa∣ved by hope; but hope that is seen is not hope, for what a man seeth why doth he yet hope for it? Lastly, he saith, we must believe in heaven the continu∣ance of our happiness, and therefore there is a perfect faith in heaven, because it is grounded upon knowledge.] But as this man understands not what faith is, so that faith is ra∣ther experimental knowledge and assurance then faith pro∣perly so called. The faith of Gods elect purifieth our hearts here, Acts 15.9. and through it we must be throughly sanctified ere we can obtain final remission of sins, or that promised inheritance, Acts 26.18. Unto whom I now send thee to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, to the intent they may receive re∣mission ofi sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith that is in me, saith Christ. Where you may take notice also of the power of the will in turning to God after illu∣minating and preventing grace: yea after men have been
soundly chastised for sin by a work of the Law, and afterward comforted from heaven with a hope of mercy to salvation witnessed in their consciences by the holy Ghost: But the words of the Greek Text are commonly mistranslated. Concerning the imperfection of hope he saith little to the purpose, but what he saith implieth a contradiction in it selfe, and to what he would assert also; for he saith that the Apostle compareth hope to an anchor for the soul which is both sure and stedfast, as the Apostle doth, Heb. 6.19. and yet this, saith he, doth no ways prove our hope to be perfect; for what greater perfection can there be in an anchor then to have it sure and stedfast, and to stay and preserve us a∣gainst all winds and storms of Satan? which he confesseth that our hope doth: Nor is it the anchor that reels to and fro, as he absurdly speaks, but that which lyeth at anchor, or the Ship it selfe, but at the distance and the whole length of a cable; whence its mobility by the winds and storms doth arise, and not from the anchor it selfe. And as for charity, he goes about page 32 to prove that it must be im∣perfect all this life long: [First, because our knowledge here is imperfect and but in part. It is, saith he, a Maxime among Divines, tantum scimus quantum diligimus, which he, or some others for him, doth English thus; im∣perfect knowledge cannot produce perfect charity.] But though the English saying is true, yet it is not the sense of the Maxime, but rather this; that we have so much divine experimental and saving knowledge as there is love found in us; that knowledge being always accompanied with a proportionable love: 1 Joh. 2.3. Hereby we know that we love God, if we keep his commandements: and verse 4. he that saith I know him, and keepeth not his commandements, is a lyar, and the truth is not in him. True it is also which the Poet speaks, quod latet ignotum est, ignoti (but not ignotae, as he hath it) nulla cupido, things simply unknown cannot be loved: yet is not our affection always towards men according to our knowledge or acquaintance with them, as he affirms; for knowledge and acquaintance may be without love. But yet it is true also which he out of Bernard saith, we can neither
desire what we know not, nor enjoy what we love not; and that we shall love God with an absolute perfection in heaven, because that we shall so know him, and that with an experi∣mental knowledge of his goodnesse.] But this hinders us not from so knowing him here as to love him above all, which is the perfection of love here required of us. Second∣ly, he saith, [that perfect charity expelleth fear; but there is no Saint here without feare] Yet we have often shewed the contrary out of Luk. 1.74, 75. and 1 Joh. 4.17, 18. Thirdly, he saith, [that perfect charity expels sin, which he denys to be exterminable here, because Saint James saith, in many things we all offend, chap. 3.1, 2.] Which is truly spoken of James of the whole race of our life, not of our final and best attainments; for in the same verse Saint James describes such a perfect man qualis invenire posset aut debet, saying, If any man sin not in a word the same is a perfect man, and able to bridle the whole body. But to fortifie his own cause, he go∣eth about to disable the word of Christ, saying, [Joh. 15.13. Greater love hath no man then this, that he lay down his life for his friend; which he saith is not yet perfect; for men may doe this out of ambition, and for vain-glorious ends: and therefore, saith he, our Saviour doth not bring this to prove the perfection of our love, but of his own toward us, so far as might be understood by outward apprehension.] But there is a life which if he and others would lay down in love to the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost, and their friends whom they should perfectly love, it would be an undeniable argument of the greatest and most perfect love towards God, and that is not to offer our only son with Abraham, or our own natural life, but the life of sin; and and that is the life which he would have us hate and lay down for his sake, Matth. 10.39. Luk. 14.26. Joh. 12.25. Rev. 12.11. nor is there any other life that men can pro∣perly call theirs but the life of sin, for the natural life and the spiritual life are Gods workmanship and gift, but so is not sin. And having thus to his power mutilated the words of Christ, Joh. 15.13. he goes about likewise to doe Christ the like service, where our Saviour saith, Ye are my
friends if ye doe whatsoever I command you: of which this Iohn of Burson, as if he affected to be herein an Antichrist, saith [This is an hypothetical proposition, which can never prove his perfection of charity, because we can never be able to perform the condition] Doth Christ then give us false marks and mock-tokens to try our selves by whether we be his friends or no? was not Abraham called the friend of God? 2 Chron. 20.7. Isai. 41.8. Iam. 2.23. and was it not upon this very score, Gen. 26.5. because, saith the Lord, that Abraham obeyed my voice and kept my comman∣dements, statutes, and my charge? This brought all blessings upon Abraham and his seed after him. But he goes on, saying: For although Bellarmine [saith Gods word may be kept, that is, fulfilled; yet he proves it not.] If he did not, he might easily have done it; and for to say that Gods com∣mandements are grievous, and to say that we can keep them not, is not the same, saith he: yes, in the Apostles sense they are, Joh. 5.3, 4. For this is the love of God that we keep his com∣mandements, and his commandements are not grievous: and he shews the reason of it in the two next verses, to the con∣founding of both the Vindicators positions; for whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world, to wit, that world of sin opposite to the world of the Father; of which sinful world he had spoken, 1 John 2.15, 16. And this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. [For a thing, saith the Vindicator, may be very light, yet heavier then I can bear.] Surely he is either a very weak man, or this is a strong mi∣stake; but how doth he prove it? [The commandements, saith he, are just and holy and good, Rom. 7.12. and the yoke of o∣bedience is easie and light, Matth. 11.30.] Both these are true; but the former of these doth not speak any thing of the lightnesse or heavinesse of Gods Law, nor yet the lat∣ter, unless it be to those that are weary of the yoke of sin, and come to Christ, and learn of him the lowlinesse and meeknesse, and all other Christian virtues which are con∣trary to sin, and which enable men to obey that Law. Now whereas he would prove that these commandements of
the moral Law are heavyer then we can bear; he brings out a testimony that speaks of the ceremonial Law especial∣ly, which no man could bear, or fulfill of himselfe, though it was far lighter then the moral Law, Act. 15.10. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the dis∣ciples, which neither we nor our fathers were able to beare? It is not, saith he, the priviledge of the Church militant to have no defect or imperfection remaining:] It is true of the Church collectively taken; but we have proved be∣fore that some have ended their warfare here before they goe hence, Isai. 40.1, 2. 2 Tim. 4.7. Ephe. 6.13. [Here, saith he, we pray, enter not into judgement with thy servants O Lord. O that my ways were so directed that I might learn thy statutes. Make me a clean heart O God.] But doe the Saints pray so always to the end of their life? They that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5.24. and Christ only lives in them, Gal. 2.20. [Here, saith he, we still find need of Christ who is our advocate with God the Father, 1 Ioh. 2.12.] But who are they that need him still as a propitiator or purger out of sin? for Ioh. speaks there to the babes, My little children; and yet he speaks to them not to sin, that is, not to continue in sin; and for that end he sets forth a helper of them there against sin: as for the young men, he saith, that they had overcome the wicked one, Ioh. 2.13, 14. how much more had the old men so done? Pag. 34. He tels us [that what he hath before writ∣ten may suffice to satisfie them whose eyes the God of this world hath not blinded; That sin will have a being in the best of men so long as our souls have a being in these hou∣ses of clay:] But we dare conclude, that if any man rest sa∣tisfied therewith in that point that his eyes were never yet truly opened to behold the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ who is the image of God, 2 Cor. 4.4. But he prays all the faithful to joyn with him in suppli∣cations to God for his adversaries, that they may see their own sins.] And so doe we also for our selves, and recipro∣cally for him and them: yet will not that follow that we
shall be ashamed of our doctrine, as he hopes we shall; For we have not drawn the same from any such puddles as he is pleased to call them, to wit, Pelagius, Bellarmine, Baily, Becanns, the Jesuits, or from the Adamites, who conceived that they were renewed to Adams first purity: unlesse he will have the second Adam, as he cals Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, to be such Adamites: Nor have we learned them from Romes fraternity now crept in amongst us, who are, as he saith, well versed in the old trade of Arch-here∣ticks (what is that? even his own handicraft;) in falsifying of truth or Text; rather (for the truth may be denyed or abused, but not falsified) whatsoever he saith to the con∣trary, to maintain lyes. But he doth hope, and so doe we also, that God will discover such in due time (by us or some other of his servants) and in the interim keep his (who are no patrons for sin, nor latrons from the due observance of Gods Law) by the help of Christ, from being subverted by them. But he goes on, [what men without sin?] saith he. Yes, the Angel shewed John many thousands that had been such upon the earth, as we proved before out of Rev. 7.14. and 14.4, 5, 6. Yea John did demonstrate some such unto us before of his own society, 1 Joh. 4.17, 18. and 5.18. But he scoffingly saith [it was happy for the woman that was ta∣ken in adultery that her accusers were not such as these preachers.] Why? doe we professe our selves to be with∣out sin? But it will be found our fault, and his also, if we live and dye in our sins, now that there is such a fountain o∣pened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem, for sin and for uncleannesse, Zach. 13.1. And yet it will not follow that if there had been one, yea many such impeccant persons there (of which none are to be found among the proud and censorious Pharisees) that the said delinquent should have had a volly of stones about her ears; for who are more sensible of humane frailty then such as have passed through the same? or who are more merciful then such as have obtained mercy to put away all cruelty, pride, and wickednesse through the help of Christ? yet must Christs expresse commandements be observed. But he comes up∣on
us with the Apostles Creed, saying, [What need is there to believe the Article of the forgivenesse of sin, if men may live without sin?] True, if they could come into this world, live here many years, and goe out again without commit∣ing of sin. But if sin that is once in cannot be purged out again, nor the image of God renewed, nor the Law fulfilled, what need is there to beleeve in God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and earth, and in Iesus Christ his only son our Lord? who is called Jesus, because he came to save his people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. and called Christ, because he is anointed for that very work, Isai. 61.1, 2, 3, 4. yea why doe we believe that he is risen again for our justification, or re∣generation, Rom. 4.25. or in the Holy Ghost, that there is an Holy catholick Church whom Christ came to sanctifie by the washing of water through the word that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing? Epes. 5.25, 26, 27. Pag. 34, 35. he gives us this advice as a point of good religion; To turn the Lords precepts into prayers, and to say with holy David, who a little before had his secret sins and his foul sins, but now is called holy David, Psalm 43.3. Send out O Lord thy light and thy truth, and let them lead me into the holy mountain, and unto thy Tabernacle: and as is Psalm 143.10. Let thy good Spirit lead me into the land of righteousnesse.] To which we say, it is a point of good religion indeed, for as the whole duty of man, by the testi∣mony of Solomon, consists herein, to wit, in fearing God and keeping his commandements, Eccles. 12.13. So his father Da∣vid made the 119 Psalm, which is the longest meditation extant in the whole book of Psalms, a devout prayer for grace to understand and fulfill Gods Commandements; and left it to the Church as an holy Alphabet to know their duty both of prayer and obedience thereby. But would the Vindicator have men pray in faith or un∣beliefe? for if the thing be not possible to be had in this life, they cannot pray for it in faith; and if it is attainable, his second position fals to the ground: And if Gods light and truth must lead us into the mountain or tabernacle of his
righteousnesse, then all sin must be left behind, and so his first position is overthrown likewise. And here is another of his contradictions, yea a twin, or a double one. But to this his advice he joyns his new Letany (to which we fay Amen;) And from blind Jesuiticall guides with their false pretended new lights in a dark Lanthorn, their feign∣edlies, pretended revelations, but delusions, Good Lord de∣liver us.] But who pretends to new lights, or insists upon extraordinary revelations? or who hath a darker lanthorn then himselfe? or what Jesuit useth the trade of lying so often as he doth? in which conflict its now known he himself would carry away the whetstone: So that if Dio∣genes came at noon-day again with his lanthorn, either to find truth in his assertions, or common honesty in the au∣thor of them, he would operam & oleum perdere. Note also that here again he cals us Jesuits. But he is pleased to salute us at the table, saying [much good may their perfection on earth doe them, sure we are that if we can attain it, it will doe us no harm] But by way of return we say, well may he fare with his much affected imperfections and corruption; similis lactuca labris: but Christ also, Rev. 22.11. saith, he that is unjust let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy let him be filthy still; but he that is justified let him be justified still, and he that is sanctified let him be sanctified still: for what a man most affects in these things, that shall be his portion in the end. Howbeit with his lips or pen he begs to have his imperfections discovered, and to be humbled in the sense of them so long as he liveth (as if the Lord delighted more in our dejectment for them, then ejectment of them;) that he may cry always with the poor Publican; but doth he beg healing and cleansing mercies, that he might offend no more, or only pardon for his of∣fence toties quoties committed, and so to end his days? Sure∣ly he should then have been but a poor Publican in the end, though he had a rich office. But he will also (at leastwise in words) make an emulator of Saint Paul, who forgat what was behind and pressed forward towards the mark, and put forth, (we wish he means not quite out of doors,) all the strength
that the Lord shall please to send him, and improving all opportunities to the best advantage for the mortifying of all sinfull corruptions in him, and for the growing in grace, untill he attaines unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. But lest all this should be had too soon in the world (but here by the ministery of the word the work is to be carried on even to perfection, Ephes. 4.11, 12, 13.) he contradictingly saith, [which shall be after grace consum∣mate hereafter in heaven,] and so desperately concludes, [As for him that can find perfection here on earth, let him never look for it in heaven.] As if it could not be had in both places or estates in several degrees; contrary to Pauls hope, 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. I have fought the good fight, I have kept the faith, I have finished my course; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. Doth not the holy Ghost say, Rev. 14.13. that those that die (here to sin) in the Lord, that they may rest from their own works and labours, (as the fourth commandement requires) that their works shall follow them? But in the last place he tels us, that he will lay down some of our arguments, and some Scriptures which we wrest to maintain them.] Wherein he shews himself a better divi∣ner then a divine; for he had none of them as yet from us, unless those which he findeth in the argument of Do∣ctor Draytons sermons, of which he mentioneth very few. First he saith [that we deny original sin.] Which thing in his sense is true: But we say every mans first fall is his o∣riginal sin. Secondly, we say (as he tels you) that original sin is taken away from the Saints on earth;] we say that it either is, or ought to be, there being sufficient grace and help offered and afforded in Christ to us for that end: [and therefore that such mortified Saints cannot derive it to their posterity.] What is this to the question in hand? yet we confess more, that neither the first Adam, nor any parent descended from him, can convey any such stain of sinfull corruption by generation to their children; because a most holy God creates both soul and body innocent and with∣out sin. But as this argument of his is none of ours, so his solution or answer is a meer figment of mans brain; for
he saith [there are three things in sin, the offence, the guilt, and the pollution, or stain, being an inclination to fall in∣to the like sins: Of which (saith he) the two first are taken away; but the last, which is the worst, is left behind during this life.] Where ye may take notice of these absurdities or contradictions: First, that Gods hates the offence, as he saith, in his dearest Saints; and, as he saith, it is abolished and blotted out by the blood of Jesus Christ: If it be abolished (as he saith it is) how can it remain in them still? and if it remain still, how can it be but hatefull to God? For the second, the guilt or obligation to punishment he saith that is pardoned; but, as we have often shewed, no sin is par∣doned till its left and forsaken, Prov. 28.13. As for the third, the pollution, which he cals the pure essence of sin. (a very pure essence indeed if one look well upon it) [that (saith he) doth not reign in a regenerate man; yet the life and being of sin is not taken away, page 36. But he cites a Text there, wherewith he cuts his own throat, if rightly rendred, Psal. 103.3. Who is propitious to all thine iniquities, and healeth all thine infirmities, or diseases.] The latter words explaining the former; and certainly where diseases are healed they are wholly removed or taken away, they leave no life nor being behind them; and then follows vers. 4. who redeemeth thy life from destruction, and crowneth thee with loving kindness and mercy: for where any life or being of sin is left there is so much destruction or condemnation left also, as we shewed out of Rom. 8.2. True it is that the Lord doth heal our souls gradually, as this puny Emperick speaks; but he leaves not (we say) the full perfecting of the cure to the life of glory, or yet to the hour of death. But page 36. he feigneth a second objection of ours, and then forgeth an answer for it, as he did before: [Regenerate parents cannot convey the guilt of original sin to their children, because to themselves it is pardoned.] Which ob∣jection is a strong barre against him, though not made by us: And upon this score the guilt of the first Adam's sin after his personal repentance could not be charged upon his posterity. But he saith by way of answer, [that they are
freed from the guilt of sin, and have righteousness imputed unto them by grace, and not by nature; but by nature they have in them original corruption, and therefore they can leave the latter, though not the former:] But we have shew∣ed before that corruption and guilt as well as grace are all spiritual and preternatural things, and pass not to the po∣sterity by procreation. In the same page he saith, [that grace and justification are not tyed to carnal propagation:] no more are original sin and condemnation, but to the most sure election of God, as Rom. 9. in Esau and Jacob.) But as he understands not what the election of grace is on which justification depends, so hath he no discerning of that Esau and Jacob to which Paul relates Rom. 9. yet are they both clearly set forth in the Scriptures; the former 2 Pet. 1.10. Mal. 1.1, 2, 3. He hath also a third argument to prove that infants have sin, [because they are liable to death, and stipendium peccati mors, Rom. 6.33.] But it were well for sinners if there were not another, and that an everlasting death, that is the just recompence of sin, as we shewed be∣fore: as for corporal death, it being but a temporal punish∣ment at the most, it might be by the first Adam's sin brought upon all his posterity, yet without any infection of sin de∣rived unto them. Fourthly, he saith there, and page 37. [That infants want not the faculty of will by which they are inclined to sin, though they do not sin in act.] Which evill inclination we have denied and disproved before, with the affirmation fa∣thered upon Irenaeus and Chrysostome by him, that Adam's sin was not one personal sin, In uno universi; but this one is our personal Adam. And therefore it is a false charge to say that the first Adams sin was his handwriting that made al his posterity debters unto God, unless in some temporal evils inflicted on them for his sake, as we shewed before. He tels you likewise, but with his wonted lying and im∣pudency, [that we say concupiscence without consent unto it is no sin.] But we say the first motion to adultery, or any other sin arising from mens or Satans immediate tempta∣tion, is no sin till some titillation or liking of the same
follows. And though Aquinas and Coster seem to speak so of original concupiscence it self; we deny it, nor do we approve that saying of that Councel of Trent (who as he saith, have as many curses as Canons) that the Catholick Church never counted concupiscence truly so called sin in the regenerate; for we do count it no better till it be mortified: And they in effect grant so much, saying, it comes from sin, and tends to sin. And Paul cals it expresly sin, Rom. 7. where the Vindicator confesseth that he was sometimes captivated by it against his will. And did it not then reign as a tyrant over him? And is tyranny devoid of dominion and power where it bears sway, and takes men captive? True it is also that the Vindicator saith in the general, [that the law condemneth sin (to wit, in a pro∣hibiting way, as we said before) as well in the branch as the root:] But that prohibition, there shall not be in thine heart an evil thought against the Lord thy God, doth onely re∣strain us from allowance of such, for we cannot hinder Satan from suggesting such unto us; nor was Christ upon earth wholly free from such injectments. And that which the Vindicator page 30 saith of the motions of concu∣piscence, is true; but both he and Augustine himself are foully mistaken if they think that all sinfull motions come from concupiscence: yet it is true in some sense which Augustine there saith, It were better to have none then to over∣come them. True, it were better for the mans ease and safety to have no temptations; but it is better for his exercise, and more for his glory (if the Lord will have it so) to have such, and overcome them, then not to be exercised at all therewith. As for Bernard's saying, take it single without the Vin∣dicators double dealing in the end or conclusion, and it makes against his position and scope; which saying is this: [That kind of sin which so often troubles us, I mean con∣cupiscence and evill desires, may and should be suppressed by the grace of God, so that it reign not in us, and that we give not our members weapons of unrighteousness unto sin; and that way there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ.] For this is
the summe of what we say, and therein he directly contra∣dicts himself; and this the Vindicator observing, adds this clause [yet it is not cast out but in death.] Having in the two last pages made an impertinent di∣gression to prove against the Papists that concupiscence is sin, and page 39 and the two following, he, comes in his erratick and wandring way to visit the Pelagians, who, as he tels us page 39. were condemned in many Councels sum∣moned and gathered together for the confutation (he should have rather said for the censuring) of Pelagius and Caelestius their heresies, about the year 420, and some years after; as in the Milevitan Councel, the Councel of Car∣thage, and the Councel of Palestine in the East: some of whose objections (with which we have nothing to do) he, to fill up his empty book like an empty shop with rols of painted wares, produceth and answereth them with o∣ther mens solutions, so solutive is he at this present: As first, [that concupiscence because it is a natural propension to things forbidden by the Law, is no sin. To which he answers, that our natural concupiscence and desires are now inordinate and sinfull, which they were not before the fall: the like he answereth to our affections and appetites to desire good, and eschew evil things, which as long as they are not carried to forbidden objects, or immoderately, are not exorbitant or sinful.] And so say we; sed quid hoc ad Rhombum? But page 40 he brings a second objection of theirs, and a third, and fourth; the second is this, [That which is not in our power to cause it to be, or not to be, is no sin: but concupiscence is not in our power to shake off, therefore it is no sin. Unto which he answereth something that is true, and something that is false. As first, that sin is to be esteemed by the will and Law of God thereagainst.] Which is true; But this is not so, where he saith that God requiring of us impossible things doth not injure us, because he commanded them when they were possible.] But this is not onely injurious to us without grace offered, but inconsistent with Gods justice and goodness also. The third objection is this, [Sin makes men obnoxious to the
wrath of God: but concupiscence in the regenerate doth not; for there is no condemnation (say they) to them that are in Christ Iesus, though they have concupiscence left in them.] Wherein take notice that the Vindicator that cals us Pelagians is herein a Pelagian himselfe, as all his fellows are. Secondly, that whereas he should deny the Minor, that concupiscence doth not make the regenerate obnoxious to Gods wrath, he admits it, and takes it for granted, that neither that nor any other sin doth condemn the regenerate, or make them obnoxious to Gods wrath: and yet he confesseth them to be sins; but saith, that by ac∣cident it cometh to pass that they are not reputed for such, but are pardoned by grace.] Which is true when they are repented of and left, and so cease to be sins; but not otherwise. The fourth objection which he brings is this, [In bap∣tisme original sin is taken away; therefore concupiscence is no sin in those that are baptized. Uunto which he answers by distinction, yet without the least instinct of truth, that by baptisme the guilt of sin is taken away.] Which we deny against some of the Fathers and the Schoolmen, as having no warrant from the Scriptures. But he confesseth [that the worst part of sin, and that which is most offensive to God, remaineth, even corruption, and an inclination to sin.] But here we first say, that the guilt is not taken away before or without the corruption. Secondly, that children when they are baptized have neither guilt nor corruption to be taken away for the present, yet may lawfully be bap∣tized in innocency, as Christ himself was, for a future do∣cument and sign. And thirdly, that in the baptisme of men grown, and newly converted, neither the acts and cor∣ruptions, nor the guilt are taken away by outward baptisme; only there is their duty in following of Christ in his death and resurrection, under the hope of his grace and help for the present, and of a full remission and eternal life in the end declared unto them therein; by which also they ob∣serve and fulfill an outward ordinance, oblige themselves to the said duty, stand under that grace hoped for, and are
distinguished by an holy ordinance and Christian profession from other men. Pag 41. he first concludes [that original concupiscence is sin.] Which we never denyed: and then he is so impudent as to say of us, [that were not these men past shame, they would never goe about to revive such he∣resies as we hoped had been long since buried among us] But who revived them, he, or we? But mark his  there. [But so long as there is a Divell in hell, or a Pope at Rome, we must never expect to be freed from such disturb∣ers of our peace.] But what disturbance have we made, or what peace have we broken? Thus he that hath played the boutefeu himselfe, and hath without cause incensed all the neighbouring Ministers and people against us where he could get access and audience, chargeth us with his own wicked practise of disturbance, who live quietly, and cause no commotion amongst men, but only seek to awaken them out of security and sloth, to watch, and war aright against their sins and Ghostly enemies, and that out of love to God and their souls, and in order to their everlasting peace as well as their present welfare, in the unity of the Spirit and the bond of perfection, which is love to God and men, the con∣quering of sin, and the fulfilling of the Law. But we must bear his false charge and challenge in this kind with the more meekness, because the holy Prophets and Apostles have undergone the like accusation at the hands of injuri∣ous, slanderous, and outragious men, and that upon the self-same account, Acts 16.21. and 18.13. and 24.5. and as long as there is a Devil in hell, and his hellish kingdom hath room in mens hearts, and sets their tongues on fire, as Saint James speaks chap. 3.6. we must expect no better usage at their hands, till the old accuser of our brethren be cast ou of them, Rev. 12.10. See Mat. 10.25. If they have cal∣led the master of the house Beelzebub, much more will they do it to them of his houshold. But in the end of pag. the 41 to the end of pag. the 48. he comes with his solutive medicines to answer some Scriptures, which he saith we allege and wrest to maintain our errours.] But this he speaks by way of divination; for
divers of them we have not yet produced; nor have we need to wrest those that we alledge, for they speak that clearly which we would prove. [The first, saith he, is that Rom. 6.6. where Paul saith of the Christians who are baptized into the faith of Christ, knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin may be destroyed; from thence (saith he) they conclude that the corruption of old Adam is quite abolished, that they are perfectly quitted from sin, and perfectly renewed in grace.] But this is one of his forged lies; for we neither cite that Scri∣pture, nor inferr any such thing from it: but since he by pre∣occupation hath quoted it for us, we shall without wrest∣ing it conclude that those which truly confess the Christi∣an faith and baptisme, both may and ought to be crucified with Christ, and through his grace and help to destroy the whole body of sin; and so we have promised by our sure∣ties to doe, when we were baptized, unlesse we will be re∣negadoes with him: Unto this Scripture he answers pag. 42 as he had done before, without fear or wit, truth, or modesty, [that the guilt of sin which the Schools term the formal of sin (but indeed is the fruit and effect of sin) is taken away in baptisme.] The falshood of which we have shewed be∣fore; the baptisme which he meaneth neither takes away the guilt nor corruption of sin; for Simon Magus was bap∣tized among the other Samaritans, and yet was still in the gall of bitternesse and bond of iniquity, Acts 8.20. Secondly, as to the corruption, he saith, [that the dominion of it is taken away, but not the being of sin, from Gods Saints, be∣cause Paul saith Gal. 5.17. the flesh lusteth against the spirit; and the same Apostle speaks of himselfe, I see another Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind, and carrying me captive unto the Law of sin which is in my members.] But we shewed before that the infant-state of the Galatians, be∣ing new-born babes in Christ, is not the full strength and stature of young men in Christ, and much lesse the dayed∣nesse of old men, or elders, and experienced souldiers or Saints in Christ. Secondly, that Paul speaks not there of his own present condition. And thirdly, that this Text
flies in his and their faces who affirm that all dominion of sin is taken away from such babes; for this sin is a prince and a Tyrant, it is not our slave, but makes us its slave. But he adds this, [that the Apostle saith not, let not sin be in your mor∣tal bodies, but let it not reign.] Which is true in regard of Sa∣tans sinful motions, as we said before; but not of the old leaven of corruption which must be purged out, 1 Cor. 5.7. And there∣fore that saying of Augustine (though it pleaseth his tooth well) for which he commendeth it, is false, that sin and concupiscence is taken away by baptisme, non ut non sit, sed ut non obsit, not that it should cease to be, but that it should not hurt us, nor hinder our attainment of everlasting happinesse:] For as long as sin remaineth in us, bringing forth the works of the flesh, spoken of Gal. 5.20, 21. it will barr us from entring into Gods kingdom. See there and 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. yea, for such doth the wrath of God fall upon the children of dis∣obedience, Ephe. 5.6. Col. 3.5, 6. Here he brings in the saying of Anselme also to second Augustine; Not that our in-bred corruption should of a sudden be consumed in our flesh (who said that it could be so consumed?) that liveth, but that it should not be imputed when we are dead.] To which we say, that if we be dead unto it in conformity with Christ it shal not be imputed unto us, but if we live and die in it, it shal be charged upon us. Rom. 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die. In the next place, instead of citing the second place of Scripture, which he fathers upon our quotation, he heaps up three, some wherof have small affinity with each other. Rom. 6.2. How shall we who are dead to sin live any longer therein? Rom. 7.14. Wherefore my brethren ye are become dead to the Law. Rom. 8.9. The Law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus hath freed me from the Law of sin and death. 2 Cor. 5.17. Unto which last place he rather alludes then expresly refers us, saying, [that a regenerate man is renewed in all things throughout in every part and power, both of body and soul; and therefore the regenerate are quite freed from all cor∣ruption of sin, and indued with all perfection of grace. But in these allegations he abuseth us; for first, we have not al∣ledged any of them heretofore to maintain our positions.
Secondly, that of Rom. 7.4. speaks of a freedome or dead∣nesse to the Law in its compulsive work, and not of being dead to sin; and though we might and shall conclude from Rom. 6.2. and 8.2. and 2 Cor. 5.15, 17. that the regene∣rate may and ought to be so dead to sin, freed from the law of sin and death, and so renewed, yet we doe not say that they all are so perfected, or can be so on the sudden; but in due time they may and shall be so, even in this life, if they quit themselves aright. Howbeit page 43. he comes to answer these and the like places which speak of a totall death unto sin, and a renewing of Gods image, with his old distinction [that it may be done inchoatively (which is ef∣fected in the least infant or babe in Christ, I speak of regene∣rate ones) but not pefectively or fully. [Surely he is wont to cure his patients but inchoativè at the most, or else, if he do it perfectivè, he will in his way put down Christ, according to his doctrine. But saith he, [the Spirit of God by these forms or phrases would teach us two special things, (what be those?) First, that sin is now like a serpent crushed in the head, Gen. 3.15. which, saith he, can never recover his former strength, nor any ways hurt the regenerate man, but only to bruise his heel, that is, by the wrigling of her tail to bring some temporary affliction upon him. But when was sin so crushed? by baptisme? was it so crushed in Simon Magus? but Paul tels the Romans that Satan the worker in and with them was yet to be bruised for the present, Rom. 16.20. and the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, and was afraid that he might through his subtilty deceive and seduce the Corinthians from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.3. Secondly, that it should be the main scope of the Saints to strive continually to mor∣tifie the deeds of the flesh, and to doe their best endeavours to be clean rid of them, and to perfect holiness in the fear of God: and this, saith he, is plainly intimated unto us in all the exhortations of the Scriptures; as where it is said, Ab∣stain from fleshly lusts; and mortifie the deeds of the body, and the like.] But first, those places, or some of them, as Rom. 8.2. 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. doe shew us that the work was done
already; and both those and others incite as to set upon the work vigorously and under hope, to effect it with hope: which he denies. And thirdly, we are by those exhortati∣ons, which are indeed express commands from the Lord, (whatsoever he or Augustine saith to the contrary) enjoyned to labour after such a riddance from sin, and perfection in holinesse, not by our own endeavours alone, but by in∣vocating the help of Christ, or else we shall effect little in in the businesse; which makes many unfruitful. And in con∣clusion he adds very impertinently, though pertinaciously enough; [If there were no lusts nor deeds of the flesh in us (yes, there are too many till they be subdued) to what end are we bid to mortifie them?] To which we will superad this, that if they cannot be killed and slain, why are we commanded to mortifie or kill them, as we are often en∣joyned to doe? Then he comes to a third Scripture of ours (as he cals it) which he saith he had quoted before, to wit, that in the second place, but we reserve it for this; where he takes upon him to answer it after his wonted manner: the place is 1 Joh. 3.9. Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin, because his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God. Unto which he answers two ways, first more largely, and then more briefly, but neither way to the purpose; for he understands not of what sort of re∣generate men Saint John speaks, not of babes, or young men, but of such old men in Christ as with himselfe and his fellow-Apostles had the love of God perfected in them, 1 Joh. 4.17, 18. But let us hear what those his answers are: [First, he saith that they, to wit, the regenerate, do not sin unto death, for they doe not wholly forsake God; howbeit they may sin against their consciences (and such, saith Paul, con∣demn themselves, Rom. 14.20, 21.) but they retain some beginnings (he should say seeds) of true godlinesse, by which as by spatks they are stirred again to repentance.] But here first he seems to contradict what he had said pag. 24. by the first account, that the Holy Ghost withdraws as he is grieved, driven away and quenched by such sins, Ephe. 4.30. 1 Thes. 5.19. then men are blind and wander, as
some such regenerate ones may wholly forsake God, as we shewed out of 1 Tim. 5.11, 12. Heb. 10.28, 29, 30. 2 Pet. 2.11. Secondly he answereth [that he sinneth not as he is regene∣rate, but in his unregenerate part, or as he is unregenerate.] But so do even the unregenerate sin in that part and manner, and yet they sin to death, or else they could not perish. But he confesseth against himself [that sin somtimes reigneth in the regenerate, which thing he had denied before: And then he brings in John, as he hath done often, to prove that all have sin in them, 1 Joh. 1.8. which is his mistake of the place that he understands not; for John doth not only ex∣plain his meaning better ver. 10. but at the first of the next chapter writes even to the babes not to sin, as we have shewed. But he will give us his sense, 1 Joh. 1.9. whose words are these; If we acknowledge our sins he is faithful to forgive us: This therefore, saith he pag. 44. is the meaning of Saint John, that the regenerate do sin, but make not much of their sin; or they doe not set open the door, or yield to evil desires so as to cast off all love to godlinesse, and not to repent. But we have shewed the contrary even now, and might doe further out of Ezek. 18.23. Mat. 12.43, 44, 45. Heb. 10.27, 28. or more briefly, because, as he tels us (yet with more words, but to as little purpose) that he which is born of God makes not a trade of sinning, he lives not in his sin, he fancies not his sin, he delights not in his sin, he sins not with purpose, with pleasure, with malice, with perseverance; sin reigneth not, but (as the Apostle speaks) the evill that I doe I would not doe.] And cannot some of them that are yet unregenerate, or but under the work of the Law at the furthest, say so likewise? we know who said, Video meliora probo{que}, Deteriora sequor. But here he brings the latter part of that verse 1 Ioh. 3.9. by way of objection, His seed remaineth in him, neither can he sin because he is born of God. To which he gives his former answer, that he sins nor unto death.] But is not this to adde to the word that is written our own words, and so to come under that curse? Rev. 22.18. Then he brings in a fourth Scripture of our alledging, as he pretends, to wit, 1 Pet. 1.21.
being born anew not of mortal, but of immortal seed, by the word of God who liveth for ever. From whence he saith, that we conclude, that since this immortal seed never dieth in them that are born of it, they ever remain regenerate, retain grace, and never fall into sin.] But as this objection is here , impertinent, and upon a new head or point of doctrine, so his answer is suitable, and false also into the bargain, to wit, that the regenerate may and do lose grace and the holy Spirit of God in regard of some gifts, and those sometimes more and fewer; but not in respect of all the gifts, for still there remaineth in them some print of faith and conversion, which yet by yielding to evil inclinations and desires is ofttimes so opprest and darkened, that it can neither be known to others, nor con∣firm themselves of the grace of God and their own salva∣tion for the present; howbeit, saith he, it suffers them not wholly to forsake God and the known truth, or the embrace∣ments of Christs merits by faith: so David prayeth, Psal. 51.10, 11. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right spirit within me, and restore to me the joy of thy salvation.] But was this by vertue of the old seed of grace, when David had been long in his sins of Adultery and murder without any true repentance for them, or by Nathan's coming unto him to call him to repentance? Therefore his conclusion from thence page 45 is not consequent, to wit, [that David had not wholly left cleanness of heart, righteousness of Spirit, nor the way of salvation, because then he would not have asked them afresh of God, as he doth.] For though some cleanness of heart and rectitude of spirit might remain in him, yet he had wholly forfeited and lost the joy of Gods salvation. Secondly, he further answereth, that the seed of God, which is his word working true faith and conversion, abideth and dieth not.] Concerning their conversion, he means a new and final perseverance, however they may fall often grievously and foully before the end, because John saith, 1 John 2.19. If they had been of us they would have con∣tinued with us.] But we have proved the contrary before out of 1 Tim. 5.11, 12. unto which adde 1 Tim. 1.19. holding
faith and a good conscience, which some having put away, con∣cerning the faith have made shipwrack: and 2 Tim. 1.15. and 2.17, 18. & 4.14, 15. In the 45 page he brings out other Scriptures as produced against him by us; and in the fift place that of our Saviour, Matth. 7.18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. To which he answers [that it cannot as it is a good tree (which shall so come to pass in the life to come,) but as it is part∣ly good and partly evil it may bring forth evil fruit; where∣of (saith he) we have sufficient trial and experience in this life.] Must we then bring forth no good fruit here? But Solomon saith, Whether the tree fall to the north, or to the south, in the place where it falleth there it shall lie, Eccles. 11.3. and David, Psal. 91.12, 13, 14, 15. The righteous shall flourish as the palm tree, he shall grow as the Caedar in Lebanon; those that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall bring forth much fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing; to shew that the Lord is upright, he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him. A sixth Scripture he undertakes to answer, which we shall truly own as alledged by Doctor Drayton in his ser∣mon, is this, Ephes. 5.25, 26, 27. but it seemeth the Vindica∣tor was afraid to recite the words, as being too full and e∣vident against his position and purpose, which are these; Hu bands love your wives as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctifie and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, and might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Concerning which he saith [This Text shews us how Christ in this life, by the word and Sacrament, and by the operation of grace doth cleanse us, that in the state of glory we may be per∣fectly holy without spot or wrinkle.] But how proves he that this must be then done, and not before? This, saith he, I shall prove by these ensuing reasons; [First, because here we know but in part, and consequently can love but in part:] But we have proved that by and in the new cove∣nant it is promised that such a measure of knowledge is to had (if sought for) that men shall not need to say, know the
Lord, for they shall all know me from the least to the greatest, Jer. 31.32, 33. and that the knowledge of the Lord shall abound like as the waters cover the sea, Esay 11.9. His second rea∣son is, [that if grace were consummate in this life there should be no difference between the state of grace and of glory.] Yea, grace may here be consummate in his degree, and that in a very high one, and yet fall short of that tran∣scendent measure which shall be attained in the life to come, What saith Paul? Phil. 1.21. for me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. His third reason is petitio principii, [all the Saints on earth have sin remaining in them; and they that deny it are liars, and have no truth in them.] Yet we do deny that all Saints must (while they are upon earth,) have sin remaining in them; and have a greater Divine then Mr. John Tendring to warrant us, even the holy Apostle John, upon whose testimony (which he understands not) he ig∣norantly and confidently relieth: See 1 Joh. 4.17. & 5.4, 5. Rev. 7.14, 15, 17. & 14.3, 4, 5. before often cited. Yet we are not such liars as he is notoriously known to be, and we hope have more truth in us then he and his book set forth.] But he adds, [that all the Fathers against the Novatians and Donatists understand this place.] Which if it were true (as it is not) the Novatians may convince them to be Novices, not Fathers; and the Donatists evict them to be Dotists or Dotards: for the Scriptures shew clearly that we must or ought to be such before, and for the obtain∣ing of the kingdome of glory. 1 Cor. 1.8. Who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Phil. 10.11. That ye may be pure, and without offence in the day of Jesus Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousness. 1 Thes. 5.23. And I pray God that your spirit, soul, and body, may be preserved blameless untill the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.14. Wherefore be∣loved seeing ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. But he saith [it is the Church triumphant, and not the Church militant, that must be found without spot or wrinkle.] Yet the Church of Smyrna, Rev. 2. and much more the Church of
Philadelphia, Rev. 3. do appear to be such here, because Christ himself who searcheth the hearts and reines, Rev. 2.23. and who finds fault with five of the aforesaid Churches of Asia, and upon occasion rebukes them sharply, finds not the least fault with these, but commends them highly; and that may also be in some sense a triumphant Church who hath upon earth gotten victory over all her enemies, and in that behalf triumpheth with Paul, Rom. 8.33, 39. In the seventh place, he brings 2 Tim. 4.7. to be an∣swered by himself, where Paul saith, I have fought a good fight, and finished my course: which he fortifieth against him∣self, as if it were not of sufficient strength by it self for him to oppose: which Text the Vindicator will not observe, nor the other place, 1 Cor. 9.27. where Paul saith, but I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, lest when I have preached unto others I my self should be a cast-away.] To both which he answers page 46 as he was wont to do, without truth or judgment; [First, that Paul fought a good fight, being now ready to be offered up; but that conflict was yet to come saith he, not so as to obtain exact perfection of grace, and to be without all inherent sin, of which he complaineth Rom. 7.] Yes, he was even at that time of his complaint freed from the Law of sin and death, as we have often shewed out of Rom. 8.2. and that long before he was to be so offered up. He tels us also, (but we know not to what purpose) [that Peter was led where he would not.] But surely it was not into sin, John 21.18. Thirdly, he saith [Paul kept the faith, and he who said unto him, my grace is sufficient for thee, and my power is perfected in weakness, ena∣bled him to overcome, though he had corruptions remain∣ing in him, and the buffetings of Satan.] But doth the man understand what he saith? It is the office of faith to pu∣rifie the heart from sin, Acts 15.9.1 John 3.2, 3. which faith Paul did not onely keep and retain, but fought the good fight of faith till the battel was ended, and so finished his race and course in that kind in dying to sin; yet he justly expected that promised reward of which he speakes Rom. 6.8. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. As to the second Text, 1 Cor. 9.27.
he saith [that Paul kept down his body by fasting and prayer, to bring it into subjection.] But was this the body of flesh and blood, or the inordinate desires of the sinful flesh? He tels us also [that Augustine did use fasting, prayers and tears to the same end.] But he did it not in the faith of Christs assistance, and the hope of final victory, of which it seems he despaired here: and James shews that if we would obtain, Jam. 1.6. we must him ask in faith, nothing wavering, for he that wavereth is like the waves of the sea, &c. In the eighth place, he brings a second Scripture, of which Doctor Drayton had made use in his sermon, and these two are all that he can call his; it is taken out of Ephes. 4. from verse 10 to 15. And he gave some to be Apostles, some prophets, some Evangelists, some pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the work of the ministry, and for the edifying the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of faith and the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfest man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. Unto this he answereth after the old mode ignorantly and intricately [First, that the mi∣nistry of the word is given not onely to convert men from sin, but to perfect men in holiness,] Then it must either effect that for which God hath designed it, or else the Lord was mistaken in chusing and using too weak instruments. But he adds, yet so as the same Paul speaks, Acts 20.32. [Which is able to build you up, that is, to edifie and build the Saints more and more.] Where first he understands not that word of Gods grace which Paul speaks of there; for it is the essential word which is almighty, not onely able to build us up to perfection, but afterwards to give us an inheritance among them that are sanctified. Secondly, he contradicts himself, because this is able to build us up to the uttermost in the way of sanctification, that we may be fittted for that inheritance. Thirdly, that fitting must also go before in this life, therefore the two things following are false, and his, are his old picklocks: for first he saith, [though the Saints do grow up under the word and Sacra∣ments, yet it is not to the attainment of an exact obedience in this life, to be without sin in this life, and to have grace
consummate; but they grow and edifie one another in love.] But we speak not here what the Saints do actually, but what they may and ought to do; nor of their mutual edifica∣tion of each other, but of the words design and abilitie to build them up to the top, or the finishing of the edifice; for a skilful and a faithful builder gives not over till the structure is finished. Secondly he saith [that the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ is attained onely in glo∣ry.] Which in his sense is false; for here we may have a perfection of degrees as well as of parts, to wit the per∣fection of sanctification or grace, which we call the per∣fection of the way, as we have often proved before, what∣soever he saith to the contrary. In the ninth place he brings in two or three Scriptures together out of Doctor Draytons sermon upon one and the same head, as he might have found more of the same kind there: They are these; [that the Apostle prayes for the perfecting of the Saints, Heb. 13.20. 2 Cor. 13.9. 1 Pet. 5.10. and surely they prayed for things feasible and at∣tainable; nor can the prayer of Christ for the same be in vain, John 17.25. I in them, and they in me, that they might be made perfect in one. Unto which page 47 he gives in the old lying and sinful distinction for an answer; namely, That the Apostles prayed for the perfecting of the Saints, and so did our blessed Saviour, and they obtained what they prayed for, that is to say, to have them sincere in this life, and to have grace consummate in the state of glory.] But we have proved that the sincerity which Paul prayed for in the be∣halfe of the Saints was a state devoid of sin, and to be had before, and in order unto the kingdome of glory; Phil. 1.10, 11. That ye may approve the things that are excellent, and that ye may be sincere, and without offence till the day of Christ, and that ye may be filled with the fruits of righteousness. 1 Thes. 5.23. Now the very God of peace sanctifie you wholly, and I pray God that your whole spirit, soul and body, be reserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he brings in two replies of ours, by way of Anticipation like∣wise; the first of which is this, is sin pardoned and morti∣fied
and doth it yet remain. [Which he answers with his old crambe centies posita, It is so pardoned as not to be impu∣ted; its so mortified that the power and dominion of it is taken away, yet it remaineth to be more and more mor∣tified and wholly cast out at the death of the body; and death shall be destroyed at the general resurrection, and so it is the last enemie that shall be destroyed.] But though he and others have often and confidently affirmed that sin shall be cast out at the death of the body, they could never bring one Text of Scripture for this article of their be∣lief, nor should they be able to do it though they live to the age of Methushelah, whose name and life is a dart of death against sin and their position. Then he brings in our second reply, which, as he saith, is this; When must sin be purged out if not in this life? must we carry the remainders of sin into the kingdome of heaven, whereinto no unclean thing shall enter? Rev. 21.27. To which he gives us his old thred∣bare and beggarly (we had almost said) and lowsie an∣swer, that men shall not carry the remainder of sin into Gods kingdome with them, but they shall lay it down at the death of the body.] Then there is hope that none shall go to hell for corruption, or thereby be debarred from heaven; there is hope also that the Vindicator may then lay down his lying and his other lewd prrctises against God and man at that day. [The thief (saith he) onely converted shall be that day in paradise.] Therefore he may safely continue in his sin till the hour of death.] But what if that thief had repented long before, even from his first apprehension, or perhaps from the committing of the fact? for this is possi∣ble, and the Scripture hath nothing to the contrary. Yea, what if he belived on Christ afore, having heard of or seen his miracles, though he had not the opportunity to confess him till now, nor to pray unto him face to face: nor doth he understand what paradise this was into which Christ and he entred; for the first paradise is a submission unto Gods will even under the punishing hand of God; and the last is the third heaven unto which Paul was caught by way of vision, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4. [And as for Rev. 21.27. he saith
it is confessed by our own fraternity to be the state of the Saints in patria.] Its true, all the reformed Churches, and that of England, (whose first reformation might have been a pattern to all the rest,) doe almost generally conceive that the new Jerusalem, or heavenly City of God spoken of Rev. 21, 22. chap. is the state of the Saints in patria; and so do the Papists also for the greatest part: which of those then must be our fraternity? But there are some of both Religions that hold the new Jerusalem to be an estate at∣tainable in this life; because John saw it descending down from heaven unto men as a tabernacle of God wherein they were to wor∣ship him; and he heard a loud voice following, and saying, behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himselfe shall be with them, and be their God, Rev. 21.1, 2, 3. But herein all doe agree that men must cease to be of Mr. Tondrings fraternity before they can enter into this state, for there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomi∣nation, or maketh a lye, Rev. 21.27. Then he concludeth with the like confidence as he be∣gun; [And thus have I briefly proved unto you the truth of the point (which yet hath not one point of truth in it) That sin will have a being in the best of men while their souls have a being in these houses of clay: And this I hope, saith he, may be sufficient to satisfie the people.] Yea, and perhaps some of the Priests also, who are very easily perswa∣ded to sleep still in sin, and loth to be put upon an hard en∣counter against the Canaanites; for such are apt to believe the unbelieving spies, and much more the Scout-master-ge∣nerall, who like his Master doth go to and fro compassing the earth, and walking up and down in it. [And if, saith he, I shall meet with any new arguments from my friends against the truth of the point I shall endeavour to answer them by way of replication for their full satisfaction.] We are be∣holden to him for his promised endeavours, and shall ho∣nour him when he hath set all the world on fire in the love of sin, with this epitaph, Quae si non tenuit, magnis tamen ex∣cidit ausis. [As for their old arguments, saith he, they stink
before God and good men, Romes good creatures excepted.] But our hope is that when the true Sabbath comes our do∣ctrine shall no more stink then the Mannaa which was kept from the sixth to the Sabbathday, Exod. 16.24.] But his and their doctrine who take his part therein shall be like the river in Egypt, turned into blood; for it is but the fading no∣tion of flesh and blood, whose fish shall die, and the river it self shall send forth a stink, where the light of Gods truth and wisedom is and doth appear, Exod. 7.18. Yet he proceeds and saith [that our arguments have been so fully answered and confuted (but we know not by whom) that were not men past shame (as himselfe is in denying his own Mother, sister, and wife, when they write unto him) set on work of hell (to wit, to stir up men to purge away all sin by seeking and setting up thereagainst the kingdom of Christ,) and ingaged for wages to Rome, (but doth the Pope then hire men to cry down sin, and preach up Christs kingdome?) they would forbear to disturb the peace of Gods Church.] But who are Gods Church? are they not such as are sancti∣fied in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints? 1 Cor. 1.2, 3. and what is the peace of his Church? is it not to have the enmity slain & the partition-wall of sin between us and God, & between each other, broken down by Christ? Ephe. 2.13, 14, 15. Doe we then disturb or interrupt this peace by our do∣ctrine? yea we further it all that we can; it is he and those which hold forth his doctrine who with the false Prophets make the breach between God and man wider, instead of hedging up the gap, Eze. 13.4, 5. if we disturb the peace of any Church it must be that which cals her selfe Christs Church, but in this and the like doctrine differs not far from the Synagogue of Satan, as will be more evident here∣after. But pag. 48. he tels us for a farewell to this point or position [That he and his party doubt not but maugre the malice of men and devils (whom he hath often in his mouth) truth shall hereby be made more manifest, and shall prevail, and that the folly of those that resist the truth shall be made manifest to all men. The Lord grant that we may obey the Apostles commands, from such turn away; and the
Lord in mercy strengthen our faith in the belief of that pro∣mise, 2 Tim. 3.9. They shall proceed no further] Unto all which in Pauls sense we say Amen, knowing him to come as nigh to those deceivers of whom Paul speaks as Joannes doth to Jannes. And then he passeth on to his second position, which he hopes to clear as the former; and so he may quickly do, even as smoke cleareth the eye-sight. The second positi∣on is, [That no man can by grace in this life perform such perfect obedience to the Law of God as not to offend against the same; or to be thereby justified other∣wise then in and by Christ of grace given. Which mixt po∣sition he resolves into three branches, or single positions, as we told you at the beginning: First, that no man can per∣form such perfect obedience to the Law of God as not to offend against the same: which was our entire second po∣sition agreed upon at the first. Secondly, that no man can be justified by the works of the Law, or by his obedience thereunto. And thirdly, that we are only justified by the righteousnesse of Christ. And for the better understanding of the point, saith he, which points, by his own distribu∣tion, are three, we must know that grace (he means the word Grace) is an equivocal word, and that it is taken two ways in the Scripture, (he might have said ten ways at the least) first, pro gratia gratis data, the free gift of God infused into our hearts by the Holy Ghost.] But so are not only the common gifts which the Schoolmen call gratia gratis data, but the grace of sanctification, which they call gratia gratum faciens: which of those then doth he mean here? doubtlesse that grace of regeneration, contrary to the sense and distinction of the Schools. Then secondly, saith he, [grace is taken pro gratia gratum faciente, for the free favour of God whereby he makes us acceptable to himselfe; and in this last sense, saith he, we say that we are justified by grace, that is, by the free favour of God whereby he im∣puteth not our sins, but he accounts us just by imputing Christs justice to us] By which you may take a view what a learned Schoolman he is for his age, who saith, that he is sixty five years old, or somewhat ancienter than his own
Mother, if we mistake not the year of her age. Now as grace is taken by him in the first sense, for we say not that the Law can be perfectly fulfilled but by the grace of sancti∣fication, I say, saith he, that no man by grace in this life can perform such perfect obedience to the Law of God as not to offend against the same. Pag. 48. and 49. he saith [that God never gave (what not to Christ himselfe?) nor e∣ver will give such grace to any, (what not in the world to come?) to fulfill the righteousnesse of the Law in their own persons, and so thereby to be found justified or righ∣teous by the same.] You see how far the Vindicator inte∣rests himselfe in the Counsell of God, as to know that he will never so justifie any man; and this knowledge he must have by private revelation, for it is contrary to Gods re∣vealed will and practise, Tit. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Pet. 1.1, 2, 3. for, saith he, [it stands not with the glory of Christ that any such grace should be given from above (behold a bold peece of blasphemy) and the reason, saith he, may be this, if by our infirmities the strength of Christ be made perfect (as doubtlesse it is in the renewing of mens souls, and the fulfilling of the Law thereby) it must needs follow that by our strength the virtue of Christs cross is a∣bated, 2 Cor. 12.9. Thus he.] But we say, he which hath learned his Christ-cross may easily perceive that he under∣stands not his A. B. C. in Divinity; for the strength where∣by the Saints do or may fulfil the Law of God is not their own humane strength, but the power and virtue of Christ, which derogates nothing from his cross or sufferings. But he backs his former saying with another Scripture which he understands as little, to wit, 2 Cor. 5.21. whereas the A∣postle saith that God hath made Christ to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him: where, saith he, the Apostle doth not say actively, that we should make or work out our own righteousnesse, but passively, that we should be made so ex indebita misericordia, of Gods free mercy, the righteousnesse of God, and that not by our selves, but by another, Jesus Christ blessed for evermore.] But what if he and all his adherents be herein
grosly mistaken, and shamefully deluded by Satans imposing a false gloss and understanding upon them? if the main foundation upon which they build the hope of their salva∣tion be sandy or rotten, what will become of the whole building erected and settled upon such a basis? Take notice then that the Apostles words which he here takes passively must be actively understood also, and that we must get our selves to be made the righteousness of God in Christ by deriving and putting on his righteousness in the way of regeneration and renewing, and strengthening grace to fulfill every commandement of God by his help and Spirit; to this effect the Apostle John speaks John 1.17. For the Law came by Moses, but grace and truth (to fufill it) came by Jesus Christ. John 15.5. I am the vine, and ye are the branches, he that abideth in me and I in him the same bringeth forth much fruit, but without me ye can do nothing. Rom. 5.17. How much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one man Jesus Christ? vers. 19. so by the obedience (Christs obedience in us) of one shall many be made righteous. Rom. 8.3, 4. But what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinfull flesh, and for sin con∣demned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us (not outwardly for us) who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit; for Christ is the end of the Law to every one that believeth. Rom. 10.4. Rom. 14.7, 8, 9. For none of us liveth unto himself, and no man dieth unto himself; for whether we live we live unto the Lord, or whether we die we die unto the Lord; whether we live therefore or die we are the Lords: for to this end Christ both died, and rose again and re∣vived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and of the living. 1 Cor. 15.10. But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace which was in me was not in vain, but I laboured more then they all, yet not I but the grace of God in me. 1 Cor. 1.31. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who is made unto us of God wis∣dome, (that is, in the understanding) righteousness, (in the will) not onely sanctification, (in both) but redemption, (or glorification) also, 2 Cor. 5.15. And that he therefore
died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. Gal. 3.24. For the Law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified (or made righteous) by faith. But of this more anon, in answer to the Vindicators next words: [And thus, saith the Vindicator, doth the Apostle speak, Phil. 3.9. That he might be found in Christ.] But let us call in that whole Text to give in evidence for us against him, Phil. 3.5, 6. Paul tels, that concerning zeal he was zea∣lous, as the Vindicator is, unto persecution, persecuting the Church, touching the righteousness of the Law (taught and re∣quired by the Jews, not onely in observance of their tra∣ditions and the ceremonial Law onely, but of the moral Law, so far as an unregenerate man could compass the same by his own strength) he was blameless: then in the seventh, eighth, and ninth verses he tels us upon what score he gave over that righteousness, and all his native priviledges as he was an outward Hebrew or Jew; But what things were gain to me those I counted loss for Christ; yea doubtless I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having my own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of (or from) God by faith. Thirdly, at the tenth and eleventh verses by way of exegesis he declares what that righteousness of Christ is which he so much longeth for, namely, first, the righteousnes of grace, that I may know him and the power of his reusurrection (but wherein or where∣unto?) and the fellowship of his sufferings (to suffer out all temptations, or to die unto sin in a suffering way is the one∣ly way of overcoming all sin, which because the world knows not they deny the possibility of the work) being made conformable to his death, vers. 10. and then the righte∣ousness of glory in the 11 verse, if by any means I might at∣tain unto the resurrection of the dead, both partly here in this life in the similitude of Christs resurrection, wherein Christ riseth in them in great power and glory, and hereafter in a
more transcendent estate when they obtain a glorified bo∣dy, which the Apostle looked for Phil. 3.21. Therefore the Vindicators conclusion hence is a non sequitur, to wit, that no man can by grace in this life perform such perfect obedience to the Law of God as not to offend against the same. But in page 49 and page 50 he comes with great vari∣ety of words, and little truth, to shew how the Law may be said to be possible or impossible unto us; and as to the first he saith [it is possible in a two-fold sense; first, in regard of outward order and discipline.] But this is rather one use and effect of the Law to set up and keep such order, then properly its possibility. Secondly he saith [it is so by the imputation of Christs righteousness, by the benefits of justi∣fication and regeneration; which benefits, he saith, be ob∣tained by faith.] But we have shewed already that justifica∣tion and sanctification are not two, but one benefit, where∣in the righteousness of Christ, that is of grace, is freely im∣puted and given to the believer that seeks it aright: [For such, saith he, God looks upon in the face of his Son (to wit, if the Son be present there with his righteousness) in whom alone he is well pleased, Matth. 3.17. And his fulfilling of the Law is their fulfilling of it (to wit, if it came to pass within them, but not without them, as he meaneth) though not in the same manner, yet to the same and as good effect as it had been done by themselves alone; which, saith he, is thus done: He for them (yea and both with them and in them; they by him, (to wit in a coope∣rative way onely;) he actually performed (so did they also) and they by imputation; (yes, if you take that for his free gift and contribution of his help) he by vertue and merit in∣ternal, they by gift & grace.] Thus all his words are in some sort true, but not in his sense. And thirdly, saith he [as touch∣ing the beginning of inward and outward obedience in this life, for this is the love of God that we keep his commandements, 1 John 5.3.] But here he is twice mistaken; for first, that obedience is the same thing which we speak of, and he should have done if he had understood himself in the fore∣going member: and secondly, that Text of St. John doth
not in that Scripture speak of an inchoative obedience only, but of a complete observance of the Law, the which he and his fellow-Apostles, with divers other other brethren, had already attained. [But the Law is impossible (saith he) to the regenerate in respect of God, that is, saith he, as he is the perfect outward and inward obedience of the Law.] Which is false: but how proves he it? Page 50. he first cites that of Psal. 143.2. which we have had so often before: Enter not into judgment with thy servant O Lord: and there he alledgeth some of his former reasons; First, they fulfill not perfectly, because they do many things against the Law.] But are the Saints necessitated to do so unto the end of their lives? for in many things we offend all, saith James, c. 3.2. and I am sure he hath oftener then once offended, in wresting this Scripture against the Apostles and perfect Saints, which James speaks to the younger believers. Then he adds out of Psal. 19. [who knoweth the errours of his life?] Surely not till God revealeth them, which he doth to his servants who desire to be humbled for them, and healed of them, Phil. 3.15. And if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal it unto you. Is. 30.21. And thine ear shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk in it, when ye turn to the right hand, or to the left. [Secondly, those things which the regenerate do according to the Law are imper∣fect (what in their youth and old age in Christ also?) for there are in the regenerate, saith he, as I have shewed in my former position (but with much ignorance and errour) many sins remaining, as original sin, ignorances and impu∣rities (he measures all men by his own last) which they ac∣knowledge and bewaile, Is. 64.41.] But that is the Pro∣phets confession in the behalfe of the unregenerate; We have been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy raggs: which words (we fear) the Vindicator may use con∣cerning his present estate, for all his pretense to the work of regeneration; for his life and doctrine bear witness un∣to it. Then he comes to a second distinction or thesis, [the perfect obedience to Gods Law is fulfilled in us two wayes; first, by application of Christs righteousness unto us (to
wit, like one of his outward emplasters;) he is our head, saith he, (what of the evill doers?) and we his members (what when we give our members as weapons of unrighteousness to sin and corruption?) and are so rivited with him that we are not to be taken asunder, but as one body with him.] Which is true only of those which are first implanted into him by the similitude of his death, and after by the likenesse of his re∣surrection, as we said before: but the Vindicator and his party hold neither of those estates attainable in this life. [By vertue of which communion, saith he, it comes to passe that that which is ours is his, (yes, when we yield the whole desire and delight of our hearts over to him and his service in all righteousnesse) and that which is his, is ours; (then we can neither want understanding to know, nor power to keep his Law, for he hath both; so that in our head (that is, in our conceit and ima∣gination) we have fulfilled the Law, and satisfied Gods justice for our sins, saith he, as I have shewed before.] But to satisfie Gods justice for our sins, is one thing, which Christ alone hath done for them that leave their sins; and to fulfil Gods Law is another, which we also must do by and through Christ working in us and with us, Rom. 8.4. other∣wise all these are meer dreams, and delusions of Satan to make men secure, if not presumptions, under the reliques, if not the whol body, of sin. [Secondly, it wil be fulfilled with∣in us (whether we sleep or wake, as he supposeth) by and in our perfect sanctification, to wit, in another world, though now our obedience is but in part: The Lord Jesus (saith he) at the last day when the last enemy, which is death, shall be destroyed, shall bring it in us unto perfection] But what shall those that dye before want their consummation in grace and obedience till the generall resurrection? and how is death the last enemy, when our sins by perfect sanctifi∣cation shall not be-destroyed and purged out till after death? How doth this man contradict himselfe, who said that in our personal death sin shal be perfectly purged away, and grace consummate unto glory? [This is the end, saith he, which Christ hath proposed unto himselfe, and whereof
he cannot be frustrate: Ephes. 5.26. As he hath begun it, so he shall finish it.] But what think you is that to us? and how shall this be sought and attained? by faith, obedience, and prayer, as our full renovation must be. [He shall then conform us to the Law, the righteousnesse thereof shall then be fulfilled in us, saith he.] But Paul commands us, Rom. 12.2. in the mean time not to conform our selves to this world, but to be transformed by the renewing of our minds, that we may prove what is that good, and perfect, and accepta∣ble will of God. Then the Vindicator goeth on with his swel∣ling words of vanity, promising liberty unto others, when himself is the servant of corruption, as the false teachers were always wont to doe, 2 Pet. 2.18, 19. and saith, that there shall not be left in our nature so much as a sinful motion or desire, but he shall at the last present us pure and without blame unto his Father, he shall make us per∣fectly answerable to the holinesse which the Law re∣quireth, and shall bring it to passe in his own good time, which is in this life time say we, for the other life is a time of harvest, and of reaping those things which we have done in the body, 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judge∣ment-seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body according to what he hath done, whether it be good or evil; and unto this Judgement we must goe as soon as we give up the Ghost; for it is appointed for all men once to die, and after follows the judgement, Heb. 9.27. and there∣fore all these are vain words and lying promises where∣with he would comfort himselfe and others without any ground of truth & Text of Scripture. But he saith pa. 51. [that the Law should be fulfilled in this life is denyed by some of our own fraternity; sin is condemned (saith Cajetan) but not extinguished] But if he abuse him not let him henceforth own him for one of his fraternity; as he may Bellarmine about ori∣ginal sin & many more Papists, both of the Jansenians & An∣ti Jansenians, in other points which he holds forth with Romea good creatures, as he cals them; yet we wil not so impudent∣ly say that he hath wages from the Pope, unlesse we knew it. But here he fals upon the second proposition or member of
his second position telling us that the Apostle saith positive∣ly that no man shall be justified by the works of the Law, Gal. 2.26. and yet the same Apostle saith, Rom. 2.13. for not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified: and St. James backs him, saying, chap. 1.22. Be ye doers of the Law, and not hearers onely, deceiving your own souls; for none else shall be found righteous before God, as we have proved before: And therefore he and we had need to have recourse to Christ for grace to fulfill it in us, Rom. 8.7. for which purpose that Text which he next alledgeth, but in a false sense, and to a deceitful purpose, must be both a direction and support unto us in this case, Rom. 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for righ∣teousness to all that believe: nor doth that of Galat. 2.21. dissent therefrom, or any way thwart the same: we do not frustrate the grace of God, for if righteousness be by the Law, and our own weak and humane obedience performed thereunto without the assisting and renewing grace of Christ, then Christ died in vain both as to me∣riting the pardon of our guilt, as also to example, and mo∣tive also: but we say there is no way for the fallen and cor∣rupt man to enter into life but through conformity to Christs death in the burial of all known iniquity (which yet the Vindicator holds to be for attainment impossible.) Rom. 6.8. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3. and yet it re∣mains inviolate which he cites out of Gal. 3.11. That no man is justified by the Law (or our own unregenerate works) before God: but the just shall live by faith, to wit, first, the life of grace, and then the life of glory; also that 18 verse stands intire; If the inheritance by the Law (and our own obedience thereunto without the assistance of grace) it is no more of promise; but God gave it to Abraham by promise. But it is false which the Vindicator subjoyns; [It is faith that answers the promise (to wit, by closing with it, and deriving from Christ by way of regeneration the things promised;) but obedience (saith he) holds no proportion with it.] Yes, the obedience of faith must do it, or else actum est de animabus in some measure, Matth. 7.21.
Rev. 22.14, 18, 19. But here he first cites [Rom. 8.3. But that which was impossible to the Law insomuch as it was made weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: and after∣wards he gives his connexion and false gloss upon the Text, saying, the Apostle having in the first verse set down a pro∣position of comfort to those that are in Christ, he confir∣med it in the second, where also he shews us in his own person who they are to whom there is no condemnati∣on in Christ, namely to such whom the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath freed from the Law of sin and death; and no other are absolutely and actually freed from that condemnation but they: though others that are still in the work have a conditional promise of that freedome. Vers. 13. but if ye mortifie the deeds of the body by the Spirit ye shall live. But the Vindicator saith [that the Apostle here shews us how Christ hath freed us from the condemning power of sin.] How is that? not by his death alone, as he would have it, but by the Law of the Spirit of life, in the first place, sub∣duing (unto those that are dying with him) the Law of sin and death. [But how is that done? saith the Vindica∣tor, that is, saith he, Christ taking upon him our nature, and therewith the burthen of our sins, hath condemned sin in his blessed body, and so disanulled it that it hath no power to condemn.] This is false as he understands it, for sin hath a condemning power so long as it remaines unmortified in us, as the Apostle witnesses Rom. 6.23. and 7.24. and chap. 8.13. as we proved before: Christ hath purchased the pardon of sin by his death, and hath it in his own hand to dispose of, but bestows it upon none save so farre as sin is bewailed and left. There is then another body of Christ which must take away the condemning power of sin, and that is the body and flesh of his like sufferance and grace; and that in order to that purchased pardon of which the bread bro∣ken in the supper of the Lord is a type as well as of the flesh of Christs word, Jer. 15.16. [And this benefit, saith the Vindicator, doth the Apostle amplifie, shewing that by no other means we could obtain it.] Yet we have shew∣ed
you but even now another means which must go before the pardon of sin: [for as, saith he, there is but one way without Christ for men to come to life, namely the obser∣vance of the Law (which way is still retained also in Christ, Matth. 19.17. Rev. 22.14. he lets us see, saith the Vindi∣cator, that it was impossible for the Law, (to wit now that we are fallen) to save us; and this impossibility proceeds not from any impotency in the Law, but from our selves, as the Vindicator truly sets it forth, and that in a three-fold respect: for first, it craves of us that which we cannot per∣form, even an absolute obedience unto all the comman∣dements, and that under pain of death.] But whereas the Vindicator saith page 53. [that that obedience may most justly now be required of us, because that by creation (he means in our first parents) we received an holy nature, and ability from God to keep this Law.] This is a false ground, as we have proved before: yet here in words he expresly contradicts his former doctrine, saying, [that by reason of the depravation of our nature drawn on by our selves (which is as much as we affirm in that kind) it is impossi∣ble that we of our selves can keep or perform the Law. Se∣condly, because the Law could not give us that whereof we stood in need, to wit, a full discharge for our infinite debt of guilt contracted by transgression; for saith he, it promiseth no pardon, but binds us fast to the curse: and secondly, superna∣tural grace to reform deformed nature: and thirdly, saith he, (but this last coincident with the former) though it shews us the way of life, yet it ministers no grace to walk there∣in; nor doth his Gospel minister sufficient grace for that purpose. But to make us some amends he comforts us with lies, saying, [but all that which the Law, could not do, Je∣sus Christ by whom cometh grace and life, hath done unto us.] But hath Christ already performed for us and in us perfect obedience to the Law, and to that end fully reformed and renewed our deformed natures? [These two, saith he, cannot be done till we be perfected in glory.] Then he con∣cludes for his second position, or the first part of it rather, but out of his false premises, [therefore there is no life to
be found in the observance of the Law.] Unto which we have often replied upon undeniable grounds, that there is no life to be found but in the observation or Gods Law through Christ Jesus. Again, he ress us [that the Apostle in another place cals the Law the ministry of death and con∣demnation, because it instantly binds men under death for every transgression of her commandements.] It is true, the work of the Law by the help of the word doth give such a condemnatory sentence: but elsewhere the Law is called the perfect Law of liberty, as James 1.25. yea and our life also, Deut. 32.46, 47. ye shall command your children to o∣serve to do all the words of this Law, for it is not a vain thing for you, for it is your life, to wit, when performed by the grace of Christ: But mark his inference from hence; [so that he which hath eyes to see what an universal rebellion of nature there is in man to Gods holy Law, yea what im∣perfections and discordance with the Law are still remain∣ing in them who are renewed by grace (to wit, after John Tendring's model) may easily see the blind presumption of those who seek life in the ministry of death.] But we know none that do so more frequently then such loose Gospellers as he, who turn the grace of God into lasciviousness: And sure we are that the Jews, who seek life in the observa∣tion of Gods Law, for the most part are more obedient to God, and consequently nearer to Gods kingdome, though yet they own not Jesus of Nazareth to be the promi∣sed Christ, then any such libertines as he is, who own Christ in words, but in life and deeds deny him; whose sentence he may find recorded before hand by way of premonition, Matth. 7.21, 22, 23. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heaven, but he that doth the will of my Father which is in heaven: Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and then will I profess unto them, I never knew them, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. The Jews are called natural bran∣ches, because they avoid known sins to the uttermost of their power, and follow after righteousness with all their strength: but such as take liberty to the contrary, are still
branches of the wild olive, Rom. 11. yea these last, though they have Christ often in their mouths, are further from the love of Christ, who hath no communion with Belial, 2 Cor. 6.15. then the former; and it is the wicked lives of those that call themselves the Disciples and followers of Jesus that hath kept both Jews and Turks, and many others, from embracing the holy way of true Christianity. [Yet, saith he, so universall is this error of seeking life and salvation by their own deeds, that it hath over-run the whole poste∣rity of Adam, nature teaching all men who are not illu∣minated by Christ to stand to the covenant of works.] But those who are rightly illuminated by Christ, Grace teach∣eth to seek salvation in the works and observation of the Law, yet not out of their own strength and endeavours a∣lone, but by the grace and help of Christ;] which grace John Tendrings vindication curtaileth. [But the supernatural doctrine, saith he, of the Evangelist, page 53. teacheth us to transcend nature, to goe out of our selves, and to seek salvation in the Lord Jesus:] All this is true if rightly understood; but so is not that which follows; and so to use the Law not that we seek life by fulfilling it (which here is impossible) but as a Schoolmaster to lead us unto Christ, in whom we have remission of our sins (so that which is to be had in the last place he puts it in the first) sanctifi∣cation of our nature, acceptance of our imperfect obedience (what always, when it should for times and means afford∣ed be made perfect?) benefits which the Law could never afford us. Thus, saith he, ye see it is impossible in our own persons (but what if Christ be brought in hither to purge us and renew us fully?) to fulfill the Law of God, no such grace, saith he, being given from above.] Oh the bold blasphemy of man against the renor of the old and new Testament! Deut. 26.18, 19. and 30.6. Jerem. 31.32, 33. Rom. 8.4. and 10.4. [Or if we could (saith he) yet it is not possible for the Law to save us: [but he confesseth that it is not through any defect or imperfection in the Law, for the Law is just, and holy, and good, Rom. 7.12. but in regard of the corruption of nature, which Christ came
purposely to abolish, 1 Joh 3.8. yea I say, quoth he, that although the Law be good, yet it is not good to that end, neither is it ordained of God for that end. (Yes at first it was, and still is in force) yet he confesseth that the Law was given for a double end; first in common to all men, namely to discover sin, Rom. 3.10. and the wrath of God due to us for sin, and to restrain all men by its rule and discipline from sin, and to retain them in a civil course of morali∣ty for the good of humane society. And secondly, in speciall; first, to the reprobate, to make them without excuse, because it teacheth them what shall be done, or left undone.] But all have not the outward Law, it is therefore the inward Law that doth this, and especially be∣cause there is grace also afforded likewise to help us in the doing of the good required, and the resisting of the e∣vil forbidden. Secondly he saith page 54. [in respect of the elect, to incite us by the sight of our sins to seek out a Saviour; as he that informs us of some dangerous disease doth tacitly advise us to seek out some expert physician, (which is not John Tendring;) but the Law was never inten∣ded that it should justifie us, or of it selfe bring us to eter∣nal life.] Yes, it was so at the first. But he brings divers arguments to prove that which we deny not (as he is very profuse and prodigal in his proof of such things;) For he first saith [that eternal life had been promised to the keep∣ers of the Law: then the promise had been vain.] So it had without grace in Christ. Secondly, if righteousnesse were by the Law then Christ had dyed in vain, because it were superfluous for him to dye for us, if we could attain it by the works of the Law; and therefore it is apparent that by the works of the Law no flesh living can be justi∣fied. Thirdly, for hypocriticall Gospellers, such as seem Saints in ostentation, that they may play the divell with∣out suspicion (as John Tendring did till he went away) who say they have faith, but shew forth no works which are not vailed with hypocrisie, and which are not done or intended to wrong ends; for such, saith he, let Isaiah tell you how acceptable their works be to God, and whether
they be like to justifie them, Isai. 1.16, 17. For the Lord complaineth that he is weary of them, and that his soul hateth them, and bids them, bring no more such sacrifices to him.] But we demand of him whether those men were Gos∣pellers, or pretended Professors? whether the works which the Lord there forbids were Ceremonial or Morals: For, he forbids not the works of the Moral Law. Fourthly, he saith, [that for true Christians that are born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God, if any works could justifie, it must needs be their works which are wrought in and through them by the spirit of God; and yet we say (quoth he) that the best works of the best regene∣rate men cannot justifie them before God: And thus we prove it; (how doth he that?) First, because all the gra∣ces that we receive in this life are given to us but in part, page 55. (sure they are wholly and freely given,) as we shewed in the proof of the other positions, and so they are imperfect grace.] But see how he contradicts himself, and lyes against the Holy Ghost in his next words, which are these, [not that the Spirit of Gods works imperfectly, but that he means not to inrich us with any grace here while we are conversant with sinful men in this vale of misery, but only so far forth as he seeth it fit to bring us unto the kingdome of perfection, where that which is in part shall be done away. 1 Cor. 13.10.] But what if Paul looked for that here, saying, when that which is perfect is come then that which is in part (or but a piece-work) shall be abolished and swallowed up, verse 11. yea, what if Paul all that time enjoyed that which is so perfect? for he saith verse the 11. When I was a child I spake as a child, I under∣stood as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became a man I put away childish things. And if so, then the Vin∣dicators conclusion will stand against us like the walls of Jericho, which fell flat to the ground, which follows in these words; And therefore our inherent justice being but as our knowledg is, imperfect, and therefore it is impossi∣ble that it should perfectly justifie us before God.] But we have overthrown that supposition of his before.
Secondly he saith [that though our good works are perfect in respect of the Spirit of God which effecteth them, yet they are tainted when they pass through us, who are so subject to sin as waters running through a dirty channel; and therefore cannot justifie us before God, in whose presence every polluted thing stands condemned: whence the Prophet saith, Is. 64.6. All our righteousness is as a menstruous cloth.] But neither are all Saints subject to sin all their life long, nor can that which proceeds from Gods Spirit be tainted by us, nor is that the righteousness of Saints, but of sinners and unregenerate men which is so menstruous, as is said be∣fore. Howbeit he brings in Gregorie's saying, Moral. lib. 21. cap. 15. and lib. 3. cap. 7. All mans righteousness should be unrighteousness if God should strictly judge it: and then Au∣gustine's saying, Wo to the most laudable and best life of men.] Unto which we first oppose these sayings of the Apostle, 1 John 2.29. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doth righteousness is born of him. chap. 3.7. Little children, let no man deceive you, he that doth righteousness is righteous even as he is righteous. chap. 4.17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judg∣ment: and then those of the Psalmist, Psal. 11.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and 119.1, 2. and 128.1, 2. unto which we could adde many more. Howbeit he goeth on in the same lying strain, saying, [if God laying aside his mercy should discusse our lives, or righteousness, in the strictness of his justice, it would be so, for God is a God of purer eyes, who charged his angels with folly.] Indeed Eliphaz, one of Jobs back∣friends, and of John Tendring's gain-saying spirit, saith so, but falsly, Job 4.17, 18. for the Lord never charged any but the fallen Angels with folly so. But he tels us further, if you will believe him, [that the best of men when he lives on earth is both a Saint and sinner; a Saint by reason of grace wrought in him, and a sinner by his own natural corruption, which in some measure tainteth every grace of God; and therefore the best of these who being compared with their fellows might seem just indeed, yet looking to the strictness of Gods justice they disclaimed all their
own righteousness.] What that of grace and regeneration also? But who are those Saints? St. Eliphaz, a lying and contentious zelot, with whom God is highly displeased, Job 42.7. But he brings in Job himself saying [chap. 9.2, 3. But how should man be just with God? if he will contend with him he cannot answer him to one of a thousand: and David, Psal. 130. and 143. 2. of which we said before that all this is true of man in his corrupt estate, and for a time afterwards, but not of the Saints best estate and growth upon earth. For whereas he saith page 56. that [Paul affirmeth, 1 Cor. 4.4. that he knew nothing by himself:] it is true. But where∣as the Apostle addeth, that he was not thereby justified, he renders a false reason of that saying of the Apostle, and con∣tradicts himself also, saying [though he served God most faithfully in the inner man, yet he saw another law in his members warring against the law of his mind; and hence he cried out, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death?] What did he feel? surely a law of sin; and felt such a body of death continually, and yet knew no∣thing by himself? Good Hyperbolick bring your ends nea∣rer together, as the servant said to his lying mother. Thirdly, saith he, [that although it were granted that some works of the Saints were perfectly good, yet any one sin blotteth out the remembrance of our former righteous∣ness, Ezek. 18.24.] But that Text speaks of a final Apo∣stasie from righteousness, not of one actual slip, or fall, as all men confess; otherwise David, Peter, and all the Saints of God during their time of actual fals had lost all their righteousness which they had wrought before by every such by-step or slip. Unto which he adds two sayings of the Apostle James, which he understands as little as the former: The first is chap. 2.10. [For whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet shall offend in one point, is guilty of all.] That is, of violating the equity of the law, and contemning the Au∣thority of the law-giver, which binds to the obedience of all the commands as well as to any one; yet is not this guilt to be understood of every breach of the law through ignorance or weakness, but of witting and presumptuous
sins. The other place, chap. 3.2. in many things we offend all, of which we have spoken before; and therefore (saith he) are we taught every day to beg the forgiveness of our trespasses.] Un∣to which we have said likewise, that although we sin not daily, we may daily pray so for our selves and others, to have our sins pardoned, which have been many & great. His fourth argument against justification by works (which in the Apo∣stles sense we renounce) is that, [Rom. 3.28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law: unto which he adds Gal. 5.3, 4. That if ye seek to be saved (or justified) by the works of the law, then are ye debters to fulfill the whole law, and so Christ should profit us nothing, who is given for that end. But he goes about to prove that here Paul excludes not onely ceremonial works, and works be∣fore grace, but all works whatsoever: (how doth he that?) for, saith he, Paul writes not these things to unbelieving Jews, but to the Galatians, who were believing Christians.] But by his leave those of the Jewish faith, who looked to be saved by their own works without the grace of Christ, were crept in among them, and had almost withdrawn them from the faith in Christ, as appears chap. 1.6. I mar∣vel that ye are so soon turned from him that called you to the grace of God unto another Gospel: See chap. 3.12. and 4.19, 20. and 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. so this argument is false. Fifth∣ly he saith, [that no work of man can be good before his person be justified before God; for without faith it is im∣possible to please God; But a man may have faith to please God before a justifying faith; the first is in God the Father, the second is in God the Son: see Heb. 11.6. But without faith it is impossible to please God, for he that comes to God must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that dili∣gently seek him. Abel, (saith he,) was first accepted, and then his offering.] But that divinity of his agreeth not with Gods sermon to Cain, if thou dost well shalt thou not be ac∣cepted? and if thou dost evill sin lies at the door, Gen. 4.7. Nor with that which Solomon speaks, Prov. 18.16. A mans gift maketh room for him; which is true of gifts brought unto God as well as unto men, especially if it proceed out of a
good willing spirit. But page 57. he comes to answer some objections, which we present not, because we oppose not his doctrine in this parergical discourse. The first is that, to what purpose are good works, if we can neither be justified, nor merit by them? he answers [That as gold is good, yet not to asswage hunger, (yet his confiding friends gold and silver made him good cheer.) and the same hath admirable effects, yet not to make the blind man see; so good works have many uses both necessary and profitable, yet not to justifie us before God, or to merit by them; for when we have done all we can, yea all that is commanded, we are unprofitable servants, Luk. 17.10. (to which Scripture we have spoken before.) But here he bringeth in some ob∣jections against his own doctrine of the impossibility of keeping the law; as first, [If God gives us commandements which we cannot perform, it is in vain to exhort thereunto, viz. to obey the same. Secondly, his promises of happi∣ness, and means for keeping them, were but mockeries; as if I should promise a child a thousand pounds to carry away a Milstone, which he is not able to wag. Thirdly, his punishments for the neglect and transgression of them should be unjust; for if laws be not made and proportioned to our power of performance, the law-giver may as well be termed a tyrant, as the laws themselves unjust. But none of this can stand with the wisedome and justice of God, viz. to command beyond our power or possibility.] Unto which objections he makes answer after his wonted manner with words of ignorance, errour & falshood: [first, saith he, God doth require of us to keep and fulfil his law, to teach us what we could have done in Adam, and what we owe to God.] But in the first Adam or Protoplast we could do just nothing, for we had no being then, nor are we debters to God upon that score, though perhaps upon another score we are. Secondly, saith he there and page 58. [to shew us that it is our own fault that we cannot now keep the Law.] Which perhaps may be truly spoken, but not in his sense and way [because man abusing his power and free liberty to do what he would, did lose both, and now he must do
what he would not, because Adam received that strength both for himselfe and us.] He often saith it, but he never yet proved it. [Thirdly, God teacheth us, saith he, what we should ask, and of whom; for God doth therefore com∣mand us to do what we cannot perform, that seeing our own infirmities, and being wearied under the Law of equi∣ty, we might sue unto the throne of grace for pardoning mercy, and the gracious assistance of the holy Spirit, to en∣able us in some measure (saith he) (yea to the uttermost say we) to perform what he so justly requireth.] To which third reason of his we subscribe, as also to that which he cites out of Augustine, saying, in the commandements we must know what we ought to have, and in our punishments we must learn that we our selves are the cuses of our own wants: yea add hereunto, and of our own failings likewise: and in prayer we must learn from whence we must fetch the sup∣ply of our defects, (or rather before we goe to prayer:) or, saith he again, to answer methodically (for all this while he hath been no very orderly man) God was upon Mount Sinai to deliver a Law (what de novo?) that was never given before, but such as was formerly ingraven on mans heart.] Thus far he speaks truly; but what follows is not so true: [that the Law was now defaced & obliterated through sin;] for we have proved already that though the righteousnesse of the Law was obliterated, yet the knowledge of it was written in every mans heart with indelible characters: [it was not now for God, saith he, (no nor ever will be) to bend the rule of righteousnesse to the crookednesse of our affections, that so he might make it answerable to our abi∣lities (yes, through his promised and premised covenant of grace in Christ) but rather to set down a straight rule, not in favour of our sinful nature (which he hateth) but to expresse our whole duty, though it be impossible for us after we have lost our ability to perform it] What is it so now impossible after that a new supply of grace and assist∣ance is vouchsafed if we seek it? [For, saith he, he that hath lent a thousand pounds may without injury demand it of them, and when he knoweth that thou hast care∣lesly
spent it, and as a Bankrupt art not able to pay a pen∣ny (which no merciful man will rigorously do, unlesse it be to evidence his prodigality and folly;) so God having given us power to obey his precepts, may at any time justly call for the performance of the same, though he know that we by our sins have disabled our selves so much as to think a good thought.] But his thoughts herein are very evil; for we have proved before that God cannot in ju∣stice, and much lesse in mercy, require of us that obe∣dience for which we in our persons never received, or could receive sufficient power to perform the same: Ultra posse viri non vult Deus ulla requiri. Pag. 59. he pro∣pounds another objection of his adversaries, to wit, that the regenerate have sufficientia principia operationis, that is, sufficient means and causes of well doing, his soul being enlightned, sanctified, and assisted by Gods spirit; and therefore he may perform what God requires. And then he goes about to answer it with mincing the truth, and ex∣tenuating Gods grace, saying [a regenerate man is enabled to doe good, but not perfectly, his undestanding be∣ing still obscured, his will distempered, and his power of doing good hindred by many lustful temptations: and therefore these principles of operation being imperfect, our actions which proceed from thence must needs be imper∣fect likewise: which he proves with his old mistaken Scrip∣tures, [Who can tell, saith David, how often he offendeth? cleanse thou me from all my secret sins: ye see (saith he) Saints have their secret sins (and he himself wants not his open and manifest enormities;) I may, quoth he, have many sins, and fail in many things which no man knows of (we doubt it not) nor yet my selfe, which yet are known to God; we cannot judge mens hearts: (Why then doth he judge ours for hypocrisie, and carying on new pretended lights in a dark lanthorn?) for we know not our own, it is Gods prerogative to search and try mens reins, Jerem. 17.9. 1 Joh. 3.20. and it is our duty with Nehemiah to pray, chap. 13.12. accept mine obedience, but pardon mine iniquity.] But the man of God doth not pray so there, as we have shewed be∣fore,
though he had his former sins also. A chosen vessel was compelled to say he knew nothing by himselfe, yet was he not thereby justified; of which before. Thus ye see that his book is stuffed full of tautologies. [And this, saith [he, may suffice for the clearing of the first branch of the se∣cond position.] Indeed it is pretty well cleared from pro∣bability of truth or piety. But for further confirmation [he dares appeal to any mans conscience (that is no more care∣ful then he is to keep it without offence to God and men) how upon the consideration of Gods strict judgement, and his own manifold infirmities, he dare justifie himselfe in a∣ny one act, not against God, but before God] But Abimeleck could do it, as himself confessed before: and Paul could do it for his habitual acts, as we shewed before, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoycing is this, the testimony of our conscience that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in fleshly wisedome, (and much lesse fleshly lusts) but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the world. [And I doubt not, saith he, pag. 60. but the proudest heart would soon tremble, and the boldest face (save his own) would blush and be ashamed, to have his best works, yea his prayer, scanned by the strictnesse of Gods Law and justice.] But Job could say chap. 6.17. My face is foul with weeping, and on my eye-lids is the shadow of death, not for any injustice in mine hands; also my prayer is pure. Hath not the Lord promised, Zephan. 3.9. Then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may call upon the Lord, to fear him with one shoulder or con∣sent: and Malach. 1.11. For from the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same my name shal be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered up unto me with a pure offering. But he goes on yet more confidently, saying,] And of the adversaries to this truth I require (quâ demum authori∣tate?) this one thing, that they will either produce a man, and prove it, that hath ever (what doth he mean from his youth up, without any corruption?) performed in his own person such perfect obedience to the Law of God as not to offend against the same.] Unto which we have an∣swered, that if ever we knew any such we should not be
very forward to shew them to such unbelieving and envi∣ous spirits as he is of: and we have produced many such already; as Caleb, Numb. 4.24. Josh. 14.6. John and his fellow-Apostles, 1 Joh. 17.7. with many thousands more. [Or else, saith he, let them acknowledge their er∣ror with shame, and forbear opposing the truth (as Jannes and Jambres did Moses) and disturbing the peace of Gods Church. [He might have said the Devils chappel, if all the Ministers of Gods Church were like himself: But as he is no living member of a true Church, which is a congregati∣on of Saints, so neither doth our doctrine disturb, but further the peace of the true Church of God: Act. 9.32. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judea and Galatia, and were edified, and walking in the fear of God, and in the com∣fort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied. To such Jorams, or high-flown spirits as he is, Iehu may answer, what peace, so long as the whoredomes of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many? 2 Kings 9.21. for there is no peace to the wicked, saith my God, Isai. 5.21. [But he fears first by our malici∣ous wickednesse (in decrying sin, and opposing Satans king∣dom, to set up Christs) our sin may become unpardonable: yet he saith that he shall pray for us, as he doth for himself (while he continueth in wickednesse) not that God would be pleased to convince us of our errours, and humble us in the sense of our sins and be merciful to our poor souls: (be∣cause we oppose his sinful positions) But we pray that the Lord would vouchsafe him mercy in reality and truth so far as to turn him from his enterprise, and then we are sure we shall be no longer accounted innovators by him, nor his opposite doctrine be esteemed orthodox. But now at length he comes to the second branch of his second position, which, as he saith, hath these two parts to be considered [First, that no man can be justified by the works of the Law. Secondly that we are only justified by the righteousnesse of Christ.] Both which are true, and suit well with what we speak, if rightly understood. And concerning the first, he saith he hath cleared it before; (but he hath obscured it rather by bringing the works of the
Spirit under the works of the law, as he will do it again by and by.) And here he tels us [that the Apostle Paul reasons admirably and plainly to this point, Rom. 11.5, 6. saying, If salvation be of grace it is no more of works, for else grace were no more grace; and if it be of works it is no more of grace, for else works were no more works.] So that it is evident (say we) that the works that are here recited are not works of grace, but works before, without, and against grace: But salvation, saith he, is by grace, for by grace are we saved though faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast. Ephes. 2. And our Saviour tels us plainly, that when we have done our best we are unprofitable ser∣vants.] And such a servant will he be for the Church, and his doctrine also unto which he pretends. [And reason it self, saith he, drawn from the Scripture doth sufficiently prove that we cannot be justified by our works; for if any works justifie us, (saith he) they must be done either before or after justification: but no works before our justification can justifie us, saith he, page 61. because an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit; and these works not being done in faith must needs be sin, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.5, 6.] Thus he goes about to maintain that which is true in it self with false grounds, as we have shewed before: [where∣upon St. Paul saith (quoth he) that all men before they be en∣grafted into Christ (which as yet he is not) are servants of sin, farre from righteousness, and bring forth no other fruits but such as deserve shame and death.] Which is all as false as the other; for Cornelius was not as yet grafted into Christ when the Angel commanded him to send for Peter, and yet he brought forth many good fruits, Acts 10.1, 2. as we shewed before. Secondly, saith he [Reason it self tels us that our works done after grace cannot be the cause of grace.] Yes, they may be some cause or means to procure a subse∣quent grace, for how can that which cometh after be the cause of that which went before? for the cause must pre∣cede the effect: and so Augustine tels us, that good works do not go before him that is to be justified (which is not true in
every behalf, (as we have shewed) but they do follow him that is already justified; and therefore they can be no more the cause of justification, then good fruits are the cause of the goodness of a tree: and that place of the Apostle (saith he) which I cited before proves it, Rom. 3.20. by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. But there are good works which follow converting and sanctifying grace, which yet may precede the great work of justification, and nevertheless are no works of the law, against which Paul disputes in this controversie. For first (saith he) Paul tels us verse 9. that all, both Jews and Gentiles, are under sin, because all are transgressors of the law (true;) and therefore all the world must be guilty before God, and can no way be justified by pre∣tending innocency and righteousness in keeping the law: (true likewise.) Secondly, he shews the reason why no flesh can be justified by the law, [because the law convinceth of sin; for by the law cometh knowledge of sin.] But what he addeth in the next place is partly false, and wholly impertinent: [but the law, saith he, convinceth them that are under grace (some of them it doth, who therefore had need to seek the justification which yet they want) of sin, and who have the greatest measure of grace (this is ungra∣ciously spoken) to be sinners, Phil. 3.9.] But that Text speaks of Paul's first conversion to Christ, not of his last and best estate. [Therefore, saith he, but by a non sequitur, they that do the works of the law by the help of grace can∣not be justified by the Law, (yes in one sense they may be∣cause the law is with them, and not against them) Gal. 5.23. because the law sheweth them likewise to be sinners, (by which words he contradicts himself) as well, though not as great as those are who endeavour to keep the law with∣out the help of grace (with which he is better acquainted then with the other way of keeping it;) and therefore, saith he, the Apostle concludeth thus, that we are justified by the righteousness of God without the law, as ye may (in his sense) see Rom. 3. from verse 20. But whereas he adds his own subinference thereunto, saying, [therefore we are not justi∣fied by any righteousness of the law, done either by the
help of grace, or without the help of grace] that is nei∣ther the Apostles doctrine, nor true in it self: and the rea∣son which he yields for his said assertion is devoid of rea∣son, saying, [for he that, obeyeth the law, howsoever he doth it, by the help of grace, or by his own strength, yet he hath the same righteousness.] Which we say is false, because those two differ as much as weakness and strength, as flesh and spirit, and as that which is natural from that which is spiritual, yea as heaven and earth from each other. Yet saith he fondly [the righteousness of the Law, because of the different manner of obtaining it, altereth not the thing: But the Apostle (saith he) sheweth a great deal of diffe∣rence between the righteousness of the law and the righte∣ousness of faith, (so he might as to matter, manner, and measure) for Moses described (saith he) the righteousness of the Law, that the man which doth those things (however he doth them, by his own strength, or some other help, if he doth them) shall live by them.] But this is a false gloss of his upon Moses; for so there shall be no difference between the righteousness of the law required by Moses, and the deeds of the foregoing Testament, and the righteousness of faith in the nevv Testament. Rom. 10.5. But the righteous∣ness of faith speaketh in this wise, If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved, vers. 6, 9. [And therefore, saith he, because the Apostle opposeth do∣ing of the law, and believing in Christ, and not the doing of the law by our own strength, and the doing of it by the help of grace, it is apparent that we can never be justified by the works of the law, by what means soever we do them, whether by the strength of nature, or by the law of grace.] But he neither understands this Scripture, wherein the Apostle is the obscurer because he is concise; nor fits or states the opposition here aright: For, first, no man can be saved or justified by believing alone that God raised Christ from the dead, that is not the Apostles doctrine or meaning; but he that will be saved must believe that Christ likewise rose again for our justification, that is, for to
cleanse us from sin, and make us just. Rom. 4.23, 24. Now it is not written, for his (Abraham's) sake alone that it was imputed to him, but also us, to whom it shall be imputed if we be∣lieve in him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our offences, and raised again for our justification by faith to sanctification: and the opposition is clearly made by the Apostle between the fulfilling of the Law by our own strength, and between the doing of that work by the help of grace in Christ, or by faith in him, Rom. 3.21, 22. were it rightly understood; Rom. 8.3, 4. and chap. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. for as Moses saith, Deut. 30.14. concerning the knowledge of the law, that the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it: so speaketh Paul here concerning Christs spiritual word whereby we must be sanctified to fulfill the Law, vers. 6, 7, 8. But the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise; Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven, that is, to ring down Christ from above? or who shall descend into the deep, that is, to bring up Christ from the dead? But what saith it? the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart: it is the word of faith which we preach, to wit, an inward living word, Christ, to quicken us in all righteousness, for the purging out of sin, and the fulfilling of the law: and then it follows verse 9.11. that if thou shalt confess with thy mouth (in way of earnest prayer) the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath (for this end, even thy justification) raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved, to wit, from all sins, spiritual enemies, and the wrath to come. And this is the Apostles doctrine every where, Gal. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. chapters Ephes. 2.1, 10. so it is most evident out of Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. where the Apostle having said, vers. 9. that I may be found in Christ, not having mine own righteousness which is of the law, but the righteousness which is by the faith of Christ, even the righteousness that is of God by faith; which he at the tenth verse by way of explication sets forth what that is, thus, that I may know him and the power of his resur∣rection (and for the overcoming of sin) the fellowship of his suffering (to suffer our every temptation with patience to
the end) and so may be made conformable unto his death (the onely way in Christ unto life) if by any means I might at∣tain unto the resurrection of the dead, first, in the power of Christs resurrection here, Rom. 6.5. and then at the last day. Thus both the Vindicators suppositions and conclusi∣ons do fall to the ground or earth, and place from whence they came. But Bellarmine (saith he) in his first book de justificatione cap. 19. labours to prove by three special arguments, that all works of the law are not excluded from our justifica∣tion.] (Which thing he might justly do, say we, if he had un∣derstood the works of justification aright) [First, because faith is a work, and that there is a law of faith as well as of works; and therefore if all works were excluded from our justifi∣cation, then faith it self must be excluded, and so to be justified by faith were to be justified without faith. Se∣condly, because the Apostles intent is Rom. 3. that neither the Jews by the observation of Moses his law, nor the Gen∣tiles by their moral works, and so neither Jews nor Gen∣tiles, could be justified by any works that they could do be∣fore they believed in Jesus Christ. Thirdly, because the A∣postle shews Rom. 4.4. that the works which he excludes from justification are those works to which wages are due by debt, and not by grace; and those, saith Bellarmine, are all such works as are done by our own natural abilities without the assistance of any supernatural grace. Unto which he or some other answers page 63. thus; But unto all those I say, we confess faith to be a work, and it is the commandement of God that we believe in Jesus Christ; but we deny that faith justifies us as it a work is performed in obedience unto this command, but as it is an instrument embracing (yea seeking) Jesus Christ aforesaid; it is not the act of believing, but the thing holden (he should have said, first sought and gotten, and possessed by believing) that is our righteousness.] True, if he understood rightly what that is or should be. Secondly he saith [that Bellar∣mine is mistaken in the whole scope of the Apostle, and St. Paul doth not give us the least intimation of what he
meaneth, that we are not justified by any works done by our natural strength: (The which is false, as we have ful∣ly and truly proved as well as formerly;) but rather shew∣eth, that inasmuch as we are all sinners against the Law, therefore by our obedience done to the Law, however done by grace, or without grace, no man can be justified in Gods sight.] But this, as we shewed before, is contra∣ry to many expresse Scriptures; see Psalm 15.1. and 112. Isai. 33.13, 17. Ezek. 18.5, 9. he is just, he shall surely live, saith the Lord God. Mat. 12.37. For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned. Rom. 2.13. For not the hearers of the Law are just, but the doers of the Law are justified. See Jam. 1.22. 1 Joh. 3.7. Little children, let no man deceive you, he that doth righteousnesse is righteous as he is righteous, 1 Joh. 4.17, 18. as before. Thirdly he saith to Rom. 4.4. cited by Bellarmine [the Apostle intendeth no such distinction of works as Bellar∣mine alledgeth, but he excludeth all works, as well those that are done by the help of grace, as those that are done without grace, from the justification of Abraham; for those works of Abraham are excluded wherein Abra∣ham might glory before men, (true;) but these are the works, saith he, which he did by the helpe of grace.] Oh absurd! for who made him to differ from other men? or what had he in that behalfe which he had not received? and why should he or any other boast before men as if he had not received that grace? 1 Cor. 4.7.] for otherwise (saith the Vindicator or his friend for him,) if he (Abraham) were justified by the works done without the help of grace, he might as vvell glory before God as men; which is not true in eve∣ry behalfe, for he received his internal helps from God, and not from himself, Psalm 100. It is he that made us, and not we our selves: But the Apostle tels us, saith he, that al∣though by those works done by the help of grace he might glory before men (where doth he tell us so?) yet not before God, and therefore he vvas not justified by those vvorks in the sight of God] But as the premisses vvere false, so is the conclusion vvhich he dravvs from thence; for by
every grace of God he vvas justified in some kind of actual righteousnesse, and purged from the contrary sin, vvhich is the only justification vvhich Paul pleads for in Jesus Christ necessary to life. Nor is his next reason lesse absurd, vvhere he saith, [for if vve could be justified by any vvorks hovvso∣ever done, by grace, or vvithout grace, then the vvages, that is, eternal life is not counted of favour, but of debt] Is it not so when vvithout the rich grace of God the du∣ties required unto eternal life cannot be performed? [But (saith he) vvhen vve cannot be justified by our ovvn vvorks (nor are we so justified) but by believing in him that justifi∣eth the ungodly (so that he makes them godly that were be∣fore ungodly) who is in Jesus Christ (what are any un∣godly that are in Christ? see 1 Cor. 6.11.) that we are then justified by his righteousnesse, and saved by his me∣rits; like the hungry dreamer, Isai. 29.8. who dreameth that he eateth, but when he awaketh his soul is empty: Then faith, saith the Apostle, and not any kind of works is imputed to him for righteousnesse, Rom. 4.5.] But here the new false Apostle John of Burstou, corrupteth and falsifieth the Text, for these words (and not any kind of works) are not found there. See Rev. 22.18. what his reward is like to be; for if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him all the plagues that are written in this book.] But Pag. 64. he saith, I shall here close this point with these conclusi∣ons: First, that no man that is a sinner can be justified by his own obedience to the moral Law. Secondly, that no man that hath offended the Law can be justified by his own satisfaction for his transgression] But who denies ei∣ther of those? or to what purpose is all this, unlesse, as we said before, to entertain his Reader with kickshaws? But wanderers love extravagancies. As to the first of these, he saith, [that by the Law cometh the knowledge of sin, Rom. 3.20. that is, the Law accounteth all such to be sin∣ners, and accounteth them as transgressors, and therefore they can never be pronounced guiltlesse by that Law which proves them guilty: but every man is a transgressor of the Law (to wit before grace, and for some time after) Rom.
3.9. Gal. 2.1. Joh. 1.8, 11. and our consciences testi∣fie it to our faces: Therefore can no man be justified by his own obedience to the Law.] But what is this to the obedience of Christ in the Saints? by which alone, as we have often said, they may be justified freely, and ought so to be. Secondly, he saith [that a sinner which hath once offended can never by any action or passion of his own make satisfaction to the justice of God for his transgression] Yet can God freely remit thousands and millions of such trans∣gressions to the converting sinner: [and the Law, saith he, being broken, there is no way to be justified by the Law, but by making a plenary satisfaction for the transgression: which no sinners satisfaction can do, because a finite act can never be a sufficient value to satisfie the offence that is done against an infinite goodnesse; as also, because all that we can do (yea much more) is required of us now that assisting grace is tendered, as our duty to the Law (or Law-giver) and therefore it cannot be rendred as any payment for the breach of the Law: Therefore, saith he, to conclude this point, or truth, we are not under the Law for the justi∣fication of our persons as Adam was, nor for satisfaction of divine justice, as those that perish: but we are under it as a document of obedience (what perfect or imperfect?) and a rule of living] But not as we ought to do, by his doctrine.] Tis not, saith he, published from Sinai, but from Sion, (but to whom is it so?) as a Law of liberty (what to take our sleep and swing in sin?) and as a new Law, not as a Law of condemnation and bondage.] Yes, it is so pub∣lished still to impenitent and unbelieving men, 1 Tim. 1.9. knowing, this that the Law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawlesse and disobedient. And yet he saith Pag. 65. [that the obedience is not removed (yes, by his doctrine a great part of it is) but the disobedience thereof is both pardoned and cured.] But how? perfectly pardoned, but inchoatively cured by his doctrine; for, saith he, [the ob∣servance thereof is necessary as a fruit of faith, (but mark how enormously he speaks in the next words) but not, (saith he) as a condition of life and righteousnesse, yet necessa∣ry
necessitate pracepti, as a thing commanded, the trans∣gression whereof is the incurring of sin; not necessitate medii, as a strict undispensible means of salvation, the trans∣gression whereof (yes, if it be habitual or final) is a pe∣remptory obligation to death.] But we have proved before out of Mat. 5.18, 19. and Rev. 14.22. that this is re∣quired by Christ as the way to life by the necessity of a medium, or means, as well as of a precept, especially of those that have both space and means to attain unto it in Christ [And thus (saith he) of the former of the two last branches of the second position, wherein I have clearly shewed (as one would shew a small and remote object in a dark night) that as no man can be justified by obedi∣ence to the Law, nor the works of the best Christians can∣not justifie them (what not in Christ?) And now he comes to the last branch, that we are only justified by the righte∣ousnesse of Christ; (which being rightly understood we al∣so maintain) [We beleeve and maintain, saith he, as the Scripture teacheth us, (what is that?) That we are ac∣quitted and absolved from our sins, and so justified in the sight of God, by and for (he should have said through) the righteousnesse of Jesus Christ.] And so do we, but not in his way and sense: And though we have said hereto∣fore that justification and remission of sins are two different things, yet we would be thus understood, that the pardon of sins in his sense, which is to take away the guilt or ob∣ligation unto punishment, and leave the corruption behind; and justification, that is, to make us just, holy and good, or liberative justification whereby sin is purged out, upon which the pardon and removing of the guilt follows through the mercy of God and the merits of Christs death: we say that these are diverse and dissentaneous things: But otherwise, as  is in the new Testament frequently to be understood of the dimission and purging out of sin by the Spirit, so both in the old and new Testament, by prayer, remission, and forgivenesse of sins, both these are connectively and collectively to be understood; because where the Lord is pleased to
purge out sin; and heal men of it, he always pardons it, or takes away the guilt; and never takes away the guilt but where the corruption and fault are first put away. Hence it is that not to impute sin, as we said before, is, first, to purge it by sanctification, and then to pardon i; as Psal. 32.1, 2, 3. and Rom. 4.6, 7. and where sin is so pur∣ged, and not imputed, there the righteousness of grace for the renewing of the same is freely imputed or given to the believing and obedient soul. But this premised, we return now to consider what he saith; who first brings that place Rom. 5.18. As by one offence (or of one the sin) guilt or judgment came upon all men to condemnation, (to wit, all that offended or sinned in that one personal Adam of theirs, as he said before) so by one righteousness, or the justi∣fication of one, the free gift came upon all unto the justification of life, that is, of glory; for there is a two-fold justifi∣cation, the one of grace, or the foregoing righteousness, and the other of glory, or the evelasting righteousness.] But wherein doth this Text speak for him, or against us and our doctrine? The second Scripture which he brings is 2 Cor. 5.21. For he hath made him to be sin for us (to wit, a sacrifice for sin, and a patern, and motive unto us, teaching us how we should in him root it out) that we might be made the righteousnesse of God in him; first in grace, and then in glory, as we said before.] Where the Apostles words make farre more for us, and our sense and doctrine, then they do for him; for there is not the least mention made in all the Context, or any where else in all the Scri∣ptures, that Christs personal obedience unto the law with∣out us and for us should become or be made our righteous∣ness. The third Text of Scripture produced by him is that, Acts 13.38, 39. Be it therefore known unto you men and brethren, that through this man (or Messiah) is published unto you dimission or remission of sins, and in him he that believeth that he is (or may be) justified (that is purged) from all things from which ye could not be justified (or purged) by the law of Moses.] Which Text makes so clearly for us, that by way of warning we will adde Pauls next words, Look to it,
or take heed lest that come upon you which is spoken in the Pro∣phets, Behold ye despisers and wonder, and vanish (or come to nothing) for behold I work a work (in the days of perfect sanctification) a work to which ye will in no wise give credit, though one tell or shew it unto you, Acts 13.40, 41. The words are cited out of Hab. 1.5, 6. and imply also an heavy judg∣ment to come by the Chaldeans, or the enemies figured thereby, which are the Devils. His fourth Scripture by him quoted is 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but now ye are sanctified, but now ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.] And as o∣ther Scriptures made not at all for him, but much more for us; so this is clearly also against him, shewing that washing from the act and habit of former sins, sanctification by Gods Spirit, and justification in in the name of Christ, are one and the self-same thing, as we further proved out of Titus 3.4, 5, 6, 7. Rev. 22.11. and other clear places. But here he saith [that some may object and say, this righteousness is Christs, and how can a man be justified by the justice of another? Unto the which he answers with some truth and some falshood; that as sin is ours by propagation (which we have often shewed to be false) so righteousness is ours (if we attain unto it truly by Christ) by imputation.] But his righteousness which he here intends is onely such by putation and imagination. [And as Adam, saith he, de∣rived sin to our condemnation (which is one of his old Chimaera's) so Christ brought life by his obedience to our justification: Thus if many be made sinners by the disobedience of one man (which if rightly understood is undoubtedly true) then how much more shall many be made righteous by the obedience of man, Jesus Christ? Rom. 5.19. especially since the nature of Christ, as he saith, page 66. is far more divine then the nature of Adam, and therefore is more powerfull in ability to work this effect to justifie us, then Adams sin was to condemn us. But as Adams sin without us, and our conformity thereunto, condemns us not, so neither doth Christs obedience, which is ab extra, justifie us; we speak of his active obedience: and by his passive we have another
benefit, the pardon of sins upon our leaving of them: and 1 John 5.11, 12. saith he, this is the record that God hath given us, to wit, eternall life; to whom was it given? to John, and those in whom Christ was risen in the power of the e∣ternal life, and this life is in his Son, so that he which hath the Son (in that manner) hath life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life as yet, that is, saith the Vindicator, he hath the righteousness whereby he bringeth us to eter∣nal life.] But this is his gloss upon the Text, and a meer dream and delusion; and this, saith he, doth the Apostle most excellently shew unto us, when he saith, [that God made Christ to be sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.20. which we even now cited.] But he speaks no such thing as he aims at, or dreams of; for, saith he, as our sins were made the sins of Christ, not by altering or transplanting them inhesively into his own person, but by assumption of them imputatively to make satisfaction for them, as fully and truly as if they had been his own inherent sins; even so the righteousness of Christ (but not his externall obedience) is as truly made ours by imputation (his inherent righteousness whereby he and we obey God is so) as if we had perfectly fulfilled the law by our own personal and actual operation.] Prove this by Scripture (Vindicator,) and you shall be made a Doctor in Divinity, which you never was, nor will be. [And there∣fore (saith he) justification is a gracious and judiciall act whereby he judgeth (he should have said a judicious and moral, a physical or metaphysical act of God whereby he judgeth) (first, maketh righteous, and then judgeth them so) the elect being in themselves liable to the accusation and condemnation of the law, to be just and righteous by faith in Jesus Christ through the imputation of his own justice, to the praise of his power, and the eternal salvation of their souls.] Which description of justification is utter∣ly false, and shews how farre he and those from whom he borrowed it are out of the way, and how ignorant they are in fundamentals, even one of the main grounds of their salvation; which description he notwithstanding goes a∣bout to explicate by the causes, as follows; saying, [Now
for the causes of justification, first, they are especially the effi∣cient; secondly, material; thirdly, the formal; fourthly, final.] Why would he have any more then four causes of an effect? I fear in this business he must content himself with fewer for the effecting and producing of the justification at which he aims. [But each of these aforesaid, saith he, must be considered two wayes; first actively, in respect of him that justifies us: and secondly, passively, in respect of the man who is justified: first, the principal cause of our justification actively considered, is God freely purposing to send his Son to be made man, to work righteousness for men.] But God justified men in the Old Testament by the Spirit of his Son, Isa. 50.8. and 5.3, 11. where he cites 1 Pet. 1.10. Gal. 4.4. Then, to wit, in the fulness of time, God sending his Son made of a woman, made under the law; then revealing his Son unto us by the preaching of the Gospel, and perswading us to believe the same, and lay hold on the Son of God by the operation of the blessed Spirit, and then accounting unto us the obedience of his Son for our righteousness.] In all which he is gone out of Gods road, or way of justi∣fication, and from the truth of the Gospel; for though God so sent his Son made of a woman, and made under the law, yet it was not to justifie us by active obedience unto the law, as we have said: [And this he did, saith he, to shew that he is the beginning, the middle, and the end of our justification: and to prove this, the Lord himself saith, Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy trans∣gressions for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins: and the Apostle plainly saith Rom. 8.33. (as he hath it page 77.) It is God that justifies: and the very Pharisees (that rejected Christ most impiously) professed this most truly that none can forgive sins but God onely: And so saith Gregorie, It is meet that he should be the giver of grace that was the author of nature. Greg. in Psal. paeniten. pithily saith, It is his office to absolve the guilty by whose justice he is made guilty.] But who questions any of all this? [Again, the impulsive cause that moved God to do all this for man, we find (saith he) to be two-fold; first, internal; secondly, external: the
first is the meer grace and free mercy of God towards men, and this because he would be merciful to man: Because we can ascribe no other cause of Gods will, which is the cause of all things, to wit, in their first creation, but onely this, quia voluit, because he would; But in acts of providence, espe∣cially in the punishment of sin, there may be an external cause found in the creature; And therefore Saint Paul saith he attributeth our redemption to the riches of his grace, Ephes. 6.7. Rom. 3.24. Titus 3.4, 5. where he saith, that after the kindness and love of God our Saviour towards men ap∣peared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regenera∣tion and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abun∣dantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour. Whereby you see the Apostle maketh the kindness, love and mercy of God to be the efficient, principal cause or motive that moved God to send Christ to be the means of our salvation.] Nor is this denied at any hand; but if the Vindicator had taken in one verse more of Titus 3. he might have easily seen that rege∣neration before described, and justification, is all one work and thing; for it follows there, that being justified by his grace (in the work aforesaid) we might be made heirs according so the hope of eternal life. But he goes on thus; [And Augustine Homil. de Nat. & Gratia saith, that it is the ineffable grace of God that a man guilty of sin (yea, and say we, polluted with sin) should be justified from fin: And especially against the Pelagian heresie, who magnified nature, to villifie and al∣most nullifie grace, he saith, that the grace of God whereby in∣fants and men of years are saved is not procured by deserts, but tendred freely without merits: and so Anselm in Rom. 11. that because all men are shut up under sin, the salvation of men cometh not in or by the merits of men, but in the morcy of God. The second impulsive cause is Christ (saith he) God and man, who purchased by his merits that we should be justi∣fied in the sight of God.] Which thing hath been justly questioned; for God might out of his free mercy and grace justisie us without any such merits; and though the death of Christ wants not its inestimable price and merits, yet
we are not justified in Pauls sense thereby, (and much lesse by his active obedience) but only by his Spirit. But he gives us a reason for what he had said out of Isai. 53.5. [because the chastisement of our offences was laid upon him, and that by his stripes we might be healed.] But here we would aske the Vindicator and his friends these questions; first, whether Isaiah speaks of a chastisement that was past, or yet to come; for certain it is that Christ was a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world Rev. 17.8. Secondly, if it was a preterit suffering, whether it was not Christs inward and voluntary death for us, and in us, when vve first became actual sinners? according to Rom. 5.6. For when we were yet without strength (according to the time) Christ died for the ungodly: and Gal. 3.1. Oh foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Christ hath been evidently set forth crucified in you? Jam. 5.6. Ye have condemned and killed the just one, and he doth not resist you. See Rev. 1.7. and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him; even so, Amen. And if so, what peace was that which was procured for us by that his suffering and death? was it not a time and space of repentance? for otherwise we, as also our first pa∣rents had immediately been sent to hell. Fourthly, what those stripes of Christ are by which we are healed? are they his personal sufferings alone, inward, or outward upon the cross; or are they his like sufferings when we suffer with him or for him, dying unto all sin? See Rom. 6.8. For if we be dead with him we believe that we shall live with him: and chap. 8.13. and if children then heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him that we may be also glorified with him. See 2 Cor. 1.4, 5, 6. 2 Tim. 2.11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3. This condition of conformity to Christs sufferings, whether inward, (of which the Vindi∣cator and his party say nothing) or outward upon the crosse, is not once thought of, though there is no other way left us in Christ to obtain salvation, Mat. 16.24, 25. Pag. 68. he tels us (but falsly) that [the material cause of our justification actually considered is Jesus Christ.]
No, it is the person to be justified. [and the benefits which we have by Christ, saith he, are two especially; First, re∣demption; Secondly, propitiation. [But those two, say we, will prove but one in the end. [First, for redemption, saith he, it is a word borrowed from the use of war (and why not from other civil and judicial acts?) and it sig∣nifies freedom from captivity; And thus Christ is our deliverance, (but how?) First from the wrath of God (see his method,) he sets that in the first place which should come last) because, saith he, he is our reconcilia∣tion] And is not that a propitiation through faith in his blood? Rom. 3.25. which blood, say we, is the promised spirit for, and signified by blood in the old Testament, and not the blood of his crosse, as he and others dream: see Heb. 9.14. and 10.39. and 13.20, 21. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. 1 Joh. 1.7, 9. Rev. 7.14. and 12.11. [Secondly, saith he, we are freed from the tyranny and dominion of sin, because that obeying from the heart the form of doctrine unto which we are delivered, that is, the Gospel of Christ, we are made free from sin, and are become the servants of Christ, which is our righteousnesse. Rom. 6.18.] Is this obedience then our righteousnesse? sure he means nothing lesse, though he speaks truer herein then he is aware of: But he will have Christs external obedience to be our righteousnesse, and none other,. [Thirdly, we are freed, saith he, from the punishment of our sins; because its against justice the pu∣nishment should be inflicted when the sin is pardoned; for, sin being the cause of punishment, it must needs follow that sublatâ causâ (which he elsewhere saith cannot be ta∣ken away in this life) the cause being defaced (or rather removed) the effect should be absolved. But against this he saith it may be objected, [That the sins of the elect are pardoned, and yet they are afflicted continually, and, as the Prophet saith, Psalm 73.13. they are chastised every morning; and therefore how can it be that he should for give the guilt of their sins, and yet, as the Prophet speaks Psalm 99.8. he should punish their inven∣tions? (But there are no sins pardoned, say we, till they be
wholly left.) Unto which said objection he answers [That the miseries of men before the pardon of sin are the pu∣nishments of sin; but the affliction of the Saints after the remission of their sin are not to be reputed penalties of Gods anger, but exercises of his servants, and arguments of his love; for, as many as I love I rebuke and chasten, saith Christ, Rev. 3.19. so also Heb. 12.5. and that for a double end; First, for our salvation, that we should not be condemn∣ed with the world, 1 Cor. 11.30. Secondly and subordi∣nately, for our sanctification, that we may be made parta∣kers of his holinesse.] But what difference is there between Gods holinesse and our positive salvation? is not eternal life a participation in full of Gods holinesse? Psalm 17, 13. I shall be satisfied when I shall awake with thy likenesse. But God punisheth those sins with temporal plagues in his ser∣vants, for their humiliation and amendment, and for a warning unto others, which he pardoneth as to the world to come, 2 Sam. 12.13, 14. and before the pardon of sin men are chastised in love to their souls, as well as after∣wards, Psalm 94.12. Pro. 3.11, 12. and Heb. 12.6, 7. As for Propitiation, he tels us page 68, 69. [that it is a reconci∣ling us to God through the blood (to wit, the blood of his Spirit) and it is, saith he, the accomplishment of that which was signified by the Mercy-seat, Exod. 30.] But the Mer∣cy-seat, or Propitiatorie, did represent Christ in the Spirit; and in his second, or spiritual coming in the power of his resurrection, when the two tables of the Law are written upon our hearts, and the face and aspect of God and the soul looks towards each other, like the two Cherubims, through Christ the everlasting propitiation and Priest. And that which the Vindicator speaks there confirms it: for first, as God gave his oracles unto the Prophets, (he should have said unto the Priests also) out of the Mercy-seat; so he did, yea doth, reveal his will unto us (his Priests and Mini∣sters) by Jesus Christ, not without us only, but especially within us, 1 Joh. 2.27. Joh. 1.17. Secondly, as God was said to dwell between the Cherubims, which covered the Mercy-seat; so in Christ the fulnesse of the Godhead dwelleth
bodily, or really, Coloss. 2.9. And thereby as God was made propitious and favourable unto his people to assist and bless them, by the blood which the High-Priest sprinkled before the Mercy-seat; so, saith he, he is pacified and reconciled unto us, and procured to inrich us with spiritual blessings through the blood of Jesus Christ, Coloss. 1.18.] Which is true of both bloods, that of his Spirit, and that of his cross; yea of the blood of sin also, which we must shed in confor∣mity to the death and bloodshed of Christ: But this last parallel is not apt but forced. Again he saith [the grounds of those benefits, or the meritorious cause thereof is the most absolute and perfect obedience which our Saviour Christ performed unto his Father for our sakes, and is to be considered, first actively, then passively: first the active obedience of Christ is a most perfect performance of Gods Law, even to the utmost tittle thereof; touching which we must consider-first, that although Christ as man fulfilled the Law for himself, that in both natures he might be an holy High Priest to offer sacrifice unto God; yet as mediator, as God and man, he became subject to the Law, and did fully and perfectly execute the same for us.] But how doth he prove that? for Christ, saith he, is not only our redempti∣on by that ransome which he paid for our sins, but he is also the perfection of the Law unto salvation (most true, but not in his sense) unto every one that believeth. And there he three things, saith he, that prove the necessity thereof to be performed for us: (what are they?) first, the justice of God that will not justifie the wicked (to wit, while they remain such in deed and will, Prov. 17.15.) but such as are just and righteous, either by a proper, or imputed righteousnesse; (yet he justifieth the ungodly that turn from their ungodlinesse, and that both by a proper and an im∣puted righteousnesse (as we have shewed:) Secondly, by the office of a mediator that was to undergo for us (or ra∣ther to do for us) whatsoever was required of us to be done] But may not this be done as well within us by Christs grace and cooperation for us? yea vvith much more piety and justice; every man being created to a per∣sonal
obedience tovvards God and his Lavv. [Thirdly,  a recuperation or recovery of happiness, vvhich could not be attained without perfect righteousnesse; because the death of Christ (as he saith) freeth us from erernal death (to wit, when we are dead with him unto sin) and the obe∣dience of Christ (that within us only) brings us to eter∣nal or everlasting life.] All which you must take upon his word and credit, for he knows not how to prove it. [And therefore we say, (quoth he) that Christ was born for us, not only auferre peccata, to take away the sins of the world (to wit by sanctification) by his voluntary suffe∣ring of the most bitter death of the cross, (but that only takes away the guilt, and shews us how in order thereunto we should sacrifice, flay, and consume all our sins,) but ad∣ferre justitiam, to bring righteousnesse unto us (but how?) by his plenary obedience (within us, not without us) to the most holy Law of God.] Which is yet unproved [And therefore those Scriptures (saith he) that do ascribe our falvation unto Christs death (which none do) are not to be taken exclusively, or as denying the active obedience of Christ to be imputed unto us, but Synecdochically, for the accomplishment of the whole obedience of Christ that was to be performed for us:] But none such was to be perfor∣med for us, or upon our score, as we have often affirmed; nor can the contrary be proved out of the holy Scriptures. [And with this affirmation of his (saith he) agree the main and major part, (for his tooth and dyet, as aforesaid) of all orthodox (he should have said heterodox) Divines, and most of the Fathers] To wit, since Calvins days. [Secondly, saith he, the passive obedience of Christ is all the suf∣ferings of Christ both in life and death for our sins.] (Yes, and much more also in our inward man for us, while we went on in our rebellion against God (of which he never thinks) because the justice of God required that we should never be freed from death without a just punishment (in Christ like death also) laid upon our selves, or on some o∣ther for us: (both which we grant.) And therefore, saith he, the prophet Isaiah prophesied that the Messiah should be
wounded, (yea had been so, as we said before) for your traus∣gressions, and bruised for our iniquities, chap. 53.5. And Daniel saith, that he should be cut off, but not for himselfe Daniel 9.26. and St. Peter saith, should hear our sins in his our body on the cross (but for what end?) that we being dead unto sin should live unto righteousnesse: and then it follows, by whose stripes (or fellow-sufferings) ye are healed, 1 Pet. 2.14. and St. John saith, Rev. 1.15. that he washed us (him and his fellow-Apostles and Saints who were throughly clensed from sin) in his own blood, or Spirit, Rev. 1.5. And here we must observe (saith he) that this obedience of Christ is of sufficient merit to satisfie for all sins (and for those that were repented of and left more especially,) by reason of the dignity of the person that did obey (or suffer,) for the hypostatical union of the Manhood of Christ with the Godhead makes the obedience of Christ to be of in∣estimable value or price, Act. 20.18.] True; but that Te speaks of the blood of Christs Spirit; for with that also is the Church of God purchased or redeemed from among men, Rev. 14.3, 4. Thirdly, the formall cause (saith he) of our justification actively considered is a free imputation of Christs actual righteousnesse (we say the inhesive) whereby the merit of Christs obedience is applied unto all beleevers, that is, the accounting of us just and righteous for the merits of that obedience which Christ effected for us, saith he, pag. 71.] But this is more formally then truly spo∣ken; [for as we, saith he, apply unto our selves the righ∣teousnesse of Christ, and make the same our own by faith and acceptation (he should have said by meer imagination) so God himselfe (saith he) applieth it unto us by impu∣tation (according to his putation) and accepts us for righ∣reous for the righteousnesse of Christ; (which we have not:) and this imputation of righteousnesse (saith he) is a work of grace [which God never spake or thought of] not of nature; a communicating of another righteousnesse; and not a conferring of any real (therein saith he truly) or habi∣tual righteousness upon us.] But without such a real or ha∣bitual
one righteousness shall no man that hath polluted himself be justified, or saved:] And this is a sweet exchange (saith Justine Martyr) (if he belie him not, or mistake not his sense) in Epist. ad Diog. that one should be sin for many, and that the iniquity of many should be covered] yea, blotted out, say we, with the righteousness of one, to wit his internal righteousness] or that the justice (or kind∣ness of one) should make many that are and were injust to be reputed, yea to be, just: to omit, that most of the Fathers (which he had read) speak to this purpose, Frier Tarrus saith in serm. de Dom. Advent. Christ hath made all partakers of his justice and merits, (so say we) that they might be able to stand in his sight, and sustain the judo∣ment of God: see 1 John 4.17, 18. often before alledged by us. [Because, saith he, there is no mortal man living whose righteousness, (to wit his own) can be sufficient to obtain eternal salvation.] But if the Frier meant it as the Vindicator doth, we hope the Vindicator will turn Frier also. [But (saith the Vindicator) Christs righ∣teousness is made ours, not because it is infused or tran∣slated into us,] Oh take heed of that, for it would drive out sin too soon, to abide habitually in us; [but because it is imputed and reputed unto us] rather by him and his party, then God [as if it were theirs (when it is not) whom God doth acquit from sin, and actually count just for the justice of Jesus Christ. And therefore the force of our justi∣fication (however I easily beleeve it) is not any habitual sanctity subjectively remaining in us, but the righteousness of Christ (of which in his sense there is no mention in the Scriptures) freely imputed unto us, and so though it be without us, (and they without it) yet it is made ours by right of giving. (if he knew by whose gift.) The Apostle (saith he) remarkably in Rom. 4.6, 7. joyneth both the imputation of righteousness and the remission of sins toge∣ther, as the two special means to make us happy;] And so do we, but not in his way, which will never make any happy. [Blessed is the man to whom God imputeth righteousness without works, (to wit, his own works, before, and without grace.)
And blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin, (but purge it away by his grace and Spirit.) [But this righ∣teousness of Christ thus imputed to us, saith he page 72 must be considered in a three-fold respect: first in respect of the truth of our imputed righteousness,] which is wholly a fancy:) and so we say, that we are as truly righteous be∣fore God as Christ himself. [Beware of blasphemy whorson Phanatick;] because we are righteous with the same righte∣ousness with which he is righteous. (The clean contrary way.) Secondly, in respect of the quantity: But so we deny that it is in the same measure (he might truly have said, in any measure) for in him it is in its fulness, and in its largest measure; but in us it is onely received so far forth as it serveth to justifie any particular believer (he should have said dreamer, that is not at all.) Thirdly, in respect of the quality: And so we say that this is not in the same manner in us as it is in him, (which is true enough) for he is righte∣ous actually, we imputatively (or passively rather;) he sub∣jectively, we relatively in him, and by him,] that is, not at all but by meer relation, or tradition, and our fond credulity. [And so, saith he, in these two last respects we cannot be said to be equally righteous with Christ (no nor with the least real Christian who seeks the true righteousness by Christ) though we be righteous with the very righteous∣ness of Christ, (to wit, as Laodicea was, Rev. 3.17, 18.) he perfectly righteous, we righteous by reason of our im∣putation, and inchoative righteousness.] Which last, if he have any, is the best string for his bow, by reason the other is a broken one. [Again, saith he, Christ is called holy, and sin, and yet is said to know no sin, and to be made sin: so likewise are we said to be just, and sinful; just in him (or rather just out) by the imputation and application of his justice (without any conversion from sin;) and sinful in our selves by the inbred corruptions of our own flesh, which is brought in by our personal fall, as we said be∣fore. Lastly, the final cause of our justification actively con∣sidered is the glory of God, which he acquired unto himself
by the wonderful mixture of his justice and mercy towards men; justice, and mercy also, that he would have his own Son die to make satisfaction for our sins (yea suffered to procure us some respite of repentance and returning, as said before) rather then our sins should esape unpunish∣ed, or we forthwith perish eternally, and mercy, that he would have the righteousness of his Son be im∣puted (no, derived) unto his servants, rather then we poor sinners should perish for or in our sins.] But if he have no better skill in compounding his own medicines then he hath made here in this jumble of justice and mercy, he is a Physician of no value. [And thus much, saith he page 73. of the causes of justification actively considered in respect of God: now in the second place we must consider the causes of our justification passively, in respect of man; and first, the efficient cause passively considered is wholly in∣strumental; and it is two-fold; external, which is the preaching of the word, and the administration of the Sa∣craments; these are the chief outward instruments which God useth for the application of Chrsts (supposed) righ∣teousness for the (imagined) justification of his servants; and therefore the Gospel is called the word of life, Acts 5.15, 16. and the ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. and the Sacraments are called the seal of the righteousness of faith; and our Saviour saith of the preachers of the Gos∣pel, whose sins ye remit (or put away) they are remitted.] But are the word and Sacraments passive or active instru∣ments? doth not the Apostle say that the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth? Rom. 1.16. Is the man infatuated? Secondly, the internal instrument whereby we appre∣hend (he should say seek) the grace of justification is onely faith in Jesus Christ.] But that is false; for by prayer also we both seek and comprehend the same: [But Christ is set forth, saith he, to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood, Rom. 3.15. John 1.12. (which place he wrests from its na∣tive sense) Gal. 3.24. and therefore the righteousness of Christ (but not in his sense) is called the righteousness of
faith; and we are said to receive Christ by faith, and to re∣ceive the promise of the Spirit (which is the purging blood of Christ) by faith. [Secondly, saith he, faith is the onely instrument] he should have said the main, yet no passive instrument, as he would have it [whereby we are justified before God. The Scriptures, saith he, are plain and plen∣tiful in this point; Is. 45.21, 25. Ezek. 20.44. Hab. 2.4. Rom. 3.24, 26. Gal. 1.8. Acts 13.39.] But the first of these, if rightly looked into, cuts the throat of justification; for righteousness and strength are joyned together, which must intimate the inward and powerful righteousness of God, and this it justifies the man; Is. 45.24, 25. where the words runne thus; Surely, shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, even unto him shall men come; and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed; in the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, (or made just,) and shall glory. Yea, that place in Hab. 2.4. shews, that he whose soul is lifted up (with any knowledge, or hope of a false righteousness) is not upright in him; but the just (who is such by any measure of inherent righteousness) shall live (the full life of righteousness) by faith. As for Acts 13.39, 40. we have spoken of that already. [And so, saith he, doth the Apostle in many other places inculcate the same truth, as Gal. 4.5, 24. and our Saviour saith, Joh. 3.14, 15.] What doth he say there? (for the Vindicator cites no words) namely thus much; [that as Moses lifted up the ser∣pent in the wilderness, that Israel reflecting upon their ser∣pentine sins and rebellion, might repent and not die; even so must the son of man (as crucified both in us, and for us, Gal. 3.1.) be lifted up (and set forth before us) that who∣soever believeth on him (as a pattern herein as well as a re∣conciler, & through faith follows him unto the like death) should not perish, but have eternal life, that is, saith he, (by his false gloss,) be justified, and so be saved onely by be∣lieving in him.] A short and easie way to be saved, if it were true; as those Israelites that were bitten by the fiery serpents, Num. 21.9. were healed and saved alone by looking up to the brazen serpent. [The Fathers also, saith he, are
plain and pregnant herein (of whom more anon) Chrysost. in Rom. cap. 3. idem Serm. de fide & lum. nat. God hath justi∣fied us, using thereto no works of ours, (such as we work of our selves) but onely requiring faith in Christ: (so say we al∣so) and without faith no man obtaineth life: But I am able to shew, saith he, page 74. that a faithful man hath lived and obtained the kingdome of heaven without works.] Do it then, and give Saint James the lie, who saith chap. 2.14. What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man saith that he hath faith, and have no works, can that faith save him? [So the thief, saith he, did onely believe, and was justified.] But was not his reproving of his fellow-thief the condemnation of himself and his partner in those e∣vils, and the accepting of his punishment, the justifying of Gods justice, and the clearing of Christ as innocent, the owning of him for his Lord, and his prayer for mercy, besides all his former repentance? which, as we have shew∣ed, was both possible and probable; was all this we say as no workes and fruits of his faith? we may justly question whether the Vindicator hath ever shewed such fruits of his repentance, and evidences of a true faith: howbeit you see he makes much of this thief, alledging him again and a∣gain, as if he would fulfil the proverb, Similis simili, &c. And-Basil, quoth he, de humilitate saith; This is to glory in the Lord, when a man doth not boast of his own righteousness; but acknowledgeth himself destitute of righteousness, and justi∣fied onely by the faith of Jesus Christ.] Who doth not so? yet do we not relie upon a false and meer imagined righte∣ousness in Christ, as the Vindicator doth. [Thirdly, the material cause of our justification passively considered, saith he, or the persons to whom justification belongs (these are rather subjects and objects, then a material cause) are those sheep of Christ that are known of him (of whom no doubt a great part are fully justified already) and he known to them; that hear his voice, and follow him, whom he predestinated to life, and elected before the foundation of the world, Rom. 8.30. Moreover, whom he did prodestinate, them he also called, and whom he called those he justified (in a sanctifying way)
and whom he justified he glorified. And Rodolph, saith he, in Levit lib. 17. cap. 2. That the blood of the High Priest (was the High. priest wont to be slain then?) was the expiation of the sin of all believers; and so Christ hath taken away not onely the original sin, but also all actual sins, in respect of the guilt, punishment, and dominion of sin; but not in respect of the corruption and pollution of sin, which still remaineth in the best Saints.] But this Rodolphus is not a good Agricola; for so Christ, who came to perfect or present his Church holy and without blemish before God, should have the worst thing and that which of all other is most hateful to God, namely the pollution of sin to be left behind; which to say is blasphemy against him. [And besides this, saith he out of Haymo in Rom. 5. He hath gi∣ven unto them everlasting life, (and to none other doth justification belong, saith he) and the reasons may be these; All those that be justified (in full) shall be glori∣fied; for whom he justified them he glorified, Rom. 8.30. But all men shall not be glorified, because the kingdome of heaven shall be given but onely unto them for whom it is pre∣pared, Matth. 20.23. Secondly, (but that Text speaketh of sitting at Christs right hand or left) Christ is called Jesus, for that he should save his people from their sins (that is, none at all fully, according to his doctrine) Matth. 1.21. But though all men are his people jure creationis, saith he, that is, by right of creation, yet all men are not his people jure donationis, given him to be redeemed (from their sins and corruptions) for of them thou gavest me I have lost none, (yes, the Son of perdition, John 17.12.) And ye believe not, faith Christ, because ye are not of my sheep, Joh. 10.26. there∣fore he shall not justifie all men thereby to save them from their sins.] But whose fault is that? Christs or theirs? for he invites all that are weary and heavy laden to come unto him, Matth. 11.28, 29. and Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the bride say Come, and let him that heareth say Come; and whosoever will let him take of the waters of life freely. Yea, though no man can come unto Christ unless the Father which sent me draw him, and those he will raise up at the last day, John 6.44. yet who is it that the Father doth not draw; first to himself if
he will come, and after to his Son, to be justified and saved by him? Hosea 11.3, 4. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their armes, but they knew not that I healed them; I drew them with the cords of a man, even with the bonds of love, and I was to them as they that tooke off the yoke, and I laid meat before them. See Job 33.29, 30. so all these things worketh God oftentimes with man, to bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightned with the light of the living: and chap. 36.10, 11. He openeth also their ear to discipline, and commandeth that they return from iniquity; if they obey and serve him they shall spend their dayes in prosperity, and their years in pleasure: but if they obey not, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge. And Christ, who tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. saith of the Jews (and might do it of others also whom he and his Father draweth) John 9.40. and ye will not come unto me that ye may have life: but men are in a spe∣cial manner given unto Christ by the Father, when they are first converted by him, and after brought to believe on the Son for salvation from all their spiritual enemies, John 6.37, 46. Thirdly, the formal cause of our justification passively considered, saith he page 75. is the particular application of the righteousness of Christ (which in his sense is mon∣strum informe) unto every saithful soul.] But is this appli∣cation an act or passion? [wherein two things are to be con∣sidered, saith he; first, that faith must apply unto us all the benefits that Christ hath effected for us.] Is the work done to our hands? is he to effect nothing in us for our justi∣fication? [Secondly, that every man in particular must ap∣ply these things unto himself; (if he desires to be deluded as he is:) for the first, saith he, this is one of the manifest differences betwixt the faith of Gods elect (of which he knows little or nothing) and the faith of Devils and wick∣ed men; that the godly do apply unto themselves all the benefits of Christ,] Or rather do apply themselves to the seeking of the same according to the promises. [and the other know them, but have not true grace to apply them.] But what are they, wise men or fools, that believe every
vain word and doctrine of men which hath no ground in the Scripture? Prov. 14.15. The simple believeth every word, but the prudent take heed to their going; [for so saith Au∣gustine, saith he, and Peter Lumbard lib. 3. Senten. distnct. 23. That there is a great difference between him that doth be∣lieve Christ, and him that doth believe in Christ; for the Devils believe Jesus to be Christ, but they believe not in Christ.] And may not some believe amils in Christ, as he doth? [Because, saith he, it is one thing to believe God, another thing to believe there is a God, and another thing to believe in God.] (yea, and another thing to believe lies.) To believe God, as he saith, is to believe that he speaks the truth in the Scriptures; and to believe God is to believe a God is: But to believe in God is to believe with love, and loving him to go unto him, and to cleave unto him, to be made one with him, to dwel in him, and have him dwel in us.] Whence it will follow that the Vin∣dicator never yet believed rightly in God. [And this is that faith by which a sinful man is instrumentally justified (in Gods way, and not his) and is both found and account∣ed righteous in Gods sight.] And hath not the faith of the Devil, the father of lies, the contrary effect hereunto. [For the second, saith he, we must understand that this applica∣of faith, or of Christ through faith, must be particularly applied (what must the application be applied?) by every man unto himself (if he desires to be led hood-winked by the nose) and that in a most special manner (even he) Because a general faith (no nor a phanatick faith, such as his is) is not thought justifying faith; for Paul testifieth that Agrippa did believe the Prophets, Acts 26.17, 18. and yet A∣grippa confesseth he was no Christian] And herein he was the honester man, then in words to confess him, and inworks to deny him as some Vindicators do. [And a natural man, saith he, by the force of Reason may be reduced to believe and acknowledge a God, and that this God is powerful, just, and true; and therefore brought to a general perswa∣sion of the truth of things to be believed, and yet all this faith (no nor his own to boot) is not sufficient to justifie
us, because true justifying faith is no natural quality (nor phanatical notion) but a supernatural gift of God, as the Apostle teacheth, Ephes. 2.8. Phil. 1.29. howbeit it were no hard thing to prove that some of the heathen understood Gods work of justification better then the Vindicator; witness that of Catullus the poet: Omnia fanda, nefanda, malo permista furore, Justificam nobis mentem avertêre Deorum. Things good and bad, mixt with a fury blind, Have turn'd away Gods just just making-mind. [or justi∣fying mind.] And therefore the general faith of the Scriptures, saith the Vindicator, is not sufficient to make us Christians; but as we read, the Saints of God do apply the promises of sal∣vation unto themselves (or rather themselves unto the pro∣mises) to seek them in a right way, as David saith, to wit, a∣mong experimental deliverances, God is my rock and my re∣deemer: and Job 19.25. I know that my redeemer liveth: and Mary (after that Christ was formed in her) my soul re∣joyceth in God my Saviour, Luk. 1.47. and Thomas saith, my Lord and my God, Joh. 21. and Paul, Gal. 2.20. who loved me, and gave himself for me.] But what promises be or are contained in these Texts? [so must, saith he, every Chri∣stian that looks for salvation apply (we say lay hold of in particular) the grace and favour of God unto himself; and his faith instrumentally justifies (or may be a help unto him) the sinner.] what without seeking of justifying and cleansing grace? [Lastly, the final cause of our justification passively considered (or the effect of it rather) is peace of conscience in this life, and the atonement (a new expressi∣on, but let it pass) of eternal happiness in the life to come: the first whereof, saith he, is attained by two special things; first, by an assured perswasion that all our sins are forgiven:] (But may not some have a false perswasion in this kind?) [so being justified by faith (that is, in a sanctifying and a pur∣gative way) from all our sins which we have committed,
we have peace towards God through Jesus Christ] for o∣otherwise, namely in his Son, our justification is but a dream. [Secondly, saith he, by an unwearied study to strive a∣gainst the stream (which in his sense of impossibility is truly and properly spoken) of our own natural corrupti∣on,] and why not against all temptations also? [and to keep a constant course (which he denyed heretofore to be pos∣sible) in the ways of godlinesse; for Christ, saith he, gave himself for us to die for us, (and not by his Spirit to redeeme us from all iniquity) and did bear our sins on his bo∣dy upon the tree;] But for what end? [that we being dead unto sin should live unto righteousnesse, 1 Pet. 2.24. or as Zachary saith, Luk. 1.74, 75. And so St. Augustine saith that Christ died for the wicked, not that they should remain wicked, but that they being justified through faith should be converted from their wickednesse, and bring forth the fruits of holinesse; because (as St. Augustine saith also) grace justifieth that we should live just∣ly.] But here the Vindicator is so blind that he brings Au∣gustine against himselfe; for he takes the word justificati∣on, as we do, for purging away of sin, and making of man just, holy, and good, by way of sanctification, which is an usual acception of the word among the Fathers. [The se∣cond end of our justification, saith he, is the eternal bles∣sednesse which shall be attained hereafter when Christ shall say unto all his justified Saints (made just and merci∣ful by his sanctifying spirit) Come ye blessed of my Father, &c. Mat. 25.34. And so much, saith he, for all the causes of our, justification actively and passively considered.] Wherein he hath given us non causas & mutilas pro veris, false causes for true, especially instead of the formall and material causes, not much unsuitable to his deceitful justification; but the efficient and final causes are for the most part applicable to the true work of justication. [And this, saith he, I hope may suffice] but it must be among such as are blind, or are willing to be deluded [for the proof of the truth of this last branch of the second position, that we are only justified by the righteousnesse of Jesus Christ. Which point being right∣ly understood hath been and shall be better confirmed by
us. I shall end, saith he, with that of our Saviour, Joh. 12.48. The word which I have spoken shall judge you in the last day.] Yea, and judgeth and convinceth the Vindicator al∣ready to be a blind guide, a stranger to the faith of Gods e∣lect, and no other Apostle then a veterator, or impostor, as we shall in our catasceuastical or affirmative part of our discourse more fully manifest. [But he concludes with his form of prayer, I pray God to enable us all to hold the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, and that we may re∣nounce all those doctrines that set up any thing of man] And much more, say we, do tend to the setting up of Satan or his kingdom [to the abasing of Christ [and that we em∣brace those doctrines which abase man,] and much more whatsoever is of the devil [and which exalt the Lord, ac∣cording to that of the Psalmist, Not unto us, O Lord, not un∣to us] and much lesse unto the Devil [but unto thy name, and unto that only give the glory, Psalm 15.] Unto all which we say (and that not formally, but cordially) Amen. You see the Vindicator hath closed (like a Saint of the Pharisaicall sect) with a prayer even as specious in words of Scripture-phrase, as his Preface was to his belo∣ved friends placed in the front of his Vindication; but when his prayer is explained to you in reference to his position, That sinne will remain in the best of Saints as long as they live, then it will appear to have the same scope and end to his said position as we have declared his Preface had. For whom can he mean and include in the relative word us, when he saith, I pray God enable us, but the Levites his friends, and other his allies with himselfe? For be it known to all men by these presents, that we disown his Tenents, and resolve to speak against them, dum maneat Lachesi quod torqueat, to speak until we lack breath, if we have opportunity. Secondly, if to hold the unity of the Spirit be intended in reference to his position, then these words must signifie to hold the onenesse of the wicked spirit; for all sin is of the Devil, 1 Joh. 3.9. therefore to pray (in
reference aforesaid) to hold the unity of the Spirit, is to pray to hold the onenesse of the wicked spirit in upholding and maintaining with one affection, that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live. Thirdly, to hold it in the bond of peace is to pray (in reference to the foresaid position) that in the onenesse of af∣fection to the wicked spirit, that he and his friends may in all tyes, bonds, obligations of a quiet and peaceable agreement be bound together to maintain, that sin will re∣main in the best of Saints as long as they live; and not to di∣sturb one another, as those foresaid false Prophets do disturb them who deny their position. Yea, the Vindicator prayeth (as ignorantly as he can, if he maintain his position) that he and his friends may renounce all the doctrine that sets up any thing of man, to the abasing of Christ; for if he intend that clause of his pe∣titionary note in reference to our doctrine of a possibili∣ty of a total mortification of sinne in this life, then his prayer is, that nothing of man, that is of us, (in contradistin∣ction to himselfe and his friends) may be set up to the mor∣tifying of all sin, and so to abase Christ by a total mortifica∣tion of sin, (if he mean to prefer his own petition before our doctrine) tendeth (absit blasphemia dicto) to the abasing of Christ. But if he iutend to maintain to the end (as he begun) that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live, then the said clause of his vote and prayer is a contradicti∣on to himself and his position; for doth any doctrine set up any thing of man, but that Doctrine which maintaineth the necessary continuance of sin in this life? for only sinne, and allsin, is of the Devill and man, Joh. 3.9. Rom. 5.12. by one man sinne came into the world: and 2 Thess. 2.3. the devil or wicked one (what ever men dream to the contrary) is called the man of sin: therefore for the Vindicator to pray that no doctrine be owned, but renounced, that sets up any thing of man, is to pray against his own position, that sin will remain in the best Saints as long as they live; because only sinne, and all sinne, is from man, as aforesaid. And
is there any thing which abaseth Christ but sins conti∣nuance? when as the Lord complaineth, thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, and wearied me with thine iniquities, Isai. 43.24. Hence also upon the same account that the doctrine of sins remaining, is the setting up of man, and aba∣sing of Christ, we say: here also the clause of his pray∣er, which is expressed in these words, And that we em∣brace those doctrines that abase man, and exalt the Lord, is a prayer for the embracing our doctrines because a total mortification of sin in this life is it which exalteth Christ in his holinesse, will, and power, to destroy all sin, ac∣cording to that, James 4.5, 6. for the Lord offereth more grace, that is, to overcome it: See Phil. 4.13. Joh. 1.16. who came to redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie unto himselfe a peculiar people zealous of good works. Titus 2.14. that the Lord may be exalted alone in that day, Isai. 2.17. Not unto us, Lord, Psal. 115.19. (in a better sense then the Vindicator doth apply those words in reference to his prayer relating to his position;) but unto thy name be the glory, who hast in some measure made known to us, and made us to believe the true doctrine which abases man, and exalts Christ; which doctrine is a possibility of a to∣tal mortification of sin in this world. Thus we have traced the Vindicator  from the first to the last of his Vindication; wherein the un∣biassed Reader may easily comprehend what nonsense, tacit contradictions (besides open ones) this Vindicator is guil∣ty of in this his Vindication; so that he hath first and last verified therein another apt Anagram of his name, In no end right. Our Gusmond hath spit folly with despite; But marvel not, for He's in no end right, The finis rei (by his confession,) Of his positions is transgression. Will you his friends elect this sinful wight To be your Pilot, who's in no end right? Can he direct your souls unto heavens blisse,
Who at both ends doth steer amisse? You Levites in his Preface cal'd to fight With us forbear, for he's in no end right. His Jus and Saints mentioned in his letters, Are mongrels compared with their betters: For he cannot on best Saints temper light, It to define, who is in no end right. Disown him then who hath no morning light; Detest this vagrant, who's in no end right. Having demonstrated the Anasceuastick or confutative part of our revindication, and observed the Vindicators ends what they are: we proceed to the Catasceuastick or confir∣mative part thereof, in two axioms or assertions contrary to the Vindicators positions. First, we affirm that there is a possibility (through the grace and help of Christ) of a total mortification of sin in this life. Secondly, that there is a possibility of perfect obedience (through the grace and help of Christ) to the Law of God in this life. It is true, that if these two assertions be not coincident, yet they consequently follow each other, so that to prove one of them is to confirm the other; for if sin by the grace of Christ be rooted out in this life, what hinders but the Law of God may be here (by the same grace) fulfilled? yea to be so fulfilled; as to be justified thereby, and that through Christ of grace given? and if the Law of God may be so far fulfilled here through the grace of Christ, as not tooffend against the same, then doubtlesse all sins may be rooted out here by the same grace: yet we shal confirm each of them apart with their respective branches, both by di∣vine and humane authority, so fully and clearly, that scarce any Article of the Christian faith shall have more evidence of truth and piety to plead for it, then our positions shall produce for themselves. And first, for the former of them, That all sin and corruption may be and ought to be in this life by the grace and help of Christ purged and rooted out
of the Saints; which we shall evince by many Topick places: And first, from Gods expresse commandements, which if they were not possible by grace to be performed were not only unjust and unlawful, but would be frustra∣ted of their end, which is observance, and accomplishment; and the Author of them would be argued of the want of wisedome or equity, and of tyranny and cruelty. Of which sort are these among many other. Job. 11.14, 15. If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickednesse dwel in thy Tabernacle; for then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot, yea thou shalt be stedfast and not fear, Psal. 4.4. Stand in aw and sin not. Isal. 1.16. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before me, cease to do evil: and 55.11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the midst of her, be ye elean that bear the vessels of the Lord. Jeremiah 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickednesse, that thou mayst be saved, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodg within thee? Acts 22.16. And now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins by calling upon the name of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5.7. Purge out therefore the old leaven that ye may be a new Lamp. Ephes. 4.20, 21, 22. But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be ye have heard him, and been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus Christ, that ye put off as concern∣ing the former conversation the old man which is corrupting through the lusts of error (or deceit.) Coloss. 3.5. Mortifie therefore your members which are upon earth, fornication, uncleannesse, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousnesse which is idolatry; for which things sake the wrath of God cometh upon the children of disobedience. 1 Thess. 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil. Heb. 10.21, 22. Having a High Priest over the house
of God, let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil consci∣ence, and our bodies washed with clean water. Jam. 1.21. Wherefore lay apart all filthinesse and su∣perfluity of naughtinesse: and 4.8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you; clense your hands ye sin∣ners, and purifie your hearts ye double-minded. 1 Pet. 2.1. Wherefore laying aside all malice, and guile, and hypocrisie, and envyings, and evil speakings, as new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow thereby. vers. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul: and 4.1, 2. Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, so arm your selves with the same mind, for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin. The second Topick is from the promises, wherein suffi∣cient grace is promised for the effecting that which is so often, so clearly and fully required. Isai. 1.25. And I will turn mine hand upon thee, and purely take away thy dross, and purge away all thy tinne: and 11.14. But with righteousnesse shall he judge the poor, and with equity shall he reprove for the meek of the earth, and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breach of his lips shall he slay the wicked: and 25.7. And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations: and 43.25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remem∣ber thy sins: and 61.1, 2, 3. The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek, he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bonnd. Jere. 33.8. And I will clense them from all their iniquities where∣by they have sinned against me: and 50.20. In those dayes, and at that time, saith the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none. Ezek.
36.25. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and from all your filthiness and from all your abominations will I cleanse you. Amos 9.8. Behold, the eyes of the Lord are upon the kingdome of sin, (for so it is in the Hebrew) and I will destroy it from the face of the earth. Micah 7.14. He will turn again, he will have com∣passion upon us who will subdue our iniquities: And thou will cast all their sins into the depth of the sea; the Lord will subdue them as he did the Canaanites, and all other the enemies of David in his dayes; so that there was nei∣ther adversary nor evill occurrent left in his son Solo∣mon's entrance upon the kingdome, 1 Kings 5.4. And will drown them as he did Pharaoh and his host, of which not one escaped. Zephan. 3.13. The remnant of Israel shall not do ini∣quity, nor speak lies. Zacha. 13.1, 2. In that day there shall be a fountain o∣pened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness. Malachi 3.2, 3. But who may abide in the day of his coming? (to wit in the Spirit:) and who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is as the refiners fire, and as the ful∣lers sope: And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, and he shall purifie the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an of∣fering in righteousness: and chap. 4.2, 3. But unto you that fear my name shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing under his wings, and ye shall go up and grow as calves of the stall: And ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I shall do this for you saith the Lord. Matth. 1.21. And thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins: and 3.11, 12. I in∣deed baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that cometh after me is mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire: Whose fan is in his hand, and he will
throughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his garner, but he will burn up the chaffe with unquenchable fire. Luk. 1.70, 71, 74. As he spake by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have been since the world began; That we should be saved from all our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us. Rom. 6.14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the law, but under grace: and 11.26. There shall come out of Sion the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. 1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful to for∣give us, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: and chap. 2.1, 2. My little children, these things I write unto you, that ye sin not; but if any man sin we have a com∣forter with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins (by way of propitiation and purgation of them) and not for ours onely, but for the sins of the whole world. A third Tropick is this, That our subduing, overcoming, and rooting out of sin is made the condition of manifold spiritual and heavenly promises, which would be frustra∣neous and void, if the condition were not feasible by grace: And such conditional but performable promises are these. Psal. 24.3, 4, 5. Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his holy place? he that hath clean hands and a pure heart; who hath not lift his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully, he shall receive the blessing from the Lord, even righteousness from the God of his salvation. Prov. 28.13. He that confesseth and forsaketh his sins shall obtain mercy. Isaiah 1.16, 17, 18. Wash ye, make ye clean, take a∣way the evill of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, &c. Come now and let us reason together, saith the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet they shall be white as snow, though they be red as crimson they shall be as wool. Jer. 4.14. Wash thine heart O Jerusalem, that thou
mayest be saved. And Matth. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Matth. 16.24, 25. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me: for whosoever will save his life (of sin) shall lose it, and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake shall find it. Chap. 24.13. But whosoever shall endure to the end (of his race and mortification) the same shall be saved. Rom. 6.5. For if we be planted in him into the likeness of his death, we shall be also into the likeness of his resurrection. vers. 8. For if we be dead with him (unto the sin) we believe that we shall also live with him. Rom. 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye shall mortifie the deeds of the body by the Spirit ye shall live. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Wherefore, come out from among them, and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shal be my sons and my daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. 7.1. Wherefore, dearly beloved, having these promises let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and Spirit, perfecting holi∣ness in the fear of God. Hebr. 3.6. But Christ as a Son over his own house, whose house are we if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoycing of the hope firm unto the end, (to wit, the end of sin, as before) vers. 14. for we are made pertakers of Christ in the Spirit after the likeness of his resurrection. Rom. 6.5. If we hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end. Rev. 2.7. To him that overcometh (all sins, tempta∣tions, and spiritual enemies) will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God. vers. 11. He that overcometh (sin, which is the first spi∣ritual death, Rom. 7.24.) he shall not be hurt of the second death, which lay lurking and hid therein. vers. 17. To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna; and I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he which receiveth it: vers. 26, 27, 28. And he that over∣cometh
and keepeth my words unto the end (aforesaid) to him will I give power over the nations (to wit, all the powers and faculties of the outward man, or the natural being) and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessel of a potter they shall be broken in shivers (if through any new temptation they shall offer to rebel Rev. 9.27.) even as I received of my Father; and I will give him the morning-starre: and Rev. 3.5. He that overcometh shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father and before his Angels: vers. 12. him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the house of my God, and he shall go no more out: And I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem that cometh down out of heaven from my God, and I will write upon him my new name: vers. 21, 22. to him that overcometh will I give to set with me upon my throne, even as I overcame and am set down with my Father upon his throne. Let him that hath an ear hear what the Spirit saith unto the Church (which condition we had six times before in the former and this present chapter.) The fourth Topick shall be the end for which Christ was given by the Father, and for which he gave himself for us, which on his part cannot be disappointed, cannot be fru∣strate, if we be not wanting to our selves. Isa. 42.6, 7. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and will give thee for a covenant to the people, for a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring the prisoners out of prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison-house. So again, Isaiah 49.8, 9. Isai. 61.1, 2, 3. as before; The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek, he hath sent me to bind up the broken-hearted (who are troubled about the remaining and prevalence of their sins and spiritual enemies) to pro∣claim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the pri∣son
to those that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, (against his and our spiritual enemies) to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto them that mourn in Sion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oyl of joy for mourning, the garments of praise for the spirit of hea∣vinesse, that they may be called trees of righteousnesse, the plantings of the Lord, that he may be glorified. See Luk. 4.18, 19, 20, 21. Luk 1.74. That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without fear. Tit. 3.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might re∣deem us from all iniquity (in a purifying way) and purifie unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. 1 Joh. 3.8. He that committeth sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sinneth from the beginning: for this pur∣pose was the Son of God manifested that he might de∣stroy the works of the Devil, to wit, by his spirit and power. Rom. 16.20. And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. Ephes. 5.24, 25, 27. Husbands love your wives even as Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctifie and clense it with the washing of wa∣ter by the word, that he might present it to himself a glo∣rious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. The fifth Topick, shall be the prayer that Christ, his ser∣vants and his Apostles have made, and thereby taught us to pray for this grace of a through purging from sin, and vi∣ctory over it and all temptations in this life; who so pray∣ed in faith that the things which they so prayed for might be obtained, 1 Chron. 4.10. And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou wouldest blesse me indeed, and wouldest enlarge my coast, and that thy hand might be with me, and that thou wouldst keep me (or redeem me) from evil, that it might not grieve me: and God, saith the Text, 'granted him that which he requested; as he will do unto us.
Psal. 55.10. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Hos. 14.1, 2. O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity: take with you words, and turn unto the Lord, saying, take away all iniquity, and give good, or receive us graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips. Mat. 6.13. And lead us not into temptation, but de∣liver us from evil. See. Luk. 11.14. Joh. 17.15. I pray not, saith Christ, that thou shouldst take them out of the world, but that thou shouldst keep them from the evil. 2 Cor. 13.7. Now I pray to God that ye do none evil. Phil. 1.10. That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere and without offence till the day of Christ. 1 Thess. 5.23. Now the God of peace sanctifie you wholly; And I pray God that your whole Spirit, soul and body, may be kept (or preserved) blamelesse unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. The sixth Topick, shall be the faith of the Apostles, and of the elect in the Primitive Church, which now and for ma∣ny hundred years hath been almost quite lost in two grand benefits and works which they believed and hoped for. This faith expected Christs spiritual coming and return with his Father and the Holy Ghost, to set up his king∣dom, not only of grace, but of power and glory in them here and for ever; and in order thereunto they were to purge themselves by faith, through his grace and help, from all iniquity in the mean time; as these following places do clearly witnesse and prove without all contra∣diction, if duly looked into. Joh. 14.18. I will not leave you comfortlesse, I will come un∣to you; yet a little while and the world seeth me no more, but ye shall see me because I live ye shall live also: At that day ye shall know that I am in the Father, and ye in me, and I in you. He that hath my commandements and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me, and he shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and ma∣nifest
my self unto him. Judas saith unto him (not Jscariot) how is it that thou wilt manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered and said, if any man love me he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come and make our abode with him. and chap. 16.22. And ye now therefore have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoyce, and your joy shall no man take away from you. See Rom. 6.5. as before. 1 Cor. 1.7, 8. So that yecome behind in no gift, waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blamelesse in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good work in you will finish (or perform) it till the day of Jesus Christ: vers 10. that ye may be sincere and without offence till the day of Jesus Christ. 1 Thess. 5.23. be preserved unto the coming of our Lord Christ; as before. 1 Tim. 6.14. That thou keep this commandement without spot, unrebukable, untill the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. 9.20. So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. chap. 10.25. Not forsaking the as∣sembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another so much the rather as you see the day ap∣proching vers 37. For yet a little while and he that shall come will come, and he will not tarry. Jam. 5.7. Be patient therefore brethren. vers 8. be patient and stablish your heart, for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh. 1 Pet. 1.13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind be so∣ber and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. All which places, and many more to the like effect, have absurdly been under∣stood of Christs external, last, and dreadful coming to judge∣ment, which in so many ages since is not come to passe, nor peradventure may arrive in many ages more: whereas the former Texts speak of a day and an appearing, or com∣ing of Christ which the Saints were to expect and prepare themselves for in their dayes; it being the kingdom of hea∣ven
which first John the Baptist, and then Christ and his Apostles, published to be at hand, Mat. 3.21. and 4.17. which accordingly came to the Saints which waited for it in a right way. Revela. 12.10. And I heard a loud voice in heaven (the Church of God, wherein he dwels) saying, Now is come salva∣tion and strength, the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast out who accu∣sed them before God day and night. In hope of this kingdom, and in order thereunto, the Saints to whom it was published purified their hearts by faith in Gods sanctifying grace to be had in Jesus Christ, 1 Joh. 3.2, 3, Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him, or we shall see him as he is: and eve∣ry man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself even as he is pure. Act. 15, 7, 8, 9. Men and brethren, ye know that a good while ago God made choice among us that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel, and beleive; and God which knoweth the hearts bare them witnesse, giving the Holy Ghost unto them even as he did unto us, and put no difference be∣tween them and us, purifying their hearts by faith. Out of this faith and hope the souls of Gods elect do cry unto God night and day for vengeance against Gods spiritual enemies and theirs, who first had crucified Christ in them, and by them, and afterwards did cruciate and vex them with con∣tinual temptations and assaults. Luk. 18.1. And he spake a parable unto them, to this end, that men always ought to pray and not to faint, saying, There was in a City a Judge that feared not God, neither regarded man, and there was a widow in that City; and she came unto him, saying, avenge me of mine adver∣sary; and he would not for a while but afterwards he said with∣in himself, though I fear not God, nor regard man, yet because this widow troubleth me I will avenge her, lest by her continuall coming she weary me. And the Lord said, hear what the unjust Judg saith and hall not God avenge his own elect which cry day and hight, though he bear long with them,? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily. Neverthelesse when the Son of man
cometh shall he find faith upon earth? Where now is this faith of Gods elect to be found? yea where is the faith of the A∣postles and their Churches to be heard or read of, who looked for no life and glory by Christ, unlesse they died with Christ unto all known sin? Rom. 6.8. For if we be dead with him then we believe that we shall live with him: and the doctrine which held forth that and no other way for the fallen man to enter into life, the Apostle commends as a faithful and undeceivable word; implying that the contrary doctrine and perswasions deceive mens souls in the end. 2 Tim. 11.12. This is a faithful saying, if we be dead with Christ we shall live with him, if we suffer with him (dying to sin) we shall also reign with him. If we deny him in this way he will also deny us. The seventh Topick is the inequality between sin and Gods grace now to be had of Christ Jesus thereagainst. Is. 5.4.11. No weapon that is formed against the Lord shall prosper, and every tongue that raiseth up against thee in judgment thou shalt condemne; This is the heritage, and so forth. Rom. 5.17. For if by one (or one mans offence) death reigned by one, how much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ? vers. 20, 21. Moreover, the law entred that the offence might abound, but where sin abounded grace did superabound; that as sin had reigned unto death, even so grace might reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ. The eighth Topick is the professed resolution of the Christians in the Apostles time to die unto all sin. Rom. 6.1. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we that are dead to sin (namely by Christian profession and resolution) live any longer therein? Colos. 3.3. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. The ninth Topick is from the true end and use of bap∣tism, to teach us this death and burial of sin in conformity to Christs death and resurrection. Rom. 6.3, 4. Know ye not that so many of us as are bap∣tized
into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk (after we are dead and risen again with him) in newness of life; for if we have been planted into the likeness of his death we shall also be planted into the likeness of his resur∣rection: knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. 1 Cor. 15.29. Else what shall they do who are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead? Colos. 2.12. Buried with him in baptism, wherein ye are also risen through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead. The tenth Topick is from the admission and assertion of this mortified and purged estate every where. Rom. 8.2. For the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus hath freed me from the law of sin and death. Rom. 6.7. For he that is dead is (justified, or) freed from sin. 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ (according to the Spirit) he is a new creature; old things are past away, and all things are become new. Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me. Chap. 5.24. And they that are Christs have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. The eleventh Topick is from the omnipotency of true faith in Christ. Marth 15.18. Then said Jesus unto her, O woman, great is thy faith; be it unto thee even as thou wilt. Chap. 21.21. Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, if ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall not onely do this which is done to the fig-tree, but also if you shall say unto this mountain, (of sin) be thou removed, and be thou cast in∣to the sea, it shall be done. Mark 9.23. Jesus said unto him, if thou canst believe all things are possible unto him that believeth.
John 14.12. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believeth on me the works that I do shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do, because I go to the Father. Unto which joyn that of our Saviour, John 16.33. In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world, even Satans world, which ye through faith shall be by me enabled to overcome. 1 John. 5.4, 5. For whatsoe∣ver is born of God overcometh the world; and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith; for who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God? The last Topick shall be the summe of all practical truth in Christ, which Paul reduceth to two heads. Ephes. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. as was said before; But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be ye have heard him, and have been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus, that ye put off con∣cerning the former converstion the old man which is corrupting according to the deceitful lust, and be ye renewed in the Spirit of your mind, and that ye put on the new man, which is created after God in righteousness and holiness of truth. Then who holds out the truth of Christ, we or the Vindicator, let all wise men judge impartially between us. Thus much for divine authority; now for humane: we shall first produce divers of the Fathers, and some of those which the Vindicator or his friends for him have alledged against us to out-bal∣lance him; and then the authority of our own Church (the best reformed of all the Protestant Churches) in her established doctrine, and late Liturgie. For the first of these; Justin Martyr in quaest. & respon. ad Orthodoxos; All men do sin, not because we cannot do otherwise: which appea∣reth from hence, because all men are not intangled with all sorts of sins, but some fall into these offences, some into others; and some men are involved with many sins, some with fewer, and some with none at all; those of whom I spake before, to wit Zacharie and Elizabeth. Origen super Gen. homilia 11. But let us see how a man may be made the good savour of Christ, sin is a filthy stinking thing. In a word, sinners are compared to swine wallowing, who
wallow in the filthy dung. If there be any of you in whom there is no savour of sin, but the savour of righteousness, and the sweetness of mercifulness, he is the sweet savour of Christ. Cyprian. serm. de Baptism. Christi. The Law teach us to a∣void sin, it reproves transgressors; and to the intent we should walk with washed and clean feet, it foreshews all things that may offend, and makes known unto us all diverticles whereby dange∣rous out-turnings and passages may be avoided: it commands no∣thing that is impossible, nothing that is austere or difficult. Chrysos. in 2 Cor. 11. homil. 3. speaking of Abraham's prayer made to God in the behalf of the inhabitants of So∣dom and the neighbouring cities which were to be destroy∣ed, Gen. 18. saith he, that Abraham speaking there vers. 27. by way of self-abasment before the Lord, said, Behold, now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord which am but dust and ashes; and thus he did, Because, saith Chrysostom, Abraham at this time had no sin left, therefore he flies unto nature it self; and because the name of earth contains in it something that is honest and decorous in its kind, he adds the word ashes thereunto. Hieron. in Epist. He which desires to reign with Christ must of necessity be pure or clean from all naughtiness and guile: if thou wilt have thy part or portion with Christ, thou must live after Christs pattern; if thou desirest the society of the Saints, keep thy heart clean from the very thought of naughtiness and sin, be∣cause the celestiall Court receives none but those that are holy, chast, simple, innocent, and pure. Augustin. de vera & falsa poenitentia: For he is first to be purged with the fire of purgation who deferreth the fruit of his conversion unto another world: and albeit (saith he) this fire be not everlasting, yet it is greivous after a wonderful manner; for it exceedes all the pain that ever any man suffered in this life. Therefore let every one so endeavour to amend his faults here, that he may not have cause to endure such pain hereafter. Here his exhortation and counsel is good, though his ground concerning purgation wants an Index expurgatorius. Idem in lib. de baptism. par. If it be demanded whether a man be without sin in this life, I confess he may by grace of Christ and the right use of his free-will.
Greg. lib. 2. mara. cap. 8. If we say that Job offended in his speech or words (which were wickedness in us to think) we should confess that God had lost the victory in his chal∣lenge or offer made to Satan concerning Jobs exposal to his sifting and trial. Prosper in his book of senten. ex Augustino. As some parents do aggravate original sin; so some do lighten or abate it, but none doth take it away, save he onely of whom it is said, Be∣hold the lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world; to whom no good of man is impossible to work, no evil is uncurable. Unto which adde that saying of Bernards, by the Vindicator quoted, yet without his additional, That kind of sin which so often troubles us, I mean concupiscence, and evill desires, may and should be repressed by the grace of God, so that they reign not in us, and that we give not our members as weapons of un∣righteousness unto sin; and then there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. Thus for the Testmony of the Fathers; of which sort we shall alledge more in the confirmation of the second position. Now for the doctrine of our English reformed Church heretofore established by law; First, in the Cate∣chism is thus demanded and answered: Q. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you? A. They did promise and vow three things in my name; first, that I should forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanity of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I should believe all the Articles of the Christian faith. And thirdly, that I should keep Gods holy will and commandements, and walk in the same all the dayes of my life. Q. Dost thou not believe that thou art bound to believe and to do all as they have promised for thee? A. Yes verily, and by Gods help so I will, and I heartily thank our heavenly Father that he hath called me unto this state of salvation through Jesus Christ our Saviour: and I pray God to give me his grace that I may continue in the same unto my livesend. And afterwards reciting the Lords prayer: Q. What desirest thou in this prayer?
A. I desire my Lord God, who is the giver of all good∣ness, to send his grace unto me and unto all people, that we may worship him, serve him, and obey him as we ought to do, &c. And that it would please him to save and defend us in all dangers Ghostly and bodily: and that he will keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our Ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death, And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness through our Lord Jesus Christ: and therefore I say Amen. And afterwards con∣cerning Baptism. Q. What is the inward and spiritual grace signified therein? A. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness. Hence it is that our Church prayed thus at the baptism of infants; And humbly we beseech thee to grant that to (the person baptised) he being dead unto sin, and living unto righ∣teousness, and being buried with Christ in his death, may crucifie the old man, and utterly abolish the whole body of sin. And now we hope that the Vindicator had not renounc'd his baptism by sinful positions and his own wicked course of life. Secondly, in our late Liturgie we are taught thus to pray in the Collect on Easter-Tuesday, and to like effect in ma∣ny other places: Almighty God, which hast given thine onely Son to die for our sins, and to rise again for our justification; grant us so to put away the leaven of malice and wickedness, that we may alwayes serve thee in pureness of living and truth, through Jesus Christ. Unto which we might adde that out of the Letanie: From all evill and mischief, and sin, from the crafts and assaults of the Devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation, Good Lord deliver us. From all blindness of heart, from guile, vain-glory and hypocrisie, from envy, hatred, and strife, from all uncharitableness, Good Lord deliver us. From fornication and all other deadly sin, and from all deceits of the world, the flesh, and the Devil, Good Lord deliver us. And thus much for the confirmation of the first position. Come we now to the establishment of the second; That the law of God may by the grace and help of Christ be so
perfectly kept and fulfilled in this life, as not to offend a∣gainst the same, yea as to be justified, and that only by Christ of grace given: whch we will divide into two branches; and first prove the possibility of such a fulfilling by the like Topicks and authorities as we did the former; and then briefly ratifie that which will follow by conse∣quence, namely that by such a fulfilling of the Law by the grace of Christ we may be justified before God and men, according to the truth of the Gospel. As for the first of these, we take it for granted that the Law of God requireth no more of us then what is contain∣ed in those two commandements, Mat. 22.36, 37, 38, 39. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; this is the first and the great commandement: and the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy selfe. Because our Saviour saith vers. 40. On these two commandements hang all the Law and the Prophets. Our first Topick to prove all this attainable by grace is taken from Gods predestination and election. See Joh. 15, 16. I have chosen and ordained you that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain. Rom. 8.29, 30. For whom he did foreknow them he did predestinate to be made conformable to the image of his Son, that he might be the first born among many brethren: moreover, whom he did predestinate those he also called, and whom he called those he also justified, and whom he justified those he also glorified. Ephes. 1.4. According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: and chap. 2.10. For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God had before ordained that we shall walk in them. 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God in holinesse unto obedience (and in order thereunto) unto the sprinkling of the blood of Iesus Christ, that is, his sanctifying Spirit, as shall be proved hereafter. The second Topick is from Gods expresse commands, which cannot be impossible, for they should be frustrane∣ous, tyrannical, or unjust, as aforesaid.
Gen. 17.1. I am the almighty God, walk thou before me and be perfect. Deut. 4.21. Ye shall not add to the words which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandements of the Lord your God which I commanded you. chap. 5.32. Ye shall observe to do therefore as the Lord your God hath commanded you, ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left. chap. 6.5. And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might: and those words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart, and thou shalt teach them dilligently unto thy children. Levit. 19.18. Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self, fear the Lord. Deut. 6.24, 25. And the Lord commanded us to do all those statutes, to fear the Lord our God for our good always, that he may preserve us alive, as it is at this day. And it shall be our righteousnesse if we observe to do all these commandements before the Lord our God, as he hath commanded us. chap. 10.12. And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thine heart and with all thy soul? chap. 18.13. Thou shalt be perfect with the Lord thy God. Josh. 22.5. But take diligent heed to do the comman∣dement and the Law which Moses the servant of the Lord charged you, to love the Lord your God, and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandements, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul. Jerem. 7.25. But this thing commanded I them say∣ing, obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, and walk in all the ways that I have com∣manded you, that it may be well unto you. Mala. 4.4. Remember ye the Law of my servant Mo∣ses which I commanded in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgements.
The third Topick is Gods promises to enable us to ful∣fill these by grace in Christ. Deut. 26.18, 19. And the Lord hath avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thee, and that thou' shouldst keep all his commande∣ments, and to make thee high above all nations which he hath made in praise and in honour, that thou mayst be an holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he hath spoken. Deut. 30.6, 7, 8. And therefore thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live, and the Lord thy God will put all these cur∣ses upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, and which persecuted thee, and thou shalt return and obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and do all these commande∣ments which I commanded thee this day. Isai. 46.29, 30, 31. He giveth power to the faint, and to them that have no strength he increaseth might: even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fail, but those that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount with wings as Ea∣gles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint. chap. 42.21. The Lord is well pleased for his righteousnesse sake, he will magnifie the Law and make it honourable. Which it would not be if it were impossi∣ble. chap. 48.17, 18. Thus faith the Lord thy redeemer, the holy one of Israel, I am the Lord thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by the way which thou shalt go: O that thou hadst harkened to my commandements! then had thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousnesse as the waves of the sea. chap. 51.4, 5. Harken unto me my people, and give eare O Nation, for a Law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judge∣ment to rest for a light to the Gentiles, my righteous∣nesse is neer my salvation is gone forth. vers. 7, 8. Harken unto me ye that know righteousnesse, the people in whose heart is my Law, fear ye not the reproch of men, neither be ye afraid of their revisings, for the moth shall eat them
up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them up like wool: but my righteousnesse shall be sure, and my salva∣tion from generation to generation. Jerem. 31.32, 33, 34. Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Iudah, saith the Lord, not according to the covenant which I made with their Fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which my covenant they broke, although I was an Husband unto them, (or there∣fore I must overule them) saith the Lord; but this shall be the covenant which I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people: And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and e∣very man his brother, saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them, saith the Lord, for I will forgive their iniquities, and remember their sins no more. Where take notice of these things; that the first cove∣nant is a covenant of works, and the effect a compulsive obedience out of fear of vengeance. Secondly, that the second covenant is made to those that now love God and righteousnesse, and obey it out of good will, after the days of compulsion are ended, which must have their foregoing work to break mans strong lusts and inclinations to sin; after which comes the revelation of free mercy and salvation out of grace, unexpectedly wit∣nessed from Heaven, to the lost, yet humbled penitent, and praying or deprecating soul, which melts his heart with godly sorrow, and inflames his heart with love to God, and righteousnesse, and with an hatred of all known sin. Thirdly, that this second covenant is of sanctification, and then of some degree of glory. As to the former, the Lord promiseth to put his Law into our inward parts, and to work the same in our hearts; which is done no other way but by regeneration, and by the promised Spirit of Christ,
which is called the blood of the new covenant, and the blood of the everlasting covenant for the purging, or the dimission away of our sins; whereof both the expiative and consecrating blood of the old Testament was a figure, Exod. 24.8. and 14.14, 10. and chap. 8.23, 24. and where∣of the wine in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper in the New Testament is a sign and representation, as the bread broken is a representation both of his word to be broken, received and eaten, Jer. 15.16. and of his suffering pati∣ence and weakness, which is a body of his to be broken unto us by degrees, and received by faith and obedience, where through we may remember Christs death, and follow him therein, crucifying sin till he come unto us in the Spi∣rit and power of his resurrection. Thus the Apostle saith, 'Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ (this Spirit, and spiritual blood of Christ) who through the eternal Spirit offered himself (as man) without spot to God, purge the consciences (or souls) from dead works, to serve the living God? And Heb. 10.29. He that falls from grace counts the blood of this covenant where∣with he was sanctified, an unholy thing (or a thing of smal price) and so doth despite to the Spirit of grace: and hence it is that the Apostle prayeth, Heb. 13.20. that God who brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, would through the blood of the everlasting covenant make the believing Hebrews perfect in every good work to do the will of the Lord; as Peter also tells the Saints 1 Pet. 1.18. that they were through the same redeemed or delivered from their vain conversation in a Jewish righteousness received by tra∣dition from their Fathers. This blood is promised unto them that walk in the light with God and his Saints, 1 John 1.7. But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all our sin. With this blood the Saints washed their robes (or imperfect righteousness) and made them white, Rev. 7.14. with this Christ washed the Apostles, and made them Kings
and priests unto God, Rev. 1.5, 6. for which they give him praise and glory; and with this is the Devil overcome and cast out, Rev. 12.11. A third thing observable in this covenant, is, that there is a clear, full, and glorious wisdome promised to each Saint in due time, so that they shall not need to say to each other, know the Lord, for they shall know him from the least of them to the greatest; for that perfect knowledge and love is then come which makes the imperfect know∣ledge and prophecying to cease, 1 Cor. 13.8, 9. Lastly, the time of that perfect wisdome, power, and love, is also li∣mited, namely vers. 34. in those words, for I will for∣give their iniquities, and remember their sins no more: it is then when God hath purged and taken away all their sins by the same blood: where forgiving of sins (as in many other places) is to be understood of the purging them away by Gods grace, which we call dimission, and that is the principal taking away of sin, upon which the pardon, or taking away of the guilt follows of course, and is cast in over and above, out of Gods abundant mercy for the death and sufferings of Christ. But to proceed; Ezek. 36.25, 26, 27. we have another of these promises of enabling grace; Then will I pour clean water upon you, and from all your sins and from all your idols will I cleanse you; a new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take the stony heart out of you, and I will give you an heart of flesh, (that flesh of Christ of which we spake before) and will put my Spirit within you, and I will cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my commandements and do them. Luk. 1.72, 73, 74, 75. To perform the mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember his holy covenant, the oath which he swore to our Father Abraham that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness be∣fore him all the dayes of our life. With which agrees that which follows, 2 Pet. 11.4. whereby exceeding
great and precious promises are given unto us, that by them we should be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. In both which places we may take notice that there are but two grand benefits promised in Christ, the first in or∣der of time and nature, is deliverance from our spiritual enemies, or our escaping out of corruption; and the se∣cond is a partaking of the divine nature; whereby we may serve God cheerfully and without fear, in holiness and righteousness all our dayes. Here is no mention made in these promises of the remission of sins, either because it is an appendant to the first benefit, God taking away the guilt with the corruption and fault, or because the Lord counts it so inconsiderable a benefit in comparison of the other two that he makes no mention of it, but casts it in over and above, as Christ speaks, Matth. 6.33. Seek ye first the kingdome of God and his righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto you. The fourth Topick shall be, That this full obedience through the grace and help of God is made the condition to the greatest part of Gods promises, and his spiritual blessings in special. Exod. 19.5, 6. Now therefore if you will obey my voice indeed and keep my covenant, ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people, for all the earth is mine, &c. And Exod. 23.20, 21, 22. Behold I send an Angel before thee (the Angel of the covenant) to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee to the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and obey his voice, pro∣voke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions, for my name (or being) is in him. But if thou shalt indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy to thine enemy, and an adversary to thine adversaries. See Levit. 26.13. all manner of blessings are promised upon this score. Deut. 11.8.9. Therefore shall ye keep all the commandements that I command you this day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possesse the land whether ye go in to possesse it, and that ye may prolong
your dayes in the land which the Lord sware unto your Fa∣thers to give unto them, a land flowing with milk and hony. (which land is a type of the heavenly Canaan) Deut. 28.1, 15. And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to serve him and to do all his commandements which I com∣mand thee this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth, and all these blessings shall come upon thee and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God: blessed shalt thou be in the city, &c. Joshua 1.7, 8. Onely be thou strong and very couragious, that thou mayest ob∣serve to do according to all the law which Moses my ser∣vant commanded thee; turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper whithersoever thou goest. Isaiah 1.19. If ye be willing and obedient ye shall eat the good of the land. Ezek. 33.15. If the wicked restore the pledg, give a∣gain that which he robbed, walk in the statutes of life, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Matth. 5.19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandements, and shall teach men so, he shall be called least in the kingdome of heaven: but who∣soever shall do, and teach them the same, shall be called great in the kingdome of heaven. Chap. 7.21. Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heaven, but he that doth the will of my Fa∣ther which is in heaven. Chap. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo I am with you to the end of the world. Luk. 10.25, 26, 27. And behold, a certain Lawyer stood up and tempted him, saying, Master, what shall I do to in∣herit eternal life? he said unto him, what is written in the law? how readest thou? and he answered and said, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, & with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbour as thy self: And he said unto him, thou
hast answered right, this do and thou shalt live. See John 15.10. If ye keep my commandements ye shall abide in my love, even as I, &c. 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and of the Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Heb. 10.36. For ye have need of patience, that af∣ter ye have done the will of God ye may receive the promise. Rev. 21.14. Blessed are they that do his commande∣ment, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter through the gates into the city. The fifth Topick shall be, The end of Christs coming to fulfill the law in us, according to Gods covenant aforesaid. Psal. 22.30, 31. A seed shall serve him, it shall be ac∣counted to the Lord for a generation; he shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be born, that he hath done this (to wit, wrought that righ∣teousness in them.) Isaiah 53.10. He shall sow his seed, he shall prolong his dayes, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. See chap. 61.1, 2, 3. before cited. Jer. 23.5 6. Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justice upon the earth, (in men) in his dayes Judah shall be saved from their enemies, and Israel shall dwel safely: And this is his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness; to wit, that righteousness which he executeth and worketh in his Saints. Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined upon the people and upon the holy city, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophesie, and to anoint the most holy: by bringing in the everlasting righteousness afore∣said.
Matth. 5.17, 18. Think not that I am come to destroy the law and the Prophets, I came not to destroy, but to fulfill; (to wit, in us, as for us) for verily I say unto you, that till heaven and earth pass away not one jot or one tittle shall pass from the law till all be fulfilled, (and that in us,) as the next words there prove. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these commandements, and teach men so, he shall be counted least in the kingdome of heaven &c. Rom. 8.3, 4. For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Rom. 10.4. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believeth. 1 Cor. .30. Who is made of God unto us wisdome (in the understanding) righteousness (in the will) and not one∣ly sanctification in both, but redemption in fulness also. Ephes. 5.25, 26, 27. As Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctifie and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish. Titus 2.14. Who loved us, and gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purifie us unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. The sixth Topick shall be from the end of the law and the written word of God. Psalm 111.4, 5, 6. Thou hast commanded to keep thy precepts diligently. O that my wayes were directed to keep thy statutes! Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy comman∣dements. vers. 89. For ever O Lord thy word is setled in heaven. And vers. 105, 106. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a light unto my path: I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.
Rom. 15.4. For whatsoever things were written afore∣times were written for our learning, that through pati∣ence and the comfort of the Scriptures we should have hope. 1 Tim. 1.5. Now the end of the commandement is charity out of a pure heart and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for cor∣rection, and for instruction in righteousnesse, that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished to eve∣ry good work. See 2 Pet. 1.19. 'We have also a sure word of prophesie, unto which ye do well to give heed as unto a light shining, until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts. The seventh Topick shall be from the end of the mini∣stry of the word set up in the Church by the Lord him∣self. Ephes. 4.11, 12, 13. And he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and the know∣ledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ. For which end see the Apostles suitable practise: Coloss. 1.28. Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man, that we may present every man perfect in Jesus Christ. As for the Topick of the end of the two Sacraments, we have spoken before. The eighth Topick then shall be the prayer which Christ hath taught us to pray, (and which his Apostles, yea Christ himself hath prayed) for this perfection; Matth. 6.10. Thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. 2 Cor. 13.9. And this also we wish, even your per∣fection. Ephes. 3 19. That ye might be filled with all the ful∣nesse of God.
Phil. 1.10, 11. That ye might be sincere and without offence till the day of Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousnesse, &c. Coloss. 1.9, 10. For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisedom and spiritual understanding; that ye might walk worthy of the Lord to all well pleasing, being fruitful in every good work. chap. 4.10. labouring fervently for you in prayer, that ye may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. 1 Thess. 3.12. And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love towards each other and towards all men, as we do towards you, to the end that he may establish your hearts unblameable in holinesse. chap. 5.23. Now the God of peace sanctifie you wholly, &c. Did those Ministers of God pray against perfection in this life, as the Vindicator and a certain Minister in Salis∣bury, who came out of New-England rather then out of new Jerusalem, are said to to have done? Heb. 13.20, 21. Now the God of peace which brought againe from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlast∣ing covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his will. 1 Pet. 5.10. Now the God of all grace who hath called us unto his eternall glory by Jesus Christ, after ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, &c. Joh. 17.23. I in them and they in me, that ye may be made perfect in one, saith Christ. The ninth Topick shall be the admission of this work as possible every where in Scripture. Psal. 112. Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, that delighteth greatly in his commandements. and 119.12. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord. Blessed are they that keep his testimo∣nies, and seek him with the whole heart; they also do no iniquitie they walk in his ways.
Ezek. 18.21. But if the wicked will turn away from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my sta∣tutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. Luk. 17.10. So likewise ye when ye shall have done all these things which are commanded you, say ye are un∣profitable servants, we have done that which was our du∣ty to do. Rom. 2.13. For not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law are justified. Jam. 2.8. If ye fulfill the royall Law, according to the Scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy selfe, ye do dwell. chap. 3.2. If any man offend not in word the same is a perfect man. 1 Joh. 5.3, 4. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandements, and his commandements are not grievous; for whatsoever is born of God overcom∣meth the world, and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. 1 Ioh. 3.22. And whatso∣ever we aske we receive of him, because we keep his com∣mandements, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. Rev. 12.17. And the Dragon was wroth with the wo∣man, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandement of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. chap. 14.12. Here is the patience of the Saints, here are they that keep the com∣mandements of God and the faith of Iesus. The tenth Topick shall be examples of men who by Gods testimony have fully followed him and obeyed him at length. Such an one was Abel, Heb. 11.4. By saith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice then Cain, by which he obtained witnesse that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts; and by it he being dead yet speaketh. Enoch, Gen. 5.22. And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah, three hundred years. Heb. 11.5. By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death, and was not found, because God had translated him; for
before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleas∣ed God. Noah, Gen. 6.9. Noah was a perfect and a just man in his generation, and Noah walked with God. Heb. 11. By faith Noah being warned of God concerning things as yet not seen, moved with fear he prepared an ark to the saving of his house, whereby he became heir of the righ∣teousnesse of faith. And though aftewards he was over∣come by wine, that was but a single act and surprize, he not knowing the strength of that wine till he had tryed it. Abraham, Heb. 11.8, 9. By faith Abraham when he was called out to goe into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowing whither he went, by faith he sojourned in the Land of Promise as in a strange countrey, dwelling in Ta∣bernacles with Isaac and Iacob, heirs with him of the same promise; for he looked for a City which had founda∣tions, whose author and builder is God. vers. 17, 18, 19. By faith Abraham when he was tryed offered up his Son Isaac, and he that had received the promise offered his onely begotten Son, of whom it was said, that in Isaac thy seed shall be called; accounting that God was able to raise him up from the dead. Iames 2.23. And the Scrip∣ture was fulfilled, which said, Abraham believed, and it was accounted to him for righteousnesse, and he was called the friend of God. Isaac, Heb. 11, 20. Iacob, Gen. 25.27. And Iacob was a perfect man, dwelling in Tents. Lot, 2 Pet. 2.7. and delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the unrighteous: for that which his daughters did unto him was by way of intoxication, with∣out his knowledge or will. Caleb, Numb. 14.24. But my servant Caleb, because he had another Spirit with him, and hath followed me fully, him will I bring into the Land whereunto he went. Ioshuah, Numb. 32.11, 12. Surely none of the men that came u out of Egypt from twenty years old and upward
shall see the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isaao, and unto Jacob, because they have not wholly followed me, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and Jo∣shuah the son of Nun, for they have wholly followed the Lord. Joseph in Egypt a lively type of Christ. Phineas, Psal. 106.30, 31. Then stood up Phineas, and ex∣cuted judgment, and the plague was stayed; and that was counted to him for righteousness unto all generations for evermore. Many (if not the whole family) of Levi in Moses his dayes; Mal. 2.5, 6. My covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them unto him for the fear where∣with he feared me, and was afraid before my name: the law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips; he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. See Deut. 33.9. Who said unto his father and his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor know his own children, for they have observed thy word and kept thy law. Job 1.8. And the Lord said unto Satan, hast thou con∣sidered my servant Job, that there is none like unto him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God and escheweth evil p. chap. 2.3. And the Lord said unto Satan, hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God and escheweth evil? and still he holds fast his integrity, although thou movedst me a∣gainst him to destroy him without a cause: and chap. 42.7, 8. And it was so that after the Lord had spoken these words unto Job, the Lord said unto Eliphaz the Temenite, my wrath is kindled against thee and thy two friends; therefore take unto you seven bullocks and seven ramms, and go ye to my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt offering, (for him will I accept) lest I should deal with you after your folly, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job hath done. And though Job had seen God then face to face, vers. 5. yet
he lived an hundred and forty years afterwards, wherein he had time to be further perfected, if need did so require. Samuel was not onely a just man, by the confession of all Israel, but declared so by a token which God at his request sent from heaven, 1 Sam. 12.17, 18. Daniel was also such an one, concerning whom, Noah and Job, the Lord speaketh as of three great favourites of his, and men full of righteousness. Ezek. 14.14. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, they shall but deliver their own souls by their righteousness. We say nothing here of Rahab the hostess (rather then an harlot) who is so highly commended, Heb. 11.13. James 2. of Deborah, of Naomi, of Ruth, of Hannah the mother of Samuel, of Rebeccah, of the Virgin Mary, of Elizabeth, and Zacharie her husband, and of John their son: It is said of Stephen, that he was full of faith and power, Act. 6.8. yea full of the holy Ghost, Act. 7.55. and that he saw the heavens opened: and of Barnabas, Act. 11.24. that he was a good man, and full of the holy Ghost and of faith: yea the Apostles imply that many such might be found in the Church. Act. 6.3. Wherefore brethren look out from among you seven men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost and of wisdome, &c. But as the Apostle concludes his catalogue of Saints and believers in the old Testament, saying, Heb. 11.31, 33. And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me for to tell of Gideon, and of Barack, and of Sampson, of Jephtah, of David also, and of Samuel, and of the Prophets; who through faith subdued kingdomes, (the power of sin and Satan) wrought righteousness, ob∣tained promises. Also John doth not onely own such a per∣fection as we stand for to be attained by himself and many others in this life, saying 1 John 4.17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: But saw first many thousand servants of God of every tribe sealed; And after I beheld a great multitude which no man could number, of all nations and kindreds, and people & tongues, standing before the throne, and be∣fore the lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their
hands, who came out of great tribulation here, and had washed their robes, and had made them white in the blood (or spirit) of the lamb. Rev. 3.14. And the like specta∣cle he saw, chap. 14.4, 5. of men that follow the lamb wheresoever he goeth, being redeemed from among men, and made the first fruits unto God and the lamb; and in their mouth was found no guile, for they are without fault before the throne of God. The eleventh Topick shall be the two parts of all practi∣cal truth in Christ; of which before out of Ephes. 4.20, 24. But ye have not so learned Christ if so be ye have heard him, and have been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus; That ye put off concerning the former conversa∣tion the old man which is corrupting through the deceit∣ful lusts, and be ye renewed in the spirit of your minds, and put you on the new man which is created after God in righteousness and holiness of truth. The last Topick shall be the new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven, which in its coming is called the Lord our righteousness, from the presence of the holy Ghost, or rather of the whole Trinity. Jer. 33.15, 16. At that day and at that time will I cause the branch of righteousness to grow up unto David, and he shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land; in those dayes Judah shall be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwel safely; and this is the name wherewith he shall be called; The Lord our righteousness. Which Jerusalem is promised to every overcomer of sin and Satan, Rev. 3.12. as before; and it is an estate to be had in this life, as Mr. Brightman, and most of the best interpreters among the the Protestants, and Arrias Montanus among other Papists, doth confess out of the clearness and evidence of the Text, Rev. 21.23. And I John saw the holy city, new Ierusa∣salem coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband; and I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and he shall be with them and be their
God: And at vers. 9. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, (viz. spi∣ritual death, which is either sin, or the wages of sin) nei∣ther sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be any more (spiritual) pain (which being effects of sin, are with their causes taken away before;) for the former things are passed away. So our obedience to the law must go before as a preparative and a qualification hereunto; Lev. 26.3. and 11.12. If you walk in my statutes, and keep my comman∣dements and do them, then will I give you rain in due season, &c. and I will set my tabernacle among you, and my soul shall not abhorre you, and I will walk among you, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people. See Ezek. 37.27. My tabernacle also shall be with them, yea, I will be their God, and they shall be my people: and Psal. 128.1, 5. Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord, and walketh in his wayes; and vers. 5. The Lord shall bless thee out of Sion, and thou shalt see the good of Jerusa∣lem (to wit the spiritual Jerusalem aforesaid) all thy dayes. Thus much of divine authority; now for humane. Justine Martyr in Resp. ad Orthodoxos, saith, That which is possible to one man is possible to any, as to saile by sea; for even as the Scripture saith, that certain of them who live under the law were unblamable in righteousness, so it was possible unto all those who lived under the law to have been alike unblamable: for Saint Luke the Evange∣list saith of Zacharie and Elizabeth, chap. 1.6. that they were both righteous before God, walking in all the com∣mandements, justification (or righteousness) of the law blameless. But what is the total righteousness of the law? even to love God above thy self, and thy neighbour as thy self; which is not impossible unto those men which apply their will and desire thereunto. Wherefore that saying, By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified, was not spoken or used by the Apostle because we cannot perform impossibilities, but because we will not frame our selves to do things possible.
Origen in his ninth homil. upon Joshuah saith, Doth not that man seem unto the Worthies to be reckoned among women, who saith, I cannot observe or do that which is written? And again in the same place; he that saith, I cannot fulfill them, doth he not manifest himself worthy to be ranked among the feminine sort, who can do nothing that is virile, or like a man, or worthy of that sex? Cyprian serm. de Baptis. Christi. Neither doth this writ∣ten law in any thing differ from the natural; but the re∣jection or refusal of evil, and the election of good are so infixed into the rational soul from above, that no man hath just cause in this behalf to complain, because there is neither knowledge nor power wanting unto any man for the prosecution and performance of the same, because we know what ought to be done, and have power to effect what we know; whereas if the precepts were impossible, or invironed with so great difficulties, or thy will therein so abstruse and hidden that the thing could not be under∣stood which thy Highness (or Majesty) requireth of us, al∣beit no man sins against his will, yet he might many ways excuse his offence (or sin) unless the equity and moderati∣on of that which is commanded, and the clear knowledge of the truth, and the distinction of things to be done, or not done, had been sufficiently provided for us by an in∣telligible authority, and therewith the possibility, facility and power had therein embraced each other. Basil. Magnus homil. 3. It is impious to say that the precepts of Gods Spirit are impossible. And in Psalm. 119.155. he saith, I knowing that thou beholdest me, have not onely fulfilled thy commandements, but I have done it also with a fervent mind. Chrysost. homil. 19. in Heb. Christ commandeth nothing that is impossible, in so much that many go beyond the commandements: and homil. 18. de poeniton. And if it be de∣manded who ever did this; he presently answers, Saint Paul, Saint Peter, and even the whole chorus (or quire) of Saints: and homil. de poenitent. 8. Do not in any wise accuse the Lord, for he doth not command things that are impossible.
Hieron. Symbol. Apost. Epist. 17. We detest their blas∣phemy who affirms that God commanded any thing impo∣ssible to man; and that Gods commandements cannot be kept of any man in particular, but of men taken together. August. de Nat. & Grat. cap. 4.3. God by giving his law unto us admonished us to do what we can, and admo∣nished us to ask what we cannot do. Idem de tempor. serm. 61. Neither could God com∣mand any thing that is impossible, because he is just; nor will condemn any man for that which be could not do, because he is pious, or good. Idem in Psalm. 56. God would never command us to do that thing, if he judged it impossible to be done of man; if thou therefore considering thine infirmity faintest un∣der the precept, be comforted by example; for he that gave us his example is at hand, that he may also afford us his aide. Idem in Heb. Epist. 89. The love of God is diffused in∣to our hearts, from whence proceeds the fulfilling of the law, not by the power of the will which is in us, but by the holy Ghost which is given unto us. Idem de verbis Apost. serm. 15. He that believeth in him shall not have his own righteousness which is out of the law, though the law is good; but he shall fulfill the law, not by his own righteousness, but that love which is gi∣ven him of God, for love is the fulfilling of the law; and from whence is that love diffused into our hearts? not from our selves, but from the holy Ghost which is given unto us. Idem lib. 2. in Julian. cap. 1. Neither is the perfection of virtue to be despaired of by his grace who can change and heal that nature which was vitiated originally (or from the beginning.) Prosp. lib. Senten. ex August. The law is given that grace may be sought, grace is given that the law may be fulfilled. Idem ibidem. The end of the law is Christ, in whom the law of righteousness is not confirmed, but fulfilled; for all perfection is to be found in him, beyond whom
here is no place or thing whither the hope of faith and truth should extend it self. Idem ibid. Every precept is light for him that loveth; nor is it so to be understood as spoken upon any other oc∣casion, where it is said, my burden is light, but because he gives the holy Ghost, by which love is diffused into our hearts: we should do that freely and liberally which fear made us do servilely. Greg. in homil. 38. upon the Gospel, called charity the wedding-garment, which he that hath not before he comes to the great marriage, is excluded. To say nothing of Alippius, Evodius, Aurelius, Possidius, and many more of the ancients, who with Aug. did hold, That the law of God by grace was possible to be kept and fulfilled in this life; we will adde a testimony or two of Leo and the Schoolmen, and then come to our own English refor∣med doctrine: he saith, serm. 12. de passione. Where sin a∣bounded there grace hath superabounded, that those who were born with the guilt or prejudice of sin, have power to be reborn unto righteousness; for the gift of freedome is stronger (or more forcible) then was the debt of bon∣dage and slavery. Idem serm. 9. de Jesun. & alibi. He may justly press us with his precept who goes afore with his help and grace; and again serm. 9. de Jejun. sept. men. We cannot attain to that which is promised unless we observe that which is commanded, but because we commonly do this without the grace of God. Also he addeth further upon those words of our Saviour, be ye holy as I am holy; seeing it seemeth difficult which I command, run to the command, that from whence the precept is enjoyned, help may be afforded for performance. As for the Schoolmen, we have their judgment briefly comprehended in that verse, Ultra posse vini non vult Deus ulla requiri. Beyond mans possibility by grace The just God nought requires of mortal race.
As for our reformed doctrine and Liturgie, those places which we alledged before upon the former position will speak to this also; That as our Godfathers and Godmo∣thers did promise and vow in our names, that we should keep Gods holy will and commandements, and walk in the same all the dayes of our life; so we should by Gods help resolve so to do, and to that end seek his grace, that we may continue the same unto our lives end. And afterwards, when the catechist had set forth the duties of the whole law in the first and second table, he saith, My 'good child, know this, that thou art not able to do this of thy self, (nor to walk in the commandements of God and to serve him) without his special grace which thou must learn to call for at all times by diligent prayer, &c. As for the Liturgie, in the Collect upon the first Sunday after the Epiphanie, the Church was wont to pray thus: Grant that these thy people may both perceive and know what things they ought to do, and also have grace and power faithfully to fulfill the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And besides a prayer said after every one of the comman∣dements, in the close of all the Church prayed thus; Lord have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our hearts we beseech thee. To say nothing of the most learned Bishops that were in their ages, Bishop Andrews, Bishop Overal, and Bishop White, with other Grandees and Fathers of our Church, King James upon the Lords prayer affirmeth, that it is blasphemy to say that any of Christs precepts are impossi∣ble; for that were to give him the lie, who told us out of his own mouth, that his yoke is easie, and his burden light: And Christs intimate disciple saith, 1 John 5.3. that his commandements are not grievous. Thus much for the first branch of the second position: now for the second which follows thereupon; That by this righteousness or obedience unto the law wrought by the grace of Christ we may be justified. Take these twelve things into consideration; First, that justification is one
and the same thing with sanctification in Jesus Christ, as we have shewed out of many places of the Scriptures; as 1 Cor. 6.11. But now ye are washed, now ye are sancti∣fied, now ye are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. He saved us by the washing of regeneration, and by the renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Je∣sus Christ our Saviour; that being justified by his grace we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Rev. 21.11. where read the Text thus, as it signifies in the Greek; Let him that is unjust be unjust still, and he that is filthy be filthy still; but he that is justified be justi∣fied still, and he that is sanctified be sanctified still. Secondly, that as we are sanctified by faith in Christ (Acts 26.18. among those that are sanctified by faith in me) so we are justified by faith in Christ; Gal. 2.16. know∣ing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Christ. Thirdly, as we are sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, so we are justified by that Spirit 1 Cor. 6.11. But now ye are washed, but now ye are sanctified, but now ye are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Fourthly, as sanctification is taken for a washing away of sin, so is justification also. Ibid. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you, but now ye are washed, but now ye are sanctified, but now ye are justified. Acts 13.39. And by him all that believe are justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses. Fifthly, sanctification is taken for a positive or infused ho∣liness or righteousness, whereby the contrary unrighte∣ousness is purged out: 1 Thes. 4.3. For this is the will of God, even your sanctification: and chap. 5.23. Now the very God of peace sanctifie you wholly. So is justi∣fication used for an inherent holiness and righteousness; Isaiah 45.24, 25. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength; even unto him shall men come, and all that be in censed against him shall be
ashamed; for in the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified (in way of inherent righteousness and strength communicated unto them, as was said in the former verse) and shall glory. Sixthly, as this sanctification is gradually attained, so is justification also. Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust let him be unjust still, but he that is justified let him be justified still, and he that is sanctified let him be sanctified still, that is, more and more; where justification and sanctification are used for an inhesive holiness, or righteousness, as was said before. Seventhly, as sanctification is communicated and gi∣ven to make us obedient unto the law, that it may be ful∣filled by us, so is justification also; Rom. 8.4. That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledg of God, or through the sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. Eighthly, as forgiveness of sins follows sanctification, as an individual companion of those sins that are purged away by it, Acts 26.18. that they may receive remission of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith that is in me: so that remission of sins is not justification, but an effect or concomitant of the same. Rom. 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifieth; who shall condemn? So did our Church believe, and did pray for children and persons to be baptized, saying, Almighty and im∣mortal God, the aid of all that need, &c. We call upon thee for these infants, that they coming to thy holy bap∣tism may receive remission of their sins by spiritual rege∣neration. Ninthly, whereas our Saviour makes the new birth ab∣solutely necessary to salvation John 3.3. Verily I say un∣to you, that unless ye be born again ye cannot see the king∣dome of God: so Saint Paul leaves out sanctification in order of causes, unless sanctification and justification be
all one: Rom. 8.30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate them he also called, and whom he called those he justified, and whom he justified them he also glorified. And so doth our Church in the 39. Article speak of sanctification under justification, or else leaves it out as needless; which were impiety in us to think: which is yet more clear out of the thirteenth Article, thus intituled. 'Of works before justification: The words of the article are these; Works done before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make us meet to receive grace. Tenthly, every grace and vertue of God whereby we perform obedience to Gods law is called a justification; and all the graces of the Saints are named as so many par∣ticular justifications: Rev. 19.8. And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linnen, clean and white, for the white linnen is the , or justifications of Saints. Hence it is that Basil Psal. 118. according to his account 119. upon vers. 2. he cals the commandements justification, as those which are to justifie or make just those that observe them rightly: so before Psal. 119.7. the law, &c. Eleventhly, by doing and fulfilling of the law, which we do accomplish by the grace and Spirit of Christ, Rom. 8.4. we become fully justified before God. Rom. 2.13. For not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. Lastly, as we are sanctified by the blood (that is, the Spirit of Christ:) Heb. 10.29. Of how much forer punishment shall he be thought worthy who hath troden under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified an unholy thing, and done despite to the Spirit of grace? So we are justi∣fied by the same blood. Rom. 5.9. How much more be∣ing justified by his blood shall we be saved from wrath through him? Hence it is also that the Apostle speaking of the love of Christ to him and his fellow-Apostles and
Saints, saith, who hath loved us, and washed us in his own blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God, Rev. 1.5, 6. where Saint John speaks of the work of justi∣fication. See 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. compared with Exod. 19.5, 6. Concerning which work of justification by Christs internal righteousness, take these few testimonies of the Fathers following instead of many more which might be alledged. Justin. Martyr. in quaest. ad Orthodoxos, before cited; But what is the universal righteousness of the law? To love God above himself, and his neighbour as himself, which is not impossible to those men that apply themselves thereunto. Wherefore the Apostle did not therefore say, that no flesh should be justified by the works of the law, because we cannot perform impossible things, but because we will not do possible things. Cyprian. serm. 6. de oratione Domini, speaking of the Publican, that went away rather justified then the Pharisee, saith, he by his humiliation deserved to be sanctified, &c. Where he makes sanctification and justification to be one and the same thing. Hieron. in lib. 1. dialog. advers. Pelag. That a man is not condemned for that which he hath not, but is justified for what he hath. Ambrose lib. 6. exam. cap. &c. I pray thee answer, whether justification seem to conferred upon thee accor∣ding to the mind: But thou canst not doubt, seeing ju∣stice or righteousness from whence justification hath its derivation, but that it belongs unto the mind, and not unto the body. Epiphanius doth not onely make righteousness and good∣ness to be the same in the end of the second Tome of his first book; but in the first Tome of his third book, having spoken of a three-fold sanctification or justification, one of the body under Moses, and another of the soul under the Prophets, and a third of the Spirit in the new Testa∣ment, he compares them to the three parts of the Tem∣ple; the first to the outward court ot space; the second to the holy; and the third to the Propitiatorie. And saith,
God counts him only just that hath his habitation in the said last steps or degrees of his inward Temple of holi∣nesse. The like saying he hath again in lib. anathe∣matum. Augustine serm. 5. de Trin. cap. 8. which nature when it is justified it is transformed from deformity unto a beau∣tiful form. Idem lib. ad Sympliciam quaest. 2. Because the purpose of God to justifie some beleevers remains, there∣fore doth he find out these good works which he may choose into the kingdom of Heaver. And there after∣wards, unlesse the mercy of God in calling men precede, neither can any man believe that he may thereby begin to be justified, and receive the power and faculty of opera∣ting good. Et lib. de peccati meritis & remissione cap. 10. we read that they which beleeve in Christ are justified by (or for) the occult communication and inspiration of his spiritual grace: and in Psal. 119. concio. 26. Who whath wrought righteousnesse in man, but he that justifieth the ungodly? that is, by his grace of ungodly makes him righ∣teous: and in Psal. 98. Who hath righteousnesse in is but he that hath justified us? Therefore we are wicked and he is our justifier, because he works the righteousnesse in us whereby we please him: and serm. 15. de verbis Apo∣stolicis, He that beleeveth him shall not have his own righteousnesse which is out of the Law (although the Law is good) but he shall fulfill the Law it selfe, not with his own righteousnesse, but with that which is given from God himselfe; for love is the fulfilling of the Law: and from whence is that love diffused into our hearts? cer∣tainly not from our selves, but by the Spirit of God which is given unto us. Cyril. Alexandrinus lib. 6. de Trin. It is the heat of the Spirit, who when he hath diffused love into us, and infla∣med our mind with the love of the same, then we have obtained righteousnesse. Greg. lib. 18. Mor. cap. 23. All the chosen ones of the imperial countrey are holy and just by participation of wisedom, not in comparison of it: they are righteousnesse
and wisedome, and the servants of righteousnesse and wise∣dom, but that wisdome (to wit Gods) is the justifying righteousnesse, and they are the justified righteousnesse. Prosper. lib. sent. ex Augustino; As there are two offices of Physick, or of medicine, one whereby the infirmity or disease is healed, and the other whereby health is preser∣ved; so there are two gifts or effects of grace, one which takes away the concupiscence of the flesh, and the other which makes the vertue of the mind to abide or continue with us, & in respons. ad cap. 6. Gallorum; A justified man, that is, he which of ungodly is now made godly, where no good, merit, or desert did go before, hath received the gift, (by which means he may attain merit or work) that what was begun by the grace of Christ may also be aug∣mented by the industry of free-will; the help of God be∣ing never set aside or neglected, without which no man can either be a proficient or perseverer in any good. Bernard. lib. Sent. For so is justification fulfilled when we abstain from the vices for bidden, and exercise the ver∣tue or good things commanded. By this time it is evident (we hope) that we are no innovators, unlesse the Fathers of the Church, the Pro∣phets, Apostles, and Christ himself, who have set forth our doctrine, shall be counted such. And it is no lesse apparent that the Vindicator is a veterator, and one of those false prophets of which he speaks in his Preface, whose study and labour it is to deceive poor souls, yea if it were possible, the very elect; in which place he tels us more truly then he was aware, [that these are the times foretold, wherein there shall be a falling away and a defection from the faith, a forerunner of the great and terrible day.] For the doct∣rine maintained in his two positions (by whomsoever first broached) clearly decyphers a manifest defection from the faith which was first given to the Saints, who looked for these two things only or mainly by Christ; first, deli∣verance out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, and then to be so renewed that they might serve God with∣out fear in holinesse before him all the days of their life,
Luk 1.68. and to escape the corruption of the world (which came in by lust,) and to be made partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. To be by regeneration justi∣fied, in hope to be made heirs of eternal life, Tit. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. who expecting eternall life have placed their Religion and Christianity in putting off the old man, and putting on the new, Ephes. 4.20, 24. In which Preface also he gives us a warrant for what we preach and write, saying, [the glory of God lies at the stake (as it doth here) and truth is opposed, he tels us that Gods people must not stand by with a guilty silence;] nor will we be silent God assisting. But whereas he saith, [that he is neither of note, nor no∣ted by the unworthiest among the thousands of Levite,] we shall easily grant him the former; but for the latter, as he was never any of the tribe of Lovi, but by intrusion, and first in a mendicant and abusive way: so if he had been one of that Tribe, he might have past for one of the unworthi∣est of them, by reason of his lewd life; as no small part of his doctrine here is the scumm of ignorance and infidelity. What he saith further, [that we in the publick congrega∣tion (to wit, at our second meeting) did beat down the truth of his positions, and seek to maintain the contrary,] he is mistaken, it was to decry and overthrow the falshood of the same, for we can truly say with the Apostle in our mea∣sure and degree, 2 Cor. 13.8. We can do nothing against the truth but for the truth: where notwithstanding he tels us that the points in controversie have been so fully and cleerly vindicated by the Worthies of our Church, (of which himself, nor we, ever saw any yet) and by our yet living Clergie (why did he then produce none of them?) that to any not puft up with spiritual pride admission of additi∣on may seem superfluous and unnecessary; then by his own words he must be convicted as one puft up with spiritual pride, whatsoever his coadjutors are; for he and they have made a large addition, if any thing in this kind was ex∣tant before. But whereas he tels us [that many people have been disturbed and disquieted (in their former opinions and purity) by reason of the audaciousnesse and impuden∣cy
of the opposers of his tenents: we say it that we were, are, and we hope shall be, bold in the cause of God against sin, and Satan, and the upholders of his kingdom; but we were never so audacious and impudent as himself, who in Suffolk changed his name, and called himself Doctor Kendall of Pembrook-Hall. How beit we will use his pretended motives for our re∣all incentives, who saith, and that truly therein, that be∣cause many of the people are not able to buy volumes, nor by reason of the weaknesse of their capacities (and small growth in grace) are able so readily to apprehend the clearnesse and perspicuity of the truth upon the hearing of them, nor yet clearly to distinguish betwixt them and falshood vailed under truths svizard, we have therefore for their satisfaction (and the edification of all men) as also for the confirmation of the truth, presented unto publick view some few collections, which being seriously weighed, considered, and digested, may by the blessing of God ena∣ble the weakest, if willing, to discover truth from falshood, Amen. Now whereas he adds, he is willing both to spend (which is true of his own money, and other mens also) and to be spent for the Israel of God: It is a grosse peece of hypocrisie; for it is their way that he opposeth, Psal. 73.1. Surely God is good to Israel, even to them that are of a clean heart. And yet he saith, it being the end for which we are what we are (that is, if he speaks of himself, his way and practise, a ve∣ry Gusmond.) Finally he tels his Readers that they are upon the Stage. Which is true of the Theatre of this world (where we hope they will act Israels part better then he hath hitherto done) and we will with him wish them to fight the good fight of faith, (which is not for sin or Satan, as his Vindication tels us, but for Christ against both) and then we may as truly, as he doth deceitfully, assure them, you, and all the Israel of God, that the victory shall be glo∣rious, (more glorious then his hath been hitherto, or is likely to be hereafter, without a sudden and earnest repen∣tance) through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be glory for ever, Amen.
And now we crave leave to speak a word or two to those that have abetted the Vindicator, or do any way fa∣vour his doctrine; and therein to advertise them of these things in the name and bowels of Christ. First, that this doctrine is not the Protestants doctrine, though it may be called a Protestant doctrine; for there are many distinct Churches, all whose faith and doctrine are called Protestant, because in many things they protest a∣gainst the Church of Rome; of which the Calvinistical is the worst, and most erroneous; the Lutherans is the next, and in some things more orthodox then the former: And the third is the ancient English reformed Protestant, which is far the best of all the three; for our Reformers desired to tread in the footsteps of Antiquity, according to their best sight and comprehension, which the other, and (espe∣cially the Calvinists) were carelesse to do, and in many things refractory thereagainst: and though we in the point of original sin may seem to differ from our English Church (which received that by tradition from many of the Fa∣thers) yet when occasion shall serve, we shall make it ma∣nifest, that we have not only divine authority for that and other things also wherein we seem to some to be out of the common road, but we have the first Fathers of the Church, and the first reformers, as well as many of the latter, on our side: and what dishonour will it bring to God, or discon∣solation to parents whose children die in infancy, that we affirm that all children are now born without origi∣nal taint or guilt, or why should an allegoricall speech, Rom. 5. of our naturall and personall Adam, or an hyper∣bolical speech of David, Psal. 51. so far impose upon us (though not rightly looked into by some others in many ages) as openly to contradict many other Scriptures vindi∣cating Gods mercy and justice? Secondly, that this doctrine of the Vindicators which we oppose is bottomlesse, like the place from whence it came, that is, it hath no foundation in the Scripture: whereas we have brought some hundreds of Texts, and might have brought more, to clear up the truth and piety
of our tenents; for we dare challenge all the Calvinists in the world to prove any of these assertions, (upon which the contrary doctrine is built) by clear Texts of Scripture: First, that we shall not be perfected in grace till the day of Iudgment, so as to be presented without spot, or wrinkle, or a∣ny such thing, whereas we have remonstrated two things to the contrary, first, that many places which our adversa∣ries understand of that day, speak clearly of Christs second coming to us in the Spirit and inner-man: and secondly, that we must be made holy and without blemish, not in that day, but before it, and in order unto it, Phil. 1.6, 10, 11. 1 Thess. 5.32. 1 Tim. 6.12, 13, 14, 15. 2 Pet. 3.14. and secondly, that we shall not be perfected in grace, or the righteousnesse of sanctification, untill we come into Heaven, or the full kingdome of God; for we have shew∣ed that justification, which is all one with sanctification, must of necessity go before glorification, Rom. 8.30. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. and so must full obedience and doing of Gods will, if the Lord affords time and means be fore the enjoy∣ment of the promises, 2 Cor. 5.10. 'then we must receive the things done in our bodies; that is a time not of sowing, but of reaping reward, Gal. 6.9. to wit, of life and glory, Heb. 10.36. 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. Thirdly, they say that sin shall be mortified and abolished by corporal death, and not by the spirit of grace only, contrary to Rom. 8.13. but if ye mortifie the deeds of the body by the Spirit, ye shall live: and Rom. 12.21. be not overcome of the evil, but overcome the evil with the good. See 1 Joh. 1.7, 9. and chap. 14. and 5.3.4. Rev. 7.14. and 12.10, 11. Fourthly, they say that the Spirit of God will a∣bolish the remainders of sin in the hour of the corporal death, and not before; contrary to the import of innume∣rable Scriptures; Psal. 31.15. My times are in thine hand, deliver me from the hands of mine enemies: and 39.13. 'O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen: and 41.5. Mine ene∣mies speak evil of me, when shall he die, and his name perish? and vers. 10, 11. But thou O Lord be merciful un∣to
me, raise me up that I may requite them; by this I know thou favourest me, because mine enemies do not triumph over me: and 54.4, 5. Behold God is my helper, the Lord is with them that uphold my soul, he shall re∣ward evill to mine enemies, cut them off in thy truth: and 59.13. Consume them in thy wrath, consume them, that they may not be; and let them know that God ruleth in Iacob to the ends of the earth: and 71.24. My toung shall talkof thy righteousnesse all the day long, for they are confounded, for they are brought to shame that seek my hurt: and 101.8. I wil early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all wicked doers from the City of the Lord; which is every Saint. Jerem. 4.14. Wash thine heart O Jerusalem, that thou mayst be saved; how long shall thy wicked thoughts lodg in thee? Psal. 112.8. His heart is established, he shall not be afraid un∣till he see his desire upon his enemies: and 139.23, 24. Search me O my God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting: and 143.9, 10. Deliver me O Lord from mine enemies, for I fly to thee, to hide me with thee; teach me to do thy will, for thou art my God: thy Spirit it is good, lead me unto the Land of uprightnesse, and of thy mercy cut off all mine enemies, and destroy all them that afflict my soul. Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thine hand findeth to do, do it with all thy might; for there is no work, knowledg, wisedome, or de∣vice in the grave, whether thou goest: and Luk 1.74, 75. That we being delivered out of the hands of our ene∣mies might serve him without fear, in holinesse and righ∣teousnesse before him all the days of our life. Tit. 2.12. Teaching us, that denying ungodlinesse and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this pre∣sent world. 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his body upon the tree, that we being dead to sin might live unto righteousnesse: and 4.1, 2. Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind, that he which is dead hath
ceased from sin, that he should no longer live the rest of his time in the flesh, after the lusts of men, but after the will of God. Fifthly, that when we were first con∣verted sin had his death-wound▪ contrary to Rom. 7.14, 24. and 8.13. Gal. 5.17. Heb. 3.13, 14. Take heed bre∣thren lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; but exhort one ano∣ther daily, lest any of you be hardned through the deceit∣fulnesse of sin: and 6.4, 5, 6. and 10.26, 27, 28, 29, 30. and 12.15. Looking diligently lest any fall from the grace of God, lest any root of bitternesse springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. 2 Pet. 2.1.20, 21. Jude 4. &c. for no sin hath its deadly wound till it be by the patience and Spirit of Christ wholly overcome and lest, Rev. 2.16. and 3.10. Sixthly, That all the guilt of sin and punishment is taken away, though the pollution and corrup∣tion remains; contrary to Prov. 28.13. Jer. 33.8. Acts. 26.18. this is to take away the effect, and leave the cause in force and being: hence it is that Hieronymus saith on 1 Cor. 6. Be not deceived, thinking that faith alone sufficeth, for every sin that remaineth excludeth men from the kingdome of Heaven, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5. how the works of the flesh are hurtfull, which are these, adul∣tery, fornication, uncleannesse &c. of which I tell you be∣fore, as I have told you in times past, that they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven. But also, saith he, they pray sinfully who persevere in sin, and de∣sire that those sins of theirs should be pardoned or put a∣way by the Lord, which they themselves have not put a∣way from them. Seventhly, they say that there is not any o∣ther active obedience or righteousnesse of Christ to be at∣tained by faith then that which Christ works in his Saints: for its contrary to Isai. 45.24, 25. and 48.18. and 53.11. and 59.17. and 61.3, 10, 11. and 62.1, 2. Jerem. 23.5, 6. and 31.31, 32, 33. and Rom. 4.11. and 5.7, 18, 19. and 8.4. Phil. 3.9, 10. Eighthly, that we are perfect in this life, and complete by justification, though not by sanctification; wheres they are both one thing, as hath been proved at
large: and while the one is imperfect the other is also. Ninthly, that justification lies in remission of sins, or ta∣king away the guilt of the same, yet leaving the sin or pol∣lution behind: whereas justification, taken in a liberative way, is a purging and washing away of the fault and cor∣ruption in the first place; as hath been proved out of Acts 13.20. and 1 Cor. 6.11. Tit. 3.4 5, 6, 7. Thirdly, consider that the kingdome of God which Christ and his Apostles preached is not onely an inward kingdome, Luk. 17.21. as it is a kingdome both of grace, Rom. 14.17. and of glory also, Rom. 8.19. Ephes. 1.18. but consequently that there is an internal heaven of holiness and glory to be had and obtained by the Saints in this life, Heb. 10.34. knowing that ye have in your selves a better and more induring substance in the heavens; for so the words are in the Greek Text. As Paul also speaks of him∣self and fellow-Apostles, whom God hath raised up and set together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephes. 2.5, 6. this is that kingdome which Christ taught his Di∣sciple to pray for, saying, 'thy kingdome come; and which he and John Baptist published 'to be at hand, Matth. 3.2. and 4.17. and which 'John saw coming down from God out of heaven, Rev. 21.23. before whose coming all sin must be purged away, for 'no unclean thing can enter into it, Rev. 21.27. yea all the spiriteal effects of sin, as the second day, sorrow, crying and tears shall be removed, Rev. 21.4. Fourthly, that they which know not, own not, nor wit∣ness this kingdome of God, with the way and means thereunto, were never sent of God to preach the true Gospel of the kingdome, but do publish their own imaginations and traditions of men, as the Vindicator, and many of far greater note then he, both living and dead, both do and have done. Fithly, that they who do not believe that he (God) will avenge his elect who cry unto him night and day for vengeance against their spiritual enemies for the rooting of all out, Luk. 18.1, 7. have not the faith of Gods elect; as hath been said before.
Sixthly, we shall leave it to your serious consideration whether it be not the voice of the unbelievers, and not of the Saints, of whom it is said, concerning the beast of sin which came out of the sea with seven heads and ten horns, saying, Rev. 13.4. and they worshiped the dragon, who gave power unto the beast, and they worshipped the beast, saying, who is like unto the beast, who is able to make war with him? Which interpretation concerning the beast of sin is not ours, but Arrias Montanus hath it, and that from a special Author also. Seventhly, we would not have it slightly passed over which is written, Numb. 13.14. concerning the ten un∣believing spies, who would neither encourage themselves nor others to go and fight against the Canaanites, that so they might have inherited the promised land, but dishear∣tened themselves and others with the apprehension of im∣possibilities, till they were excluded therefrom in the end; 'for whatsoever was written in time past was written for our instruction, Rom. 15.14. 1 Cor. 10.6. Heb. 4.1. and so was the story of Bar-Jesus, Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13.6. who called himself Bar-Jesus, that is, the Son of Jesus, and pretended to become a prophet, but he opposed the true faith in Christ, as the Vindicator and some others do, seeking to turn away the Deputy Sergius Paulus from it, and so perverted the right way of the Lord, being an enemy to the true righteousness; in which regard, he is not onely called a false prophet, and a sorcerer, as his name importeth, but smitten with blindness: from which sin and all other, as well as from the horrid effects thereof, the Lord in his mercy preserve us all; and let those in speciall find mercy at his hands, who opposing the truth have done it ignorant∣ly in unbeliefe, 1 Tim. 1.13. Eighthly, that a great part of the Clergy in this nation, and no smal part of them in authority, begin to decline from the Orthodox faith of our English reformed Church, and to urge the rigid and turbulent opinions of Mr. John Knox, the father of the Gomarists in Scotland, whose doctrine and discipline in an hundred years space hath not brought
forth so much reformation of life in that nation, as our late erected Government hath done there, though for the most part by awe and constaint. Lastly, that as this doctrine deviates from the Apostles faith, Rom. 6.8. for if we be dead with him, we believe that we shall live with him; so it swerves from the right end of both the Sacraments; for by baptism we are bu∣ried into the death of Christ, that like as Christ was raised up by the glory of the Father, even so we should walk in newness of life: for if we have been planted together into the similitude of his death, so then shall we be into the likeness of his resurrection, Rom. 6.5, 6. and in the Lords supper we are to shew forth the Lords death (in dying with him unto all iniquity) until his coming a∣gain unto us in the power of his resurrection, 1 Cor. 11.26. Which two estates are by the Vindicators doctrine op∣posed as things of impossible attainment in this life; and so the summe of the Gospel, the right belief and true Chri∣stian race, hereby denied, decried, and openly opposed in this Vindication, by which the Vindicator hath verified (as if his name were ominous in reference to his design) another anagram of his Name, O hindring net. God hath his net, and so hath the Devil, Both nets are daily us'd about the evil: Gods net draws fish out of the sea of sin, The Mare clausum Satan casts them in; Where Satans drudger-man is still impli'd To watch, and draw Gods fish on his shore side; This work to do, (John Tendring) he is set To plead for sin, hence call'd O hindring net. True Doctrine is Gods net; his fisher men Are ministers of righteousness, and then False doctrine must be Satans net to draw Men from their due observance of Gods law; By which they love to God and man forget: And such thy book doth prove, O hindring net.
Having finished also the catasceuastical part of our Re∣vindication, in the next pirce we shall presume to offer some Queries (because we desire to lay open our hearts and minds for the trueths cause) to such as are held to censure and rashly to judge of those whom they beleive are contrary-minded unto themselves. 1. Querie Whether do you or any of you pretend to an infallible Spirit, whereby you do not (nor can erre) in what you affirm or deny to be divine truth according to the Records, commonly called the Scriptures. The reason is, because the late Synod confessed, cap. 31. of their Con∣fession, that Councels and Synods have erred, as themselves have done: else why do they not answer the Examen a∣gainst it in the materal points, out of pity to the examiners, (who pitied them) to undeceive them and the well-meaning people. Secondly, because if it be true, as aforesaid, then why do the Committees for trying in one place, and ejection in every County, though some are more moderate then others, put the Article at the foot of other Articles, That he is ignorantand insufficient for the work of the Ministry; when sometimes the person the said article is put upon, is a grave Doctor of Divinity, and may be their catechisers Father for age in years and learning. Thirdly, because many are put out, (and others kept out) of a livelyhood in the way themselves live and grow, with other additionals rich by, because they cannot ex consciencià subscribe and own their masters opinions, Et jurare in verba magistri; and yet these masters by their own confession may erre as their masters did whose servants were the miser men, John 7.45, 46, 47, 48, 49. 2. Querie: What do you aim at in your preaching with such bitterness (especially in Wilts) against us? whe∣ther to maintain a combination and faction of self inte∣rest or that the people you preach unto may live a peacable and most holy life, and their souls saved in the day of the Lord. The reason of this Querie is, because the A∣postle saith, James 1.14. If you have bitter envying and strife
in your hearts glory not, also you lye against the truth: and vers. 16. where envying and strife is there is confusion and every evil work: vers. 17. and that the fruit of righteousnesse sown in peace of them that make peace. Therefore Heb. 11.14. the Apostle saith, follow peace with all men, without which none shalt see God. 3. Querie. Whether such doctrines as hold out a possi∣bility of a total mortification of sinne (through the grace and help of Christ) and a perfect obedience to the Law of God, are not the Doctrines which do perswade people to live that most holy life, but lead men, as some have said, from Heaven to Hell, if Hell be where no sin nor unclean thing can come, and Heaven be where much sinne will remain (it is confessed) according to the Vindicators attestation and position. The reason of this Querie is offered, by reason we have heard from an intelligent and present hearer thereof, that a Minister in Salisbury, (but it is said he was late a New-England man) did pray to God in his ignorant real (before many people) that he might never believe such a doctrine as a possibilty of a total mortification of sin in this life. And we pray God of his mercy not to say Amen to his pray∣er, but pray unto the Lord Jesus for him or such-like, that he would intercede to his Father, saying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they say. 4. Querie. Whether it be not interest, and self-love in any, to maligne others for what they hold out to the world for doctrines according to godlinesse, before the said ma∣ligning persons do confute by plain Scriptures the said do∣ctrines held out to be contrary to godlinesse; and likewise give the said maligned persons freedom and time to make reply and answer for themselves: for you may see what Festus said, Act. 25.27. 5. Querie. Whether they do well, and do as they would be dealt with, who charge men for preaching poysonfull do∣ctrine, before they themselves have heard such kind of do∣ctrine from them whom they charge with it; or have recei∣ved some information from others, either viva voce, or under
their hands, that the persons charged have preached such kind of doctrine. 6. Querie. Whether the holy Scriptures, commonly called the word of God, be not the rule, and the only ex∣tornal rule, to confute all error, and confirm all truth by; because it is said, Isai. 8.20. to the Law and to the testimony. 7. Querie. Whether an errour in Divinity be not a Scri∣pture-axiome commonly mistaken, and not understood. As an Anabaptist (for so some are called by others of divided judgments) mistook that Scripture-axiome, Matth. 20.25, 26. where it is said, The Princes of the Gentiles exercise domi∣nion over them, and they who are great exercise authority over them; but it shall not be so among you. From which ex∣ceptive particle (but) in the last clause, the said person denied magistracy to be exercised over Christians; for which cause he was (some years since, as its said) imprisoned in Lin∣coln-Castle, and indicted upon the next opportunity before the Judge of Assise for that County: Upon which Indict∣ment he produced his Bible, and desired the Judge that the place might be read, where it is said, but it shall not be so a∣mong you. But who was most in fault for his said opinion? the poor misunderstanding man, who out of conscience did ad∣here to the translated Scripture, or they who did translate the said two verses amisse, and so led him from the mind of Christ to the said misunderstanding? for the words are, . Now the preposition , which signifieth ofttimes contrarium & adversus, being added to the verbs  and , must make the said verbes to signifie to abuse and pervert their rule and authority; which was no doubt our Saviours meaning, when he said to his disciples, but it shall not be so among you, namely, not to abuse any authority com∣mitted unto them; which is a good caveat to all Christian magistrates to use their authority rightly and Christian-like: according to which if the foresaid words had been
translated, (as they ought to have been) the foresaid con∣scientious man had (no question) submitted to Christi∣an magistrates, and so have been kept out of prison; for who will not submit to magistrates out of obediential love, while they exercise their ruling power and authority ac∣cording to rules of justice prescribed by God, without respect of persons, because then there would be no com∣plaining in our streets? But saith Christ, wo be to them by whom offences come, Matth. 18.7. 7. Querie. Whether it be not the most compendious way of right judging every pretended divine controversie, to put the said controversie into a Scripture-axiom or axi∣oms; and consider whether both parts (which are com∣monly called the subject and predicate) of the said axiom be expresly or equivalently contained in the Scripture: as for instance; It is said by the Romanists, that Papa Ro∣manus est caput Ecclesiae, that the Pope of Rome is head of the Church: and, that, Maria est mediatrix gratiae, that Mary, Christs Mother, is the intercessor to her Son for grace and help for us in time of need. Now its confessed that caput Ecclesiae, which is the pro∣dicate, or last part of the foresaid axiom, is in the Scri∣pture; but we cannot find the subject, or first part of the aforesaid axiom (Papa Romanus) in the Scripture, which surely must be therein contained if ever we think to prove by Scripture that the Pope, of Rome is head of the Church. So must we find mediatrix gratiae in Scripture, the predicate or latter part of the second axiom, before we do with con∣fidence affirm that Maria est mediatrix gratiae, that Mary is the intercessor to her Son for grace to be given to us in our time of need: therefore why should we believe the said assertions for divine truths, when we cannot find those axioms to be expresly or equivalently laid down in Scri∣pture? 8. Querie. Whether the sense we put upon an axiom (expresly laid down in Scripture) ought not to be proved to be expresly or equivalently in some one Scripture or o∣ther of Gods word, that so we may justifie our said sense
of the axiom to be the very mind of Christ according to the Scriptures. As for instance; Saint John saith of him∣self, Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords day: In which words are these two divine axioms: First, That there is a Lords day. Secondly, that Saint John saith, I was in the Spirit on the Lords day. Now he that will presume to fix his proper sense upon the first axiom, affirming what is meant by the Lords day; or upon the second axiom, what is meant to be in the Spirit on the Lords day; must not he first prove that his said sense is plainly declared in some Scripture or other to be a Scri∣pture-sense, and so the mind of God? otherwise he may justly be questioned why he putteth such a sense upon the said axiom, which the holy Scriptures do not expresly hold out in some place or other of the said Scriptures. And in case some other place of Scripture do fully declare his sense of the axiom to be divine, (according to his assertion) yet he must prove by the context (if not by the text) of Scripture, that his sense imposed is the sense and meaning of the axiom he hath laid down in the said place; otherwise it had been much better for his advan∣tage to have chosen the axiom in Scripture which expresly holdeth out his said sense, then to put a sense upon an axiom which he cannot prove by the text, or context, to be the genuine sense of the said axiom. The sense which too many Divines put upon Saint John's words, is, that Saint John meaneth by the Lords day the first day of the week, which they call our Christian Sab∣bath (in contradistinction to the Jews Sabbath) to be set apart as the Lords day, which we must solemnize and keep sacred as a day to the Lord, (commanded by him) to be solemnized by all good Christians in holy duties, as preaching the word, hearing the same, administring the Sacraments publickly with prayer and thanksgiving; and also spend the remainder of the day (vacant from publick duties) in private reading, prayer, and repetition of Ser∣mons, &c.
It is true (and we confess it) that the foresaid duties are most needful to be practised by us; and that a day to do them in is most needfull to be appointed and assigned: and as for our selves we do profess to all whom it may con∣cern, that we are most ready to perform the same du∣ties enjoyned on the said day in every capacity we stand re∣lated unto; yea we acknowledge our selves bound in ob∣ligation of Scripture and Conscience to observe the said day (now set a part to be observed by this nation) from outward and bodily labours so farre as we can do it without transgressing some other command of God incumbent at that time upon us: and thus we acknowledge we cease from our said works, as a figurative Sabbath, which imports a cessation to rest; and as an instruction to put our selves and others in minde to cease from thinking of our own thoughts, words, and actions, Is. 58.13. which are our sinful thoughts, words, and actions, as being most properly ours, because Saint James saith, every man is drawn away of his concupis∣cence, James 1.13, 14. which we must cease from, that so at length we may come into the true rest which is prepared for the people of God, Heb. 4.9. This is our confession of faith in this particular afore∣said; and if the Christian magistrates we are to live under, do appoint two such Sabbaths aforesaid in a week to be ob∣served by the nation, we are ready to do what is required of us accordingly in every capacity we stand in. But we still querie the said Divines, whether they can prove by text, or context, that Saint John in the foresaid place (Rev. 1.10.) did mean by the Lords day the first day of the week; or whether the first day of the week is spe∣cified in any place of Scripture in plain terms to be our Christian Sabbath, and so to be used and set apart (as afore∣said) for the Lords day. Thirdly, what place is there in the New Testament which calleth the first day of the week the Lords day, for Christians to observe, as the Lords day, in cessation from all bodily labours which are appointed for the benefit of the natural life? because if there be no such day specified in the
Scriptures, as aforesaid, it is lest to Christian magistrates to order and appoint a day of cessation from bodily employ∣ments in reference to the performance of such pious and needful duties aforesaid, to the glory of God, and good of our souls; which must be cared for in special man∣ner, for Christ saith, What will it profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his soul? Matth. 16.26. Secondly, because if the said day be set apart by God to the ends and purposes aforesaid, and in such a manner as is pretended, then we must be bold to tell the Christian magistrate, that he hath no more liberty and authority to dispense with any civil affaires to be done on that day, then any private man hath; unless there fall out some present and unavoidable necessity to transact some performances for the preventing or suppressing of some imminent and de∣structive mischief. In other cases we say (if it be as afore∣said) the Christian magistrates must not allow and tolerate such civil affairs to be done on the Christian Sabbath, as are ordinarily and frequently allowed to be done; for Christ who said, Give unto Caesar the things which are Caesars, said also, Give unto God the things which are Gods, Matth. 22.21. And likewise Christ-saith, Math. 15.19. Let none teach for doctrines the traditions of men: hence all (especially in au∣thority) must be wary how they publish any thing to be Gods mind, for to bind others to its observance, as the positive command of Jesus Christ, unlesse it be plainly ex∣pressed according to their sense in some Scripture-axiom or other; for as an axiom is onely true or false, so a di∣vine axiom is always true. 9. Querie. In case it be a plain Scripture-axiom which is affirmed or denyed, whether then to find out the true meaning and scope of the said Scripture-axiom as its trans∣lated, whether (we say) it be not requisite, first, to consi∣der if the words of that axiom be rightly translated out of the original tongue or language in which the axiom was first written, that is, whether the words of the axiom in the translation do bear the same and as full a sense as the words in the original do evidently import.
Secondly, whether the verbs (if there be any in the said axiom) be translated in the same mood and tense which the original language will bear, and are usually put into; when there is great reason (for to make good sense) so to do. As for instance; Solomon saith, 2 Chron. 6.36. If they sinne against thee, (for there is no man, saith our Translation in the said place, that sinneth not) and thou be angry with them, &c. Those words in the parenthesis, (for there is no man which sinneth not) are offered and premised as the reason of the hypotheticall axiom, if they sinne against thee. Now its as true as an usual saying, that hypothesis nihil point in esse, a supposition doth not put the thing absolute∣ly, but in possibility onely: as 1 Sam. 12.25. But if ye shall still do wickedly ye shall be consumed both ye and your King: now none can conclude from thence that they must needs continue to do wickedly, or that there is not a possi∣bility to abstain from doing wickedly; but the hypothe∣sis or supposition in that place doth onely declare that there was a possibility for them still to do wickedly, or not to do so any more. Hence also the hypothesis, 2 Chron. 6.36. doth only declare a possibility to sinne, or not to sinne against God, (if they sinne against thee.) Now Solo∣mons words which are by him brought as the reason why he said to God, if they sinne against thee (which are those in the parenthesis aforesaid) are so translated that they make the hypotheticall axiom (if they sinne against thee) ridiculous and nonsense; because if it be true, that there is no man that sinneth not, then its ridiculous and nonsense to say to God, or any other, if they do sin, when it is pre∣judged and declared that there is no man which sinneth not: but it is most apt sense to say, if they sinne against thee, for there is no man which may not sinne, or that is not in a possibility to sin, by reason of the mans weaknesse for a long time, and the manifold temptations he is liable unto. Hence the Translators ought to have translated the said verse (to make it good sense) if they sinne against thee, for
there is no man which may not sinne; which is the Potential mood of the verb, and present tense of the same mood, which the Translators ought to have rendred the verb In (to sinne or transgresse) though it is true that the said verb in the said place (in the Hebrew text) is in the future tense: but who is there (that knows any thing of that language) who knows not that the Hebrews have no potential mood of a verb; and that when they have oc∣casion to make use of the same mood to declare the sense of Scripture, according as it is intended, they then ren∣der the future tense of the Indicative mood in the Poten∣tial mood, as aforesaid? which the English Translators should have done, to have made the hypothetical axiom good sense in reference to the reason given immediately in the Parenthesis, to illustrate the hypothetical axiom by. Again, its requisite to find out the sense and scope of a Scripture-axiom, to observe whether the said axiom be laid down absolutely, without any dependence on the con∣text; or whether it be laid down with some relative par∣ticle (to be taken notice of) evidencing its dependence upon the context, antecedent or consequent. As for instance; it is thus translated, Eccles. 7.20. for there is no man which sinneth not; hence it is more confidently affirmed, then truly by most, that Solomon doth acknow∣ledge that there is no man upon earth which doth good and sinneth not. But the mistake of these men (who affirm as aforesaid) is from the mistranslating of the Hebrew particle ; which indeed is a relative particle, and doth intimate that this verse doth relate unto the 19 verse, which is the antece∣dent context thereunto; where it is said, that wisdome doth strengthen the wise more then ten mighty men which are in the city: The meaning is, that wisdome will fence and secure a wise man more from dangerous assaults and violence, then ten mighty men which are in the city. For the illustra∣tion of which, and to shew the excellency of wisdome, and the use thereof in a superlative degree, Solomon doth subjoyn the 20 verse, so as to make it with the 19 verse a
discrete axiom, by putting a discrete particle (if rightly translated) to the 20 verse: but our Translators expresse that particle  by a a causal particle, for, which indeed being so expressed maketh those said 19, 20 verses (relating together) to contain in their relative respect little or no sense at all, as will appear to every truth-searching man, thus: Wisedom doth strengthen the wise man more then ton mighty men which are in the City, for (or because) there is not a just man upon earth which doth good and sinneth not. Now is that a good reason or cause why wisedom doth strengthen a wise man more then ten mighty men, even because there is not a just man upon earth who doth good and sinneth not? surely its not a better reason then his was who gave out of his shallow judgement that Tenderden steeple was the cause of Goodwin-Sandes, because-Goodwin Sandes was after Tenderden steeple. That story Bishop Lati∣mer made use of upon an occasion (in a Sermon before King Edward) concerning such who ignorantly put non causam pro causa, that which is no cause for the cause. So do the Translators by their translation put non causam pro causa; for sinne is no cause why wisedome hath any ex∣cellent effect, but the contrary rather, if we believe what Solomon saith, Eccles. 10.1. Dead flies make the ointment of the Apothecarie to smel; so doth a little folly him that is in reputa∣tion for wisedom. But if the Translators had translated the particle  discretely, though: although: notwithstanding: and rendred the verb (which is in the future tense of the Indicative mood) in the present tense of the Potential mood then had they given a good and profitable sense of the words thus; Wisedom strengtheneth a wise man more then ten mighty men which are in a City; although there be no man upon earth which doth good and sinneth not: as it did strengthen Christ, Luk. 20.20, 21. and Stephen also, Act. 6.10. By translating the said words in the manner aforesaid (as they should have done) they had not been guilty of seducing the people to believe, by their translation, that Solomon doth affirm (contrary to Scriptures) that there is no man upon earth which doth good and sinneth not. If
those (who are Judges, and assume power to scan and judge mens words) do conclude the axiom or axioms to be posi∣tively and absolutely affirmed or denyed, which are only in∣tended relatively to the antecedent or consequent axioms; we say, if they do so, quis pene innocens sit? who can free him∣self from treason or blasphemy, as often as their tryers and Judges please to declare their words absolutely and ab∣stractly spoken, when the author of them intended them (as Solomon did in the place aforesaid) onely to be relatively spoken? By which kind of dividing axioms he did more wickedly then wittily, who said, Hang all the Law and the Prophets, concealing and not mentioning Christs antecedent words, Math. 22.40. On these commandements hang all the Law and the Prophets. 10. Que. Whether if we doubt of the meaning of an axiom which is a divine testimony, we are not to consider (to the end we may see the meaning of it) the artificial argu∣ments contained in the said axiom: for though testimoni∣um be argumentum inartificiale, yet the axiom consists of artificial arguments, and these testata must be proved by artificial arguments, or something equivalent or tanta∣mount unto them; which are qualifications requisite to be in every witnesse, as scientia, virtus, prudentia: First, Knowledge in the testis, else he will speak he knoweth not what, like them, 1 Tim. 1.7. Secondly, Vertue, or else talke they care not what, as they did, Math. 28.15. upon a sad account. Third∣ly, Constancy, else the testes will seem to contradict them∣selves as they did that cryed before Christ, Hosanna to the highest, and the next day cried, Crucifie him, crucifie him. Therefore to find out the true meaning of the res testata, the thing affirmed or denied, we must see what arguments (relating one to another) are contained in the axiom which is a Scripture-testimony. As for instance; Christ saith to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born again of water and of the Spirit, &c. Now what water Christ meaneth is the thing to be inquired into. We instance in the said place, because there was a learned respondent who did of late in a publique disputa∣tion
affirm (and the opponent did not deny it, though he might) that elementary baptismal water was meant by Christ in the said place. His only reason was (without any further demonstration) because so many Fathers had for so many ages downward attested it (without any arti∣ficial arguments, but onely their bare words) to be so: which is the reason (we professe to all men) why we doubt that sense to be the meaning of water in that place, unlesse the said respondent can assure us that those Fathers, (or some of them) were by inspirement infallible in gi∣ving of the said sense; if he can, then we will believe their Ipsi dixerunt, without any artificial arguments to prove what they say; because we then know what they affirm is true by reason they have (then) received the unction, (1 Joh. 2.26.) which is truth, and is no lye: But in the mean time he must pardon us that we dissent from him and his catalogue of Fathers (on which he buildeth his faith, for ought we see) in that point; and desire him to give us leave, or rectifie our weaknesse by some stronger reasons then we heard from him at that time, to declare to him first negatively, that the words of Christ could signifie no such thing. Our reason is from the artificial arguments contained in that axiom, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. The axiom is a compound axiom, (as all exceptive and exclusive axioms are,) wherein are two axioms, one affirmative, the other negative. Now as affirmation is before negation, so in the said ex∣ceptive compound axiom, the affirmative axiom is first to be considered. 1. That a man is to be born again of water and of the Spirit, to enter into the kingdom of God. 2. Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. In the first axiom is laid down the effect, to be born again, and its causes, water and the Spirit. In the second axiom is intimated the necessity of those
causes to the said effect, that without those two said can∣ses none can be born again to the kingdom of God. And so much for the general consideration of the two axioms. Our first reason (we say) why baptismal elementary wa∣ter is not meant there, is, because the effect and its causes are of the same nature or quality, according to the old and true maxime, Qualis effectus talis causa, & contrà, Such as the effect is such are the causes, by reason that Causa est cujus vi res est, A cause is by whose force and vertue a thing is. Hence the birth (specified Joh. 3.5.) being (as none, we believe, will deny) spiritual, the causes must be spiritual also, which Christ nameth to be water and the Spirit in a copulate re∣spect to the effect; also Christ putteth water as the first cause in order to the effect aforesaid: hence we affirm both causes, water and the Spirit, concurr as partial requisite cau∣ses to the effect. Secondly, that both causes therefore must be spiritual because the effect is spiritual: but baptismal elementary water is a grosse, material, and no spiritual water; and therefore the said water cannot be the water Christ meaneth as a partial concurrent cause to the new spi∣ritual birth. If it be said, that baptismal elementary wa∣ter is figurative, and representative of the new birth: That will not serve the turn; because Christ doth not speak of a new birthin respect of a partial representative cause, but he speaks of water as the true and reall, partial, cowork∣ing cause out of which a man must be born again, there∣fore the said elementary water is not meant. Neither can what is said be evaded by affirming that instrumental causes may be of another nature to the princi∣pal efficient causes; as the Apostles were, when it is said by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.9. we are labourers together with God: for though that be true in some respect, when they are used as preparatory causes, or instruments to the preparing of the said effect, yet it is not true that heterogeneal causes can communicate immediately their vertue in common to the said effect, and yet the effect be wholly of the nature of one of them, and not of the other; as we say in this place, that the effect is wholly spiritual, and Christ nameth water the pre∣ceding
concurring cause in common with the Spirit, from which this spiritual effect doth proceed. Again, though Paul do call himself a fellow-labourer, as aforesaid, 1 Cor. 3.9. yet the same effect of which he was a preparatory instrument, and but a preparatory instru∣ment, might have been produced without him; and no man, we think, dare affirm, that except Paul or his fellow-Apo∣stles had concurred, that the Corinthians and others could not have been begotten again in Christ. Again, Christ specifieth the water in the said place to be so necessary, that except a man be born of it and the Spirit he can∣not enter into the kingdome of God: which, if it be elementary baptismal water which is there meant, then no man nor child can be saved, or enter into the kingdome of God without it, no not Seth, Enoch, nor Abraham, nor any of the Patriarchs, unless they and every one of them were baptized with ele∣mentary water: but it is not likely, though the Jews had ce∣remonial washings, and though their washings were called baptism, that any of them used to baptize with water as Christ hath left the institution & direction of it to be, In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost (as is expressed Matth. 28.19.) which yet they must use in like manner, or none of them were or could be born again to the kingdome of God without it; because Christ saith, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter, &c. Again, if it be such water aforesaid which Christ maketh so necessary, as aforesaid, then those do very ill who are of that opinion, if they do not urge all parents to baptize their children so soon as they peep into the world (especially if they maintain the old tradition, of original sinne) because they are liable to sudden death (Quod cuivis potest accidere cuiquam potest) and not deferre the baptizing their children unto some more convenient time (as many do) for a more pompous and magnificent administration thereof. In the next place, we do affirm with confidence, that the water Christ meant in the said place is the divine and spiri∣tual word, according to that, John 15.3. Now you are clean through the word I have spoken unto you, which is Christs
living and powerful word, which is called spirit and life, John 6.63. which also is aptly called water by Christ, be∣cause it hath the same parallel effect to the defiled and un∣regen erate soul, that water hath to the defiled body; for as water cleanseth the defiled body, so the said word ma∣keth clean the defiled soul, according to that Ephes. 5.26, 27. where it is said, Christ gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctifie and cleanse it by the washing of water, in or through the word, as the Greek expresseth it, making the word the exegesis of the water; and the vulgar Latine turneth it, the word of life: hence Christ did say to Nicodemus, Ex∣cept a man be born again of water, that is, the word, called water as aforesaid, he cannot enter into the kingdome of God. Secondly, this word is meant by the water aforesaid, because none can enter into the kingdome of God without a washing with that word called, also Tit. 3.5. the Laver of regeneration, &c. for no unclean thing can enter, Rev. 21.27. and Christ said, John 15.3. Now you are clean through the word I have spoken to you: and James 1.18. it is said, Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth. But we presume to adde yet a little further, to shew how needful it is to prove from the text, or context, that the sense we fix upon a Scripture-axiom is the proper sense which the Holy Ghost intendeth in the said place; Because one Mr. Ste∣vens of Fenny Drayton in Leicestershire hath set forth a book which he intitles A three fold defence of original sinne in refe∣rence to the old common notion thereof; in which book he saith, (p. 94.) that the Examiners of the late Synods Con∣fession of faith deal sophistically with him and his party in leaving out their chief argument, which lieth (hid we con∣fess to us) in 3 John 6. But if it do appear that we have sophisticated with them, we acknowledge that they may justly (according to their large power of admitting or hindring) interdicere nobis aquâ & igne; sed qui non est sponte nocens we desire him to pardon; for we do profess to him that we did not dream of such a best in the said place among all their weak arguments for their tradition of original sinne, as aforesaid.
The sense Mr. Stevens sixeth upon those words (John 6.3. That which is born of the flesh is flesh,) is, that original sinne and the impurity of the natural birth is meant by the same words; and therefore there is a necessity of a new birth (spoken of v. 5.) from original sinne. Which we grant if it be in all men; but that is petitio principii; its the thing to be proved, though yet there is a necessity of a new birth according to v. 5. and for the reason added v. 6. but we challenge Mr. Stevens, (who boasteth of this place to contain (being as little to the purpose as the rest) their chief argument) to prove (for as yet he hath not done it) that Christ meant by flesh (from which that which is flesh is born) is original sinne and impurity by nature; which we openly deny (as it were at the market-crosse.) 1. Because flesh in Scripture is taken in more senses then Mr. Steven's his distinction of flesh in the said place (p. 94.) doth comprehend. Secondly, because flesh is more largely taken in Scri∣pture then he can yet fathom within his apprehension; and opposite also to the sanctifying work of the Spirit: there∣fore we say Mr. Stevens distinction and his explication of it doth not prove what he with rash confidence affirmeth. Now that flesh is taken in Scripture in other respects then Mr. Stevens mentioneth, as aforesaid, these following Scriptures do evidence: 2 Cor. 5.16. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh; yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth we know him so no more. Let Mr. Stevens apply the said place to his sense of flesh, John 3.6. and make good and Christian-like sense of the said words if he can; for there is spoken of a knowing Christ no more after the flesh, although they had known him so before: now to know them after the flesh must intend not to own them after the flesh any more, because Paul could not but know them after the humane flesh by reason all are in that condition to be outwardly conversed with. Secondly, He did never know (that is, own) Christ at any time after the flesh, as it is meant by Mr. Stevens in the se∣cond member of his distinction; for Christ was not born
in original sinne, nor yet lived at any time in the corruption of nature. Hence flesh in this place doth not come under any member of Mr. Stevens destinction. Again, flesh in this place is the same in sense, as appeareth by Pauls expres∣sion, in reference to men, and the reason of the Apostles dis∣owning any man henceforth after the flesh is grounded up∣on his disowning Christ after the flesh any more: for so the arguing lieth clear, by the emphatical expression or revocation; yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth we know him so no more: therefore the flesh is to be taken in that place in the same sense as it re∣lateth to men and Christ; and Paul would henceforth know neither men, nor Christ after the flesh: hence its plain that the flesh there was a state in contradistinction to the Spirit, or his other sanctifying work of the Spirit, in which Paul would not henceforth know them in. Again, in John 6.63. flesh is taken in another sense then Mr. Ste∣vens doth apprehend. But to come nearer to the sense of flesh, as it may suit with John 3.6. flesh is taken Gal. 3.3. not for corruption of nature in any kind, (because none can think the Galati∣ans ever did expect to be perfected by sinneful nature, after they had begun in the Spirit; much lesse did Paul drive at it, so as to upbraid them for attempting to be perfected by the flesh in that sense;) but for the fleshly ordinances they were turning back unto after they had begun in the Spirit; as doth plainly appear in chap. 4.21, 22, &c. chap. 5.1, 2, 3. So Heb. 7.16. the Ceremonial services (in which the Sribes and Pharisees rested in and were captived to, are called the carnal comman dement: So Heb. 9.11, 12. Hence the observan∣ces of them were but carnal, because the ordinances were but fleshly. Hence that which is born of the flesh is still flesh, according to Christs words, John 3.6. Now with Mr. Stevens his favour, in this sense of flesh, and not in his, of original sinne, and impurity of the birth, did Christ teach Nicodemus, first, the necessity of a new birth; Secondly, the necessity of it by the water and Spirit, which are the two copulate causes of it named by Christ; and
that upon the reason Christ giveth, from the nature of the cause to the like nature of the effect, in two instances, v. 6. that which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the spirit is spirit: for it was in that flesh, that is, in fleshly ordinances that he and others were captived in, therefore not in Mr. Steven's sense of flesh did Christ intend that in∣struction to Nicodemus, because Christ had no occasion gi∣ven him from Nicodemus to fall upon the doctrine of ori∣ginal sinne; this appears from Nicodemus discourse with him, owning him (upon his working such works) to be a teacher come from God: our Saviour knowing Nicodemus was a master in Israel, v. 10. and likewise well knowing wherein all the present masters of Israel stuck, and what they gloried in, being puffed up (though cap∣tived) with fleshly ordinances (Col. 2.17, 18, &c.) he taught Nicodemus a new lesson, of the necessity of his and their new birth, from better principles then fleshly rules and ser∣vices, which onely served, Heb. 9.13. but to the purifying of the flesh, because that which is born of the fiesh is flesh still, v. 6. Secondly, their necessity of being born again appeareth from that, Rom. 10.3. where it is said, they went about to establish their own righteousness (we hope none will say it was original sinne and corruption) and neglected the righ∣teousness of God: and Matth. 5.20. Christ telleth his Disci∣ples, that except their righteousness exceeded the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, they shall not enter into the king∣dome of heaven; therefore it was necessary for them to be born again, and also all of their way and mind: hence Christ useth an indefinite pronoun, applicable to all such men, Except any be born again, &c. Secondly, because its not likely Nicodemus should be more ignorant of the doctrine of original sinne then Mr. Stevens, if there were such an universal continued pollution of it (as the world hath been made to believe, without any Scri∣pture-arguments, unless onely seeming arguments) by the pretended masters and doctors of the Christian Israel, it is not likely (we say) that Nicodemus should be ignorant, as aforesaid, by reason he was a teacher and master in Israel,
v. 10. and John 7.50, 51, &c. especially, because the Psalmes of David were extant long before Nicodemus time; there∣fore he could not be ignorant of the 51 Psalm, from whence is the chief argument the Zelots for original sinne have: but yet nothing convictive to any rational man, notwith∣standing the answers given to our interpretation of the 5. verse; which also are not worth the replying unto, unless it be to satisfie weaker capacities, who believe every thing the Originalists say concerning the same. 3. Reason. Because Christ knowing Nicodemus his good will unto him, v. 1. John 7.50, 51. would never (upon Ni∣codemus his wondring at the strangness of Christs speech) have omitted to explain himself to Nicodemus in the matter of original sinne, and in such a manner, as Nicodemus should have been convinced to say as they did, John 16.29. Now thou speakest plainly, by reason it was Christs great business to seek and save that which was lost, Matth. 18.11. but Christ speaketh not a word of that, for Nicodemus goeth on still, wondering how these things could be, v. 9. and Christ reprov∣eth him, v. 20. saying, Art thou a master in Israel, and know∣est not these things? and so our Saviour proceedeth to de∣clare to him what he knew and had seen, and admireth that Nicodemus should be so ignorant not to understand earthly things, which are below the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.48, 49. and so Christ proceedeth to shew these masters of Israel the mystery of the belief (besides the necessity of it) in many particulars; and first, in that of Moses lifting up the serpent in the wilderness, v. 14. surely if the state of original sinne and natural impurity by birth had been Nicodemus (as Mr. Stevens and others say it is all mens) his state and condition, Christ would (no doubt) upon the account a∣foresaid have taught Nicodemus (upon this occasion of his coming to him) to bewaile and deplore first and mostly his original birth in sin; as that notorious murderer execu∣ted in Cheapside, An. 1657. was taught and pressed in his con∣fessions (as its printed, and its reported by whom it was) to bewaile his original sinne and impure natural birth before and above all his debauched life, adulteries, and horrid
murders for which he was executed: but Christ speaketh not one plain word of any such thing to Nicodemus of his and others impure natural birth, therefore we cannot pin our belief upon Mr. Stevens bare opinion of the sense of the said place. But we say again with more evidence then Mr. Stevens can for all his confidence in his conceit, from the text and context, that Christ spake to Nicodemus of the necessity of his (and all his fellow-doctors) being born again from their fleshly state, in and from the fleshly ordinances of the Law, that they were puffed up with and rested in. 1. Reas. Because the said rights and services signifie flesh, and are declared to be carnal, as aforesaid. 2. Reas. Because they made nothing persect; but the bringing in a better hope did, Heb. 7.9. 3. Reas. Because to treat of this state and new birth from them was more pertinent to the occasional discourse of Christ to Nicodemus, then any thing that Mr. Stevens hath said or can say to the contrary. Hence we declare to the impartial Reader, that Mr. Stevens hath wronged us, and born false witness against us, (peradventure it is for want of reading the ten Comman∣dements to his people, that he forgot the ninth Comman∣dement) in saying, before he had proved it, we have sophisti∣cally dealt with him and his party in leaving out their chief argument for orignal sinne from John 3.5, 6. for they have no colour but a fading fleshly colour for what they say, John 3.5, 6. Now for his abuse of us in this particular we ask no more satisfaction from him at present, but that he will be pleased to declare that he is more then confident we can answer his weaker arguments, and also that we can make more then sufficient replies to his weak answers to our arguments against original sinne; because we have worsted him (we appeal to the impartial stander by) in his strong∣est argument (as he rashly calleth it) for original sin out of the place aforesaid. Therefore (upon the account aforesaid) we hope he will make it known, that we may spare our needless paines
to make further reply unto that part of his weak defence of original sinne, which concerneth the Examiners to take notice of; and as for that part of the said book which con∣cerneth Doctor Taylor, we doubt not but he will let Mr. Stevens know in due time, qui vir siet against his defence for original sinne. We must yet take a little further liberty to declare the necessity of looking upon what grounds we fix our sense upon any Scripture-axiom in any particular place of Scripture, because there is a grave Doctor, and some others in Wilts, who fix this sense on Christs words, Matth. 19.21. namely, that Christ adviseth the rich man to go sell all his temporal possessions and give them to the poor: this is their sense, and the sense of many more without demonstrative argument from text or context; and therefore we deny to take their words for it without reasons given with them. First, because we can find no command in general through out the Scripture to command a rich man to sell all his temporal estate and give it to the poor: if there be, let these abounders in their own sense shew it us; for if there should be any such place of Scripture, it would cross other Scriptures; as first that 1 Tim. 5.8. where it is said, he that provides not for his family is worse then an infidel; and this man for ought we know might have a family. Secondly, it would cross that Scripture where it is de∣clared, that one should not be eased, and another burdened, but that there should be equality, 2 Cor. 8.13. Now if the young man had then gone and sold all he had (as Christ did bid him) and given it to the poor, he had indeed eased them, but burdened himself, in leaving himself nothing of his vast estate; for it is said, he had great possessions; and so he had made himself a burden to others. Again, it is not certain there were so many poor at that time among the Jews; and they medled with the Gentiles in that case (its probable) no more then the Samaritans did with the Jewes in divers cases, John 4.9. Thirdly, Christ doth not bid him sell it and have it in common, to communicate it, as they did, Acts 4.32.
with others; if it had been so there might have been some argument from it to incline him to obey Chrsts advise, be∣cause then he might have had as good share (being before his own) as others had in like need: but Christ bids him go and sell all he had, and so fulfil the Proverb, make himself as poor as Job, without giving him any comfort in refe∣rence to his estate, by telling him that he might have part of it himself with the poor; but, go sell all and give to the poor, saith Christ unto him. Fourthly, Paul telleth Ananias, Acts 5.1, 2, 3. that his estate was his own, and that he was left free to do as he pleased, he was not bound by any requiring to sell all his estate, and bring it to be distributed; but Peter reproveth him for his hypocritical dissimulation onely in keeping back part of his estate under hand, contrary to his outward pretence hence: à pari, it is not likely or probable from what Christ said to him, that Christ required him to go and sell all his temporal estate and give it to the poor: for A∣nanias is not by Peter told that he was required to sell all that he had and to give it to the poor; but Peter saith to him, whiles it remained was it not thine own? and after when it was sold, was it not in thy own power? &c. 5. Reas. Because Christ telleth him that he should be perfect ipso facto, (upon the supposition of his fore∣going universal obedience which he professed he had per∣formed) yet Paul saith, 1 Cor. 13.12. If Ishould give my body to be burned, and my goode to the poor, I should pro∣fit my felf nothing if I have not love: therefore Christ could not intend to bid the man sell his temporal estate that ipso facto he might be perfect, because that fact in it self would not have made him perfect, according to Pauls restimony aforesaid. 6. Reas. Because Christ had no occasion given him to dis∣course of temporal estates; therefore Christ did not bid him fell all his temporal estate and riches, but his own false spiritual riches, which was his high conceit of himself; for after Christ had declared the happy estate of Children, Mat. 19.13, 14. then cometh this Querent (St. Luk
styleth him a ruler cap. 18.18.) to know what he must do, and telleth Christ what he had done in order to Christs di∣rections, vers. 28. and would know what he had more to do; Christ telleth him, to sell all that he had and give it to the poor; the words are , sell all thy own which remaineth, or sell all things remaining that are thine: now the self-chosen righteousnesse, and such like stuffe are the mans own, for the earth is the Lords and the fulnesse thereof, 1 Cor. 10.26. therefore that is not the mans, but Gods, that he may command when he pleaseth, & may be no impediment to eternal life unto them that do in∣joy a great measure of it. Hence you see the occasion given to Christ from the Querie of the man, and his reply, from whence (no doubt) our Saviour took opportunity to give him the advise aforesaid. Read also the other Evangelists, Mar. 10.17. to ver. 23. Luk. 18.18, 19, 20, to 23. ver. 10, 25, 26. Mat. 22.34, 35. and it may easily be perceived how apt these sort of men are to justifie themselvs, when that which is high in men is oft abomination to God: so we may see how Laodicea was lifted up with this sort of spiritual false riches, Revel. 3.10. as is apparent by the Lords counsell to that Church what to do in that case. And Paul upbraid∣eth the Corinthians, that they were rich, and ful, and wanted nothing, and reigned as Kings, &c. 1 Cor. 4.8, 9. yet not in truth, as those Kings spoken of, Revel. 1.11. but onely in their own high conceivings, because the said Church of Corinth was not so rich in temporals at that time. Secondly, it appeareth that they looked on themselves as rich in high conceivings, by Pauls expressions in reference to them, ver. 6, 7. Thirdly, because he wisheth they did reign, that the Apostles might reign with them. Hence, it is easie, by comparing the foresaid testimonies with the words and deportment of this man, to understand that it was spiritual false riches of selfe-chosen righteous∣nesse that were his great possessions which our Saviour biddeth him to sell and part with, that he might be perfect and complete (having done what he said) and so by his righteousnesse which Christ would have him, shew forth, he
might have treasure in Heaven; for Prov. 22.4. it said, By humility, and the fear of the Lord are riches, and honour, and life: and Math. 18.4. Christ saith, Whoever shall humble himselfe as a little child, the same is great in the kingdom of God. We summ up all in this Syllogisticall demonstration: Those riches which Christ had onely an occasion to take notice of to be the mans possessions, the same in reason we ought to believe Christ did intend when he bid the man sll all he had &c. But they were his spiritual false riches of his chosen holinesse andhigh-conceitednesse that Christ had occasion given him from the man, and others of his like mind, to take notice of. Therefore those riches were the riches which he counsels him to sell. The major cannot be denied; and we hope the Assumption is proved by former instances. If it be said, it was his temporal estate, because he∣went away sorrowful: We answer, that it will not follow ne∣cessarily thereupon: because those who are rich in false spi∣ritual wisedom and holiness, (Luk 18.11.) are as unwilling, yea more, to part with their possessions, as theformer; and therefore our Saviour telleth them, that Publicans and a∣dulterers should enter into Heaven before them, Mat. 21.31. And the reason is, because it is easier to convince the Pub∣licans and Harlots (having no excuse) then to convince these, as appeareth Job. 9.34, 40. and 7.48, 49. If it be yet further urged, that Christ meant as aforesaid, because he bid him give them to the poor: We answer, though Christ did bid him do so, yet its Ignoratio elenchi to conclude thence that Christ meant the mans temporall pos∣sessions, because there are other poor besides these poor; as Christ telleth the Church of Laodicea, that she was poor: therefore none can affirm that Christ meant only the for∣mer poor, because, Where there are many specials under a general that is only named, we must give some undenyable reason why that special we nominate is meant rather then another speciall by reason all the specials are not alike, but differ specifically, and by their next forms,
from each other, even as a man and a brute do, and yet are both animals, living sensible creatures, but yet not both rational creatures: so do many poor in temporals, and false righteousnesse, differ specifically; and this last sort of poors is meant by Christ, who could not boast of their righteousnesse, and did not boast of it, as this sort of people did, Luk. 18.11. and these are the poor devils who are poorest of all in this kind, because they have not so much as that chosen false righteousnesse to boast of as this ruler had (as he is called Luk. 18.18.) and as Laodi∣cea did boast of, Revel. 3.17. who yet was truely poor in the midst of her riches; therefore Christ bids him sell them, (in that they kept him from being perfect to the kingdom of Heaven) and give them to those poor devils, for then they might boast as well as himself, and be rich like him∣self. If this seemeth strange arguing to any, let them con∣sider how the Apostle (James. 2.29.) doth argue the Soli∣fidians, who boast of their vain faith without works, even by a parallel of faith in the devils; thou beleevest there is one God, thou dost well; the devils believe and tremble. Hence upon the same account, may we think Christ argued the mans necessity to sell all in reference to the poor devils, and give them to those, because they would do good to no man, but hinder him of Heaven. Secondly, because riches are for some poor which stand in some relative respect to them, therefore Christ bids him give them to the poor devils. ver. 21. if he parted with these because they were acquired from the devils perswa∣sion and delusion, and therefore to give them to the devils, who were the instigators to him to seek them and boast in them, was most proper counsell from our Saviour to him. But it is said further, Christ bids him sell them and give them: therefore it was his temporal riches, because the other cannot properly be sold. I answer yea, in the sense that the Scripture oft times sutteth out selling and buying by: as Prov. 22.23. Buy the truth and sell it not, also wisedom and instruction, and understanding: this is spoken to the o∣bedient
Son, ver. 22. See the phrase is used Isai. 55.1, 2, 3. & Christ wisheth Laodicea 'to buy of him change of raiment, &c. Hence that expression doth not conclude that it was the mans temporal estate that Christ would have him sell. But we desire leave to offer (in reference to our sense of the mans great possessions which he was advised to part with) the place, Luk. 13.33. So likewise whoever he be of you who forsaketh not all he hath he cannot be my disciple: whe∣ther no man can be Christs disciple unlesse he sell all his temporal estate, and give it to the poor; for it would then follow that none of themselves, because they have a great share of temporall estates, are Christs Disciples, nor ever must expect to be untill they have sold all their temporall estates, (sive malè, sive just parta) and give them to the poor, which are innumerous since our plundring and sequestring times: hence Christ did not mean in the said place, Luk. 14.33. when he de∣clared a necessity of forsaking, or a putting away all, that e∣very one who would be Christs disciple must part with all his just-gotten riches (as for goods ill gotten let them look to that who have them) if ever he will be Christs disciple, we hope, our enemies being Judges; for the sense of the place, Luk. 14.33. will give sentence that we give a right sense thereof negatively, lest they should be for∣ced to part with their wealth before they expect to leave sinne, which they usually affirm must be in them while they live: and why upon the same reason shall we con∣clude that Christ did not mean, the rich man, Math. 19.21. should sell those, and no other possessions then are inclu∣ded in that place? Luk. 14.33. for  is the same expressed in both places to be parted with. But its urged yet further, that the disciples did so un∣derstand our Saviour by his general speech, because Peter said, ver. 27. to Christ, we have forsaken all and follow∣ed thee, and ver. 29. Christ saith, Every one that hath forsa∣ken houses, brethren, lands, for my sake, shall receive a hundred∣fold, and shall inherit eternal life. If these words of Christ were intended literally of hou∣ses
and Lands a hundred-fold to be received for what they forsook, it is not to be questioned, but many who have got houses and Lands (how unduely soever got and possessed) but they would forsake them all upon this pre∣tended account, and let them take them whose they were, if they might have a hundred-fold more for them they left, & Heaven to boot at last when they can enjoy these no longer. Therefore surely our Saviour did not intend his reply to Peter literally. Again, Christ doth not begin with that com∣forting speech to Peter, after he had told Christ what they had done, but saith to him, first, you that have follow∣ed me in the regeneration you shall (in due time) sit upon twelve thrones; intimating plainly that it was for their following Christ in the regeneration, not for their forsaking all they had, which was not much, (Math. 4.19.) of tempo∣rals) to follow him, that Christ spake such good words and comfortable unto them: yet then he addeth further, that in case any do forsake freely of themselves all they have, (but Christ adviseth the man to sell all he had) for his names sake, to honour and serve him, they shall have such a multiplied reward as is after specified, ver. 29. yea with persecutions, Mark. 10.30. But let it be granted that Peter and the rest thought that Christ bid him sell all his tem∣poral estate and give it to the poor, who had need; yet it doth not therefore follow that Christ meant his words in that sense because Peter and the rest thought so; for the Disciples themselves (as well as others, Joh. 2.19.) mi∣stook in their nonage their Masters sense and meaning of his words, as appeareth by their mistake, Joh. 21.23. Hence it is no argument for our censurers to build upon, that they mistake not also Christs sense and meaning, by concluding it to be his temporal estate, because the Apo∣stles at that time did think so: but as the Apostles did mistake their Master sometimes, so do they our Saviours meaning in the said place. We shall presume to trouble their patience a little fur∣ther, by adding the interpretation of two other Scriptures,
namely Isai. 64.6. Phil. 3.10. which are much abused and prophaned too frequently, and of late by Mr. Ditton and Mr. Phelps, Grandees in the Committee of Wilts for ejection, &c. and have been fierce men against us for that purpose, in a letter to a person of Honour, and of better di∣vine principles then themselves: for in the said letter they declare that the true Church of God doth account all her righteousnesse to be as filthy rags, and do specifie Isai. 64.6. for their warrant: but with their good Worships favour we confidently deny it, yet not without reasons, but first from the relative respect wherein the 6 ver. standeth un∣to the 5. ver. which said two verses are disposed together in a compound discrete axiom thus; Thou meetest him who rejoyceth and worketh righteousnesse, those that remember thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth, for we have sinned, in those is continuance, and we shall be saved, ver. 5. But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesse is as filthy rags, and we do fade like a leaf, our iniquities like the wind have ta∣ken us away, ver. 6. Here we may evidently perceive the righteousnesse in the 5 ver. is set in a dissentany respect with the righteousnesse in the 6. ver. and is so to be dis∣posed by the particle (but) in the 5 ver. as both of them are to be considered and judged together in the form of a discrete axiom, of which that particle But is the signe. Now in a discrete axiom the parts are dissentanies or disagreers. Hence the righteousnesse in the 6. ver. is not the same with that in the 5. ver. because disagreers are not thesame. Secondly, in a discrete axiom the disagreeing parts (which are here disagreeing adjuncts to their subject) do but dis∣agree in some Logical or accidental respect unto their subjects: which argueth that (though their natures in ab∣stracto are opposites) yet they do but so disagree in refe∣rence to each others subject, as they can likewise agree to be (upon occasion) in eithers subjects. For instance; they which had the righteousnesse as fil∣thy rags, ver. 6. might have had that righteousnesse, ver. 5. which God (who rejoyceth not in filthinesse) doth rejoyce
in, and meeteth them who work it, ver. 5. yet still those two righteousnesses are not the same in those two said ver∣ses, because they are disposed in a discrete axiom, which doth comprehend disagreeing parts; otherwise the axi∣om in a discrete form is ridiculous: as for instance, ratio∣nality and risibility are agreeing respects or arguments to man, because he is a risible as well as rational, though not by the same way, or from the same principle. Now to dispose them in a compound discrete axiom, saying, a man is a rational, but a risible creature, it were but ridiculous to wise men to say so. Hence we conclude that the righteousnesse in the 5. ver. is not the same with that in the 6. ver. because they are discretely or diversly disposed in a discrete axiom as aforesaid. And therefore it cannot be that the Church∣es best righteousnesse is as filthy rags. Secondly, it cannot be so, because it is said God meeteth them who work that righteousness, v. 5. for God loveth not wickedness, neither can evil dwell with him, Psal. 4.4. But we shall presume to mind them of divers Scriptures which will demonstrate the said opinion of the true Churches best righteousnesse to be most impious. It is said Ephes. 5.27, 28. that Christ sanctifieth and cleanseth his Church with the washing of water by the word, that it may be without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, holy and without blemish; and is the righteousness of this Church as filthy rags? It is said, Is. 4.3, 4. That it shall come to pass, that he who is left in Sion, and he that remaineth in Ierusalem, shall be called holy; and when? namely (v. 4.) When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughter of Sion, &c. by the spirit of judgment, and spirit of burning: and what will the righ∣teousness of these holy ones be still as filthy rags? It is said 2 Cor. 3.18. of the true Church, that they are changed into the image of Christ, from glory to glory as by the Spirit; and is their best righteousness as filthy rags? It is Christs testimony to his Church (his Spouse) Cant. 1.8, 10, 11. and 4.1. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee (Christ doth not say in himself, but in thee,)
and is her righteousness yet as filthy rags? what cannot the Lord discern? or is he so partial that he will not see it, or say it is so (if it be as filthy rags) but say to his Church or Spouse, thou art all fair, there is no spot nor wrinkle in thee? Can. 4.4. It is said, 1 Cor. 6.11. of those that they were washed san∣ctified justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, & by the Spirit of my God? and was all their righteousness but as filthy rags? It is said, Rev. 19.8. The fine linnen with which the Saints are clothed is the righteousness of the Saints; and is that fine linnen filthy rags? see what is said, Rev. 2.5. And what is the new man created after God in righteousness and true holiness, which the Ephesians were exhorted to put on Ephes. 4.23. was it but as filthy rags? If the late Doctor Drayton had spoken as blasphemous doctrines as his Judges and Examiners have done, he had been deservedly accounted ignorant and insufficient for the work of the Ministry: but sic fata volunt, that the ignorant ofttimes sit in the chair, and the intelligent stand at Barre. But they say further that our great Apostle did 'count all his own righteousness as loss and dung, Phil. 3.9, 10. He did indeed account all his Pharisaical righteousness (in which he had boasted himself with a Pharisaical devotion and zeal) but loss and dung, Phil. 3.3.45. which he calleth 'the righteousness of the law without the faith of Christ, v. 4, 5, 6. but did he acknowledge the righteousness he had attained unto by an operative faith (which giveth victory over the world, 1 John 5.4.) as filthy rags? What was the righteousness to which the crown was promised him, and all who loved the appearing of Christ? was that righteousness (we ask again) but loss and dung? Paul fought a good fight indeed! he finished a fair course in such a righteousness, and he kept a fruitful faith indeed which brought him to no more righteousness but that which is but dung and loss! O, but it is said he called it so in com∣parison of Christs righteousness, or that which he had by faith in Christ. It is true, he saith that 'he desires to be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness of God by faith, v. 9.
Its worth observing what expressions Paul useth in that verse, for he doth not hence, nor Rom. 4. intend to con∣demn all righteousness of the law, but onely the righte∣ousness of the law exclusively considered without the faith of Christ; but not that righteousness of the law which is through the faith of Christ: and therefore he saith ac∣cording to the Greek reading, Phil. 3.9 10. that I may be found not having my 'own righteousness of the law; , 'but that righteousnesse which is through the faith of Christ. Whence he sheweth evidently that he received the righ∣teousness of the law, which was that he attained not unto when he was a Pharisee, v. 5, 6. through the faith of Christ, for the law is the rule of all righteousness, and re∣quireth all righteousness, Matth. 19.14, 15, &c. but it must be attained through faith in Christ, because that faith deduceth it from Christ, and maketh it to be what it is, 'even the righteousness of or from God by faith, v. 9. The Translators by their translation turn the words, as if Paul set the righteousness out of the law in contradi∣stinction to another righteousness to be attained unto through the faith of Christ; when as its the same righteous∣ness for nature with that Paul had before, but it was now qualified & altered through the faith of Christ; Pauls righte∣ousness out of the law was not so qualified, before he belie∣ved in the Lord Jesus, according to his requiring, Joh. 14.1. Hence we say that Paul did not account his best righte∣ousness loss and dung, nor yet his righteousness out of the law loss and dung through the faith of Jesus absolutely in it self, but as it was unqualified with his faith in Christ. And surely he did not advise Timothy to follow after the righteousness which is loss and dung, when he biddeth him 'follow after righteousness & holiness, patience, meekness, 1 Tim. 6.11, 12. They call St. Paul in their letters our great Apostle; but very inconsiderately, if his best righteousness he had was but loss and dung, for then he was not very great in his at∣tainments, to attain to no other righteousness but that
which is but loss and dung: Saint Paul useth but a compa∣rison to set out the difference of his righteousness of the law; but comparisons do not determine things in their absolute nature, but in their comparate affection, as wis∣dome is better then rubies, Prov. 8.11. There is a comparison of better & worse, yet it will not follow that rubies are worth nothing at all; yet are they worth nothing in comparison of wisdome, when they come in competition, and one of them is to be removed, then rubies are to be cast away ra∣ther then wisdome, because wisdome is better then rubies. There are many comparisons in Scripture of things and persons compared, which are neither of them in their po∣sitive degree such as they seem to import in their com∣parative degree; as Luk. 18.14. it is said, the Publican went away rather justified then the Pharisee: and yet it will not follow that either of them (for the present) were justified, that is, made righteous. See in Ezek. 16.51, 52, &c. It is said of Judah, thou hast justified thy Sisters Sodon and Gomorrah, they are more righteous then thou, &c. yet none will say, if they consider v 49. that Sodom was righteous. Therefore its needful to ponder what is declared by comparate affecti∣ons, lest we judge of things amiss, by putting our sense up∣on things from the comparative affection between them, which we mistake often, and so put our conceited sense to be that wherein things are compared, when indeed they are not so to be compared, without perverting the sense of the holy Ghost. As once an highly esteemed preacher did pervert the sense of the Text, Ephes. 2.1. you hath he quickned who are dead in trespasses and sinnes; from whence he gathered this Doctrine (never intended by that text) that an unregenerate man can no more stirre, or con∣tribute any thing to prepare his conversion, then a logge or a stone, or a dead body can move; and he gave for his  or , this reason, because he is compared to a dead man; to which indeed he is compared in respect of spiritu∣al life, which is no more in him then life in a dead carcass; but yet the said unregenerate living man is not dead in his natural life also, which yet quickneth and acteth all his or∣gans
and faculties, whereby he may hear, read, and pray to God to make what he heareth and readeth powerful and effectual to the ends and purposes appointed, that so faith 'at last may come by hearing, Rom. 10. and through prayer for strength to avoid temptations he may through watch∣fulness abstain 'from fleshly lusts which war against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. Thus it is easie to abuse comparisons to the bearing of false testimony against the mind of Christ. They ingenuously confesse in their foresaid letters, that they dare not accept of Dr. Draytons Sermon on 2 Cor. 7.1. (which was sent unto them as a love-token to their souls by the said person of Honour) because it doth direct them to place their perfection in inherent righteousness, which they say they do obtain by faith alone in a mediator (without them, not within them;) no marvel that Dr. Drayton found so little respect from them, and the Vindicator (though a vagrant, and not long known to them) so much favour with them, because he was for no inherent righteousnesse, but imputative (if he can get it) to be his perfect righteousnesse, with his imperfect and debauched life; for then sinne may remain in him, accord∣ing to his positions, and he may well confesse all his righ∣teousnesse to be as filthy rags, without any trouble to him, because the hypocritical Church confesseth hers to be so, Isai. 64.6. And that they may justifie their not daring to own any inherent righteousnesse (but such as is as filthy rags a∣foresaid) in themselves, they produce for their warrant Pauls testimony of the Coloss. 2.10. saying to them, 'you are complete in him, that is, as they dream, without inherent righteousnesse, but that which is aforesaid; though Paul tel∣leth them how its to be complete in Christ, ver. 11. even by being circumcised with Christs circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sinns of the flesh: not keeping it still to 'humble them with a voluntary hu∣mility, ver. 18. but that they might be eased of so great a burden, and so complete in Christ, being partakers of so
great a benefit by Christs circumcision aforesaid. But we wish them to go (but not too late) with the foolish Virgins, Mat. 2.25. and buy some of the salve Christ mentions, and anoint their eies, Revel. 3.18. that they may see whether they had no inherent righteousnesse, in whom Christ was formed again, Gal. 4.19. and whe∣ther they had no inherent righteousnesse who were chang∣ed into the image of Christ from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. whether Peter did not think they had inherent righ∣teousnesse who were partakers of the divine nature, or that the said divine nature in them was as filthy rags as afore∣said. This very antipathy in them against inherent righte∣ousnesse moved (it seemeth) Mr. Ditton to come in open court of Assize at New-Sarum, March 16. 1657. and stand behind their Comittee-servant Cox his back, to clap him on the back, as an incouragement of his zeal against a pos∣sibility of a total mortification of sin in this life; for the said Cox did then and there acquaint Judge Windam (before whom I was necessitated to have a trial with the Vindica∣tor, who was run away a little before) that he had some thing to inform his Lordship with concerning my self and Dr. Drayton, namely, that we had infected the whole Coun∣ty of Wilts (Ʋtinam id verum fuisset) with the doctrine of perfection or a perfect life; the causa , the in∣inward impulsive cause of his so doing, could be no other but an ignorant zeale and detestation of a perfect life, and the doctrine of it: and the causa , the out∣ward provoking cause could be no other without doubt but a desire in the said Cox to blast me and Dr. Drayton by informing the Judge what manner of Preachers we were to divert some (if he could) from considering too strictly upon the merits of my cause: and whether it had any such influence or no I cannot say; but I had ten pound damage awarded me for a slander, which did so neerly concern my life and estate to what I had: for a Jesuit (which was the slander) is to be hanged (as my Counsel opened before the Judge) his bowels ripped out, and his
carkass to be quartered, by the Law of this Nation, if it be proved against him; for which mischievous revenge done me I had ten pound damage as aforesaid awarded me (which I had almost said I scorn upon such terms;) Gods Law hath appointed a retaliation to be done unto a false witnesse, (so righteous are Gods judicial Laws, though they are little thought of to be put in practise; as if we could conform to better Laws then they which come from Hea∣ven.) that where Draeo's Laws are made against real offen∣ders, there ought to be some severe Law made against him who should be a false accuser of men in such cases, that so men might be terrified from attempting to accuse falsly, lest they came to fall in the pit which they dig for a∣nother. There was a severe Law made of late (and not unjustly) against such as should be taken , as the woman was, (Joh. 4.4.) but there was no Law made at the same time against trapanners, according to that Scripture, Deut. 19.16, 17. &c. hence some (as its notoriously known) have been trapanned by wretches who looked for gain from their own quarter, because they knew the urmost of their peril, if their plot did not succeed as they intended, by reason there was no parallel Law made against the false ac∣cusers. But we return to Cox aforesaid, and do salute him for his zeal against a perfect life, with the ensuing expresse: Cox, come, give evidence again at Size 'Gainst perfect life, at which your stomachs rise; Come oft, and unto Judges make addresse, Tell them we have with such strange wickednesse As is a perfect life infected round Wilts County, to restore it holy ground; Which Cox and's Master sorry are to see, That Wiltshire people should so poysoned be With doctrines of a perfect life, lest they Should be at last infected with that way, And so stand forth, as once Zacheus did, To restitute again what may lye hid.
But Cox, though at your back your Master stand, I fear you not, but I will lend a hand To pull poor wretches out of all their sinne, Which Tendarings Levits have them setled in. I care not whom before you make complaint, So I can save a soul and set a Saint Free by our doctrine, and at liberty, Joh. 8.32, 36. From sinne i'th Land of his nativity, That Christ may have a people him to serve Who will not from him and his just Laws swerve, Which is the thing he cals for it our hands. Saying in that our due obedience stands; Because that he is holy so must we 1 Pet. 1.16. Be in our lives, and thus his Temple be, 1 Cor. 6.16. Where he will dwell, but not with sinne he saith▪ (Psal. 5.4. For it's against the doctrine of the saith Which he did teach when as he said Come out, 2 Cor. 6.17. Touch no uncleannesse, of the sinful rout: Then will I be your God and you my flock, 2 Cor. 6.18. And you again graft into Abrahams stock. Rom. 11.23. 11. Querie. Whether it be be not needful for the discovery of divine truth contained in the Scriptures, & for satisfying all mens scruples, to the end we may all at last come to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, Ephes. 4.3. We say, whether it be not needful to call and admit of all divided judgments in a Nation to meet together, and choose out some from among themselves to declare and debate in some publique assembly their respective assertions of divine truths, that so all parties may come to see wherein the strength and weaknesse of their own ar∣guments lyeth, when they shall hear the answers of o∣thers to their own arguments, and likewise hear objecti∣ons against what they hold; they having also permitted unto them time and freedom to make answer, and subscribe it under their hands to all the debates agitated, decla∣ring what they assent or dissent unto, and their reasons wherefore they do so.
It hath been the cause (we beleeve) of great misery and mischief in reference to such divisions about what is truth (as Pilate said,) that the powers of Christian Nati∣ons (like the Popes) who pretended to justifie their po∣licy and Divinity to be according to godlinesse layed down or held out in the Scriptures, have (to that end) conve∣ned assemblies usually, and for the major part, of such men of esteemed learning, as they have been more then con∣fident would contend, tanquam pro aris & focis, for them and their interests to be most religious; likewise would have them an admiration because of advantage, Jude, epist. v. 16. Rom. 16.17, 18. but so long as Synods and Con∣ventions of men are designed from interest, and do con∣sist of such who are flexible jurare in verba magistri, and only study how to please their present powers and Masters; as they did to please the late King James, and others of his designe, in the Synod of Dort, (if we believe the acta Sy∣nodalia of the Remonstrants) for Vorstius must not be ad∣mitted to that said Synod, whose name was Worst, as Bi∣shop Andrews (its said) told King James, when he asked him what that Vorstius was; he answered the King, that his name was Worst. So some of our Divines (as its re∣ported) told the said Synod that they were not sent to debate that rigid and horrid question of absolute re∣probation, but that well-pleasing question of absolute love and election of God to some who be from all eter∣nity; elected though from the demonstration of this, any of ordinary capacity might easily conclude what they must needs think concerning reprobates and their reprobation. We say again, if Synods are called and convened as aforesaid, we cannot expect Gods blessing upon their en∣deavours, how specious soever their meeting seemeth to be: For all such as God will blesse to such a work, must be unbiassed, and holy men of God, besides their acquired learning; for only such will say (if allured, or threatned by higher powers) as the Apostles did to the rulers, Act. 4.19. whether we should obey God or you judge ye. 12. Querie. Whether it be a sinne to pray for grace and
help from Christ to live here without sinne, and in perfect obedience to all and every one of Gods commandements, which consist in our operative love to God and man, Matth. 22.37. to 41. The reason, because the doctrine of per∣fection is deemed an innovation and heresie, and to pray therefore for such a thing must be evill. 13. Qu. Whether (if we ought to pray as aforesaid) it be a sinne in any of the Saints to believe and expect that God will give grace and help by Christ unto such praying Saints to live without sinne and transgression to his laws in this life as aforesaid. 14. Qu. Whether it can be demonstrated clearly out of Scriptures (for its often affirmed to be so) that what Adam received of God for himself, he received: (as a common root, and by vertue of a covenant of God with Adam relating thereunto) for all mankind; and what he lost in himself by his personal sinne, he lost likewise for all his posterity, and they must for ever lose the same without they repent of Adam's sinne, and saved by an absolute de∣cree of election. Our reasons of this Querie are these; First, because it will then follow that if Adam had stood in his integrity (as he might have done) untill he had had a child of thirty years of age, which might have lived a most holy life as Enoch did on earth, yet upon Adam's fall or transgression afterward, his said child or children must have lost all, and been inwardly defiled with Adam's sinne, and under the condemnation for it, though untill that very time they had lived most innocently in personal obedience to all Gods lawes; for many say (without book) because God did (as they say) so covenant with Adam, that what he lost by transgression he and his posterity should lose (ipso facto) the same, and his posterity be as truly defiled with his sinne as himself. Secondly, because if it be so as aforesaid, then in case Adam had stood and persevered in obedience to his lives end, as he might have done, (for it is said, James 1.13, 14. God tempts no man to sin, but that every man is drawn aside of his own concupiscence,) then though his posterity
yea hitherto had broken Gods righteous laws, yet the just God must not have been angry with them, nor punished them as sinners, because Adam himself did not sinne, in whom the Lord (as they say) made such a covenant as a∣foresaid; and therefore what he received and did not for∣feit by his own transgression, they must likewise receive, and must not lose (by vertue of the said covenant with Adam) notwithstanding their personal frequent rebelli∣ous and disobedience. Orighteous God, cause us to see and consider what dan∣gerous sequels may be inferred, directly opposite to thy justice and mercy, from such a fictitious covenant (as is pre∣tended by many Divines) that God made with Adam for himself and all his posterity. 15. Querie. What dishonour and wrong is offered to Gods justice and mercy, or to any attribute of God, by un∣believing and disowning the old tradition of original sinne from the first personal Adam. Let the more zealous then considerate defenders of it produce the clear Scriptures to prove that our denial of it doth wrong Gods justice and mercy, that so he may be justified in his saying, and pure when he judgeth, according to the said tradition. 16. Querie. What cause have parents to quarrel or grieve that they hear their children be born innocent, and fit members for the kingdome of heaven, Matth. 19.14, 15. Matth. 18.3. let them produce Scripture plainly to prove that its more for Gods honour to ordain them to come in∣to the world as firebrands of hell; the reason is, because St. James telleth us, 'mercy rejoyceth over judgment; and the Psalmist saith, Psal. 14.59. that 'Gods tender mercies are over all his workes; which in the foresaid case of be∣ing under wrath for Adam's sinne cannot be rightly at∣tested and declared: and Is. 57.16. 'the Lord maketh the souls, and also the Lord restored Adam into his favour from his guilt, &c. before he had any children; therefore if Adam's posterity were under the condemnation for his sinne, the mercies of God are much obscured towards the posterity of Adam.
17. Querie. What honour and excellency is taken from Christs merits and saving grace by declaring that our justi∣fication or making righteous is from Christ within us, Col. 1.27. not without us, and from his saving grace commu∣nicated to us in our obedience to his laws? The reason of this Qu. is, because there is so much pleading that our ju∣stification is by Christs imputative righteousness residing in himself, and not communicated to us, but putatively onely, and so our pollution may remain still, if we be justified in Christ by the said external imputation of his righteous∣ness onely; for there is no inward cleansing by that means communicated unto us. And peradventure the observing of the common transgressions committed by most men (yea professors of religion, like those Tit. 1.16.) very frequently, first brought in the imbelief (because men 'resist not, striving unto blood against sinne, Heb. 12.4.) that all our sinnes cannot be purged away in this life: we say the observing and believing as aforesaid, brought in (without doubt) the perswasion of a justification by Christs righteousness imputed onely to us, and not by inherent righteousness within us, that we might have quiet con∣sciences (notwithstanding our iniquities  us in our faces) by dreaming we are justified by  imputa∣tive righteousness without us, and not wrought in us through our obedience by the help of his grace and holy Spirit. 18. Qu. Whether these who cry out against others for heresies and blasphemous opinions, ought not to be sure before that they are so, lest it be retorted on them (as Paul did against his contenders, Act. 24.14.) by the way that 'you call heresie, so worship we the Lord our God; and e∣specially to be careful they are sree themselves from all he∣resie; for Turpe est doctori cùm culpa redarguit ipsum. 19. Qu. Whether the Lord did intend to alter and abate those qualifications (enumerated Ps. 15. and Ps. 24. v. 3, 4.) of them that should inhabit his tabernacle through Christ after he came in the outward flesh; because if he did not intend so to do, then these are still the qualifications to be
shewed forth by every one that is to dwell in Gods holy hill; even to walk uprightly, to work righteousness, & speak the truth from his heart, not to do evill to his neighbour, to perform his oath though it be to his own hinderance, &c. and not to swear deceitfully. 19. Quer. Whether religion standeth in assuming or practising of any outward formes and services, so as the practitioners of them are to be accounted the religious men above others who assume them not, yet practise more mercy & justice in their actions then the aforesaid do, & also live as unblameable lives. The reason of this Querie is, because the Lord by the Prophet Micah telleth them that to do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with God, is the good which he hath shewed them to do, & that he careth not for their offerings, nor for their rivers of oyle, nor yet for the fruit of their bodies for the sinne of their souls, Micah 6.6, 7, 8. Secondly, because in Is. 58.2, 3, 4. its said, They seek me daily, and delight to know my wayes as a Nation that did righteously, they ask of me the ordinances of justice, they take delight in approching to God; yet for all this, & their fasting to , the Lord declares his dislike of them, v. 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 3. Because it is said, James 1.27. Pure Religion and undefiled before God the Father, is to visit the fatherless and widowes, and keep himself unspotted of the world. We desire to know of any inquisitive man, or professor of Religion, whether there be any place of holy Writ which speaketh like to this of the pure Religion. So that it ap∣peareth that the mercy and unspotted life is the pure Re∣ligion and undefiled before God the Father; and there∣fore they are the most religious men who practise most of the mercy and unspotted life, though they be of no di∣vided opinion amongst us at this day, yet practise all outward services with others for peace sake. Hence it is to be considered, whether many in America who have not the written Scriptures, be not better Christians then many in England; for I have heard a woman commonly
called a Moore) then of Mr. Jesse his Congregation, who relaed thus much in reference to St. James, his Religi∣on of their Countrey-natives practised, that they used when any of them were sick to goe to them, and one to do this office about the patient, a second to do another, a third to do another office of help about them, and not to leave them until they saw them dead or recovered: This was her testimony unto a person of Honour in my hearing, she also saying of themselves, we do not as is usually done in England, to send to see (peradventure) how they do, but afford them little help of their own, but God help them; according to that, James 2.16. 'Depart in peace, be ye warmed; but give them nothing. 20. Querie. Whether to be oft distempered with passi∣ons of pride, wrath, maliciousnesse, envy, and to be of an un∣reconcileable spirit, be not worse then to be oft distem∣pered with wine and strong drink. The reason of this Querie is, because the latter sort of distempered ones are looked upon as irreligious men (as indeed they are) and are shamed and spoken against for such distempers by the former sort of distempered men, who are yet more frequently distempered (and longer) with malice, wrath, irreconcileablenesse, and envy, then the others are with wine. Now as every effect is to be argu∣ed from its causes, by reason it is from them, so must men judge of the said effects more or lesse evil, from their cau∣ses and principles from whence they come; and hence it will appear, that those who are often distempered with wrath, anger, malice, are worse then the other; because envy, wrath, and malice, &c. are from the devils nature more immediately and properly, (according unto that, Ja. 3.14 15, 16.) where its said, 'that this wisdome is devillish: the other distemper is more indeed of the brutish & sensual nature, according to that, Phil. 3.18, 19. Whose God is their belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things. Hence it will follow, that the wrathful and ma∣licious man because he sheweth more of that id Diaboli to be in him, (though the other more of the id ruti to be
in him) is the worse of the two; though he that is the best of the two will be shut out of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.11. if he repent not here; but whether it be not inconsideratenesse or partiality, (let them judge whom it concerneth) to count the distempered with wine for irreligious persons, and yet to account the other sort, who are distempered with wrath and envy, for religious persons, and their wrathful envious passions but the infirmities of Saints, especially if they walk in some outward form of a religious esteem: do not the Apostles words, Jam. 2.4. reach these, Are you not partial in your selves, and Judges of evil thoughts? because that which is high in most men is abomination to God, and because the malicious distemper is more of the devils nature as aforesaid. We shall offer further some Texts of Scripture to be enquired into, as how far their scope and aime doth concern us, because of what is said, 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. 1 Querie. What is St. Pauls intent when he saith, Rom. 2.3. And thinkest thou O man that judgest them which do such things, and dost the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? The reason is, because God is no respecter of persons, v. 12. v. 6. 2. Querie. What did our Saviour mean, Math. 7.12. where he saith, All things that you would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. The reason of this Querie is because of what Job said, Job 16.4. and many care not who sink so they swim. 3. Querie. What did St. Paul mean, Phil. 2.21. where he saith, All seek their own, and not the things which are Jesus Christs. 4. Querie. What did the Lord mean, Jer. 45.5. where it is said, Seekest thou great things for thy self? seek them not. 5. Querie. What did Christ mean. Math. 16.26. where he saith, What is a man profited? if he shall gain the world and lose his soul?
6. Querie. What is the scope of that, Psal. 50.20. Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother, and slanderest thy own Mothers son. 7. Querie. What is meant, Isai. 63.8. where it is said, My children will not lie. 8. Qu. What doth Christ intend, Luk, 17.1, 2. when 'he said, Woe be to them by whom offences come; it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the Sea, then that he should offend a little one. 9. Qu. What is meant by that, Math. 7.2. where 'it is said, With what measure thou metest it shall be me∣ted unto thee again. 10. Qu. What is meant by the false ballance, Prov. 11.1 'where it is said, A false ballance is an abomination to God, but a just weight is his delight. See Prov. 16.16. & 20.10. Levit. 19.35, 36. The reason of this Querie is, because 'it is said, Dan. 5.27. that the King was weighed in the ballance, and found too light: therefore other things are weighed besides natural or artificial things. 11. Qu. What doth the Psalmist mean by those words, 'Psal. 119.126. It is time for thee Lord to work, for they have made void thy Law. 12. Qu. What is the scope and intent of the Lord in those words, Mal. 2.8, 9. Ye are departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the Lord of Hosts. v. 9. Therefore have I made you contemptible and base before all according as you have not kept my ways, but the people, have been partial in my Law? 13. Qu. What did David mean by that, 1 Sam. 26.19. For they have driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord, saying, go serve o∣ther Gods. 14. Qu. What is meant, Heb. 8.10, 11. After those days, saith the Lord, I will put my Laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. v. 11. And they
shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for all shall know me from the least unto the greatest. 15. Qu. What is the meaning of those words of the Psalmist, Psal. 119.98, 99, 100. Thou through thy com∣mandements hast made me wiser then my enemies, for they are ever with me. v. 99. I have more understanding then all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditations. v. 100. I understand more then the ancients, because I keep thy precepts. 16. Qu. What is the meaning of that, 2 Cor. 8.13. Not that one should be eased and another burdened, but that there may be equality. 17. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Ezek. 17.18, 19. The reason is, because of the sore threatning declared by the Prophet for breaking oath with the King of Ba∣bel; and we see that the Lord calleth it the despi∣sing of his oath, and the breaking of covenant with him. What will the Lords displeasure be lesse against such who have lifted their hands to him to reform in doctrine and discipline according to the word of God? Exitus actu pro∣babit; what will you do in the latter end thereof? Jer. 30.23, 24. 18. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Revel. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. The reason is, because the Lord threatens to remove the Candlestick unlesse they repented, for that they had left their first love. 19. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Jam. 1.20. where it is said, The wrath of man doth not accomplish the righ∣teousnesse of God. 20. Qu. What doth the Apostle mean, v. 26. where he saith, If any seem to be religious, and refrain not his tongue, that mans religion is in vain. 21. Qu. What is meant by that, Math. 23.25. where it is said, These things thou oughtest to have done, and not to have left the other undone. 22. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Jam. 2.7. where it is said, 'Faith without works is a dead faith. The rea∣son
is, because we are said (by many) to be justified by faith alone without works; which if so, then we are justi∣fied by a dead faith, according to St. James, and its con∣trary to the justification of Abraham, v. 21, 22. 21. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Gal. 6.1. Bre∣thren, if a man fall by an occasion, you who are spiritual restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thou thy self maist be tempted one way or another. The reason of this Querie is, because of that mentioned, v. 1. Bear ye one anothers burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Rom. 15.1. You that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, which are but such for a time, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. 22. Qu. What is the meaning of that, 1 Cor. 15.26. where it is said, 'The last enemie which shall be destroyed is death. The reason is, first, because its said, v. 25. 'Christ must reign untill he hath put all his enemies under his feet, and death is said there to be the last: therefore what death is meant there is worthy of Divines enquiry. Secondly, if it be so that death is the last enemy, then all sin must be destroyed before death come, and so sinne shall not remain in all Saints as long as they live. 23. Qu. What is the meaning of that, 1 Cor. 11. v. 26. where it is said, So ost as you eat, &c. you shew forth the Lords death untill he come. The reason of this Querie is, be∣cause it is spoken to every one who rightly receiveth the Lords Supper; and if so, it cannot be meant of his last com∣ing, which is so much spoken of among Divines. 24. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Luk. 18.8. where it is said, 'When the Son of man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth? The reason of this Querie is, because we be∣lieve that it is not likely to be meant of the rarity of the faith to be-lieve that Christ came to save sinners, or that he was made man to suffer for our sinnes. 25. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Rom. 8.4. where it is said, That the righteousness of the law might be ful∣filled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spi∣rit. The reason of this Querie is, because it is usually af∣firmed
that Christ hath fulfilled all righteousness of the law for us; and the Apostle saith, that it might be fulfilled in us. 26. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Mark 16.17, 18. And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall they cast out devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly poyson, it shall not hurt them; and they shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover. The reason of this Querie is, because these signs are declared to follow (not the Apostles who were to preach the belief) in their order every believer, as to know hether they be∣lieve a right or not, which is set down, ver. 16. to be of that 'necessity, that he who believeth not shall be damned; there∣fore it concerneth us much to know whether we believe aright yea or not: hence these signs shall follow them which believe, and the believers shall do these ensuing things in their order; It doth therefore concern us to find out what is contained under those stupendious expressions, that eve∣ry believer must do as aforesaid. 27. Qu. What is the meaning of that, Matth. 28.20. 'And lo I am with you to the end of the world. The reason of this Querie is, because that is the divine record from which a succession of ministration is proved to continue downward from the Apostles to the end of the world; from whence the ministers of the word and Sacrament do claim their own office to be Jure divino, and that they are the Apostles successors descended lineally from them by vertue of Christs words and promise to the Apostles, Lo I am with you to the end of the word. But how they will prove what they say from the said words of Christ by rational arguments, is the thing for the present we doubt of. First, because the words are spoken not to the Apostles successors, 'Lo I will be with you to the end of the world; but it is personally spoken to the Apostles, 'Lo I am with you to the end of the world. But to this it is said, that Christ did intend their successors to be included under
those words, because the words are not literally true of the Apostles, by reason they are fallen asleep with their Apostolical doctrine, and are no more personally in this world; therefore the words must include (say they) their successors, 'I am with you, namely, my Apostles in your successors, to the end of the world. But this is an addition to Christs words, for Christ saith no more, but, Lo I am with you to the end of the world: and by what authority they make that addition aforesaid, it concerneth them to consider, because the curse is heavy whic his charged on them who adde or take from Christs words, Rev. 22.18, 19. But if they say Christ did intend to continue successors of the Apostles for the good of his Church, to put them in remembrance, and teach them how to walk in all the com∣mandements of God without offence: we then ask (if it be so) whether Christ hath appointed themselves to be the true successors unto the Apostles by vertue of the said words; for to argue meerly from the said words, there must be successors of the Apostles, for divers good ends; ergo we ministers aforesaid, and them of our mind, order, and practise, are the men; is no better arguing to perswade the doubtful of what they say, then he that would per∣swade himself that his sonne must be the next Bishop of C. because it is appointed by order and authority, besides custome, that he must be a Cambridge-man or an Oxford-man; and if an Oxford-man, then of this Colledge, or ano∣ther Colledge; if of this Colledge, then why not my son as well as another? especially since I perswade my self he is the man intended for the Bishop. Just so is the former argument; Christ did intend to have successors in the Apo∣stles ministration, because he said, 'Lo I am with you (though the Greek text will not justifie that translation) to the end of the world; and therefore we are the mini∣sters who are their successors. Truly the Pope and Popelings argue just so for him to be Peters successor; Peter, say they, was at Rome, and governed there, and Peter was the prime and chief Apostle; for Christ said to Peter, 'Feed my lambs, feed my sheep,
Joh. 21.15. and thou art Peter, upon this rock I will build my Church, Math. 16.18. Now the Pope is a Minister also, if you will take his word for it, of Jesus Christ, by vertue of the words of Christ aforesaid; and he sits and rules at Rome where Peter governed Christs Church (as they say) therefore the Pope is Peters successor, and head of the Chri∣stian world upon the foresaid account. Do not the Protestant Ministers smile at such argumen∣tations for the Popes supremacy? and do the Ministers who are in contradistinction to the Pope argue any better for their succession and authority, to be the Apostles successors, & their Ministers & Bishops to be jure divino, because Christ said to his Apostles, 'Lo I am with you to the end of the world? for suppose that Christ had said in plain terms, 'Lo I will be with you & your successors to the end of the world, will it be rational to say, quia antecedens, ideo hoc consequens, therefore we are specifically the said successors? must there not be something else looked into, and to be proved, before they conclude, ergo we are successors of the Apostles, by reason Christ said, 'Lo I am with you and your successors to the end of the world? What are there no more maides then Maukin? may there not be another sort of successors besides these claimers unto it? which if there may be, then its but like the arguing of the man aforesaid for his sonne to be the Bishop of C. Surely Haman had a little better ground of argumentation for his perswading himself that he was only the man (from former received and peculiar favours fom the King, Est. 3.1, 2. & 5.11.) that the King would delight still to honour him above all others, chap. 6. v. 7. and therefore upon surmise v. 7. he saith to the King, (upon the Kings asking what should be done to the man the King delighted to honour, v. 6.) Let the royal apparel be brought forth which the King useth to wear, and the horse the King rideth upon, and the crown royall which is upon his head, and let this apparell and the horse be delivered to one of the Kings most noble Princes, that they may array the man whom the King delighteth to honour, and bring him on horseback through the streets
of the City, & proclaim before him, 'thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delighteth to honour; & what was Haman therefore the man? truly he thought he should be the man upon the said same antecedent probabili∣ty for it: but yet he was deceived, for it was another whom Haman never dreamed of. Hence we say, is it good arguing that the Apostles must have successors by vertue of Christs speech, (which we have not yet well considered of) Math. 28.20.) therefore we are their successors, and so Ministers of Jesus Christ who can there be none but Haman (which notes troubling,) that the King doth delight to honour? is there not a Mordecai (the hidden contrite teacher) that he at last may have the honour conferred upon him, that Haman was more then confident was intended for him? Therefore he who argues from the general to the special, as belonging to it, must argue from the general to the special, secundum id generis quod est in specie, according to that of the generall that is in the speciall; which is to be applied thus to our purpose: The Ministers aforesaid do claim their ministration from the Apostles, because they doubt not (though the words they bring will not remove their doubt) but the Apostles were to have successors; and if successors, then they themselves are the successors; but how do they prove it? for none can argue themselves suc∣cessors, but secundumid generis, that of the general requisite to be in them that was in their predecessors. Now the Apostles, to whom Christ spake the words, had with their office suitable gifts thereunto, conferred upon them, to teach the people inflibly to observe what∣ever Christ commanded them. Hence we aske the fore∣said claim-layers to be the Apostles successors, how they can lay claim (on their glosse aforesaid upon the words of Christ); whether they lay claim to the office of the Apostles, for teaching, and other services of their mi∣nistration, without the like gifts; or with the like gifts. Now if to the office without the like gifts, then they do not lay their claim (with their favours) rationally, from our reason given before, how we must argue from the
general to the special, but according to that of the ge∣neral which is in the special: therefore if they have not the like gifts in teaching, which is to teach infallibly by inspiration from Jesus Christ, even as witnesses are taught, when called to make oath in point of testimony, to speak the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help us God; We say, if they have not the like gifts aforesaid in teaching, (which they deny they have) say∣ing, revelations and infallibility are ceased now, and Synods may err, (as they confesse in their late Confessi∣on of faith, which they there make good) then they are not the Apostles successors (notwithstanding their claim) because we cannot believe that Christ meant a successor of an identicall office of teaching, without the gifts that then were concomitant to the office, and were inherent to the officers, the said Apostles. We wish them to consult again, and lay down the claim of their office from the Apostles: unlesse they will also lay claim to the like gifts in teaching with the Apostles, because they were so neerly and neces∣arily joyned toget her in there, Ephes. 4.9, 10, ends 11, 12. to enable them to perform their office to the ends and purposes expressed, Ephes. 4.13. Therefore what Jesus Christ hath joyned together let none dare to put asunder; as to pretend to their predecessors office, and not to their gifts. Again, they call themselves Pastors and Teachers; now their ministration is not the same in office with the A∣postles, to whom Christ spake the foresaid words. If they say all of them are included in these words, Lo I am with you: because it is said 'Ephes. 4.11. that he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evange∣lists, and some Pastors, some Teachers: we answer, that it is true, that Ephes. 4.11. there is an enumeration of several persons concrete with their several offices: yet it will not follow on that account, though they be like Pa∣stors or Teachers, that therefore those officers are so inclu∣ded in the words, Math. 28.20. Lo I am with you to the
end of the world; and that they are the Apostles suc∣cessors, and that they justly can derive their claim from the said place, Math. 28.20. for though omne majus ejus∣dem generis continet minus in some respect; yet its not , that every minus contint majus, that the less containeth the greater, that is, because the Apostles had vertually what the Pastors and Teachers had, and that they could upon any occasion perform their office, yet is not the Apostles office their office; nor yet could the Pastors and Teachers perform the Apostles office, because it is a lowre office; and if so, they cannot call themselves the Apostles successors by vertue of these words, Mat. 28.20. by reason of what Christ did, Ephes. 4.11. Hence it is we say, these words, Math. 28.20. will not afford them warrant to call themselves what they do; but it had been much better for them to have laid hold on Ephes. 4.11. and argued thus for their claim of Pastors, &c. There are Pastors and Teachers mentioned in the said place, and though they themselves are not Apostles, or Prophets, or Evangelists, yet they are Pastors and Teachers, and in these imployments Ministers of Jesus Christ: we say it had been much better for them to have laid hold on that place for the end aforesaid, because they had held forth some more colour to justifie their office they pretend unto; but yet little more of rational evidence for what they say, save only still an argumentation like that of the man for his Son to be the Bishop afore∣said. For though there be mention made of Pastors and Teachers, and they are to be continued to the worlds end; will it follow therefore upon any other certainty then the argumentation aforesaid, that they are their suc∣cessors as Pastors and Teachers in their generation, un∣lesse they can prove that id generis, that of the general re∣quisite of gifts to be in them with their office, which were in the appointed Pastors and Teachers mentioned Ephes. 4.11? for the gifts (as aforesaid are still to be concomitant with their office: therefore it is said, Ephes. 4.8. Christ gave gifts, and so among the rest made some
Pastors and Teachers; and it is undoubtedly intended to be conveyed by the imposition of hands, 2 Tim. 1, 6. where Paul saith to Timothy, I put thee in remembrance to stir up the gift of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands. Therefore that ceremony was a document to fi∣gure out the manner or reality of conveying the gift with the office by the Donor himself; but there is no mention made of it, Ephes. 4.11. because Christ made Pastors and Teachers as he himself was made a High-Priest, Heb. 7.6. 'after the power of endlesse life; so they were made Pastors by the power of endlesse life. And there∣fore it is is said, v. 8. When he ascended he gave gifts un∣to men, and so made some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers: Hence there∣fore not one, but all were endued with gifts immediately by him who did appoint them their office. Now whether they had lesse gifts then to be infallible in their teaching and instruction, is the businesse to be inquired into; which we say they had not, from that which is expressed, Act. 6.3. where when there was a want found of supplying a defect, v. 1. then the twelve Disciples, commonly called the Apostles; (and were those sent out Math. 28.18, 19, 20.) wished them to look out among themselves: (it seems it was not so rare, nor were they ignorant in those times of such endowed men, nor did they deny such men extant who were full of eminent gifts men of honest report, and full of the Holy Ghost and wisdome, which they found out; and the Apostles authorised and con∣firmed them, v. 5.6. in their office, and left not that unto the people to do: henc therefore these Pastors & Teachers Christ intended, Ephes. 4.11. were such, and so qualified, (we be∣lieve) for the office of Pastors, &c. Hence also we say, if the several and respective Ministers (claiming their ministra∣tion as aforesaid) will prove themselves their successors, (whether included or not included in the words, Math. 28.20.) who are mentioned Ephes. 4.11. and so the Mini∣sters of Jesus Christ, then they must demonstrate them∣selves to be men of honest report amongst. Apostolick-men
(if there be any) and full of the Holy Ghost and wisdome, even that wisdome specified Jan. 3.17. and not be puf∣ed up with pride, and shewing bitternesse and wrath; and carry themselves Diotrephes-like, loving so far to have the preeminence, as to have power to receive whom they think fit into the Ministerial office, and to reject whom they affect not, because they are not of their mind, though peradventure better qualified with saving truths then them∣selves; yea do not only so, but forbid or hinder them that would receive them, or cast them out of their lively∣hood. Hence we sayagain, that if they derive their claim; as a∣foresaid, to be their successors, they must be qualified like those Pastors, which we have proved to be qualified as aforesaid by reason it is said, Ephos. 4.11. they were of Christs own making and gifted with his immediate gifts, v. 8. which cannot be lesse or fewer then fit for the ends they were appointed unto, v. 12, 13. the ulti∣mate whereof is to become a perfect man, (which most of our Ministers deny to be in this life,) unto the measure of the stature (or age) of the fulnesse of Christ. Therefore, the Ministers of England, if they lay claim to be the successors of the foresaid Pastors and Teachers, and so the Ministers of Jesus Christ, they must be such Pastors, so made by Jesus Christ inwardly; for their outward or∣dination is but a ceremony, which they most frequently apply where there is not the thing signified, namely such gifts in those ordained men; which if there be, then they must first understand those gifts to be, and own them, yea, imploy them for those ends expressed, Ephes. 4.12.13. which ultimate end is denied by many to be attain∣ed in this life; and their great contest and zeal is to lay claim to the said succession, for to justifie their office, and not to have the office of Presbyter, Ministers and Bi∣shops to be extinct out of their Church, but we heare no disputes nor can we see such zeal and animosities put forth to defend their claim to their predecessors gifts: but they can be content to say, yea to excuse themselves, to be
like other men (save only in the Grecians wisdome and literature, 1. Cor. 1.22.) in passions and conversations, if not below other men, (as too often its to be feared;) but their office forsooth they would have looked upon as to be the Ministers and Bishops of Jesus Christ; when the gifs aforesaid of such Pastors Ehes. 4.11. and of such Bi∣shops & Deacons which are specified, 1 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4, 5. &c. are not to be found, yea not be believed can they be in these days; so that if the Son of man come again (as he will come) will he find faith? as its said Luk. 18.8. on the earth, (a∣mongst these sorts of men,) to believe that there is any who can come while he liveth to a perfect state in holinesse? though its declared to be the end that all these officers are appointed, Ephes. 4.12, 13. The foresaid men are so sollicitous and careful to prove their office of ministration to be from the Apostles down∣ward, that when they are reproched as to have their of∣fice from the Pope and Popish Bishops, (because those did once rule in England,) that they presently deny it, and say (having brushed their vesti tures and pickt out the Crosse) that they have cast off the reliques of Rome, and only retain (they said) the office, which indeed the Popes had from their immediate predecessors; and so they run to the top of the scale or ladder to see the Apostles descend∣ing (like the Angel on Jacobs ladder, Gen. 28.12.) to ju∣stifie them to be their successors for matter of office with∣out their gifts, as aforesaid. But we believe that Christ meant by that place of Scripture otherwise then such a con∣tinued future succession to follow to the end of the world: for the words are, . I am with you all the days to the end of that age. Hence why may not we think Christ meant the like dayes, of which he biddeth them rell Herod that fox, Luk. 13.23, 24. Behold, I do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected: so all the days of their age or dispensation he would be with them to assist them in the accomplishment of their cures or work; which like dayes are intimated, Hosea, 6.2. After
two days he will revive us, and in the third we shall live in his sight; which Christ (we believe) calleth the last day, (and not the end of the world) when he saith, and I will raise him up at the last day, Joh. 6.39, 40, 41. in a paral∣lel respect to the Lord Jesus day, who was raised up at the last day; for it is said, he was dead and buried, and the third day he rose again: so it is said Rom. 6.4, 5, 6. &c. We are buried with Christ by baptisme into death, &c. for if we have been planted together into the similitude of his death, even so shall we be into the similitude of his resur∣rection: which work of mortification to a new life the A∣postles were appointed to preach, v. 19, 20. until the accom∣plishment 'of the age of the fulnesse of Christ, Ephes. 4.13. In this foresaid sense the words may be justified to be tru∣ly spoken to the Apostles in their own persons, but not in the sense the words are translated into, Lo I am with you to the end of the world: for so they cannot be literally true; therefore such as desired to hear of such a succession aforesaid, and finding no fitter place in their apprehensions, they presently fancied Christs meaning to be in their suc∣cessors, by saying 'Lo I am with you to the end of the world, that is, with you in your successors: and then the next inse∣rence is, themselves are the Presbyters and Ministers of Je∣sus Christ, because Christ meant (as aforesaid) I will be 'with you in your successors to the end of the world; which yet he may be with the Apostles successors, and yet none of the publique ministration of England may be the said Mini∣sters of Jesus Christ, that is, according to his constitution and order; though many of them, we deny not (but ac∣knowledge them) to be God-fearing men and wel meaning servants for Jesus Christ; but yet we cannot believe them to be Ministers of Jesus Christ, that is, by his order and ap∣pointment, by reason that we are more then confident that Christ would not have the office of the Apostles in their ministration separated from the gifts concomitant and needfull thereunto; which we cannot yet find to be in them, yea they disown them to be unattainable, and therefore not to be in these after days expected, though it be
said, Wisdom 7.27. Wisdome entreth into holy souls, and maketh them friends of God and Prophets: and Rev. 18.20. Rejoyce over her thou Heaven, and the holy Apostles and Prophets; and such also we look for, when the new heavens and the new earth cometh wherein dwell∣eth righteousnesse, 2 Pet. 3.13. And when the everlast∣ing Gospel cometh to be better known, and preached a∣new to them that dwell on the earth, &c. also then will Pastors be given by Christ according to his own heart, Jer. 3.15. with such gifts as those had, Ephes. 4.11. who shall officiate in teaching his Church according to his own order and discipline: in the mean time we cannot tel how to perswade our selves that our Presbyterrian pub∣lique Ministers or Bishops, nor any other divided opinions among us who call themselves Ministers of Jesus Christ, are more then Ministers for Jesus Christ in a prudential way; which yet we do not despise, but honour them, if sober, and peaceable in their ministration; for we believe the said ministration to be very serviceable to righteous and just ends, even to have its service until the time of a bet∣ter reformation then we have yet seen: for we see for∣mer (if not worse) deformities acted under other names and imployments of Ministers; utinam id verum non esset! But we say no more at present, save only wish all whom it may concern to mind the words of St. James 2.12, 13. So speak and so do, as they that are to be judged by the Law of liberty or freedom; for there shall be judgement (saith the Apostle v. 13.) without mercy to him that sheweth no mercy: (which Christ doth not relate to friends only, but to reputed enemies, Math. 5.44. &c.) and mercy rejoyceth over judgment, Jam. 2.13. that is from the Father of mercies, whose mercy is over all his works, Psal. 45.9. and if they do so speak and do, &c. then we doubt not, (according to that 2 Cor. 10.6.) but the messen∣ger of the Lord of Hosts will suddenly return again to his Temple, Mal. 3.1. and build up once again the Ta∣bernacle of David which is fallen down, &c. Act. 15.16, 17. but in the mean time their service (whose souls are
not lifted up, Hab. 2.4.) in a prudential way of mi∣nistrarion will be acceptable to the Lord in their mea∣sure, according to that Mal. 3.16. &c. Then they that feared the Lord, spake often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord and that thought upon his name; and they shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in the day when I shall make up my jewels or special treasure; and I will spare them as a man spareth his own sonne that serveth him: then shall ye discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not, Mal. 3.16, 17, 18. FINIS.
The Contents of the Integral (or of this whole Book) is distributed into a Tri∣cotomie, and offered to the Readers view, that he may (primo intuitu) perceive what he shall (if he please) find despersed and argued (à capite ad calcem) throughout the same. THE first part of it, is a ge∣nuine and fit Paraphrase on the Vindicators Hypocritical (Saint like) Preface. And first, a Paraphrase up∣on the salutation (in the Pre∣face) To all the Lovers (in his sense) of Gods truth, &c. Secondly, a Paraphrase on the Preface it felf, consisting of many Paragraphs in co∣loured words of Scripture-phrase to deceive the hearts of the simple. The Revindication it self comprehends two parts, First, the Anasceuastick confutative part, i. e. to confute by answering the Vindicators pretended Scriptures and Fa∣thers, which he doth rashly and ignorantly produce to justi∣fie his pernicious positions, placed in the front of his Vindication, wherein we trace him from pag. 2. to p. 146.
The second part of the aforesaid Tricotomie is Cata∣sceuastick, the confirmative part of our contrary assertions, by several Topick heads of Scripture testimonies. Secondly, by humane testimonies; first, of the Fathers commonly so called.) Secondly, our English reformed Church, in our first reformation, from page 146. to p. 200. The last part of the foresaid Tricotomie consists of two sorts of Queries, occasioned from our overforward con∣tenders and Censurers, and offered to them (or whom∣soever they may concern) to pensitate with serious thoughts. The first sort of them, are to such as fix (two magisteri∣ally) their own sense, (before they have deliberately consi∣dered it) upon some particular Scriptures, as if their sense were (before they are sure of it) the very mind of the Lord in the said places; some Scripture instances we have set down, mistaken (we appeal to all impartial Readers) by several persons, as that of John 3.5, 6. by one Mr. Stevens, who doth weakly call the said place, their strong reason to maintain his old tradition of origi∣nal sin, in his shallow Book called, A threefold defence of original sin. Other instances of Scriptures in a mistaken sense, are those Isaiah 64.6. Phil. 3.8, 9. mistaken by two grave Committee men (who have been our back friends) in the County of Wilts. Thus we have delivered the summe of the Tricotomy of our Book intituled A Revindication.
Its true we have inserted some personal reflections which do not concern every Reader, and therefore it may be said, they might have been left out, as if they savoured of a like Spirit; we answer, we must commit that to him, who knoweth all things; we have much more to say a-against some, and to vindicate the deceased, whose death we wish them to consider of, that were so violent against him, who was more knowing (I am sure) and more meek (I am affraid) then themselves, and we thought it not amisse to name some passages, and persons; having been so publickly wronged by the same, that the world may see what unruly spirits there are in these dayes of re∣formation against the Doctrine of a possibility of a total mortification of sinne in this life; because it hath been for the said Doctrine, we have been traduced in the Vindica∣tors senselesse Vindication, and also through many counties, it hath been sounded and ecchoed out that we are Jesuits, and Factors for Rome; so strangely and unexpectedly is Rome (it seems by the foresaid callumny) reduced, as to hire us to publish and convince a possibility of a total mortification of sinne in this life, and to cry up a possibi∣lity of a perfect obedience to the law of God in this life. If this be to be vile, we are content to be more vile, 2 Sam. 6.22. If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, John 18.23.
Here are some Errata referring to the book aforesaid, which we desire the Reader to take notice of, for the better understanding what we mean in the respective places: we confess they might (by the mutual and diligent care of all parties of us concerned) have been prevented; therefore we do not excuse our selves, that it could not be helped, saying, in many things we offend all; for our endeavour here hath been to prove a possibility to live in this life through the grace and help of Christ without offence: and there∣fore these Errata we acknowledge did happen by our neg∣lect and oversight who were mutually concerned to have looked better about us: Sed nihil factum infectum fiers potest; its too late now to mend them otherwise then by their subscription; therefore we desire the Reader, when he per∣ceiveth in any page of the book a Crupsis, either of inver∣sion, redundancy, or defect of, words to make grammatical construction, then to reflect upon these nominated Errata, to rectifie the sense of the said place, and as for the objectum occupans, and adjunctum occupat about the same, we leave them to the Readers censure as he pleaseth. PAraph. p. 2. l 34. r. service. l. 36. d. fore. l. 37. r. 13.11. p. 7. l. 2. r. to re∣proch them for. l. 29. r. Wilton. p. 9. l. 39. after preface. r. and positions. p. 12. l. 2. for said. r. side. p. 13. l. 29. r. Act. 19. p. 15. l. 1. r. to do wickedly. Book. p. 2. l. 6. r. catasceuastically. p. 25. l. 18. r. Mat. 22. p. 26. l. 28. r. 1 John 2.22. p. 37. l. 6. r. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. p. 39. l. 10. r. Sidkenu. p. 35. l. 12. d. not. p. 82. l. ult. adde be. p 100. l. 37. adde is. p. 106. l. 21. f. servant. r. Son. p. 112. l. 23. del. not. p. 117. l. 30. r. as it is. p. 127. l. 19. r. because of him. p. 136. l. 1 2. d. it. p. 139. l. 15. r. Joh. 5.40. p. 144. l. 17. f. note. r. vote. l. 30. r. commander. l. 31. f. whence. r. whom. p. 188. l. 25. adde be. p. 200. l. 4. f. held. r. bold. p. 210. l. 20. r. the res testata. l. 23. f. prudentia. r. constantia. p. 217. l. 17. f. rules. r. rites. p. 228. l. 7. del. a. p. 229. l. 22. r. Phil. 3.6, 7, 8. p. 230. l. 29. d. through the faith of Jesus. p. 233. l. 10. after nature r. 2 Pet. 1.4. p. 241. l. 2. r. related. p. 16. l. ult. r. id bruti. p. 243. l. 28. r. before all the people. l. 29. d. the people. p. 245. l. 10. f. who. r. what. p. 254. l. 10. r. yea not to be believed they can be, &c. p. 256. l. 8. after earth. r. Rev, 14.6.
