R368 12682581 65690
Tunbridge-Wells: OR A DAYS COURTSHIP. A COMEDY, As it is Acted at the Dukes-Theatre. Written by a Person of Quality. Licensed, Roger L'Estrange. LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Henry Ro∣gers at the Crown in Westminster-Hall, 1678.
PROLOGUE. TH' Old English Stage, confin'd to Plot and Sense, Did hold abroad but small intelligence, But since th' invasion of the forreign Scene, Iack pudding Farce, and thundering Machine, Painted to your grave Ancestours unknown, (Who never disliked wit because their own) There's not a Player but is turned a scout, And every Scribler sends his Envoys out To fetch from Paris, Venice, or from Rome, Fantastick fopperies to please at home. And that each act may rise to your desire, Devils and Witches must each Scene inspire, Wit rowls in Waves, and showers down in Fire. With what strange Ease a Play may now be writ, When the best half's composed by painting it? And that in th' Ayr, or Dance lyes all the Wit? True Sense or Plot would fooleries appear, Faults (I suppose) you seldome meet with here, For 'tis no mode to profit by the ear. Your souls (we know) are seated in your Eies, An Actress in a Cloud's a strange surprize, And you ne're paid trebble prizes to be wise.
Actors Names. Tom. Fairlove.—A Gentleman of the Town, that Loves hand∣some Women. Owmuch.—A Gamster, that Lives by his Wits and bor∣rowing of Money. Mr. Wilding.—A modish Husband, that gives himself the Li∣berty of the Age. Sir Lofty Vainman. A Baronet of great means and little sense, a great affecter of figures and hard words. Squire Fop.—A Coxcomb that pretends to know all persons and business. Alderman Paywel. An indulgent City Husband. Dr. Outside.—A Man made up of Physical terms and little Art. Parson Quibble.—A Welch Vicar in Love with the Widow, and strangely adicted to punns. Poet Witless.—A conceited Rhimer, that strains his fancy be∣yond his Judgment, and Writes Nonsence for strong Lines. Farendine.—A Quondam Mercer disgusted with his Profes∣sion, and from a sedentary Fool being turned a Riotous Coxcomb pretends to all the worst Qualities of a Gentleman. A Boy.— WOMEN. Alinda.—A wity discreet Lady, beloved by Fairlove. Courtwit.—A great pretender to Wit, and an Admirer of it, where she finds it. Paywel.—A pampered Aldermans Wife, that imployes more of her Husbands Estate in Lewdness than Charity. Parret.—Parcel Midwife, parcel Bawd, the Confident of Paywel. Brag.—Two Whores.— Crack.—Two Whores.— Page.—Lacquies.—Coachmen.—
Tunbridge-Wells: OR, A DAYES COVRTSHIP. ACT. I. Fairlove discover'd dressing: His Lacquey attending. Fairl. HAst called my Sister? Lacq. An hour since; I consider a Lady re∣quires more time to harness than a Coach and six— Fair. What Company came down last night? Lacq. Three Coachfuls, besides droves of Horsemen. Fair. Hast learn'd their Names. Lacq. And Qualities, Intrigues, and Assignations. Fair. Come, your discovery. Lacq. In primis, Lady Brag, a rich buxom Widow, with a noise of Bullies attending her. Fair. She has been here these two daies. Lacq. But her Adorers came last night, Videlicet, Mr. Farendine the spruce Mercer, Parson Quibble, and Poet Witless. Enter Owmuch. Fair. They'l serve for a Vacation Courtship—Iack Owmuch! Owm. What Hurricane of Love drove thee from London, before our Beauties do desert the Mall, the dusty Park, and treating Mulberry? Fair. You appear to me the stranger miracle: Have Mari∣bone and Putney lost their charms, that you forsake the Town this Bowling-Season? Owm. The Courts retirement to Windsor has attracted so many
Modish Fops, there are few Cullies stirring, and thou knowest my business Tom's to borrow mony. Fair. I faith I want it for my own Occasions. Owm. Husband thy holy day Oaths, and don't suspect me for so vain a Sot, as to hope to borrow mony of a Wit. Fair. Continue that wise faith, lest you prove more terrible to thy Acquaintance than a Sheerness Ague. Owm. As to my foolish Acquaintance, I may say Nature de∣sign'd them my inheritance, and as Lord Paramount I still dispose 'em Fairl. If all Fools be thy Copy-holders thou maist be Pope for the universality of thy jurisdiction. Owm. Sometimes indeed they pay me Peter pence: My happy Stars dispos'd me th'other day amongst a Collony of Elder Bro∣thers, whence I chose a Brace to whom Fortune had been more bountiful than Nature. Fair. Some dull insipid Heirs to their Parents industry: Owm. Right; Masters of Land in present, and of wit in reversion. Fair. Where do these Dotterels lodge? Owm. Here at Bounds under the same Roof with you—Boy, in∣form the Knight and Squire where I am; then in my name salute the Lady Brag; within this hour, say I'le kiss her hands. [Exit Boy. Musick within. Morrow to the Right Worshipful Sir Lofty Vainman, to his fair Si∣ster, and to the celebrated Esquire Fop. A SONG within. HOw wanton, and frolick's this Age, Wherein Gallants so briskly invade The Misses that furnish the Stage, And the Madams in Maskarade? Vnseen and unknown they still court, And walk a Corant to and fro', Bad faces ne're hinder the Sport, If the Blade's well provided below. The Ladies make choice by the size, The Gallants by Garb and Proportion, And when their brisk Spirits do rise, They fall to their carnal devotion.
There needs neither Parents consent, A Ioynture nor Rites of the Church, If fiercely the Gallant be bent, The Ladies scarce leave him ith'lurch. Yet if he too faintly pursue The Idol he seems to adore, With a frisk she'l bid him adieu, And leave the young Fop at the door. Fair. The Fidlers named a Sister, Came she down with you? Owm. Yes, and such a pollished piece of Flesh and blood, Tom; so tempting fair. Fair. Prithee say. Owm. Such a delicious, delicate, ingenious Rogue; no shrug∣ging, cease your vain hopes, and to thy future torment know, that she's reserved. Fair. For my imbraces Iack. Owm. Learn to dispair betimes, thou maist as soon perswade the Dutch to adjure Traffick, as move her to affection; she has a frost in her blood, and a fire in her brain. Fair. If handsome, let the Fire be where it will I'le quench it. Owm. There's more than up and ride here Tom, you will find her no Theater Visor-mask, nor one of the Moseleys Persons of Quality, she defies the inchantment of a Snake curl, cannot be mollified with a treat, nor will she dance after a consort of Guineys. Fair. Introduce me, and let me take my venture. Owm. Thou mayst as soon draw the chief Prize in the Indigent Officers Lottery, as purchase her; the majesty of her beauty will command thy reverence, and the acuteness of her Wit thy admira∣tion. Fair. Doubtless I shall admire her, for I find I love her already. Owm. I'd fain see that movable in petty-coats thou couldst not love. Fair. I'm a well wisher to the soft Sex. Owm. As ever trappan'd Virgin of her trifle, thou obligest all, from the Bib to the Mufler, from the bulk to the Alcove. Fair. Had my design on Woman been half so successeful as thine upon gouty Purses and consumptive Coxcombs, I had not been thus long condemn'd to the dull and nauseous embraces of an old over∣ridden acquaintance.
Owm. Thy pennance would become my Paradise. Fair. Dost love an old Obliger? Owm. I could ne're keep Friend to make th' experiment. Fair. You should caress them, as I do mine, not cheat 'em so in∣humanely. Owm. Thou art as foul mouth'd as a decayed sinner in the lower Alsatia: 'Tis as great a Sollicism in good manners to say a Gentle∣man cheats, as to call a Lady of Quality Whore, for obliging a a distress'd Cavaliere with a nights lodging. Fair. I beg your pardon; you out wit them. My Sword. [To his Boy Enters Owmuch his Boy. Boy, Sir, an ancient Gentlewoman without inquires very loudly for you. Owm. What kind of Animal is she? Boy, she calls her self Madam Parret. Fair. The Midwife, I'le withdraw—I had rather stand ten broadsides of a Ship Royal, than the artillery of her Voice: she quarrelled once a Bearward, and tho nine Oyster Wives came in to his assistance, she half killed him with noise, and rendred him in∣tirely deaf for a month after. Owm. She's a Woman of an uncontroulable clamour when she's moved, and nothing does it sooner than to debauch one of her fair Lodgers without her privacy. Fair. My ears have suffer'd so cruel a Martyrdom in the confir∣mation of that truth, I dare not oppose it. Owm. She out does a Play-house Orange Woman for the politick management of a baudy intrigue. Fair. Well, when you have rendred her conversable, I'le appear, and in the interim hasten my Sister for the Wells. [Exit. Owm. Boy, send her in—She comes with fresh intelligence of Game, if profit's the Attendant, I'le make a stoop and gorge the golden Prey; if only pleasure, let those whom ease and plenty have made wanton, pursue the riotous variety, I cannot live upon it. Enter Parret. Par. Dear Owmuch! I have run my self into a Bath to find you. Owm. Thou art the prettiest obliging Creature! But do these Waters afford ne're a piece of barren, or disgusted Matrimony, some Widowed antiquity, or antiquated Virginity, to whom a strong chined Gentleman, with a back of the first rate, may be ser∣viceable.
Par. Doest take me for a Harridan, or a Cuffey? ha! Owm. I believe thee a very obliging Creature, truely. Par. I won't be believed an obliging Creature by ne're a Sir Fopling of you all, the Court know me a Creature of Heavens special Handy-work, and if I live to see the City, Bow shall Ring with thy abominations, till Mary-Overs eccho thy lewdness: Tempt me to be an obliging Creature; Owm. Let this Guiney render me more intelligible to your good Name. Par. You have a good Lady of your own, and for you to make these wild excursions to abuse your old acquaintance with the oc∣cupation of an obliging Creature. [Weeps. Owm. A few tears may do her parched hide a kindness, and cement the clefts in her face, which gape for a show'r like a clay fenn in the Dog-dayes. Par. But as I was saying Mr. Owmuch, if you can discover any implyment, whereby a poor Gentlewomans reputation may not be blited, you shall find me as pliable as a Willow; tending to all occasions, Honourable and commodious. Owm. Now you speak reason; Ladies come down here for the common cause, and can you (who are the very modle of experi∣ence) imagine that desires can be satisfi'd without their common remedy: Waters are but waters Mrs. Parret, there goes more to the composition of an Heir, than minerals. Par. Now you come to me; and I've an Aldermans wife in chase to answer your full wishes, who wanting the conveniencies her Sex requires, is kindly willing to spare the decrepit years of her Husband, and to mannage his Cash to his ease, and her own satisfaction. Owm. In short, she wou'd be furnish'd with an able friend. Par. That can hardly be done in short, Mr. Owmuch. Own. Busiy not thy projecting head about dimensions; she may spare the question the Lady ask'd the Gyant, by your assuring her that all's proportionable, Fairlove comes, you'l find me at the Wells. [Enter Fairlove. Par. I'le give the Lady an Inventory of your abilities. [Exit. Par. Fair. I find the Beldame has not digested our last quarrel, by the flight she took upon my appearance. Owm. I warrant you disappointed her assignation, for she loved thee passionately.
Fair. I've younger game upon the Wing, your Knights Sister. Own. The worshipful Wight appears; who rightly mannaged may prove a future introduction to that amour, and a pleasant diversion at present. [Enter Sir Lofty Vainman. Vain. My Stars are superabundantly propitious in administring the Seraphick felicity of this crittical encounter. Owm. Such accumulated kindness will bankrupt my poor ac∣knowledgements. Vain. My soul's inhabited, or rather Collonized with an alla∣crity to see you. Fair. I know not how his Soul's inhabited, but's head may pass for a Collony in Greenland, it is so thinly peopled. Vain. My noble Mustapha, is he thy Zanger? [to Owm. Owm. A Gentleman, whose accomplishments will recommend themselves to your acquaintaince. Vain. As I'm a Baronet of th' old Iocabus stamp, I am his Vassal in decimo sexto. Fair. You much honour me. Vain. Fragrant Sir, I honour any Man of parts, for I hate a Dunce, and adore a new Acquaintance. [draws his Book. Fair. Pray enter me into the List. Owm. D' you book 'em all Sir Lofty. Vain. I should obliterate half else, here's thy Name, and thy friends should be Registred next, could I decipher't. Fair, Mine's Fairlove. Vain. Odoriferous Mr. Fairlove! I reverence thy Name sub∣limely, and to ellucidate the redundancy of my devotions, I'le enter it upon the knuckles of my Pedestals. [writes upon his knees. Fair. 'Tis the friendliest fool I e're conversed with. Owm. Now shall I be more slighted then a passionate cast Mistress, who thinks a Man obliged to disgest the nauciousness of her Age, because he was surfeited with the pleasures of her youth; for he admires an acquaintance no longer than he gets a fresher. Fair. Keep him from others, and my acquaintance with him shall tend to thy advantage. Vain. So! I have you down in capital characters. Courtwit peeps, steps back, then Enters. Fair. You may enter without the hazard of a blush, for these are very modest Gentlemen. Owm. A modest Gentleman is less acceptable to a well bred Lady then an Eunuch to an experienced Widow.
Fair. This Knight I'm sure allows the character, he seems a harm∣less Servant to fair Ladies. Cour. If but to the Fair, what will become of me? Vain. Excuse me thrice resplendant Nimph, I am so to all. Cour. Who speaks to all is silent still to me. Vain. You shall make an impropriation of me, and be the sole Incumbant of my amours. Pardon me, Madam, tho I illustrate my ellocution with those clerical metaphers, know I am a Baronet of 2000 per Annum. Cour. I guest it by your ridiculous bravery, and extraordinary confidence. Vain. She's a Lady of an intellectual sublimity. Fair. She'l improve by the converse of so ingenious a Knight. Vain. She may impregnate, Sir. Fair. You mean my Sister no dishonour. Owm. I dare ingage for's innocence. Vain. I contemplate the impregnation of her capacity by this snuch. [Pulls out his snuch Box. Cour. This is the extravagants Coxcomb, that ever nature pro∣duced to countenance folly. Fair. Would thou hadst him for better and worse. Cour. To sell to Gresham Colledge to be anatomiz'd for a Fool, 'twere worth the Virtuoso's while to find out the Seat of folly, and learn to cut Gallants of the simples. Fair. Didst know the sweet conveniency of a wealthy Fool, thou'dst have a greater aversion to indigent Wits, than celebrated Court beauties to an habitation in North-Wales. Cour. If Fate design me for such an unfinished piece of Manhood may she send me a soft insipid Fool, for these half witted Pops are more obstinate than ignorant Devotes, and less tractable than Mules. Fair. You Lady Wits have still the ill Fortune of fooling your best Servants first, and then your selves: I expect you should con∣sume your youth amongst the Wits, and purchase a large dowry in Sonnets and Reparties; but when maturer age shall blunt the edge of these fantastick nothings, and shew what you thought wit, want of discretion, Sister. Cour. Would you wou'd instruct more by example, Brother. Fair. My defects are no warrants for your Follies. Cour. But running in a blood they ought to be the more excu∣sable, at least to you.
Vain. Pray Madam, whats your name? Cour. I was christen'd before I could well remember—Ha, ha. Vain. Does she deride Sir Lofty Vainman? Owm. No, 'tis a perticular grace. Vain. Say you so; in veracity, the elegance of my fabrick titti∣lates the imaginations of most Ladies I converse with. Fair. You are certainly Venus's Darling, and that my Sister may be in your Books, her name is Courtwit. Cour. But who gave her that name is the next query; the Knight makes me too much a Girle, and my Brother would have me too soon a Woman, certainly there's a medium Mr. Owmuch. Owm. She's as pleasant as any thing in Nature. Fair. Ever except a Monkey and a Shock Dog. Cour. And a Lover Brother, for there is nothing in Nature so fantastically apish. Fair. Tis because Ladies are caught like Dotterels by imitation, we are fain to counterfeit your follies to bring you to our lure. Cour. You make Dotterels of us, and we make Dolts of you. Enter Fop. Fop, Faith and troth I'm glad I've found you, dear Coz. [to Sir Lofty Cour. Was he afraid to lose the Knight or himself? Owm. He pretends to know all persons, and their concerns, has the ambition to be thought a Wit, and commends all things in the wrong place. Cour. Methinks our Knight ingrosses him. Owm. A fresh object to Sir Lofty is next to a new acquaintance. Cour. Never was Knight and Esquire better matched, Fair. It grows late, I suppose you command Sir Lofties Coach. Owm. And him to, or I mispend my time. Fair. Mayst thrive in thy adventure: Come Sister. [Exit with Courtwit. Owm. Fairlove designs Sir Lofty for his Sister, but I intend him first for my own advantage, and then may she be happy in her Fool; tis true she seems averse, but an Estate yoked with a Ladyship may change her mind: But now to my own Plot. O Lord, Sir, I had forgot your danger! I beg your pardon, your safety makes me rude. He muses then pulls Vainman hastily. Vain. Where's Fairlove and the Lady? Fop. Do you know Fairlove? Owm. If you respect Sir Lofty spare your impertinance.
Fop. Ne're stir, I love you for that, as if any man knew Fair∣love better than I, Owm. Had you the knowledge of an Oracle, you must be ig∣norant of this concern. Fop. I thank you for that, as if your business were not the Wells. Owm. No more than to th' Indies. Fop. And now you talk of th' Indies, I'le discover a mistery of Trade, our Merchants are taxed with th' exportation of broad Gold to that Clime, when insincerity the greatest part is exchang∣ed with Sweden for Copper. Owm. A Pox on your brazen impudence! Fop. Why it is generally used amongst the Misses instead of Mer∣cury in all their washes. Vain. By the soul of industry it may turn to account, for most of our refined Gallants look as if they used the same wash too. Owm. Will you believe me? Fop. I love you for that ne're stir, as if this were an Age to be∣lieve any Man. Owm. There's no perswading him, I must think upon some other course. So-ho-Boy— [Enter Boy; he whispers the Boy goes out, If this prove not let the Devil take the Dice, and throw me a worse change.— [Boy returns with two naked Swords. Mr. Fairlove sends you these to take your choice. Fop. I love him for, what shall I do for a Scabbard. Owm. One you may dispose as you please, th' other he intends to sheath in your sweet guts. Fop. The Devil take me for a souced Mackarel, if ever I spoke to the Man in my Life. Owm Just now, none knew him better, Fop Know, or know not, I'me a Person of resolution, and scorn to fight any Man without a quarrel: Send me a sword! [Exit. Owm. Your Kinsman has put me in a kind of heat, but he's an Animal; and were not your interest concerned. Vain. Most indearing odoriferous Owmuch, Owm. If you carry not some spell about you. Vain. Not I, by the spirit of Garagaeneva. Owm. It were else impossible, I've a passion for thee, as if thou wer't a Miss of an hours acquaintance. Vain. Put in sincerity, dost affect Sir Lofty Vainman.
Owm. Refuse me else! were Fairlove ten thousand Friends, since he resolves to quarel my noble Knight, I'd renounce him. Vain. Quarel me! Owm. In short, for I dare disguise 't no longer; these Weapons I us'd to scare your Kinsman, were sent by Fairlove to you, who took offence, how e're he seem'd to bear it, at the ambiguity of your expressions. Vain. I apprehend the Gentleman's very quarrelsome. Owm. The veriest Wasp in Europe▪ he beat a modish Fop for dis∣charging a Volley of crittical non sence upon Ben Iohnsons Fox, and kickt a Vallet de Chambre in the pride of his Lords cast Suit, disputing precedence with a Ballad-maker: at certain times the De∣vil possesses him, and then he destroyes Friend and Foe without distinction. Vain. You have talkt me into an intermitting Fever, what's to be done? Owm. Done! Cut's throat. Fain. Is't for the credit of a Baronet in Commission to fight? Owm. That's considerable. Vain. Besides, my Estate is 2000 per Annum, what has he? Owm. What Fortune and the Dice oblige him with. Vain. May I dwindle to an Esquire, if I scorn not to risque my life at such uncertainties. Owm. What if we try the Sisters intercession? Vain. Most Philosophically imagin'd. Owm. Yet I've a certain scruple. Vain. Be not retrograde my dear Elixir of amity. Owm. I swore upon an accident never to tempt a Lady empty handed. Vain. I apprehend, thou shalt▪ present this Locket. Owm. To the Lady, but hast no slight regalio for the Chamber-Maid, to facilitate address. Vain. Here's a moveable of eight guineys. Owm. Illustrated with a Paper of Verses 'twill serve turn: but let me consider what I'me indebted, a hundred and fourscore. Vain. It wants ten, thou art a faithful Debtor. Owm. Then thirty makes just two hundred pounds. Vain. My Purse is superstitiously at thy devotion. Owm. And to requite the courtesie I'le introduce you into the acquaintance of a rich young Widow, whose pleasant conversation
will shorten the time spent in adjusting your quarel. Vain. Thou art expansively obliging, I'le go numerate the pounds, and randevouz you at the Portal of my apartment? [Exit. Owm. Every Man in's way; here's a good mornings purchase; two hundred pounds, a Locket, and this ring; all got by honest in∣dustry, the Brandenburg of couzenage, by which the zealous sober Citizen does circumvent the ignorant, oppress the indigent, and swallow the prophane and prodigal. To thrive is but our Neighbours right t' invade, And cheating's the chief knack of every Trade. [Exit. ACT. II. SCENE. I. In the Widows lodging, Enter Brag and Crack. Brag▪ OUr Wits grow duller than a Dutch Lampoon, and our best projects meet as bad success; as if the Devil (Trai∣tor to himself) had leagued with vertue to suppress poor Sinners. Crack. Well fare old London, I say there's the game; there they come tumbling in with fiery bloods, light heads, and weighty pur∣ses; these dull waters render intrigue too flegmatick and serious. Brag. O the dear time when Misses came up first in fashion: then half the Town were Novices in love; and not so many Ladies of the game: the subtil practice of one afternoon for Petty-coats i'th' Row, and Lumbard Street, for Smocks in Cornhil, and for Gloves at th' Change, whilst Covent garden furnished golden Cash, then were the happy dayes. Crack. But now grown numerous, like other Traders, must rest content t'imploy our industry for smaller gains than our happy Predecessors. Brag. We are barr'd the blessing of variety for want of choice, we cherish costive Fops, whose narrow bounty scarce affords us gruel. Crack. The Mercer comes off pretty handsomely. Brag. Inspir'd with Pontack, that spur to Venery, we feel his bounty. Crack. In that gay mood, he turns a Debauche; and hates the City Idol, Interest. Brag. What think you of our quibbling Levite. Crack. The Guiney-gelder, he was born in Wales, and thinks a mark a most Majestick Bounty.
Brag. Curse on these hide bound Cullies! I must have such met∣tled Sparks as scorn to starve their venery; a poor it inerent White-Friers Sinner, that nightly plies 'twixt Theator and Temple, I can't live upon such scraps; I'le strait cashier 'em. Crack. That were ill policy: Sutors about a Widow are like Daws circling a Prey; their cawing may invite the Eagle, but sum∣mons certainly their fellow Daws, Brag. We might extract more Spirits from these Weeds. Crack. No Chimistry is like a Womans Wit. If mine fail not, I'le turn 'em all to profit. Brag. But I'd fain see some proofes. Crack. You are too impatient, the World's improved, and not so easily imposed upon, as formerly. Brag. Playes and converse have so refined the Age old Cheats wont pass; Yet had I rich Pretenders! Crack. New Setters up must entertain all Comers; and I despair of none, but your dull Rhimer, for one may easier extract from Cinders Balsamick Oyle, than gold from Poets. Brag. Why then let's squeeze the Parson. Crac. His Tyth Geese and Pigs come in so slowly they'l scarce discharge a Treat of pettit Pasté and brandy. Obscure, I hear some footing. I vow my Lady's busie— Brag hides: Crac. runs to the door to stop Quibble and Farendine. Pray be civil—Your Coat speaks more reverence, than to press upon a Ladies privacy; if these intrusions be countenanced no Person of Quality will drink the waters at their Lodging. Quib. It is my duty to have regard to so comfortable an impor∣tance as a young Widows water. Crac. She's none of your charge, Mr. Quibble. Quib. But I have been at charges with her, therefore I charge you t'evade your frumps, least I crack your conundrum, Mrs. Crack. Crac. The Cracks have as good a report as the Quibbles in spight of your Welch Herauldy. Quib. Thy tongue's a very cracker, all noise, and no danger. Crac. It is not such a fire-brand as yours, to cause dissention in a whole Parish. Far. There's no dealing with Women, the Merchandize sel∣dome answers expectation. Crac. He prates like a City Orphane. Far. Know I defie that inclosure of horned Beasts, where hypo∣crisie
stalks like Religion, and fraud wears the Cloak of Sobriety; I dwell within the Precincts of Gentility; keep a Warehouse with∣in the sent of his Majesties Kitchin, wear my sword, maintain my Miss, converse with the Huza's, storm Punks, beat Watches, and reel to bed by three in the morning. [Enter Witless. Wit. Where's this magnetick of beauty; here's an Ode shall make her fairer than Nature designed her, it contains 999 Stanza's, writ all ala vole; my Muse ne're drew bit for't. Quib. Then she baited on horseback, for I'm sure she keeps the Stage. Wit. That such shrubs of illiterature should censure us! But I'le consound their ignorance: know that I am happily the best Poet that ever translated Farce. Crac. 'Tis the first time I ever heard of your merit▪ Wit. That argues you of low conversation; why, th' Age takes its measure from my garb and writings, and for Playes a late piece of mine ravish'd the World; it was so charming, so divertisant, the Actors could not hear it without bursting their buttons. And I confidently dare aver 'twill read and act with any Play in Christen∣dome. Hast seen Tunbridge Wells? Quib. I don't frequent the Theators. Wit. I'de have it acted all by Women: Crac. And why by Women? Wit. Because Baudry and non sence is best received from their mouths. Quib. Your Muse roams, and becomes vagrant. Wit. Tempt me not, least I tell thee, thou Non-Conformity to Order, how much the canting Pulpit has borrowed from my strain, t' inhance its reputation. Crac. Y'had best prophane Heroick Playes to. Wit. Poor Chamber Utinsil; thy heart is no more proof against Love in rhime than thy sleazy Smock against him thou likest. Crac. He must be a better Engineer than thou, to undermine it. Wit. Thou art no competent Judge; therefore I'le make an Essay upon thy Lady. Crac. No admittance there to an empty handed Lover, she's re∣solved to value your affections by the price of your Presents. Wit. Present her strait these Verses, where resides the Cleopa∣trian Pearl of Poetry. Crac. These paper presents might find at Epsom a more fit imploy∣ment.
Wit. O thou impertinences! but you are great Judges, Gentlemen. When most Stupendious Thunder from the Earth With silent noise concealed this Ladys Birth, The Bull in Paralax did bray so lowd That Fate by him had like to have been cowd. Wit. Do you Laugh at me, Laugh at an Authour, by Ate Ne∣mesis and all th' infernal spawn inspires Lampoon, I'le dray thy Portracture in Travesy so horribly deformed, and like a Hag, thou shalt deface thy Idol Looking-glass, and in thy cruel garter hang thy self. Horrour, and Hell with Nature shall conspire And blast thy face, to compliment my Ire. [Exit. Quib. His Muse is still upon the speed, I wonder he posted a∣way no sooner. Crac. Your conundrums are as unacceptable to my Lady as his Rants; she understands no Courtship but Plate and Jewels. Quib. For Plate, I've little besides a Brandy-Cup. Crac. A brandy Cup! you sure mis-understand me. Quib. We'l beget right understandings, fear not, how e're I'le give thee a Mark to remember me by. [gives her Mony. Crac. You are too noble. Quib. A Wit of my own strain, there's Ten-groats for that jest. Crac. What a quarter you keep with your kindness? Quib. Art with me again? that joke deserves a kiss. Faren. These Priests are prodigal of their flesh; but were he an Arch-Flamine I durst drop Angels with him. Quib. My bounty has been so remarkable you can't forget me. Crac. The way to keep benefits in memory is to repeat 'em. Quib. When next we meet we'l come to repetition. Crac. You see th' address I use, to be at your devotion. Faren. Your kindness shan't forestal my bounty. Crac. My Lady, hears nothing from me but your praise. Faren. You give my love kind hopes. Crac. She's the richest Widow that ever thrift, or cousenage produced. Far. Present her this small token of my Love. [a Iewel. Crac. Now I'le pronounce her Yours; the strongest simpathies in love or Nature are less violent than her inclinations to a frank∣lover. Faren. Iv'e given direction for a Richer present, when Poet,
or Parson rival me in bounty, may I return to my first vomit, snort at goverment over a Coffee dish, and curse French Weavers. Crac. Not a word of your Profession, as you affect preferment; my Lady sounds at the very Name of a Citizen. Faren. That generous humor does improve my hopes; I want but little of a Gentleman, except a Priviledge not to pay my debts; for I can swear as lowd, talk as profainly▪ Drink as deep, and Court a Miss as lewdly: Therefore I'le order straight my Journy-man to shut up Shop, turn all my Wares to cash, defraud my Creditors with a composition, and make me large returns of th' overplus, that I may put my self into a Garb, Purchase a Knight-hood, and atchiev'e the Widow. [Exit. Crac. 'Tis a most Gentleman-like resolution. [Enter Brag. Brag. Excellent Rogue! Thou hast out done thy self! Crac. What I performed, was all by your direction. Brag. Thou growest too modest, I acknowledge thee the buil¦der of my Fortunes, and thy own. Crac. This Gold and Jewels are but fortunes pledges, here comes your Doctor, and in his thred bare velvet. [Enter Outside. Brag. Would you have him leave his degree behind him? Out. Madam, I cou'd not take my round, without certifying my self of the intrinsical operation of your Ladyships waters. Brag. They pass but dully. Outs. Do you ponderate them, according to prescription? Crack. Alas! She has not discharged (saving your Worships re∣verence) the demi-quantity she drank. Out. Some viscous obstructions latent; but I'le prescribe an ap∣perative: I profess they should be drank at the Well, least they e∣vaporate their volatile Salt. Enter Parret in a heat. Par. O! you are a worthy man to be relied on. Out. Why all this indignation, Mrs. Parret? you see I dispatch my Patients as fast as the best of the Colledge. Par. You are a worshipful dispatcher indeed, t' have had a Lady under your hands these five weeks for the common cause, when I have known more good done in five minutes. Out. The Waters must have time for operation. Par. Is it not a shame for you, and your waters not to render a Lady fruitful in five weeks. Out. The Husbands old and defective.
Par. Were not you imployed to supply those defects? Do we not call the Phisician to help th' infirmities of Nature? and were not you called (as they say) by my advice, I thought you an able Man, but you approve your self a Man of weak practice, and feeble parts. Out. Be pacified, whats within the power of Man I'le effect. Par. What's within the pores of Man may do much by a right applications, I know't by experience, I beg your Lady-ships par∣don that I borrow your Doctor for an hour. Brag. Hee's freely at your service. [Exit with Doctor. Brag. I hope Owmuch has brought some freshgoslings. [Enter Owmuch, Vainman, Fop. Owm. You'l pardon, Madam, this bold intrusion. Brag. I seldom admit Company at my Lodgings, when I drink the Waters, but yours is at all times acceptable. Owm. The reallity of your compliment will appear in your cour∣teous reception of my friends. Brag. They need no other Character t' assure their welcome. Owm. Sir, Lofty Vainman, and Esquire Fop. [They Salute her. Vain. Her Lips are softer than the Clouds, and melt to Manna. Fop. My memory, fails me, or I should know this Lady. Brag. Know me! Fop. I've seen those eyes shoot glances in the Park and now I think on't, your Manty was Cherry and Buff trimmed with a Gen∣tinella colour'd ribband. Brag. What shall I do? I shall be discovered. [To Owmuch. Owm. Let not fear betray you, 'tis his humour to pretend to know all persons. Sir Lofty I must recommend this Lady to you for a Virtuosa, and leave you Esquire to the mercy of Mrs. Crack. Fop. You are for the Wells now. Owm. You should be an Astrologer by your conjecture: Do you know I want twenty Guineys? Fop. Was I ever ignorant. These make an even hundred. Owm. I owe Sir Lofty two. But I'le leave my Fools to their For∣tunes. [Exit▪ Owmuch. Vain. My Visage is the perspective of my heart, and my tongue, the Landskip or passage of my intellects. Brag. 'Tis too intricate a Prospective for me to judge by, for I have but one sure proof of love. Vain. Make it the Standard of mine, and if it prove not Alchimy
contemn my prowess, and render my Chivalry ridicule! Brag. Your imprecations have unlocked my breast, indulge my modesty to whisper the kind secret. Vain. The Heavens are not more bountiful when they dissolve in fruitful showres to impregnate Nature: But con licenza that rapture merits quotation. [draws his Book. Brag. Sure Nature takes delight in varying Fools, and made this for her sport, he's so affectedly ridiculous. Vain. Madam, my auricular aurifices dilate themselves to enter∣tain your secret! [they ingage in dumb shew. Crac. You are the cunningest Squire I e're met with. Fop. Yet I dare wager you know not what's a Clock. But I've that about me does to a minute. [drawes his Watch. Crack. A very gentile Watch, and well studded! Fop. 'Tis East's own handy work, and made of old spurroyal Gold, newly returned from Holland, to quicken the motion. Crack. I doubt it will move as dully back as a sat Burghy-master after a surfeit of Pilchers. She goes to put the Watch in her Pocket, he holds her Arm. Fop. Ne're stir, I love you for that. Crack. Tell me when you shall have't again, and I'le swear, you are cunninger than the Deaf dumb Fortune-teller. Fop. Ne're go you are a pleasant Lady, as if I knew not. Crac. I'le lay a Crown you don't. Fop. Done! Crac. Done! And you shall keep stakes. Fop. In feikens I love you for that. Crac. Now resolve the question. Fop. I shall have't when I ask for't, shan't I? whose the Fool now? Crac. Try, and ask. Fop. That's well enough; D' you think me such an Ass to lose my wager. Crac. The Angel be your guard, and mine the Watch. Fop. Ne're stir, I thank you for that, but lend me it me agen, and I'le teach you to set th' alarm. Crac. O fie; I can't indure a noise, it makes me sound. Fop. It has such a pretty motion for the tide. Crac. Pray let that motion rest till I take Water. Fop. Foutreblew, I hope your heels are not so light as your fingers.
Vain. 'Twill stupifie all indigent pretenders, and ratifie the value of your charms. [to Brag. Brag. 'Tis not the present, but the love I value, they that are alwaies giving before Marriage, will give it afterwards to better purpose. Vain. This Locket shall remain, bright Pyramid, a splendid hostage to confirm my Love, which future Presents shall expa∣tiate. Brag. You are generous, but I must beg your pardon. The waters make me unmannerly. [Exit. Crac. Madam, I come. [Exit running. Fop. My watch, ne're stir my Watch! Her heels are so light, I wonder how they ballance her brains. Vain. I am intranced with such Seraphick charms. Fop. I'le lay my Soul t' a Pepper Corn that you're in Love. Vain. Delphos ne're spoke with more veraciousness. Fop. Delphos, and Iupiter Amon were Asses, Timothy Fop was a seventh son, and divined in's Mothers belly. Vain. Thou art enthusiastically congnitiant, but I must make an est inventus of Owmuch. Fop. And I'le voyage the while towards the straights of your Sisters affection. Vain. Hold Armiger, you must a while retire; the Knight must nuptialize before the 'Squire. [Exeunt. ACT. III. SCENE. I. The Wells are discovered full of people washing and drinking Wa∣ter; amongst the rest Fairlove, Alinda, Alderman, Mrs. Pay∣well, Parret, Out-side, Owmuch, Courtwit, the two last ad∣vance towards th' Audience. Owm. YOur Brother's ingaged in a very hazardous adventure. Crac. Were she more wittily abusive, and enviously censorious than the Ladies of the Circle on the Queens birth night, he has confidence enough to put her out of countenance, and new colour her paint with blushes. Owm. Nay she has her proportion of assurance too; and the
tartness of her Wit may give his Love a surprise. Court. 'Tis well if it do; for if her wit were no more surprising than her beauty, 't wou'd neither deserve his Love, nor our ar∣gument. Owm. They must both abate their value in your presence. Court. Were this from any body but you, I shou'd value my self much upon that compliment. Owm. My commendations are not, I hope, scandalous. Court. But praise is a dangerous surfeit from persons that afford such large pennyworths. Owm. Where deserv'd, they may be received without vanity. Court. So might Lady's favours by you, tho' you continually boast 'em, and least you should brag of mine, I'le not take one thing kindly you say. Owm. That won't be for the reputation of your good humour. Court. If 't be for the reputation of my good name, 'tis better. Owm. That's as insignificant t' a well-bred Lady in this Age, as a patch ill placed; it disgraces her beauty. Court. Those modish Ladies are very unkind to themselves to be obliging to you. Owm. That's another argument of a vertuous ill nature, to be suspitious without cause. Court. Pray give me a proof of your good one, by handing me down, th' other walk to avoid my Brother; for I had as live be seen in the Company of a Baboon, as of so near a Relation in pub∣lick. [whilst they walk off, Fairlove and Alinda advance. Fair. 'Tis as impossible for you Ladies to be fair without being ill natur'd, as for a fig to ripen against a North wall. Alin. 'Tis not over civil for an entranced Cavaleire to tell his Lady her faults at first sight. Fair. Since scorn's the prerogative of Beauty, 'tis no great im∣putation. Alin. But to me, who cannot challenge that Character, 'tis very offensive. Fair. Prophane not, Madam, such divine perfections; Nature has copy'd out all other faces, and drew you only her Original, for this Age to adore, and the succeeding to take their measures of pro∣portion from. Alin. I'm sorry I cannot say as much by you. Fair. 'Twere not difficult, had you the same affection.
Alin. But then, I must outlye a Lover. Fair. That's as easie, now I have shewn you the way. But setting apart your rallery, which is but the breathing exercise of your wit, I'm confident you have no aversion for me. Alin. I am so far from doubting your confidence, I believed you impudent the first minute I saw you. Fair. Let's kiss and be friends, why shou'd we Wits quarrel? Alin. I had rather subscribe my self a Fool, than be of your society. Fair. That wou'd avail you little, for I'm such an amorous Cox∣comb, I shou'd turn fool too, rather than forsake you. Alin. Since the matter's so difficult, let's draw cuts who shall go first. Fair. I'm in no haste; may I dye if your company be not extream∣ly pleasant. Alin. And yours so tiresome, I'm resolved to quit the Walk, ra∣ther than give my self a farther pennance. [Exit looking back. Fair. So quick! She expects now I shou'd follow her; and for my pains be laughed at, nay it may be scorn'd: I'm in the snare, but to own my chains were to adjourn my wishes; and become the passive anvile of her gilting wit: Rather than I'le erect th' imperi∣ous Throne of her proud Tyranny, I'le curb my Love that she may give a loose t'her own desire: I know she burns, but scorns to own the fire. [Exit. Alinda re-enters Alin. He's gone, I fear I was too sharp; and yet he took more li∣berty in's smart replies to me; but they were brisk and wity, full of spirit: Yet what's his wit to thee, or thine to him? I'le rend his memory from my soul; be gone! Love vainly hopes a conquest o're this heart, Since 't has resisted Wit, his keenest dart. [Exit▪ The Wells continue still full of company: Enter Wild∣ing and Courtwit. Court. I wonder you'd embark on the Vessel of Matrimony hav∣ing so little kindness for the Voyage. Wild. Beauty, and Portion were such tempting Devils. Court. I shou'd suspect 'em for Angels, since they have brought you so soon to Repentance. Wild. Had not your beauty relieved me, they had play'd the Di∣vil's in earnest, and led me e're this to dispair. Court. Your faithless inconstancies hath play'd that Devils part
with so many of our Sex, that I'm arrived at that Harbor already, and utterly dispairing of Mans reformation, have form'd most desperate resolutions against Marriage. Wild. Indeed it is pleasanter t' enjoy the same delights at liber∣ty, and change often; else it is as dull, for if a man must be con∣fined to one dish, a Wife's the more Sanctified diet, and some∣times the more wholesome. Court. How profainly you talk? Wild. A Wife of the second year has less Harmony than the Bells in a Pestilence, a perpetual jangling, and should the Hus∣band rise at every peal, the thin Animal might rest to Eternity. Court. And you come to th' Wells for a recess. Wild. Rather to put my self i' th' mode, and chuse a Miss; for their price is so inhanced in Town (through the vanity of Witless Heirs) that a very waiting Actress expects a Settlement. Court. Approves your Lady these excursions? Wild. We be neither so ill bred to concern our selves with each others intrigues. Court. On these terms I cou'd fancy Marriage extreamly. Wild. Fie, Love and liberty have softer charms; Birds never hatch well in a Cage; And I'm not so enamour'd on the words, to have, and to hold, but I cou'd be kinder without 'em; especi∣ally to so dear a Creature. Court. But how long wou'd this kindness continue? not till Death us depart. Wild. Can you be so cruel to expect it? Love and Youth shou'd finish their course together, for ther's no condition in Nature so miserable, as to be strong in desire, and weak in per∣formance. Court. What think you of the Married one? Wild. As of a Pestilence, none but so fair a Doctress can relieve. Court. I fancy Paywell has the same power, and happyly more inclination. Wild. She's in years, and Married; and I'm a very conscienti∣ous Sinner. Court. Therefore may oblige you with more safety. Wild. Dull security rebates all pleasure; give me danger, and difficulty, to inhance th' object, I hate an easy purchase. Court. Now I know your mind, I'le grow extreamly scornfull, to heighten your affections.
Wild. I would not have you put a constraint upon your self; you have beauty and youth sufficient to heighten love without such artifice. Cour. I cannot digest that compliment without a glass of Water, Lets to the Well. They walk towards the Well, and the Alderman and Mrs. Paywel, Outside and Parret advance, follow'd by an Old Woman with Water. Ald. Give me t'other glass; these Waters are so cold, I profess they'l hardly down. Outs. Stir Mr. Alderman, motion warms, and gives the Waters just operation. Payw. By my truly, if they don't satisfie my longing for a Boy, I shall scarce applaud 'em. Outs. You see they 've brought th' old Gentleman t' an appetite. Par. He eats well (as you say) but I can't discern the Madam one jot the better satisfied. Ald Midwives will talk Mr▪ Doctor, and my Bunting's so pas∣sionate for a great Belly, she'l ne'r have done by her good will, when any Man enters upon that argument. Par. She's not so long upon that point as you'r too short, Mr. Al∣derman. Pay. Many a Woman wou'd have supplied his defects elsewhere rather than suffer such an estate to go out of her line. Outs. Have patience till I have finish'd his course; then by the help of a prolifie Bolus, and a secret Arcana I'le administer, I dare ingage an happy product. [Parret spies Owmuch at distance. Par. Yonder's the Party I told you of. Payw. Conduct him to the Place of Assignation—; Well Do∣ctor, the hopes you give me shall suspend my longing—Good Ho∣ney fee him well. Ald. I ha'nt known my Bunting in a better humour; Come Doctor, lets walk, and see how the squares go among the Nine-pins. [Exeunt Alderman and Doctor. As Paywel is looking for Parret she meets Wilding and Courtwit advancing toward her. Payw. Mr. Wilding, You are very late this morning. Wild. I have been here this hour. Payw. What Creature have you got by th' fist? her Garb savours much of the Mall by twylight.
Court. And why o'th' Mall, Dear Madam? Payw. Because of your Court tincture, Nature works you all in wax, and like an Artist Painter, cloaths variety of Features with the same complexion. Wild. You are too severe; this Lady lives in Fleetstreet. Payw. I beg your Ladiships pardon, and since y' inhabit within the verge of the City, supplicate a further acquaintance—Y' eye my Point, I think 'tis the greatest curiosity in Europe, my Smock's laced with the same, I assure you. Wild. Now she's enter'd her right qu. Payw. And were it not for giving scandal in so open a place I coud shew that might creat th'envy of all the Court Misses. Wild. 'Twould much oblige the Company. Court. And no wayes disoblige the Court. Payw. They rail at me already for wearing such rich points up∣on my petty-coats, and swear they don't become a Tradesmans Wife, but did they see what's under my petty-coats. Wild. That were a sight indeed. Payw. I'le come one day with all my trappings, and dazle their weak eyes; and let'em know a Banckers Wife can vie jewels with the proudest of 'em. Enter Witless, his Pockets crammed with Papers▪ Alderman Faren∣dine, Quibble, Outside, Tipwell, as from Nine-pins. Quib. Sussex, Sussex, I'le be judg'd by the Alderman. Aid. I scarce observ'd it; What say you, Doctor? Faren. He's a Bettor, What says Poet Witless. Wit. I vote against you, either tip from the Brook or bowl again. All. Content. Quib. Not five, Mr. Alderman. Ald. Five for a Crown. Outs. For another. Wit. Not five, six. Faren. Not six, six to four. Outs. I take you. [Exeunt huddling, Witless drops a paper. Court. The Poet has drop't a paper, pri'the reach it. Wild. What's here? A Lampoon, and to that Satyrical Tune of Amarillis. Court. As you love me sing it. Wild. I have none of the charming'st voices, and may therefore obey you without further intreaty.
LAMPOON. COurtwit she's exceeding gay Courtwit she's exceeding gay. And kisses Wilding, when she may Without her Brothers knowledge, For plush Outside, she does deride, Tho a Member of the Colledge. Court. The rhiming Fop was much your friend; proceed, Alinda she is seldom kind; Alinda she, &c. Altho' her wit seem much refin'd I doubt at last 'twill fool her; For she's of Age, I dare engage And wants a Man to cool her. [Courtwit snatches the Verses and tears them. Wild. Oh unmerciful to destroy a Poet in a moment! Pay. They found a fate too noble: But I implore your pardons to seek the Alderman! Court. Rather a Rummer of Rhenish, let's observe her. Wild. I can find nothing worthy observation but your self. Court. Alwayes except your Glass, for there you may observe on of the prettiest affected Gentleman, what ever France taught to be ridiculous in England: Wild. And yours represents the beautyfullest Angel that ever England produced for France to adore. Court Such another compliment would make me sound: I had rather be led a corant in the Bear-garden than flattered in pub∣lick: And see where comes the Morrice, which will prove a much better diversion. [Amorrice Dance, which done Enter Roger. Cour. Is my Brother gone? Roger. When the Lady with the Blew-livery took Coach, he mounted his Barb. Court. Be ready at th' end of the walk: I must take the other glass; come Platonick. Wild. I may thank your virtue for that unfashionable epithite, mine ne're deserv'd it.
Court. Were't not in hopes of your conversion, I should be loath to venture my reputation in your Company. Wild. And had not I contrary hopes, I should fancy my self to have the worse of the bargain, for it is a greater imputation for a Man of Wit to converse thus publickly with a Vertuons Lady, than it can be to her to rally with the greatest Debauché in Nature. Court. 'Tis pity Custom allows such a mixture of conver∣sation, that the Chast can scarse be discerned from the Misses. Wild. Why shou'd Custom distinguish what Nature has made so like; indeed your Vertuous Ladies are the worse Natured, for they presume so much to be saved for their Chastity, that they'l be sure to be damned for their Pride. Court. 'Tis Nobler to fall by the crime of Angels, than the Sin of Brutes. Wild. So you fall any way, I shall be pleased. Court. A glass of water will allay this Flame. Wild. Love, like a burn, must be drawn out by fire, Waters may quench my thirst, not my desire. Court. Some more such flights (good Servant) as we walk, for your discourse before was neither Rhime, nor reason. [The Scene of the Wells shuts. SCENE II. Quibble, Farendine, Outside, Witless, drinking. Wit. Here's a health to the blazing Star of perfection. Quib. Perhaps she's but an exhalation; I'le not falsify th' inten∣tion of my health. Out. Drink with a mental reservation; I'le do thee reason. Quib. I abominate drinking obscure healths as much as praying in unknown tongues. Wit. I say the Blazing Star, th' Epithet's my own, and I'le man∣tain it. Quib. If she be a Star, I'le drink her up to a Sun, Mercer to thee. Fair. No more a Mercer than thy Mother, I've turned my Shop out of doors, and can justify my self a Gentleman to the Heraulds. Quib. Then here's to thee, Gentleman of the last edition.
Draw. Anon, anon Sir, did you call? Faren. Th' other Bottle. To the happy Man that first enjoyes the Widow—Little do they imagine whose health they drink. Outs. Each man believes he drinks his own. Faren. T'unriddle all, she's mine; I've given earnest for her. Quib. To give earnest before marriage is to forestal the Market. Wit. And that's directly against the Statute. Faren. Damn Statutes! tho I gave the Widow no earnest, yet I gave earnest for the Widow. Quib. Worse, clear circumvention, a superstitious fraudulent design to marry her without her own consent. Wit. A very Rape in Law, He that a Widow sans consent does wed, In his own wrong does get the Maiden-head. Faren. A Widows Maiden-head, Ha, ha, ha. Quib. He meant the Virg in-Widow. Wit. Right, 'tis the unhappiness of us great Poets to speak things in our Seraphick flights somewhat unintelligible: Now listen to an Ode. A BALAD. YOu Ladies who in loose body'd gown, Forsakes the sneaking City, And in whole Shoals come trundling down, Foul, foolish, fair, or Wity. Some for the Scurvy, some the Gout, And some for Loves disease, Know that these Wells drive all ill out, And cure what e're you please; They powerfully break the Stone, And heal consumptive Lungs; They'l quicken your conception, If you can hold your tongues: Then you that hither Childless come; Leave your dull Hees behind you, You'l never wish your selves at home Our Youth's will be so kind t' you. Quib. An Ode! a Grubstreet Balad. Wit. Thou degenerate Bastard of Levi; but for ludere cūm sacris, I'de break thy canonical Crown.
Quib. Then 'twoud be as little currant as thy rhimes; but I'le swear the peace against thee immediately. Wit. Thou dogmatical Dunce in Orders: Didst e're know Poet bound to's good behaviour, We that can depose Kings, subvert States, creat and annihilate unborn Worlds. Quib. Treason and Blasphemy, bear witness Faréndine. Outs. He means in's Plays; he shew'd me a Comedy wherein he murther'd a dozen Kings by one Plot. Wit. Let me see e'r a Parson do as much; I went not treacher∣ously about to incense the People, and foment Rebellion, but con∣trived my Stratagem with such artifice, they destroyed each o∣ther playing a Prize at Cudgels. There was surprize for you. Outs. Why should sober persons differ about trifles? Wit. Know'st the value of an Ode, the worst Syllable I sung was worth the East India Fleet. Quib. I'd not give this grain of snush for a whole Volumn. Wit. Urg'd by's contempt, and by m'own rage inspir'd, My Muse with ruinous revenge is fired; But I'le so mawl the Slave, abus'd my Poem, That Friend, nor Foe, nor Heav'n shall dare to know him. [Exit in rage, the rest following him. SCENE III. Owmuch, Paywel, Parret, Boy with Wine. Owm. This Room's more airy, and has better prospect, down with the Bottles Boy, and set us Chairs. Par. Here's health to this Ladies hans in Kelder, Gentleman. Owm. First to the work of Propagation, dear Midwife. Pay. I vow you make me blush: here's to the premisses. Par. She drinks it with a gusto. Owm. Do thou pledge it so; I have known thee a well-wisher to the business. Par. I'd have you to know I am not past my labours. Owm. I wish thee a Hercules to perform twelve upon thee. But, Madam, we baffle opportunity. Pay. Th' Alderman towards five will be in the Grove at Nine∣pins; but should you fail and prove inconstant. Owm. My word's my reputation, that's my Soul; for what's a faithless man? a walking shadow.
Pay. You profess nobly, and if your actions answer expectation you shan't repent the knowledge of my person. Tho I've anci∣ent Man, I want no Money. Owm. And for all other wants let me supply them. Pay. As an earnest of future bounty, accept this. gives him a Purse. Owm. 'Tis a younger Brothers glory to serve so generous a Mistress. Pay. Go, Y' are a Flaterer; th' Alderman will think me long. But at five, Dear Friend, you'l not let slip the time. Owm. Nature shall sooner lose her youthful Season, and lie confin'd insensible of warmth within the womb of Winter, than I forget, that blessed hour, that Spring of happiness. [Exeunt. SCENE IV. The Wells again, where Alderman, Outside, Farendine, Witless, and Quibble are discovered sitting upon a Bench, others walking. Enter Wilding and Courtwit walking very fast. Cour. You speak such soft things, I wonder any heart can resist'em: Wild. Dear nimble Soul give me leave to breath, y'have run me this hour as if I were taking my heats for a race. Court. You are an able Servant to tire upon a Ladies frolick: Now have I a mind, after all this ramble I have led you, for your further persecution, to make you dance. Wild. Are not you a cruel Lady to tempt a Man to caper, that can scarce stand? but since you provoke me, you shall find me a Tarquin. Court. After the Rape was over, as dull and insignificant. Wild. I'le be judged by the Bench, if y' are not a little too severe to a foundred Servant. Court. No disputing, for I'm resolved to be absolute. Wild. Since there is no resistance. [Dances. [After the Dance, Enter Owmuch, Paywel, Parret. Court. Here comes Owmuch, Ile try his breeding. Wild. Be not so froward, he's ingaged, I'le spend the utmost of my strength to serve you. Court. Now I've made you know your self I can have mercy. Wild. You'l cross your inclination, and I dare venture on a Country dance. Cour. Will yor Ladyship please to take a Frisk this morning? Pay. Come Owmuch, I love to shake my legs.
Court. Sit not idle, here are Ladies, Gentlemen, would be in motion. [Farendine, Witless take the Ladies. A Dance Ald. Well said Honey! Have a care of heating thy self. Outs. Enough, enough, this violent exercise exhales all the vo∣latile Spirits by insensible transpiration. Court. Fancying you very weary, I care not if I drop you at your Lodging. Wild. 'Tis happiness enough to be disposed by you. [Exeunt. Ald▪ Let's be jogging towards South-borrough, 'tis almost dinner-time. Pay. Dear Bunting I attend you: I shall too much incommode you. [To Owmuch offering her his hand. Exeunt. Out. You're Horsmen Gentlemen, I shall enjoy your Companys. Far. I've business at Rust-Hall. [Exit. Wit. A meer pretence, he'l slip to the Widow. Quib. Slip as he will, the Noose shall sail him. Wit. And you too, unless you hang in your sursingle, [aside. My puisant Love must tyrannize her soul, I'le govern her, and raign without controul; By the Soul of Poetry a most stupendious flight. [Exeunt. ACT IV. Enter Alinda, Fairlove following. Alind. ARe you not extreamly audacious to persue me thus in∣to my Lodgings? Fair. And are not you a strange Lady, first t' invite me, and then to make so slight of my welcome. Alin. I invite you, 't was in my sleep then, for that little know∣ledge I have had of your conversation waking▪ has been so un∣pleasant, I can never wish your Company but on Good Fridays, because it is a day of pennance. Fair. What a strange deceitful world do we live in? I've been an interpreter of Ladies looks these Ten years▪ and if the lan∣guishing glance you gave me, when you took Coach did not plain∣ly sy, Fairlove follow me, and see how kind I can be to a person of your merit, I'le ne're trust observation more.
Alin. My eyes were very intelligent to be so soon acquainted with your deserts; But if your Name be Fairelove, I would in∣treat you to march fairly off: You see the door. Fair. Does it lead t' your Lady-ships Bedchamber? Alin. Yes, yes, through a close Lobby behind the Stairs. Fair. If it be dark, 'twill be difficult to find; I'le stay for my Guide, [Enter Parret. And if I am not deceived the Devil has sent me one. Par. Madam, my Patroness presents her devoirs to your Ladi∣ship, and desires to know the state of your Paraquetta's health, and whether your pretty Shock has puppi'd yet? Alin. The poor Creature has been in travel ever since last night. Fair. For want of some of your occupation, Mrs. Parret. Par. How can your Ladiship suffer the lewdness of that prophane fellow? I'de not be seen in's debauch'd company for a dozen of Christenings. Alin. He rudely follow'd me from the Wells, I can't be quit of him. Fair. I never heard you desire it; but for this Beldam, she is al∣way Bedlam mad, near Midsumer Moon. Par. By the Faith of my Body he's the greatest Debauché in Na∣ture, nor fit to be trusted in a civil womans company, he would have ravish'd me; a broom-stick in a Petty-coat, could not 'scape him; Madam, there's not a Village within nine miles, but is at charge with his adulterous Off-spring. Fair. Tho my breeding has not been so course as t' allow me a vindication in her Billingsgate phrase; I hope your Ladiship will not entertain the worse opinion of me. Par. If she values her reputation she will, for to be seen in thy company, is to be concluded a Wench. Alin. These clamorous reproaches in my Lodgings will not, I'm sure, be much for my reputation; therefore sweet Mrs. Parret, let me intreat your silence. Par. Command your Bully, Does he think to bear me down, I am not to be opprest by any man. Fair. I intend no oppression; let me intreat your absence. Par. For ought I know you may debauch the Lady, nay perhaps ravish her, y'have intruded into her privacy already. Fair. There's but one way. Give me thy hand, thou'rt as peev∣ish as a sick Judge towards th' end of a long impertinent Cause, thou knowest I love thee. [gives her Money.
Par. You are such an insinuating kind of Gentleman, I beg your Lady-ships pardon for th' exorbitancy of my Passion, and shall give my Patroness assurances of your good health. [Exit. Alin. Receiving so pious a Character of your good life, I've reason t' invite your stay. Fair. I am not so scrupulous, the first invitation shall serve; unless you peremptorily command my absence I dare not stir. Alin. Your civility might have sav'd you the labor of coming, and me the trouble of bidding you be gone. Fair. If you find it so difficult to bid me go, consider how vexatious my absence may prove. Alin. Doubtless I should imploy all the water-fillers in hunt∣ing after you. Fair. But that I'm extraordinary good natur'd, I'd take you at your word, and make my leg. Alin. That wou'd I fain see, for I'm so civil to believe you have learnt to dance. Fair. O! I could lead you such a Corant to Church▪ Alin. Had I the grace to follow! Fair. You blush as if you were not quite past it. Alin. Would you had enough to find the door? Fair. Swear first that you will not call me back. Alin. My word may serve sure. Fair. Not now, your eyes have prov'd so fraudulent, and in most Women, they're less deceitful than the tongue. Alin. Well since it must be so—By all— Fair. Hold! do nothing rashly, swear seriously, an demurely. Alin. You are a pleasant Gentleman: here comes my Bro∣ther, you had best tell him I invited you. Fair. Nay, I'le Swear it, for I find you hant courage to deny it. Alin. Rely upon't. [Enter Vainman▪ Vain. T'is Fairlove, If Owmuch should not have glutinized our Imbroglio. [he starts back. Alin. Nay Brother you may advance, for our discourse might suit the Piazza for it's concern, and the Mall for it's impertinence. Fair. Madam, I suppose, you speak for your own, since y ought to have mine in more reverence. Alin. Good forward Sir, it is not come to that yet. Fair. Not to the Maturity you wish Lady. Vain. The ruptures cemented, I may be bold dear▪ Fairlove! I
am transcendantly perplexed by the participation of some sinister misapprehensions between us. Fair. I never entertained the least of Sir Lofty. Vain. By the quiddity of my Knight-hood, I was as innocent of any intentional injury, or injurious intention, But con licenza, that figure must not laps quotation. [draws his Book. Fair. Your Brother slips no opportunity of improving his observation. Alin. I find little difference between ye; for he silently ob∣serves his own follies, and you loudly proclame yours to render 'em observeable to others. [Enter Owmuch. Owm. How! Sir Lofty and Fairlove; I wish my Stratagem to keep 'em at distance been't discovered. Alin. I'm glad this Gentleman comes to my deliverance. Fair. You talk as if you were with Child. Alin. I've been in travail ever since you came. Fair. She means she has been at labour to detain me here. Alin. I suppose you know his way of confidence. Owm. I doubt not but you understand your selves; and my business lies to Sir Lofty. Vain. Fairlove and I have contracted a reintigration of amity, thou hast performed a Miracle. Owm. Tom can witness how industruously I labour'd, but pray a word. Fair. I may connive a wile at his deceit, till I've imprinted on my sisters Soul the knowledg of her happiness, in marrying so Rich a Fop; But he shall then refund, or joyn his interest to conclude the Match. Vain. Balsamich Fairlove, I petition thy pardon, for I have very ponderous engagements. Fair. You are Master of your own occasions. Alin. Sure Brother you wont leave me abandon'd to the dis∣cretion of a stranger. Vain. Were you my Mother, I could not recommend you to a Person of more sincere sobriety, or sober sincerity another admir∣able anti me tabole but time compresses my afair. [Exit with Owm. Alin. My wise Brother as trusted us together. Fair. He knew I ran the greater hazard in trusting my self. Alin. I shall scarce eat you, tho' it be towards dinner time. Fair. Yet your fair eies devours my peace; your Beauty preys upon my heart continually.
Alin. How do you Sir, Are you well? [Alinda stamps. Fair. Well, Madam: y'astonish me. Alin. You spoke so like a Wight in Love, I was afraid you'd sound, and knock'd for a Restorative. Fair. You are resolv'd I find to murther me. Alin. Die not yet, I beseech you, 'till the World has taken notice you were my Servant: That may advantage me. Fair. I had rather live miserable all my life, than profit a Woman by my death, Alin. Nay, it shall cost you nothing, die when you please, I'le mourn at my own charge, and wear the ruthful Bandore like a Bill upon my forehead, t'inform Mankind that here's a Woman to be let. Fair. By Lease or yearly Rent. Alin. That's as we can agree, perhaps for term of Life. Fair. Y'are a mad Soul, nothing but age and wedlock can tame you. Alin. When I am hungry especially, therefore I'le to dinner. [Exit. Fair. And because I can digest a good meal better than your unkindness, I'le follow. [Exit. SCENE. II. Enter Witless, Quibble, Farendine, Crack. Wit. Not except my Verses, I'le lampoon her to dishonour. Crac. You mispend your fury; my Lady's not of the Tribe of Hellicon, and were you heir apparent to Parnassus, she'd not accept it for a joynture. Wit. Each Acre of that precious Land is worth an Empire. Crac. What's Empire to her? that would be content with a Parish. Quib. Or the tyth of a Parish: Well urg'd Crack. Faren. She'l be as soon pleas'd with a tyth Pig. Wit. Or a Pigs tail. Quib. The tip of such a tail's worth all thy rhiming Reams. Wit. Avaunt ignorance, I despise and desert you like two legg'd Brutes, that have felloniously stollen the Shapes of rational Crea∣tures. [Exit. Crac. There's one blown off in vapour; These I must manage to more profit. [Aside.
Quib. Your Lady, I doubt, is no Saint. Crac. Your reason good charitable Vicar. Quib. Because she loves deeds of darkness, and seldome comes to light. Crac. She loves you indeed but too well. Quib. Softly, dear Rogue, Farendine over hears. Far. She wheedles him to give me opportunity to woo the Wi∣dow, which these Orators will soon effect; when Gold is no pre∣vailing advocate. Quib. Thy services have been remarkable, and I'le reward them methodically, with a positive mark of my liberality, a comparative mark of thy fidelity, and a Superlative mark of my own gratitude. [gives her money. Crack. You'l observe the time and place. Quib. I'le be as watchful as a famisht Cat, that has her Prey in a pound. [Exit Quibble. Crac. 'Twas no slight cunning to stave off these Suitors, to give your love and bounty free access. Faren. I thirst to see thy Lady, and present her with my heart, this offering. [a purse of gold Crac. She loves old gold most passionately, but I delay your bliss, I pray walk in. Far. Be faithful and be happy. [Exeunt SCENE III. Fairlove, Alinda. Fair. To make protestations were t'increase your doubts: but rest assured I'le serve you with all the faith becomes a Gentleman; your apprehensions are to me no strangers. Alin. You then must think it worth a Sisters care, t' impede the ruin of an only Brother. Fair. In pity to him, and kindness to my Sister, before I had the honour to know you, I meant to retreive him from that Harpies snares. Alin. Persue the kind design; I should be proud to have him joyn'd to a Person of her conduct. Fair. Your partial Character seems t'nsinuate a former know∣ledge of my Sister Courtwit. Alin. I've seen her oft at either Theater. But could not till
last Spring boast her acquaintance, when she was pleased t' oblige my morning walks i'th' Mall with her converse. Fairlove, 't was there she gave me that little, but kind knowledge of your worth, which best justifies my Modesty, in craving thus abruptly your assistance. Fair. The greatest justice you can do my love, Is to believe that I was born to serve you. [Enter Fop. Fop. Ner'e stir Madam, you know I'm to lodge next door to the sign of your heart, that is when you consent to be my wedded Mate; But now I think on't, the Devil swallow me if I care a blew-point for your resolve; for your Brother and I have con∣cluded the matter. Alin. Without my privity. Fop. I love you for that, ne're stir a very impertinent interoga∣tion; let your Brother pay your Portion, and I settle a joynter, and then a Fig for your privity, Alin. Y' are not gone I hope so far. Fop. We go hand in hand ner'e stir, I love you for that, when he weds the Widdow, I must marry you. Fair. You! Alin. Why are you concerned at such a Butter-fly? Fop. Zookes ne're frown for the business; you may as soon overthrow the new Pyramid as alter me; and if y' have been con∣cerned before me, you shall be concerned altogether, for Timo∣thy Fop—I love you for that ne're stir. Alin. Why so chollerick; pri' thee tell me this Widows Name. Fop. I love you for that, she hopes to be wiser by me. Alin. I might indeed dispair oft. Fair. He makes a secret of a Proclamation; I'le tell you her Name presently. Fop. The Devil barrel me for a shotten herring, if I suffer that, her name is Brag; as I know how to keep a secret; so I scorn that any Man shou'd disclose it before me. Fair. She's on of Owmuches Decoys, a very Iilt. Alin. My fears were too prophetick; what's to be done Fop. Nay you may whisper till your hearts ake, but if I catch you in the censuring walk in Greys-Inn, I'le be even with you ne're stir, and in th' intrim I'le withdraw to contemplate my own merits. [Exit. Fair. Could we but draw my Sister to our party, we soon might frustrate this intended Match?
Alin. I blame not her aversion to his follies, yet hope her Charity will feign that love t'attract him for the present, and di∣vert him from this intended treachery. Fair. Your friendship will oblige her to much more, I know the shade she usually frequents, give me the Honour to attend you thither. Alin. Y' are grown too serviceable to me now, to scruple any favour vertue warrants▪ [Exeunt. SCENE. IV. Owmuch, Vainman, Brag, Crack. Owm. The Widow's yours, and I'm proud o'th' service; as for this Bond, your kind acknowledgement, take your own time for payment. Vain. Your precipitated favours confound my intellects; come Widow, I hunger to stamp thee a Lady. Brag. You triumph in your Victory, but I bar Sealing till the Man in Black has delivered you up to my use. Crack. If the grove will serve for a Chathedral, Quibble shall exercise that function. Owm. He's a pretender, and will ner'e consent. Brag. Unless I were disguised. Vain. By the rapidity of invention, I apprehend a Night gown with a visor my sister left in my appartment might serve. Crac. Admirably, for I'm to meet the Person by assignation. Owm. You are setting up for a Husband then. Crac. Not there beleive me Sir. Madam— [seems to whisper Brag▪ Brag. This Ring, pri'thee take it, and may it answer thy desires. Owm. Let her engage the Minister, and I'le meet you two hours hence. Crac. Doubt not my working him. Owm. But to assure the business Crack, take Gold, it will work on any Clergy Man in Europe. Give her Ten Guinnys. Vain. Most beatifically imagined; ther's Twenty; thou and the Parson shall divide. Crac. In the next close from Bounds you'l see an Oak carv'd full of Lovers names; Be there in readiness, and leave the rest to me.
Vaen. Well, you'l remember. To Owmuch. Owm. I hope t' arrive in time; but shou'd m' affairs detain me, you may confide in Crack, she's a Girl of wit, and for the management of this concern much apter than my self. Vain. Come Widow, this Night I'le celebrate the Baccha∣nalia's of Hymen; and inebriate my Knight-hood in the pro∣fundities of Venus. [Exeunt. Crac. How the Fool's exalted in imagination; I've lodg'd i'th' grove a brace from the same Herd, And if blind Fortune favour my design, The Raskal Dear shall make the fatter mine. [Exit. ACT. V. Alinda, Fairlove, Alin. YOur Sisters Plot appears most probable to break this match; but she's too obstinate, to gratify my hopes of her Aliance. Fair. Correct, by a compliance to my love, that errour in your self, which you condemn in her. Alin. Happily, I've the same aversion to wits, as she to fooles; but here comes your Sisters Engineer. Enter Wilding in Spanish-habit. Fair. Thou'rt habited as if thou dwell'st next door to a Play-house. Wild. This is my City Maskarading suit, my Pattent of Intrusi∣on to all meetings. Fair. 'Twas happily brought down—wher's Courtwit? Wild. In her love dispatches for London, and has immured her self like an Anchorite for that Employ. Fair. I hope you are well instructed. Wild. What Wit or Courage can perform, expect. Alin. I doubt not your capacity, nor Spirit, and hope the piety of my intenions, will bribe Heavens assistance; I'le not detain you, for it is near the hour chose by my Brother for this fatal Match. Wild, My haste to serve you, shall prevent your wishes. [Exit. Fair. Having proceeded to the rupture of one Marriage, it
is but reasonable we should enter upon the Treaty of another. Alin. So it be still in raillery, I'm content. Fair. If we continue to make love in jest, Death may finish the Treaty, er'e we conclude the Match. Alin. No matter' we'l leave it like a game at Chess to be play'd out by our Heir's. Fair. Then I hope you'l be pleased, that we may withdraw and gett 'em. Alin. 'Tis time for me to do so, when you dare use this bold Language. [Exit. Fair. Nay that frown shall not discourage me; I'd after, tho she could arm her eyes with lightning. [Exit. SCENE. II. Paywell, and Parret. Pay. Would it not torment a Woman of my longing to lose so precious an opportunity? Par. Any Woman in nature, as I hope for benevolence. Pay. Yet business may detain him. Par. I shall have the worse opinion of him, whilst I breath, for failing a Lady in the Heaven of her expectation. [Enter Owmuch. Owm. My haste intended to prevent your love; I hope I have not slip'd my time above a quarter. Par. D' you think a quarters disappointment to a Lady nothing, when I've known many good gifted men rendered uncapable by the bare delusion of a minute. Owm. Pri'thee silence that unruly morcel, that unmerciful tongue of thine. Par. Y' are a rude, sawey, mallipert, impertinent fellow, to prate thus to a Woman of my occupation. Pay. Good Mid-wife leave us, and be vigilent in thy office. Par. I'le see him damn'd first; keep watch for such a Scoundrel. Owm. Will you be a Fool, and spoil all for nothing. Par. No nor an Ass, to keep sentinel for nothing. Owm. Is that it? here, commend me to my friends in Guinney. [gives her mony. Par. So you'l commend me to mine in the Lowcountries, I care not if I do. [Exit.
Pay. She's a troublesome Old Creature, but very useful. Owm. Having introduced me to the Honour of your acquain∣tance, I must own her obliging. Pay. I know you Courtly; but Complements in Love are like long Graces before feasts, they cool the meat, and dull the appetite; we'l be familliar. Owm. Now have I no more power towards this she thing, than if my Breeches had been impoverish'd in my Youth t' inrich my Voice. Pay. Let me advise you to be very civil, tho you press me ne∣ver so far, consider me a person of Honour. Owm. Rather then risk your displeasure, I'le take my leave. Pay. You misapprehend me. Owm. Hell take your meaning! 'tis but too plain, that lewd Grimace has turn'd my Stomach—Madam, I'm the most rude de∣bauched fellow in a Ladies Chamber. Pay. Y' have been so civil I dare not credit it; come give me your hand. Owm. Slife, what an un∣satiable fist's there? marble against rain is not so moist, nor the sweat of a Iew so rank. [gives his hand and snatches it back Pay. I vow y' are such a backward man. Owm. You'l find me an Hercules forward; I must ravish you; for let me perish I am a most unsatiable Creature. Pay. I ne're met a reasonable Creature, but I was able to give him reasonable satisfaction. Owm. The Devil in Breeches cou'd not scare her; I've ta'ne her Mony; and something will be expected; well, Madam, since y' are desperate. Pay. O Lord, I vow, what d' you mean, I protest, nay I Swear, I'le cry out, Parret Parret. [Enter Parret. He pulls her towards the Chamber, she calls softly. Par. O Madam th' Alderman, th' Alderman! we're undone. Pay. What curs'd fortune's this? [stamps. Owm. Which way shall I avoid him. Par. I'm distracted, he's at the Stair foot. Pay. Into my closet with him quick, I hear him Enter▪ [They lock him up, Enter Alderman. Ald. Ah Bunting! I've had the crossest luck, and yet I had the better of the lay, a 100, Pounds to a farthing, the Devil's in that
Tipwels fingers and in's horses knees; the Beast was so pliable, and at command, he had little disadvantage in tipping on Horse-back; all nine as I live Chuck. Pay. Poor Dear, how thou Sweat'st I was afraid thou hadst been ill Chick. Ald. I'm come for more chink Bunting, wher's the key of the Closet. Pay. 'Slife Man! what's the Matter with your eyes? Ald. Why Bunting? why, what's the matter? Pay, They're as red as my Petticoat. Parret. Par. Madam. Pay. Fetch the eye water quickly, if you heat your self, and drink and han't a care, it may grow to a Fistulae. Ald. Indeed law Bunting they burn, and smart extreamly, but give me the Key. I'le be back immediatly. Pay. The Key's in my other Pocket, but thy eyes are so blood-shot, it greives my heart to see 'em, some chairs, quickly good Parret quickly. Enter Parret, chaires set, he lyes down, and they drop Water in his eyes. Ald. I profess the Water's very refreshing. Pay. Be sure you wink hard Chicken, and keep it in. [she steps to the Closet, and lets Owmuch out. Softly as you love me; to morrow I'm for London, where let me see you often, in th' intrim keep this for my sake [gives him a Iewel. Owm. And in exchange receive my heart, and future service. [Exit. Pay. Come hony, how dost find thy self? Ald. Very clear sighted, Bunting, thanks to thy care; but I must back, I profess, I'm deeply ingaged, fetch the Key. [Exeunt. SCENE. III. Enter Crack babited like the Widow. Crac. My Cloaths and Stature favour my design, and by the as∣sistance of this Ring and Visor, I hope to pass for the suppos'd rich Widow; nor will▪ my Mercer los by the exchange, since I'm the fre∣sher merchandize o' th' two; and for our Portions, hers is in Fee∣tail, and mine in Capite, a nobler Tenure. But here's the Parson; [Enter Courtwit in Quibbles habit. Your Servant Mr. Quibble.
Cour. She takes me for the Vicar in disguise; could I but hit up∣on his quibbling strain, I see I might pass. Crac. I'm confident you take me for the Widow. Cour. Thou'rt cosened, for I'm so taken with thee, I'd only take thee for my self. Crac. The Widow's lodg'd, thou shalt have her within this hour. Cour. This intrigue I understand not, yet must not let my ig∣norance betray me. [Aside. Crac. You entertain your happiness but eoldly. Court. I want some marks of gratitude to signalize my bounty. [Feeling in's pocket. Crac. All I desire is, that you marry me gratis. Cour. Marry you, I thought I was to marry the Widow. Crac. Your Wit's so volatile, you must marry me to Farendine. Cour. I conceive you and so I hope you'l do by the Mercer. Enter Farendine. Crac. Here he comes, Mercury thou Favourer of Wiles, assist my love! follow me, and when I stop perform your Office. [To Courtwit. Faren. 'Tis she, I know her petty-coat, and size, and, as I live, the Parson following her; the Fool is made a Property to marry her to me, his Rival; She beckons, and I le follow—And wed her with that silence she desires. Exit Crack. Courtwit, and Farendine following. SCENE IV. Enter Sir Lofty Vainman, Brag, Fop, Wilding in Spanish habit. Vain. Challenge my Spouse! I bid defiance to thy diminitive breeches. Brag. He's mad beyond the cure of hellebore. Wild. I'm mad indeed to seek a Runagate, one that forsook me in the heat of Wedlock, the next day after the religious Priest had joyn'd our hands, as love before our hearts. Brag. He'l perswade me I was begot i'th' Moon, born in Aries, are bred in Capricorn, to learn to make Cuckolds: If ever I saw the man before, may I never attain a Ladyship. Wild. Resign my Wife, Sir Lofty, and that quickly, or— [Laying his hand on his sword. Vain. You obliterate your self and her, she has no cognizance
of your Person, and y' appear an Allen to her affection. Wild. I'm not the only Husband labours under that misfortune: Fop. Not of a Million ne're go, I love you for that. Brag. Where in the name of mischief did I marry thee, and when? Wild. A month since, at Pancras. Fop. The Devil pickle me for a Pilchard, if I know what to think of't. Brag. This is the strangest fixion Hell e're contrived to cross a Womans love—Good Sir, a word— [Whispers Wilding. Vain. I'le interrogate him of her appellation, quallification, de∣means, and th' Et cetera appurtenances of a Widow, and if he exhibite satisfactory reasons, or reasonable satisfaction. Wild. Well, I confess what I alledged, is false. Brag. Bear witness, you heard him say 'twas false Wild. 'Twas you I said were false t' your Nuptial Vow. Brag. Hell has inspir'd him to my ruin! Vain. Have you any cognizance of her Name? Wild. I married her by th' Name of Barbara Brag. Fop. I love you for that, there may be two of one name. Wild. But not of one face, Mr. Fop. Fop. Does your Donship know me; I'm an East India Elephant, if I don't remember you too; your Name is Wild. Don Roderigo de los Blustrados hectoromanos Bullirockos. Fop. Dear Blustrados, when shall we be drunk again? Wild. Thou 'rt as sawcy as a Country Squire with's Mothers Maid; when didst see me drunk? Ha! Fop. Can Pharo and Stichback slip your memory? The De∣vil swallow me for a quartern of Brandy, if we han't been drunk an hundred times. Wild. Then have I kick'd you ninety nine. [kicks him. Fop. Faith and troth I remember nothing of that tho. Wild. I'm satisfi'd you must, if you remember th' other. Fop. If this be your satisfaction, The Devil keep you company for Timothy Fop— [Exit. Wild. Nay take your Knight, least he share your calamity. Vain. I hope y' are too intelligent t'imagine a Knight can be kickt. Wild. I beg your pardon, my toes are no Heraulds. Vain. Since y' implore my pardon, I can recede—Come Widow [offering to lead her out.
Wild. You must pardon me for that too, she's my Wife, there∣fore unhand her, and vanish without expostulation. Vain. He looks as terribly as a Sea fight. [he sneaks away. Brag. What horrid injury, or strange affront has my too wan∣ton youth, or erring Pride offer'd your friends or you? thus to provoke your malice or revenge to ruine me. Wild His very being a Gentleman obliges all Men of Honour to endeavour's rescue from your destructive snares. Brag. If he's a stranger to you, let my knees with [Kneels. humble intercession, beg your favour; and you shall share in all th' advantages of profit, or what else I can call mine, by being His. Wild. This Knight's committed to my care, and by a person I dare not disoblige. Brag. Then I dare dye— help, help, murther, a rape! I'm ravish'd, I'm ravish'd. She pulls a Knife out of her Pocket, Wilding indeavours to hinder her, She lets fall the Knife and lays hold of him. Wild. 'Sdeath! Who offers y' any violence? Let go my Arms you Whore, or if I get 'em loose, I'le nail thee to the Earth. Brag. Repeat thy stabs till thou hast made my body but one sear, rather than wound my honour, a rape, murder, rape! Enter Owmuch, Vainman, Fop, and Neighbours. Owm. Where's this Villain, this lewd ravisher? Brag. Welcome to my redemption, I've lost my breath, and faint with strugling. [they disarm Wilding. Owm. Sir Lofty pray approach, and comfort her. You are a Spanish Letcher—To justice. Do right with him, you shall be cut for th' Stone, my Tarmagant, and Rampant Don, you shall. Wild. When thou knowest me, thou'lt repent this usage. Owm. That's more then e're I did my Sins. What art? Wild. Dismiss your rabble, and I'le tell you. Owm. Now she's retriev'd, make sure, and speedy work, I brought the Vicar with me, he's within. [to Vainman. Fop. I love you for that ne're stir, you'l stay till I run to Bounds for your sister, we are to be married together by contract. Vain. Make expedition then; come relict. [Exeunt. Vainman Brag, Fop. Owm. Neighbours, I thank you for your kind assistance, now he's disarm'd I shall be singly able to govern him; [Exeunt▪ neighbours
now my Coatamuntain Don, what's thy design, and business here? Wild. To cut thy Throat, unless thou break this Match between Sir Lofty, and thy Strumpet. Owm. Dost know the value of this Throat Castilian? It yearly swallows half a thousand pounds in deep pontac, clear Mant, and Burgundy. Wild. These whiskers off, you cannot chuse but know me. [pulls of's whiskers. Owm. I'th' Name of Protheus, why in this disguise? Wild. Fairlove and I are equally ingaged to save Sir Lofty from the ravenous jawes of your damn'd Cockatrice; and if y' affect your safety, you'l assist me in't. [Off'ring to go out. Owm. You are too quick, your haste ill suits your garb: move but a foot towards the interrupting them, and this shall centre in thy heart. Wild. 'Tis base t' insult upon a Man disarmed. Owm. Were you ten thousand friends, you shou'd excuse me; 'de not release my share in this Knights marriage, t'ingross th' ami∣y of all mankind. Wild. Thy base ignoble ways of livelihood beget a general scandal on the name, and garb of Gentleman, they'l grow con∣temptible, being used by thee. Owm. Thou art too young, and scrupulous a sinner; examine but the Town, and thou wilt find the gayer part, to have as little Landas thou, or I, and yet they keep guilt Coaches, their race and hunting Nags, Lacquies, and Pages▪ and what is more expensive then all these, Misses, whose cloaths may vie with Eastern Queens, and Pallaces with Cardinals for cost; and can'st believe these miracles performed by simple rules of honesty, and honour? Thou art not such a Novice. Wild. I know there are sev'ral ways of livelihood, most indi∣rect; but this damn'd down right cheating I affect not. Owm. Kind Nature gave to ev'ry Man his Portion, some in Wit, to others Lands or Moneys, and did contrive us for each o∣thers use. And I account it as unreasonable to waste Wits preci∣ous tallent on a fool without advantage, as to let Lands gratis— My brain's the nobler freehold. Wild This curs'd Match will, in Alinda, ruin Fairlove hopes, and forfeit me the kind respects of Courtwit.
Owm. Why this is right the World; you do not blame the Match as bad, but as it injures you. Enter Farendine with Crack Vizarded. Farend. Widow, now y' are at home, I hope, you'l shew your face, and welcome me. Owm. No more cross plots I hope; what Widow have you there? Far. The Tunbridge Widow Sir, the Widow Brag. Wild. Do the Widows multiply? Far. She may in time, and season; Gentlemen y' are welcome. both; call in the Fidler, I'le dedicate this Night to mirth and hy∣men—By your favour she's my Wife, Sir, and I'le have the first kiss—Ha! Crack. Owmuch indeavours to pull of her Visor Farendine prevents him. Owm. This your rich Widow? Far. I'me abus'd, cheated, gull'd, I'le be unmarried, avaunt Sor∣ceress, come not near me. Crac. But I will, my Love, and kiss thee too. Owm. Was that kiss over and above the twenty thousand pounds. Far. Mock not a Man in misery! Damn'd Quibble, thou knewst what trash thou wedst me to. Crac. I think y' are obliged to him for bestowing the Maid on you, and keeping the grass Widow for himself, nay I'm the better fortune. Far. Thou art indeed much younger, and mayst crown me oft'ner with the City night cap, if thou call'st that a fortune. Crac. What say you to this security for my good behaviour? [Gives him a box full of Iewels and Gold. Owm. That Cabinet's thy Ladies? Faren. But the contents were partly mine before, and to the rest I'le make her prove her title, If Cuckold be my fate, yet thus adorn'd I shall be rather envyed than scorn'd. Crac. She gave 'em me to pack for London, meaning to cheat you of your dividend, and I to end disputes, took this occasion to re∣store to th' Owner, my dear Husband, Owm. Deceitful Wretch! [Enter Fop, Fairlove, Alinda. Fop. Where's Sir Lofty? faith and troth this Gentleman wont let me marry his Sister.
Fair. You know it was the Ladies fault not mine. Enter Vainman, Brag, Courtwit in Quibbles, habit. Fop. I love you for that ne're stir; but here comes Sir Lofty him∣self; if he'l promise her to one, and bestow her on another, I'le have nothing to do with him or her either. Wild▪ You justly may condemn my ne∣gligence, since the success ha'nt answer'd your desires, and I must suffer in your good opinion till time permit me to recite at large the various sinister accidents, which did obstruct my service. To Alinda, who must be supposed t' have been inquiring the success of the design. Fop whisper, Vainman. Alin. Since he's undone, 'twill but avail me little to know how. Vain. D' you refuse to ratifie the parole of Sir Lofty Vainman, your own natural Brother? Courtwit and Fairlove seem to discourse all this while. Alin. Wou'd you'd refuse that com∣mon Creature too. Vain. Sister you erre, I 've made an enclosure of her, brought her within the pale of Matrimony. Fop. I love you for that, some envious Knave may still pretend a right of common, and make a gap to graze a Nag, or so. Vain. I apprehend no such danger: But this is digressive from my interrogatory; Will you nuptialize our Consanguinity, Timothy Fop? Fop. That's the point ne'r stir, press it home. Alin. Would he had ta'ne your place. Court. Lets lose no time in vain congratulations. [To Fairlove. Gain from Alinda, if I free Sir Lofty, a Marriage promise, whilst I and Wilding disgust him with his Bride. Fair. Thou advisest like one of Cupids Privy Counsellers. Fairlove goes to Alinda, Courtwit to Wilding, who having whispered go to Vainman. Brag. Cheated of gold, and Jewels both! To Owmuch, who is sup∣posed to have told her. Own. Of all, sh' has given 'em Farendine, whom she has made her Husband. Brag. Damn'd Wretch! yet ther's some comfort, the Knight may still be manag'd to advantage. Owm. Yes, to yours, but how am I assured you'l not deceive me there, as Crack says you design'd of the Gold, and Jewels. Brag. You know I Sealed you yesternight a Bond. Owm. Well remember'd 'twas for a thousand pounds y' are Mrried now pray let me have 't in keeping.
Brag. You see 'tis in my power to destroy, yet I'le deliver't to your use. [gives him the Bond. Owm. Honest Girl! this is good Mony still. Vain. Since you both affirm her Whore, you shall find Sir Lofty hath profundity, I'le affiance her to my Kinsman. Wild. 'Twill hardly hold in Law, y' had better bribe the Vicar to Swear he did not marry you. Vain. Most feasible, but let's proceed methodically; surrepti∣tious Spouse. Brag. What sayes my heart? Vain. This Don avows of's proper cognizance, that thou art much inclinable t' a thing we call an Harlot. Brag. He challeng'd me for's Wife, and is it probable he'd wed a Whore? Vain. A very falacious Age, it cannot be suppos'd. Fop. Faith and troth the wrankest Whore Master in England would be glad of an honest Woman, if he knew where to find her. Vain. It is an intrinsical intrigue, and an apparent Stratagem. Alin. I hope your folly will not still besot you. Vain. D' you suppose I'le give credence t' a Rival? Alin. Lend Faith to Mr. Fairlove, he has known her these seven years past a common Jilt in Town. Fair. Whetstons Park ne're held a more debauched one. Brag. What e're I was, I'm now your Sister, and his Wife. Alin. Mine, I defie thee; be Sister to he Goates, ther's nothing that has honesty or Honour, but must abhor thy converse and Alliance. Fair. Y' have made a wondrous happy Match here. [to Owmuch Owm. What I have done Sir, I dare justify. Brag. Let 'em say their worst Sir Lofty, you are not the first that has Married an obliging Lady. Vain. An obliging Lady, Zooks an obliging Lady, what a Lacquer she has found for a Whore? I'd give half my demeasnes for an emancipation. Brag. I'le not abate a farthing of a thousand a year annuity for life. Owm. And the present payment of two thousand pounds, due to me by bond, one on your own account, on hers the other. Vain. By the heroick atchievements of my Progenitors, it is too unconscienable.
Owm. For my part I'le not abate a soulze. Brag. Nor I, I'le force him to maintain me. Fair. Since they'r so obstinate, for your fair Sisters sake, I'le release you from this shameful Match on easier terms. Vain. Covenant your Articles, and you shall have Lofty Vain∣man to the pedestals of the Indenture. Fair. Th' Articles shall be only two, and short ones; first your consent to Marry Alinda, I've hers already, and a thousand pounds for th' party I ingage in your release. Vain. I frankly condescend to both. Fop. I love you for that, Alinda's mine. Vain. That's immaterial; a Cavalier may Honorably infringe his parole to be infranchized from an Harlot. Faren. Now your hand's in; be charitable to a quondam Ci∣tizen, free me from this Chamber-Utinzel, I'le give you 500 pounds, for which these Jewels shall remain security, Nay, I'le ne∣ver more pretend to th' qualifications of a Gentleman. Fair. On these conditions, I accept them. [takes the Cabinet. Brag. Quibble's in order certain. Owm. That I'le ingage, 'tis impossible he should make good his undertaking. [Enter Witless, leading Quibble wrap'd in a rug. Wit. Come Parson, since thou abhorrest Women I'le see thee righted. Quib. Right or wrong, I'le have nothing to do with 'em. Owm. What new Monster have we here? Quib. A certain incumbant upon a Neighbouring Vicaridge, you might know me Mrs. Crack, for you have had some markes of my kindness. Crac. What two Parson Quibbles? Fair. No faith, this is a fair Nun, and no black-Frier. [pulling off her peruk, All. How, Madam Courtwit. Fair. The same, she never was in orders; and, I suppose, her Marriage won't stand good in Law. Brag. Bafled on all hands! damn'd chance! Owm. It would perswade a Novice in Vice to change his Copy, and turn honest. Crac. I hope you'l return th'overplus of the Gold, and Jewels, I'm but a poor Maid. Faren. Not a farthing, when I have paid the 500 pounds, I'le distribute to every Man his own.
Fop. Ne're go that's honest, the Gold Watch belongs to me. Court. Here ends our modish Courtship, for I'm so out of love with Wits since mine has proved the best, that I could find in my heart to cast my self away upon a Fool. Fair. A rich one Sister's the more substantial Man, and if Sir Lofty and you can make a Bargain, the 1500 pounds I've got shall be your portion. Vain. I superstitiously imbrace the proposition? Court. What, without my approbation? Vain. I know you are too intelligent a Wit to refuse a Knight of 2000 a year. Court. And because I will not forfeit that reputation, here's my hand to the foolish bargain. Owm. I shall expect present payment of the Bond you made to me, tho th' other of your quondam Wifes proves bad. Fair. How could he contract so great a debt to you. Vain. Let me dissolve like a Cherubim, if he owes me not 200 Guinnies, mony lent. Fop. And me an hundred, or I'm a guilt Nutmeg. Fair. What an unconscionable fellow wert thou, was not 300 pounds an handsome purchase: Be satisfied, and give him up the Bond, least you provoke me t' indite you for a Cheat. Owm. Upon condition they discharge the Guinnies they pre∣tend I owe them; there it is. [gives up the Bond. Fair. I'le ingage they shall. For you may fair Trapans I would advise you to pack up your tooles, and post for London, and there live penitentially this long Vacation, on Mackarel, and Cucumbers; till Smith-field Pigs increase your commons. Brag. Crac. You are a damn'd jeering Rogue. [Exeunt Brag, and Crack. Fair. Mr Quibble, my Sister shall return your Cassock, which she stripp'd you of, when you were drunk; take warning how you fuddle with Footmen; and to morrow you shall have the profit of our Wedding; and you Poet Witless may imploy this evening in composing Epithalamiums to be Sung to the Brides in the morning, they may turn to better account than your next Droll. Fop. I love you for this ne're go; what shall become of me? Fair. Y' had almost scapled my memory; But since I have robbed you of one Wife, the best justice is to help you to another; a Medly of poor Wits and Rich Fooles make the best mixture
in Nature; and I've a Sister in London at your Service. Fop. The Deel swallow me if I post not to London within this minute to Court her. Fair. Tis now too late to cellebrate our Nuptials, and too early to rectire, a Country Dance may prove perhaps no very un∣pleasant motion. Court. Come Platonick; let's have a Dance at parting. Wild. My condition is not so desperate as you imagine it, for I can more confidently beg a kindness from a married Woman, be∣cause the concession is less to her disadvantage. Court. Did I abound as much in Charity as you in hope, the Knight were in a very dangerous condition. Wild. I care not how little Charity you have, for they say that's extreamly cold, give me love. Court. You know not how a Dance may warm it. [a Dance. Fair. Tho th' execution of our first design met very ill success, our obligations are still payable to your good intentions, the pro∣ects were both Courtwits, and she resolved to reserve the best t' er self, as an Encomium of her Wit. [To Wilding. Wild. To which I shall submissively subscribe. Owm. And I for ever curse. Fair. 'Twere nobler to repent, you plainly see No Wit can prosper without honesty. [Exeunt. FINIS.
EPILOGUE. HOw harmlessy we've treated you to day, There's not one dangerous Line through all the Play. There's no keen biting Satyr to enrage The guilty Consciences of half the Age. No mighty Sense to make the Criticks jar, And set the envious Tribe at mortal War. No Lines so rare, intrigues so wondrous wity Enough t' adjourn the Wits to a Committee, And make the Chair-man o'th' Cabal cry, ram him, Confound him, sink him, split him, rot him, damn him, Down with him for a sawcy son of a Whore; He must be damn'd, the Dog shall write no more. No, thanks to our safe Authors milder Stars, He has no such dangers, no such threatning fears, He gives you no occasion for your spight, Is no pretender to their fame that Write. Then Gentlemen, you may be kind to Night▪ Yes there indeed, 'tis worth your while to frown, 'Tis victory to run great Authors down. But let This Triflle of a Play creep safely under, For Gallants 'tis too humble for your Thunder.
Books newly Printed this Year 1678, and are to be Sold by Henry Rogers at the Sign of the Crown in VVestminster-Hall. SCarrons Comical Romance, or a facetious History of a Company of Stage-players, interwoven with diverse curi∣us and choice Novels, rare Adventures, and amorous Intrigues, n Fol. 2. The wonder of the Peak of Darby, commonly called the De∣vils Arse of Peak, English and Latin. Oct. 3. Melpomene or the Muses delight, being new Poems and Songs Written by several of our Great Wits of the present Age, Oct. 4. Camera Regis, or the present State of London, Oct. 5. The Works of Homer; both Odysses and Illiads, translated into English Verse by the famous Thomas Hobs of Malmsbury, Twelves, ogether with Mr. Hobs his Preface about Heroick Poetry, and the ife of Homer. 6. The Memoires and rare Adventures of that Heroick and va∣rous Lady, Henrietta Sylvia Molierae, now compleat in six parts, Written by her self now living in France. 7. Ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy, Written by Thomas obs of Malmsbury, Oct. FINIS.
