S3432 12311209 59361
THE HISTORY OF SCOTCH-PRESBYTERY: BEING AN EPITOME OF The Hind let Loose, By Mr. SHIELDS. With a Preface by a Presbyter of the Church of Scotland. Juven.— Vitia ultima fictos Contemnunt scauros & Castigata remordent. LONDON, Printed for I. Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball in Cornhill. MDCXCII.
The PREFACE. THE following Treatise (being but a short Compend of a larger Book) ap∣pears at this time to give the World a just Account of the Principles, Pra∣ctices, and Behaviour of the Scotch resbyterians; it was written some Years ago by ne of that Fraternity. It is sad to consider, how uch the Spirits of Men are soured and imbit∣ered by Faction and Interest, it shuts their Eyes gainst the clearest light. The Dictates of Huma∣ity, and the Genius of the Christian Religion eeten our Passions, but when we are enflamed y the Interests of a Party, we forget the ex∣ress Laws of God, and if they look us broad in Face (when we offer violence to our Convi∣ions) we bow and bend them by metaphysical ricks and Evasions to serve our Design, contra∣y to their original Bias and Sanctity; and this as never so visible, as in that turbulent and fiery ct that frequently disturbed, and now at last ath almost over-un the Church of Scotland, in they have Ruined and Oppressed a Learned, rave, and Orthodox Clergy, especially in the outhern Shires. They have a Systeme of Opini∣ns peculiar to themselves, which they call Their rinciples; for though a thing in it self is just and easonable, yet if it be not agreeable to Their rinciples (that's to say, the Opinions that are ore immediately, properly, and originally Cal∣ulated to serve the Designs of their Society) they eject it with Indignation and Disdain, they pity ll Mankind that have not the same Thoughts that hey have, and they continue by the Authority of their Guides, under the slavery of implicite Faith ore than any other Sett of Men in the World The Christian Religion above all things design∣d to alienate our Thoughts and Affections from he Pageantry and Vain-glories of the World, nd to moderate our Passions, that they might not rove troublesome to Society, nor extravagant in heir Violence, nor precipitate in their Actings; he Spirit of Faction opposes the Gospel in these great Ends, for it covets nothing so much as out∣ward Glory and Empire, and it prosecutes these Desires with restless and implacable Ardours, and ll under the Visor of Religion. When our per∣verse Inclinations (which God commanded to be ortified) are made more head-strong by the otions we have of Religion, then our Appetites ecome as wild as they are unreasonable. We find this clearly exemplified in the Phari∣ees of old. Our Saviour came that he might de∣troy the Works of the Devil, and enliven the World by a reasonable Religion, to turn Men from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the living God, to inspire Mankind with the Princi∣ples of the best and wisest Philosophy, most useful in all the Changes and Vicissitudes of this Life, and that which did certainly prepare them for a better, he taught his Disciples to be most assiduous in those Duties of Religion that made no Noise abroad, and fell not easily under the Observation of Men; that advanced solid and substantial Pie∣ty, to love God and our Neighbour, to approve our selves unto him that seeth in secret, to despise the Censures and Applause of a perverse Genera∣tion, and to live upon the invisible Supports of a good Conscience, to exercise Patience, and For∣titude, and Magnanimity; because by our Reli∣gion we were engaged to Combat with the World, and with all its cross Accidents, under the Banner of a crucified Saviour. Yet when we read the History of the New Te∣stament, we find that the most zealous Sect of the Pharisees, opposed this blessed Design of our Sa∣viour in all its principal Branches. They took great care to be seen by the People, in all their odd and extraordinary Performances; they were mighty forward to propagate their own Traditi∣ons; the private Doctrines of their Schools were much dearer to them than the Commandments of God, Mark 7. 3. As for Simplicity of Intention, In∣nocence, and the Love of God; they thought such Vertues not so convenient for them who were in the Government, and thought it necessary to have the People blindly to obey their Dictates: That Religion that penetrates to the Center of our Spirits, and changes the whole Bias of our Souls, crosses the Desires of our degenerate Na∣ture, and leads every Thought captive to the O∣bedience of Christ, and is supported by the Faith of distant and invisible Rewards; they thought such a Religion yielded no nourishment for Vain-glory, and therefore they despised it, and ordered the matter o that amidst all their long Prayers, disfigured Faces, and theatrical Fasts, they might leave their insatiable Passions of Pride, Vain-glo∣ry, Covetousness, Malice and Revenge, untouched, and unsubdued. Hence it is, that they were very careful in little things, Mat. 23, 24 whatever drew after it the applause of the People, who al∣ways admired the most empty and the most tran∣sient things. Their Batologies were mistaken for Zeal and Devotion, and their outward Austerities, for true Mortifiction. They did all things to be seen of Men, Mat. 23. 5. and if the Law of God did expresly contradict their beloved Scheme; the Law it self must needs bow to their Principle.
There is nothing in Humane Nature that we feel more tenderly, nor is there any thing more deep∣ly engraven on our Souls, than the Gratitude we owe to our Parents, when their Infirmities and Disasters require our Assistance; yet by their Do∣rine of the Corban, they evacuated this Funda∣mental Piety; Justice, Compassion, and Natural Affection were in their Eyes but mean and de∣spicable things, they only understood the abstruse Mysteries of Religion, and nothing provoked their indignation so much, as to be thought igno∣rant; wherefore they so huffingly tell the poor Man restored to his sight by our Saviour, dost thou teach us, Ioh. 9. 34. tho by the most evi∣dent Arguments, he had just before exposed both their shameful Ignorance and Vanity; and when St. Paul himself was tinctur'd with this lea∣ven; his brisk and generous Spirit was sadly employed in persecuting the Church. There is nothing more opposite to the pure and undefiled Religion, than Pharisaical Pride and Hypocrisy; nor no kind of Pharisees persecute with greater Violence and Spite, than that sullen and demure Tribe that affect Domination and Tyranny, by a counterfeit and disguised Humility. The sad Effects of such an insolent Humor, are too sadly felt by the Clergy of Scotland. The Pres∣byterian Courts and Judicatories are as void of the common Forms of Justice, as of Tenderness and Humanity, the late Erection of it being in its Frame more properly Calculated to advance Tyranny, and tho their Agents propagate many Stories to lessen and extenuate, and sometimes to excuse their unaccountable Proceedings; yet as long as they confess the shameful rabbling of the Clergy, they acknowledge more Barbarity and Cruelty, more Reproach to our Nation than can easily be named: Certainly it cannot be imagi∣ned that the Episcopal Clergy left their Houses, their Livings, and some of them their Relations, and their Countrey, for no other Design than to tell Stories of the Presbyterian Persecution; any Man that believes this, needs not refuse the most monstrous Improbabilities: Men are not so fond of Crosses and Afflictions, the Bias of Hu∣mane Nature is on the other side, they general∣ly prefer the Law of Self-preservation to the Law of Self-denial, and the Doctrine of the Cross has but few to follow it if they can avoid it. There is no Weapon so proper against the As∣saults of a restless and ungovernable Party, as Christian Patience: This is the Time of our Suf∣ferings, God in his Anger▪ hath let loose our Ene∣mies to chastise us; and when we are duly hum∣bled, he will again mercifully visit us, and em∣ploy us in the Attendance and Service of the San∣ctuary. If we have preached unto others Forti∣tude and Christian Magnanimity, under the sa dest Calamities, from the Pulpl, why should no we do it by our Courage and Constancy? Th Providence of God, that superintends the meaest Creatures, will not desert them that are ma after his own Image. It was to let us feel th Mutability of all Earthly Conditions, that we are surrounded thus with Difficulties, on the Right and on the Left Hand. When I read the Heroick Flights of a Pagan Soul; M. Arel. Atonin. and how little the Glory of the Roman Empire appeared to him that sat upon the Throne, in the midst of Guards Divertisements, and Flatterers, I cannot but ac∣knowledge how shameful it is for the Disciples Christianity to be so soon and so easily shake with Changes and Disasters: If the Contemplation of Philosophy and Natural Religion raise his Spirit so far above ordinary Thoughts, wha may not be expected from us, who have bee taught the most infallible Proofs, the Doctrine Immortality, and the Glories of the World come? Seneca tells us, that a good Man wrest∣ling with Disasters, and not yielding to  Mean∣nesses of Vice, is a Spectacle worthy o Iupiter himself. The Ears of God are always open the Prayers of the Oppressed; their Petition proceed from Feeling, more than from ArtForm, or Custom. Let us look into the Error of our Lives▪ and judge our selves, st  shoul be judged more severely by our God, whom w have offended. Let us wash out our Blemishe by true Contrition, and return unto our Father who does not willingly grieve the Children Men; but for great and wise Ends suffers, for while, the Rod of the Wicked to le on the Lo of the Righteous, that his Children may be prepared for that Glory which is to be revealed▪ The Graces that are most essential to the Christian Religion, cannot be exercised but under th Cross: All things work together for good, to the that love God. We are told by our Saviour, tha an House built upon a Rock stands  against a the Violence of Rains, Storms and Tempests. The Party with whom good Men struggle at present in Scotland, have neither Unity amongst themselves, nor any true Christian Princi to buil upon: And When I say thus, I do ot comprhend all that may go under the name of Presbyterians, but such as give up themselves, witho Reserve, to follow their pernicious Tenrs, a such as have all their Paces; for God judges according to our new and factious Discrimintions. It is not by our Names, but by our Nture, that we are separated at the Day of Judment; and therefore let no man mistae me, if I thought this or the other Denomination, th
Church or Society, could secure a Man from hazard: I mean no such thing.ull. de Octe. . 1.  si sibi ipse con∣ntrat & non in erdum natura bo∣itate vincatur t ut neque ami∣itiam clem pos∣t, nee justitian, es liberalitatem. But it's undeniable, that the Faction that lately pul∣led down the Beauty and Order of our Church, spend their Zeal in lesser things, of very bad, or of no Consequence at all; and their new and upstart Govern∣ment eats out the Life and Primi∣ive Innocence of Religion, and promotes Pride and Singularity, and those other Vices that are most opposite to the pure and spiritual Tenden∣cy of the Gospel. They are the Men I intend the Ring leaders of that waspish Gang, who by their Principles are obliged to trample upon all arthly Powers, unless they truckle under the E∣dicts of Presbytery, and recommend no other Doctrines with Affection and Zeal, but such Opi∣nions as enslave the Consciences of Men to their Tyranny and Government, and many of the poor People are so infatuated, that they calmly bow under the heaviest Burdens, if they are laid on by their Spiritual Task-masters. It is very sad to consider the present Decays of true Christianity: What's become of that un∣ffecte Simplicity, that Truth and Purity, Hea∣venly mindedness and Charity, that adorns the Profession of the Gospel? What's become of that teady and regular Devotion, that taught Men fre∣quently to lift up holy Hands, without Wrath or oubting, unto Heaven; by which they were made to love God above all things, and their rethren for God's sake, to relieve their Neces∣ities, to assist them in their Troubles, to rejoyce with them that do rejoyce, and to weep with them hat weep▪ nay, to endeavour the Good of all Mankind, as far as is possible? If Men were affe∣tionately zealous to propagate this Religion, hen it would appear like it self in all its beauti∣ul Colours, pure, peaceable, gentle, and easie to be treate, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without artiality, and without Hypocrisie, Jam. 3. 17. But here Envying and Strife is, there is Consusion nd every evil Work. Shall they who proudly all themselves the special Ambassfdors of Christ, ve so much in Animosities and Contentions, and ot tremble before the Searcher of all Hearts, ho sees into the first Motives and Springs of all ur Actions? If the Purity of Religion be in∣nded, why so much Noise and Clamour, so ma∣y Arts and mean Tricks, so many insidious Ac∣sations, so many bold and impudent Lies, so any pragmatick and restless Methods to over∣row their Antagonists? Can the Gospel of Peace propagated by the Stratagems of War? Or ve they such mean Opinions of their Opposites, that they will suffer their People to be deluded with Giddiness and Enthusiasm▪ and themselvs so tamely beat off the Stage? 'Tis true, many of our Ministers are now made uncapable to serve the Publick; yet by their sacred Character, they are still obliged to serve the People, and to re∣cover the Souls, for whom Christ died, from the Enchantment and Enthusiasm of Seducers: I hope they will defend the Gospel without fear, upon all Occasions, in Season, and out of Season. It is not a Question of Discipline, or Ecclesiastical Government only, (though that be of great Con∣sequence in it self,) that is now debated: But the Question is, Whether such Methods must be fol∣lowed, as expose Christian Religion? Whether the People shall be taught from the Pulpit to bur∣lesque the holy Scriptures, to lampoon Revela∣tion, and to ridicule the most grave and serious things? Mankind, indeed, is liable to many Va∣nities and Follies, and yet no Follies debase Hu∣mane Nature so much as those that put on the Garb of Religion. 'Tis lamentable when Men avouch the Authority of God for their own Dreams, and plead a Divine Right for all their new and fancied Opinions. The first Presbyterians thought it enough to say,Read the Preface to Dr. Hooker's Po∣lity. that their Model was allowable; and therefore they levelled their Ar∣guments to prove such a Scheme of Government was not altogether forbidden; and it was never heard, that the Foreign Presby∣terians would have refused the Communion of the Church, because the ancient Government of Epis∣copacy was retained in it: So we see all the French Protestants, who have fled to Germany or England, serve in either Church as Ministers, according to the Rites and Ecclesiastical Canons of the place where they live: It is only the Covenanted Pres∣byteriaus (for any thing I know) plead a Divine Right for their new Model, and their latter Disci∣ples are forward and daring on this Head. Their Government must be founded on the express In∣stitution of our Saviour, and therefore the Exer∣cise of their Discipline must be nothing less than the Administrations of his Kingdom and Royal Scepre: To contradict or despise them, is an Af∣front to God himself; and to be sure, the Bag∣gage of their Lay-Elders, and Commissioners from Burghs, are all of them by Divine Right. And yet all this is not so bold or ridiculous, as when they endeavour to prove their Scheme by particular Texts of Scripture. There is one that calls himself the Vindicator of their Kik, he wrote a Book some Years ago,Pretended Answer to the Irnicum. to prove that Presbytery was the only Go∣vernment instituted by our Savi∣our; and all he brings for it, over all his Book,
which I had the patience to read over) is, Mat. 20. 25. compared with Luk. 22. 25 He tells us in another Book,I cannot ele the Page, having no Books by me. of himself, that his Way is Argu∣mentative; that is to say he writes nothing but pure Reason and Demonstration. Now let us calmly examine what Foundation there is for Presbytery in the Texts lately men¦tioned, for our Saviour supposes Degrees of Subordination amongst his Disciples, as well as in all other Societies; and therefore he directs such as would climb to the highest Places, to take other Methods than those that are most usual in World∣ly Preferments;  he that deserved Preferment in the Church, was to be the Servant of all; and e that would be great among his Brethren, should in the first place appear full of Humility, Condescention and Charity; And this Txt refers to the Method of their Promotion, not to the Ex∣tirpation of their Iu isdiction. He supposes one would be great among them; and the true way to attain hat Greatness, was not to aspire to it am∣bitiously, by Force and Violence, as the Lords of the Gentiles did; but by all the Acts of Modesty, Humility and Self-denial. But let me ask whe∣ther the Apostles understood this Precept of our Saviour, in the Sense of the Presbyterians, or not? If they did, how came they to exercise Ju∣risdiction over all inferior Ecclesiasticks, during all their Life-time, in all the Churches they had planted? Did they (who could not but under∣stand his meaning) go quite cross to the Institu∣tion of our Saviour? The plain Truth is, there is no Text in the Scripture can be alledged more absurdly for the Presbyterian Parity, than this Text, since our Saviour tells them, He did that himself amongst them, which they were to do to one another; and therefore the doing of it to∣wards one another, could not infer Parity a∣mongst them, unless they blasphemously infer, that Christ and his Apostles are equal; for our Saviour recommends what he enjoyns from his own Practice, that he who was their Lord, was their Servant; and therefore the greatest among them were to be modest, calm, and humble to∣wards all their subordinate Brethren; and this qualified them for Ecclesiastical Promotions. Is it not very unlucky, that a Man shall write a Book to prove the Divine Right of Presbytery, and yet bring no other Proof for it than this Text, which (if understood in the Presbyterian Sense) degrades our blessed Saviour to the De∣gree of one of his Disciples; for what he com∣manded the Apostles, he practised among them himself: And this is the strong Motive to en∣gage their Obedience, that they should not exer∣cise their Jurisdiction as the Lords of the Gentiles, by a Spirit of Pride▪ Vanty and Domination but by the more amiable ad enraging Behaviour of Modesty, Meekness, Charity and Humility for he that was to be the greatest among them, was to be their Servant: And certainly the Bi∣shops of the Church, by their Character, Digni∣ty and Station, by their publick Cares, Fears and daily Labour, feel that they are more Servants than Masters. When one was promoted among the Iews, to higher Dignities, there was another appointed to tell him, that upon that Day he be∣gan to serve. And did not St. Paul think so of himself, though in nothing behind the chiefest Apostles, when the Care of all the Churches lay upon him? And all the Fathers of the Church, from the first Plantations of Christianity, had this Notion of their Dignity, that they were the Servants of all. Now when this one Text is answered, I think his Book is answered, nor had this part of that Pamphlet been touched here, if it had not been commonly insisted on by others as well as by his Author. Now if I should yield that there was any foundation for Ecclesiastical Parity in this Text, it cannot be stretched so far, as to prove the Na∣tional and Classical Presbytery, it rather favours the Congregrational Model, which always appear∣ed to me much more innocent and allowable, than this new and unaccountable Platform of Presby∣tery. If this Author would be entreated to single out of all his Scriblings, an rgument one or two that he himself judges most proper to advance Presbytery, we would thank him, and return ou Answer very easily and speedily, and this Over∣ture is so much the more reasonable, in that may be done in a sheet or two; but to go throug all his Shufflings, and childish Tergiversation and unmanly Calumnies with  his defamatory Libels are stuffed, is as unpleasant as it is undifying, and the Publick is not at all concerned read such particular Stories; yet something mu hereafter be said to convince him of his idene were it no more than to let him see his Books deserve no particular Answer. I have no more to trouble the Reader with but to give him a short account of the followin Epitome. It is the true Compend of Mr▪ Aleander Shields Book, entituled, The Hind He is the most accurate and diligent of al the Writers, there is none among them understands the Genius of Presbytery none more consequential to their Principles, an must acknowledge, that none writes for Presbtery with greater Zeal and Vigour; and Principles are inconsistent with Civil Goverment and Christianity, yet his Superstructure builds upon them is consequential; and thefore
I heartily invite all Men (who at any time think of the things of this Nature) to read the fol∣lowing Abridgment of his Book, and next let me ntreat them to use their Reason exactly and im∣partially, and then tell me whether a Civil Go∣vernment of what ever Form or Denomination an subsist, where such Principles are heartily entertained by a considerable number of the Sub∣ects; and whether the Severity of Laws against uch Enthusiasts, e not the most Christian com∣assion towards the State rather than Cruelty, Tyranny, or Oppression, with which those rest∣less Incendiaries did asperse the Government of h. 2. Our Nobility who understood the Go∣vernment and Constitution of our Nation, did aely demonstrate, that our Scotch Presbytery ad nothing to match it all over the World; whether you consider the Novelty of their Pre∣ences, their restless Clashings with the Civil Au∣hority, or their shameful Confusions and Divi∣ons among themselves, and this needs no other roof, than to read their own Books, The Acts of heir Assemblies, and their most Authentick Papers, we know what Morals they are taught by their Guides, when we remember their tumultuous bbling of the Clergy in the West of Scotland rom their Houses, Livings and Preferments, we eed not rake into that Puddle any more. In he beginning of the late Revolution, those Furies oke loose upon the House of God, and barba∣ously drove from it the immediate Servants of he Sanctuary. It is not the Guildings and Pallia∣ons of their Vindicators can wash off the blem∣sh of this shameful Tragedy; if the Foundati∣ons be destroyed, What can the Righteous do? et in the following Epitome, such violent Pro∣ceedings are justified; nay, the Murther of the Archbishop of St Andrews, and such like religious eats of their Zeal. Therefore let me once again ntreat the Reader to read over this little Book arefully, since Mr. Shields was at the pains to ga∣her together and justifie in one Book the Histo∣y of his Party, their Strugglings against Autho∣ty, their Declarations and Testimonies against he State, and all their Commotions from their rst beginning in Scotland till the Year 1687. And cause the Book it self is not easily got. Two Objections I foresee will be managed by Agents against this Book, the first is that is not owned by the whole Party, but written a single Minister. To this, I answer, that Mr. Book is rather the History of their pro∣edings, than a private Systeme of his own O∣nions; and since it is supported by their publick , Declarations and Testimonies of their Society, is rather the common Apology than the Senti∣ents of one of their Number: And therefore I challenge any Man to let me see any one Article, wherein he is inconsequential either to himself, or to the received Doctrine of the Party; for as long as the Solemn League and Covenant, is the ori∣ginal Standard of their Sect, the Dictates of Na∣tural Reason, and Texts of Scripture, must be in∣terpreted, as they may best promote the ends of the Covenant; and therefore unless you let me see something in the Book not allowed by the Cove∣nant, it is very impertinent to say▪ that it contains not the Presbyterians Doctrine, for I know no∣thing distinguishes the Presbyterians of Scotland from other Dissenters; but the bloody Principles of the Covenant by which they over-turned the ancient Monarchy, Sacrificed the best of Kings, and changed a prosperous Nation into a field of Blood. The next thing I foresee their Agents will pro∣pagate is, that tho they were guilty of many ex∣travagant Tricks formerly, yet now (that they are re-established) they will act with great Mo∣desty for the future: But can the Aethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? Must not they assert their Classical Authority and Dis∣cipline? Will they so shamefully desert their Colours? Must they not give their Testimony as their Predecessours have done? Don't we see that they have Male-versed more in three Years time, than can well be repaired for twenty? Will their Agents oblige their Meetings and Assemblies to declare against this Systeme solemnly and judi∣cially? No, they'll keep those Opinions, and practice them upon all Occasions; for they are obliged to do all they can to support the Cove∣nant when they may coveniently: Nay, I durst say, that the late pretended Assembly would justi∣fie the Murder of the Arch Bishop of St. Andrews without ten contradicting Votes; nor is there any thing asserted in this Book, that is peculiar to Mr. Shields. read The Apologetical relation of the Church of Scotland, Naphthali, jus popui vindica∣tum, The Cup of cold Water, The Banders disbanded, and several other little Pamphlets, whose Titles I have forgot; and you shall find that this is the common Strain by which they are distinguished from the Presbyterians abroad, as well as from all other Christian Churches. If Episcopacy had been a grievance to the Na∣tion, as was tumultuously alledged, it had been e∣nough to remove those venerable Persons from the Heln of Ecclesiastical Government, and then the Affairs of the Church (by the acknowledg∣ed Principles of Presbytery) should be managed Communi Presbyterorum consilio. All the Presbyters by their Delegates from all Corners of the Nation had an equal Right in this Government: But in∣stead of this we have a new Model set up and the
cclestastic Government is lodged in the hands of a few Peevish and Tyrannical Persons, who never sleep quietly until all the Clergy be extirpate, who do not hold their Mission from the Conven∣ticle. When this is objected as an extraordinary Solecism in Justice as well as in Government, they answer, That tho every Presbyter has a right to govern which he cannot part with yet pro prae∣senti ecclesiae statu, the Government should be thus modell'd; and this in plain Scotch is no more, than that the Heads of the Faction judged it con∣venient, that none should be allowed any share in the Government, but the sworn Inizaries of the Covenant▪ and therefore tho the Presbyters all over the National Church had an equal right to govern, yet they should be restrained from the Exercise of Government, until the Faction got intirely uppermost. But let me ask peaceably and calmly, By whom are they are restrained? Either by the remainders of the Presbyterian Preachers, or by the Secular Power: If the first, how can threescore Suspend a thousand Mi∣nisters from the Exercise of Government? Before whom are they cited? By what Authority is this done? Is this done by the acknowledged Prin∣ciples of Presbytery? But if this be done by the Secular Power, then it seems the Presbyterians now think and teach that the Secular Power can intrust some few Ministers with the Ecclesiasti∣cal Government, when others are restrained, and which is still more absurd. they allow them in the Exercise of the more Spiritual part of their Ministry, the Administration of Sacraments and Preaching of the Gospel; but they must not meddle with the Discipline of the Church: As if the one had not been originally intended to shelter and defend the other. However, it is easie to observe, that the Presbyterians love Go∣vernment (by which they secure the Interest of this World) much better than Preaching of the Gospel, which more immediately prepares Men for another. But if they think Presbyters may be thus restrained from the Exercise of Eccle∣siastical Discipline, why might not the former Government restrain Presbyterians, as well as the present Powers restrain the Episcopal Cler∣gy from that part of their Ministry? It is very ad that Men are driven to such Shifts as cannot be maintained, neither by the Principles of true Reason, nor by the peculiar Hypothesis of the Party. They have one Answer to all this, that the Episcopal Clergy would endeavour the O∣verthrow of Presbytery: But what they might do as to that, I know not, I believe there are but few of them that are very zealous to contnue the present Scheme; and perhaps the Con∣trivances of Presbyterians to exclude them from the Government, is as proper a Mean to over∣turn Presbytery, as the Admission of them int the full Exercise of their Function might hav been. For my part, I do not see how such▪ Syncritism betwixt these contending Parties ca be obtained, after all the political Daublings a∣bout it. The Clergy should stand their Ground and let the World see that they value their In∣tegrity and Principles, at least, as much as they do their Conveniencies; for nothing less tha the Essentials of Morality and Christianity are astake. The following Treatise cannot but be chear∣fully received of both Parties, because it contains the distinguishing Doctrines, Principles and Practices of the Presbyterians; for I assure you it is most faithfully copied by a Friend of mine in the Author's own Words, from the Origina Book. 'Tis true, he did not transcribe th whole Treatise, for that is Voluminous, and contains so many Steps of their Rebellion, that you desire a particular Account of them, you must have recourse to the Book it self, rather than to this Epitome; but he hath, in a fe Sheets, contained the Strength of the AuthorReasonings, and all his Flourishes: So that yo have a just Notion, as well as a true Account of the special Tenets of Scotch Presbyterian with all the natural Consequences that they yield: And if Strangers will not believe the Episcopal Clergy, let them read their Opinions their own Books. If one would know the Doctrines of Epicurus, he must go to Lucretius; that of Socrates, he must read Plato; if the Morals of the Stoicks, he must read Marcus Aurelies, and Seneca: So it were very unjust to say that Mr. Shields did not give a true Account the Doctrines of the Scotch Presbyterians, bein not only a Leading Man of the Kirk, as now established, but also a Man of good Parts, indefatigable Zeal, and great Industry; and this the Reason why his Book is compendized, be∣cause he drove their Principles to their ju Consequences; and though I have no Kindnes for his Opinions, yet I cannot but love his Igenuity and Skill; and if any Man tell me mistook the Doctrines of Presbytery, I mus ask him Pardon to think otherwise, and th none of them dare tell him so when he is present. I id you heartily farewe
An Account of the true Scottish Presbytery, from the Year 1570. to the Year 1687. by Mr. Alexander Sheilds, a Presbyte∣rian Minister of the Kirk of Scotland, as it is now Established by Law. FROM the year 1570 and downward, the Testimony is sta∣ted and gradually prosecuted, for the Rights, Priviledges, and Prerogatives of Christ's Kingly Office, which hath been the peculiar Glory of the Church of Scotland, above all the Churches in the Earth, that this hath been given to her as the word of her Testimony; and not only consequentially and redu∣ctively, as all other Churches may challenge a part of this dignity, but formally and explicitely to contend for this very head, The Headship and Kingship of Iesus Christ, the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and his mediatory Supremacy over his own Kingdom of Grace, both visi∣ble and invisible. This is Christ's Supremacy, a special radiant Jewel of his Imperial Crown: which, as it hath been as explicitely incroach∣ed upon in Scotland, by his insolent Enemies, as ever by any that en∣tered in opposition to him, so it hath been more explicitely witnessed and wrestled for, by his Suffering Servants in that Land, than in any place of the World. This was in a particular manner, the Testimony of that Period, during the Reign of King Iames the Sixth; as it hath been in a great measure in our day, since the Year 1660. Which, as it is the most important Cause, of the greatest Consequence that Mor∣tals can contend for; so it hath this Peculiar Glory in it, that it is not only for a Truth of Christ, of greater value than the standing of Heaven and Earth, but also it is the very Truth for which Christ himself Dyed, considered as a Martyr; And which concerns him to vindicate and maintain as a Monarch. The Witnesses of that day made such an high account of it, that they encouraged one another to suffer for it, as the greatest Concern; Being a Witness for Christ's Glorious and free Monarchy, which as it is the end of the other two Offices, so the Testi∣mony
is more Glorious to God, more Honourable to his Son, and more Comfortable to them, than the Testimony either for his Prophetical Office, or for his Priest-hood, because his Kingdom was specially im∣pugned at the time; as Mr. Forbess and Mr. Welsh writ in a Letter to the Ministers at Court. The Corruptions and Usurpations wronging this Truth, that they contended against, were Prelacy and the King's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Matters: Which will be useful to hint a little, how they prosecuted the Conflict. When Sathan by several Instruments and Means, both by force and frauds did endeavour to put a stop to the Reformation, by re-introducing the Antichristian Hierarchy of Pre∣y, when he could not reestablish the Antichristian Doctrine of Po∣pery; he left no means unessayed to effectuate it. And first he began to bring the name of Bishop in request, that was now growing obsolete and odious. And indeed his first Essay reached little further than the bare Name, for they were to be Subject to, and tried by Assemblies, and hardly had so much power as Superintendents before. But it was a fine Court-juggle for Noblemen to get the Church Revenues into their hand, by restoring the Ecclesiastical Titles, and obtaining from the Titulars either Temporal Lands, or Pensions to their Dependers. The faithful Servants of Christ did zealously oppose it. Mr. Knox denounced Anathema to the Giver, and Anathema to the Receiver. And the following Assembly condemned the Office it self, as having no sure Warrant, Authority, nor Ground in the Book of God; and ordained all that brooked the Office, to demit Simpliciter, and to desist and cease from Preach∣ing, while they received de novo admission from the General Assembly, under the Pain of Excommunication. In pursuance whereof, the Assemblies from that time until the Year 1681. did with much painfulness and faithful∣ness attend the work; until by perfecting of the second Book of Dis∣cipline, they compleated their work, in the exact Model of Presbyte∣rial Government. Which was confirmed, and covenanted to be kept inviolate, in the National Covenant, Subscribed that Year by the King, his Court, and Council; and afterwards by all Ranks of People in the Land. Whence it may be doubted, whether the Impudence of the succeed∣ing Prelates that denyed this, or their Perjury in breaking of it, be greater. This was but the first brush: A brisker Assault follows. Wherein, for the better establishment of Prelacy, and not only Diocesan but also Erastian Prelacy might be set up, the Earl of Arran, and his wicked Com∣plices, move the King, contrary both to the Word and Oath of God, to usurp the Prerogative of Jesus Christ, and assume to himself, a Blas∣phemous Monster of Supremacy, over all Persons, and in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. But this also the Faithful Servants of God did worthily and valiantly resist: And at the very first appearance of
it, gave in a Grievance to the King, Anno 1582. That he had taken upon him a Spiritual Power, which properly belongs to Christ, as only King and Head of the Church; the Ministry and Execution whereof, is only given to such as bear Office in the Ecclesiastical Government in the same: So that in the King's Person, some Men press to erect a new Popedome, as though he would not be full King of this Common-wealth, unless as well the Spiritual as Temporal Sword be put in his hand, unless Christ be rest of his Authority, and the two Iurisdictions confounded, which God hath divided, which directly tendeth to the Wrack of all true Religion. Which being presented by the Commissioners of the General Assembly; the Earl of Arran asked, with a Frowning Countenance, who dare Subscribe these Treasonable Arti∣cles? Mr. Andrew Melvil answered, we dare, and will Subscribe, and render our Lives in the Cause. And afterward, that same Assembly presented Articles, shewing, that seeing the Spiritual Iurisdiction of the Church is granted by Christ, and given only to them, that by Preaching, Teaching, and Overseeing, bear Office within the same, to be exercised, not by the Injunctions of Men, but by the only Rule of God's Word, hereafter, no other of whatsoever degree, or under whatsoever pretence, have any colour to ascribe, or to take upon them any part thereof, either in placing or displacing of Ministers, without the Churches admission, or in stopping the Mouths of Preachers, or putting them to silence, or take upon them the Iudgement of Tryal of Doctrine, &c. But in contempt and Contradiction to this, and to Prosecute and Exert this new usurped Power, Mr. Andrew Melvil was sommoned before the Secret Council, for a Sermon of his, applying his Doctrine to the Times Corruptions: Whereupon he gave in his Declinature a∣gainst them as incompetent Judges; and told them They were too bold, in a Constitute Christian Church, to pass by the Pastors, Prophets, and Doctors, and to take upon them to judge the Doctrine, and to controul the Ambassadours of a greater than was there, which they neither ought nor can do. There are (saith he, loosing a little Hebrew Bible from his Girdle) my Instructions and Warrant; see if any of you can controul me, that I have past my Injunctions. For this he was decerned to be warded in the Castle of Edinburgh: But he conveyed himself secretly out of the Countrey. When as also a Convention in Faulkand was consulting to call home the Papist Lords; Mr. Andrew Melvil went thither uncalled; and when found fault with by the King for his Boldness, he answered, Sir, I have a Call to come here from Christ and his Church, who have special Interest in this Turn, and against whom this Convention is Assembled directly: I charge you, and your Estates, in the Name of Christ and his Church, that ye favour not his Enemies, whom he hateth, nor go about to call home nor make
Citizens of these, &c. And further challenged them of Treason against Christ, his Church and Countrey, in that purpose they were about. About the same time in a private Conference with the King, he called the King, Gods silly Vassal; and taking him by the Sleeve, told him; Sir, I must tell you, there are two Kings, and two Kingdoms; There is Christ, and his Kingdom whose Subject King James the 6th is, and of whose Kingdom he is not a King, nor a Head, nor a Lord, but a Member; And they whom Christ hath called to Watch over and Govern his Church, have sufficient Authority, and Power from him, which no Christian King should controul, but assist; otherwise they are not Faithful Subjects to Christ. Sir, when you were in your Swadling-Clouts, Christ Reigned freely in this Land, in spight of all his Enemies; but now the Wisdom of your Council, is Devilish and Pernicious, &c. To the like effect, Mr. Robert Bruce, in a Sermon upon Psal. 51. gives faithful warning of the Danger of the Times. It is not we (sayes he) that are Partie in this Cause; no, the Quarrel is betwixt a greater Prince and them. What are we, but silly Men? Yet it has pleased him to set us in this Office, that we should oppone to the manifest Vsurpations that is made upon his Spiritual Kingdom. Is there a more forcible means to draw down the Wrath of God, than to let Barrabas that nobilitate Malefactour pass free, and to begin the War against Christ and his Ministry? It putteth on the Copestone, that so many of our Brethren should not be so faithful, as their calling and this Cause craveth. Fie upon false Brethren, to see them dumb, so faint hearted, when it comes to the Chock: not only are they as ashamed to speak the thing they think which is a shame in a Pastor, but speak directly against their former Doctrine. They will speak the Truth a while, till they be put at, but incontinent they will turn and make their Gifts Weapons to fight against Christ, &c. Hereafter when the Parliament 1584. had Enacted this Supremacy, and Submission to Prelacy, to be Subscribed by all Ministers; the faith∣ful first directed Mr. David Lindsay to the King, desiring that nothing be done in Parliament prejudicial to the Churches Liberty: Who got the Prison of Blackness for his pains. And then when they could not get access for shut doors to Protest before the Parliament; yet, when the Acts were Proclaimed at the Cross of Edinburgh, they took pub∣lick Documents, in name of the Church of Scotland, (tho' they were but two) that they protested against the said Acts: And fled to Eng∣land, leaving behind them Reasons that moved them to do so. And Mr Iames Melvil, wrote against the Subscribers at that time, proving, That they had not only set up a new Pope, and so become Traitours to Christ, and condescended to that chief Error of Papistry, whereupon all the rest de∣pend; but further, in so doing they had granted more to the King, than ever the Popes of Rome peaceably obtained, &c.
After this it is known what bickerings the faithful Witnesses of Christ had, in their Conflicts with this Supremacy upon the account of Mr. David Blacks Declinature, which they both advised him to, and approv∣ed when he gave it in, against the King and Council, as Judges of his Doctrine. And the Commissioners of the General Assembly ordained all, to deal mightily with the power of the Word, against the Coun∣cils Excroachments: For which they were charged to depart forth of Edinburgh. After which he added a second Declinature: Declaring, There are two Iurisdictions in this Realm, the one Spiritual, the other Civil; the one respecting the Conscience, the other Externals: Therefore, in so far as he was one of the Spiritual Office-bearers, and had discharged his Spiritual calling in some measure of Grace and Sincerity, should not nor could not be Lawfully judged, for Preaching and applying the Word, by any Civil Power; he being an Ambassadour and Messenger of the Lord Iesus, having his Commission from the King of Kings, and all his Instructions set down and limited in the Book of God, that cannot be extended, abridged, or altered by any mortal Wight, King or Emperor; And seeing he was sent to all sorts, his Commission and Discharge of it should not nor cannot be Lawfully judged, by them to whom he was sent; they being Sheep and not Pastours, to be judged by the Word, and not to be judges thereof in a judicial way. The Interloquutor being past against him for this; the Brethren thought it Duty, that the Doctrine of the Preachers should be directed against the said Interloquutor, as against a strong hold set up against the Lord Jesus, and the freedom of the Gospel; and Praised God for the Force and Unity of the Spirit, that was among themselves. And being charged to depart out of Town, they leave a faithful Declaration at large; shewing, how the Liberties of the Church were invaded and robbed: And when the Ministers were troubled upon Mr. Blacks busi∣ness, and there was an intention to pull them out of their Pulpits, the General Assembly advised them to stand to the Discharge of their Calling, if their Flocks would save them from Violence; and yet this Violence was expected from the King and his Emissaries. And when Mr. Black had a Remission offered to him, refus'd it altogether, lest so doing he should condemn himself and approve the Courts Proceedings: And the Brethren conferring with the Counsellors, craving that some penalty should be condescended unto for satisfying his Majesty in his Honour, would not condescend to any how light soever; lest thereby they should seem to approve the Judicatory and their proceeding. The imprisoned Ministers, for declining the Council, had it in their offer, that if they would without any confession of offence only submit them∣selves to his Majesty, pro scandalo accepto, non dato, they should be re∣stored to their places: But they could not do it without betraying the Cause of Christ.
The Ministers of Edinburgh were committed to Ward, for refusing to pray for the Queen, before her Execution in Fothringam Castle 1586. they refused not simply to pray for her, but for the Preservation of her Life, as if she had been innocent of the Crimes laid to her charge, which had imported a Condemnation of the Proceedings against her. Afterwards in the Year 1600. the Ministers of Edinburgh would not Praise God for the Delivery of the King, from a Conspiracy of the Earl of Gowrie at that time, of which they had no Credit, nor assu∣rance; and would not crave Pardon for it neither. For this Mr. Robert Bruce, was deprived of the Exercise of his Ministry, and never obtained it again at Edinburgh. But all this was nothing, in Comparison of their wrestlings for the Royalties of their Princely Master, and Priviledges of his King∣dome, against that Tyrants Insolencies, after he obtained the Crown of England. For then he would not suffer the Church to indict her own Assemblies. And when the faithful thought themselves obliged to counteract his Encroachments, and therefore convened in an Assem∣bly at Aberdeen, Anno 1605. they were forced to dissolve: And there∣after the most eminent of the Ministers there Assembled, were Tran∣sported Prisoners to Blackness. Whence being cited before the Coun∣cil, they decline their Judicatory. And one of their Brethren, Mr. Robert Youngson, who had formerly succumbed, being mov'd in Con∣science, returned: And, when the rest were standing before the Coun∣cil, desired to be heard; and acknowledged his Fault, and Subscribed the Declinature with the rest. And for this they were Arraigned, and Condemned, as Guilty of Treason, and Banished. Before the Exe∣cution of which Sentence, Mr. Welsh wrote to the Lady Fleeming, to this effect; What am I, that he should first have called me, and then Con∣stituted me a Minister of glad things, of the Gospel of Salvation, these fifteen Years already, and now last of all to be a sufferer for his Cause and Kingdom? To witness that good Confession, that Iesus Christ is the King of Saints, and that his Church is a most free Kingdom, yea as free as any Kingdom under Heaven, not only to Convocate, Hold, and keep her Meet∣ings, Conventions and Assemblies: But also to judge of all her Affairs in all her Meetings and Conventions, among his Members and Subjects. These two points, (1) That Christ is the Head of his Church, (2) That she is free in her Government from all other Iurisdiction, except Christ's, are the special Cause of our Imprisonment, being now convict as Traytors, for main∣taining thereof. We have now been waiting with joyfulness to give the last Testimony of our Blood in Confirmation thereof. If it would please our God to be so favourable, as to Honour us with that Dignity. After this, the King resolving by Parliament to advance the Estate
of Bishops again, as in the time of Popery, without Cautions, as be∣fore; and further to establish not only that Antichristian Hierarchy, but an Erastian Supremacy; The faithful Ministers of Christ, thought themselves bound in Conscience to protest. And accordingly they offered a faithful Protestation to the Parliament Iuly 1606. obtesting, That they would reserve into the Lords own hands, that Glory which he will communicate neither with Man nor Angel; to wit, to prescribe from his Holy Mountain a lively Pattern, according to which his own Tabernacle should be formed: Remembring always, that there is no absolute and un∣doubted Authority in this World, except the Soveraign Authority of Christ the King; to whom it belongeth as properly to rule the Church, according to the good Pleasure of his own Will, as it belongeth to save his Church by the Merit of his own Sufferings: All other Authority is so entrenched within the Marches of Divine Command, that the least overpassing of the Bounds set by God himself, bring Men under the fearful expectation of Temporal and Eternal Iudgements, &c. Yet notwithstanding of all opposition, Prelacy was again restored in Parliament. And, to bring all to a complyance with the same, Pres∣byteries and Synods universally charged, under highest pains, to ad∣mit a Constant Moderator without change: which many refused resolutely, as being the first step of Prelacy. Upon this followed a great Perse∣cution of the faithful, for their Nonconformity, managed by that Mongrel and Monstrous kind of Court, made up of Clergy-men, and States-men, called the High Commission Court, erected anno 1570. where∣by many honest Men were put violently from their Charges and Habitations; the Generality were involved in a great and fearful Defection. But the Copestone of the wickedness of that Period, was the Ratifi∣cation of the five Articles of Perth; kneeling at the Communion, private Communion to be given to the Sick, private Baptism, and Confirmation of Children by the Bishop, and Observation of Festival Days. Which were much opposed and testified against by the faithful, from their first hatching Anno 1618. to the Year 1621. when they were ratified in Parliament. And against this the Testimony of the faithful continu∣ed, till the Revolution Anno 1638. The following Period, from the Year 1638 to 1660▪ continues and advances the Testimony, to the greatest heighth of purity and power, that either this Church, or any other did ever arrive unto. We shall give a short deduction of the rise, progress, and end of the Con∣tendings of that Period. In the midst of the forementioned Miseries and Mischiefs, that the Pride of Prelacy and Tyrannical Supremacy had multiplied beyond
measure upon this Church and Nation, and at the heighth of all their haughtiness, when they were setting up their Dagon, and erecting Al∣tars for him, imposing the Service Book, and Book of Cannons, &c. The Lords People were surprized with a sudden unexpected Delive∣rance, by very despicable means; even the opposition of a few weak Women; which afterwards was followed out with more Masculine fer∣vor, accosting King and Council with Pititions, Remonstrances, Pro∣testations, and Testimonies against the Innovations, and resolving up∣on a mutual Conjunction, to defend Religion, Lives, and Liberties, against all that would innovate or invade them. To fortifie which, all the Friends to the Liberty of the Nation, did solemnly renew the National Covenant; which though in it self obligeing to the Condemna∣tion of Prelatical Hierarchy, and clearly enough confirming Presbyterial Government, yet they engaged unto it with an enlargement to suspend the Practice of Novations already introduced, and the approbation of the Corruptions of the present Government, with the late places and Pow∣er of Church Men, till they be tryed in a free General Assembly. Which was obtained that same Year, and indicted at Glasgow: And there, notwithstanding all the opposition that the King's Commissioner could make, by Protestations and Proclamations to dissolve it, the six preceding Assemblies establishing Prelacy were annulled, the Service Book, and High Commission were condemned; all the Bishops were deposed, and their Government declared to be abjured in that Nati∣onal Covenant; tho' many had, through the Commissioners perswa∣sions, subscribed it in another Sense without that application: As also the five Articles of Perth were there discovered to have been incon∣sistent with that Covenant and Confession, and the Civil places and power of Church Men were disproved and rejected: On the other hand, Presbyterial Government was justified and approved, and an Act was passed, for keeping Yearly General Assemblies. This was a bold beginning; out-braving all difficulties. Which in the following Year were much encreased, by the Prelates and their partakers, Rendezvouzing their Forces under the Kings personal Standard, and menacing nothing but Misery to the zealous Covenan∣ters: Yet when they found them prepared to resist, were forced to yield to a Ratification, concluding that an Assembly and Parliament should be held for healing all Grievances of Church and State. In which Assembly at Edinburgh, the Covenant is ratified and subscribed by the Earl of Traquaire Commissioner, and enjoyned to be subscribed by the Body of the whole Land, with an explication expresly concerning the five Articles of Perth, the Government of Bishops, the Civil places and power of Church Men.
But the Year following, King and Prelates, with their Abettors, go to Arms again; but were fain to accommodate the matter by a new Pacification, whereby all Civil and Religious Rights were ratified. And in the following Year 1641, by Laws, Oaths, Promises, Subscripti∣ons of King and Parliament, fully confirmed; the King, Charles the First, being present, and consenting to all. But the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus being thus advanced, the Glory of the Lord did shine upon us with such Splendor, that it awaked Eng∣land, and animated the Lords People there to aspire to the like Refor∣mation. For advice in which, because, tho' all agreed to cast off Pre∣lacy, yet sundry Forms of Church Government were projected to be set up in the room thereof, chiefly the Independent Order: Therefore the Brethren in England wrote to the Assembly then sitting at Edinburgh, who gave them answer in behalf of the Presbyterial Government. So from henceforth the Assembly did incessantly urge Vniformity in Refor∣mation, with their Brethren in England, as the chiefest of their De∣sires, Prayers and Cares. And in the Year 1643 prevailed so far, that the English Parliament did first desire that the two Nations might be strictly united for their mutual defence against the Prelatical Faction and their Adherents in both Kingdoms; and not to lay down Arms, till these implacable Enemies should be brought in Subjection; and did instantly urge for help and assistance from Scotland. Which being sent, did return with an Olive-branch of Peace, and not without some beginning of a Reformation in England. And afterwards a Bloody War beginning between the King and Parliament, with great success on the Kings side, Commissioners were sent from both Houses to Scot∣land, earnestly inviting to a nearer Union of the Kingdoms, and desi∣ring assistance from this Nation to their Brethren in that their great distress. And this produced the Solemn League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, first drawn up in Scotland, and approved in the As∣sembly at Edinburgh, and afterward embraced in England. This is that Covenant comprehending the purpose of all Prior, and the Pat∣tern of all Posterior Covenants; which the Representative of Church and State in the three Nations did solemnly Subscribe and Swear, for themselves and Posterity; and of which the Obligation cannot be Disan∣null'd, Disabled, or Dispensed, by any Power on Earth. And this Covenant was rigorously imposed upon all Recusants; who were wick∣ed Enemies to God, and Church, and Nation, and for their Malignancy were then to be Prosecuted, not for their Scrupling at a Covenant, but for their contumacious contempt of a Law. This was no violence done to their Conscience; for as they had none, and could not pre∣tend to any, so they were never troubled for that, but for their opposition
and conspiracy against the common Cause. However it went through at that time. And that the Covenanted Reformation, in a nearer Conjunction betwixt the united Churches, might be promoted, the Parliament of England called an Assembly of Divines at Westminster: And desired the Assembly of Scotland to send thither their Commissi∣oners; and they accordingly nominated and elected, Mr. Alexander Hen∣derson, Mr. Robert Douglas, Mr. Samuel Rutherford, Mr. Robert Baille, Mr. George Gillespie Ministers; and Iohn Earl of Capils, Iohn Lord Maitland, and Sir Archbald Iohnstone of Warristown, Ruling Elder; to Propone, Consult, Treat, and Conclude in all such things as might conduce to the extirpation of Prelacy, &c. and for the settling of the so much desired Union of the whole Island, in one Form of Church Government, one Confession of Faith, one common Catechism, and one Directory for the Worship of God. Forces were also sent to assist the Parliament of England: Which were favoured with great success in their Enterprizes, till that War was ended by the total overthrow of the King, and all his upholders. But that Prelatical and Malignant Faction being brought much under in England, attempted to try the Fortune of War in Scotland, under the Conduct of Montrose: Who, tho' he prevailed for a time, yet at length was defeat at Philliphaugh, in the Year 1645. yet certain it is that they had Commission and Warrant from the King; as the Assem∣bly that Year, Feb. 13. remonstrates it to himself: Warning him in the Name of their Master, the Lord Iesus Christ, that the Guilt which cleaved to his Throne was such, as if not timely repented, could not but involve him∣self, and his Posterity, under the Wrath of the Everliving God, for his being Guilty of the shedding of the Blood of many Thousands of his best Subjects, &c. At the same time also the Assembly did zealously incite the Parlia∣ment to a speedy Course of Justice against these Incendiaries and Murderers, as the only mean of cleansing the Land from that deluge of Blood then Current, and of appeasing the Wrath of God: And solemnly and seasonably warned all Ranks to search to understand the Language of that Dispensation; wherein many publick Sins and Breaches of Covenant are pointed at; and the Covenant it self is there very Encomiastically vindicated: We are so far from repenting of it (say they) that we cannot mention it without great joy; for no sooner was the Covenant begun to be taken in England, but sensibly the condition of affairs there was changed to the better; and our Forces sent into that King∣dom, in pursuance of that Covenant, have been so manifestly and mercifully assisted from Heaven, that we have what to answer the Enemy that re∣proacheth us concerning that business. These following Acts were made,
thus, Feb. 14. 1645. Sess. 18. Vnless Men will blot out of their Hearts the fear of Religion and Cause of God, they must now or never appear actively, each one stretching himself to, yea beyond his power. It is no time to dally, or to go about the business by halves, nor be almost but altogether zealous: Cursed is he that doth the work of the Lord negligently. If we have been forward to assist our Neighbour Kingdoms, shall we neglect to defend our own? Or shall the Enemies of God be more active against his Cause, than his People for it? God forbid. (And among the Enormities and Corruptions of the Ministry in their Callings, this is one, §. 4. 5. Silence in the publick Cause; some accounting it a point of Wisdom to speak ambiguously, whereof the remedy is, §. 15. That beside all other scandals, silence and ambiguous speaking, in the publick Cause, be seasonably Censured. Gen. Ass. Edin. June, 13. 1646.) Act for Censuring the Complyers with the publick Enemies of this Church and Kingdom, Gen. Ass. Edin. Jun. 17. 1646. Sess. 4. Where they judge it a great and scandalous Provocation, and grievous defection from the publick Cause, to comply with these Malignants, in any degree, even to procure Protections from them, or to have invited them to their Houses, or to be Guilty of any such Gross degrees of Complyance; Censured to be suspended from the Communion, and while they acknowledge their Offence. And Gen. Ass. Aug. 24. 1647. Sess. 19. Ministers are charged, us they have occasion from the Text of Scripture, to reprove the Sins and Er∣rors, and press the Duties of the Time, and in all these to observe the Rules prescribed by the Acts of Assembly, wherein if they be negligent, they are to be Censured. And July ult. 1648. Sess. 2. in their Declaration con∣cerning the unlawful Engagement, they say: Suppose the Ends of that Engagement be good (as they are not) yet the means and ways of Prosecution are unlawful; because there is not an equal avoiding of Rocks on both hands, but a joyning with Malignants to suppress Sectaries, a joining hands with a black Devil to beat a white Devil. And Aug. 3. 1648. All Ministers that do not apply their Doctrine to the Corruptions of the Time, which is the Pa∣storal Gift, and that are cold or wanting of Spiritual zeal, Dissembling of Publick Sins, are appointed to be Censured even to Deprivation; for forbear∣ing or passing in silence the Errors and Exorbitances of Sectaries in England, or the Defections current at home, the Plots and Practices of Malignants, the Principles and Tenets of Erastianism; And if they be found too sparing, General or Ambiguous in their Applications or Reproofs, they are to be deposed, for being pleasers of Men rather than servers of Christ, for giving themselves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in the Cause of God, for defrauding the South of People, yea for being Gulty of the Blood of Souls, in not giving them warning. See also their seasonable and necessary Warning Iuly. 27. 1649. Thus did these famous Fathers give us a perfect Pattern of pu∣rity and strictness, in opposition to all degrees of Coformity and Com∣plyance with the Corruptions of the Time.
In the mean while, the Malignants in England being crushed in all their Projects, the King renders himself to the Scots in Newcastle: By whom (because by Covenant they were not obliged to defend him, but only in defence of Religion and Liberty, which he had been de∣stroying, and they defending; because in this War he did directly oppose and oppugn these Conditions, under which they were only to defend him, and therefore they had all along carried towards him as an Enemy, as he to them; And because by the same Covenant they were obliged to discover, and render to condign Punishment all Malig∣nants of whom he was the chief, and to assist mutually all entred into that Covenant) he was delivered up unto the English, and kept under restraint in the Isle of Wight, until he was Condemned and Executed, Ian, 30, 164. Which Fact, tho' it was protested against both before and after by the Assembly of the Church of Scotland, out of zeal against the Sectarians, the Executioners of that extraordinary Act of Justice; yet it was more for the Manner, than for the matter, and more for the Motives and Ends of it, than for the Grounds of it, that they opposed themselves to it, and resented it. For they acknowledged and re∣monstrated to himself, the Truth of all these things upon which that Sentence and Execution of Justice was founded. And when the un∣lawful Engagement was on foot to Rescue him, they opposed it with all their might: Shewing, in their Answers to the Estates that Year, 1648, and Declarations and Remonstrances, the sinfulness and destructiveness of that Engagement; that it was a breach of the Commandments of God, and of all the Articles of the Covenant: Declaring with all (Iuly ult.) they would never consent to the King's Restitution to the exercise of his Power, till security should be had, By Solemn Oath under his Hand and Seal, that he shall for himself and Successors, give his assent to all Acts and Bills for enjoyning Presbyterial Government, and never make opposition to it, nor endeavour any change thereof. July ult. 1648. Sess. 21. By which it appears, they were not so stupidly loyal, as some would make them. Yet there was too much of this Plague of the Kings-evil even among good Men: For after the Death of Charles the First, in the Year 1649. they began to think of joyning once more with the Malignants, and taking into their Bosoms these Serpents which had formerly stung them to Death. There was indeed at that time a Party faithful for God, who considering the many Breaches of the Solemn League and Cove∣nant, and particularly by the late Engagement against England, did so Travel, that they procured the Covenant to be renewed, with the So∣lemn Acknowledgment of Sins, and Engagement to Duties, which was uni∣versally Subscribed and sworn through all the Land; wherein also they
regret this tampering with Malignants. Whereupon they subdued their Adversaries at Sterling, and in the North they did also give Warning concerning the Young King, that notwithstanding of the Lords Hand against his Father, yet he hearkens to the Councils of those, who were Authors of these Miseries to his Father; by which it hath coe to pass, that he hath hitherto refused to grant the just and necessary desires of the Church and Kingdom, for securing of Religion and Liberty: And it is much to be feared, that these wicked Counsellors, may so far prevail upon him, as to engage him in a War, for overturning the Work of God, and bearing down all those in the three Kingdoms that adhere thereto. Which if he shall do, cannot but bring great Wrath from the Lord upon himself and Thone, and must be the cause of many new and great Miseries and Calamities to these Lands. And, whereas many would have admitted his Majesty to the Exercise of his Royal Power, upon any Terms whatsoever, the Assembly declares, That in the League and Covenant the duty of defending and preserving the King is subordinate to the duty of preserving Religion and Liberty: And therefore, he standing in opposition to the publick desires of the People for their security, it were a manifest breach of Covenant, and a preferring the Kings Interest to the In∣terest of Iesus Christ, to bring him to the Exercise of his Power. And therefore, if his Majesty, or any having or pretending Power and Commission from him, shall invade this Kingdom, upon pretext of establishing him in the Exercise of his Royal Power; as it will be an high Provocation against God, to be accessary or assisting thereto, so it will be a necessary Duty to resist and oppose the same. July 27. 1649. Sess. 27. And when the bringing home of the King came to be voted in the Assembly, there was one faithful Witness, Mr. Adam Kae Minister, in Gallaway, protested against it. But notwithstanding of these Convictions, Warning, yea and Dis∣coveries of the Kings Malignancy; They sent Commissioners, and concluded a Treaty with him at Breda. During which Treaty, the Commissions which he had sent to Montrose, and his Complices, were brought to the Committee of Estates, discovering what sort of King they were treating with. Whereupon the Estates concluded to break off the Treaty, and recal their Commissioners. To which intent, they sent an Express with Letters to Breda; which falling into the hands of Libbertone, was by him, without the knowledge of the other Commissioners, delivered unto the King: Who then sound it his in∣terest to dissemble. And so sending for the Commissioners, he made flattering Speech to them, shewing that now after serious delibera∣tion he was resolved to comply with all their Proposals. Whereupon the Commissioners dispatch the Post back with Letters, full of praise and joy, for the satisfaction they had received. The Estates, being over-swayed more with respect to their own
Credit (which they thought should be impeached, if they should retract their own Plenipotentiary Instructions, to conclude the Treaty upon the Kings assent to their Conditions) than to their reclamant Conscien∣ces, they resolved to bring home the King. Yet they thought to mend the matter, by binding him with all Cords, and putting him to all most explicite Engagements, before he should receive the Imperial Crown. Well, upon these Terms home he comes: And before he set his Foot on British Ground, he takes the Covenant. And the Com∣mission of the General Assembly precluded his Admittance to the Crown, if he should refuse the then required satisfaction, before his Corona∣tion, by their Act at the West-Kirk, Aug. 13. 1650. Which is this, The Commission of the General Assembly, considering that there may be just Ground of stumbling, from the Kings Majesties refusing to subscribe and ex∣cite the Declaration offered to him by the Committee of Estates, and the Commission of the General Assembly concerning his former Carriage and Re∣solutions for the future, in Reference to the Cause of God, and the Enemies and Friends thereof; doth therefore declare, That this Kirk and Kingdom doth not own or espouse any Malignant Party, or Quarrel, or In∣terest, but that they fight meerly upon their former Grounds and Principles, and in the defence of the Cause of God, and of the Kingdom, as they have done these twelve Years past: And therefore, as they disclaim all the Sin and Guilt of the King and of his House, so they will not own him not his Inte∣rest, otherwise than with a Subordination to God, and so far as he owns and Prosecutes the Cause of God, and disclaims his and his Fathers Opposition to the Work of God, and to the Covenant, and likewise all the Enemies thereof And that they will with convenient speed take into Consideration the Papers lately sent unto them by Oliver Cromwell, and vindicate themselves from all the falshoods contained therein; especially in these things wherein the quar∣rel betwixt us and that Party is mis-stated, as if we owned the late Kings Proceedings, and were resolved to Prosecute and Maintain His Present Majesties Interest, before and without acknowledging of the Sin of his House and former ways, and satisfaction to Gods People in both Kingdoms. A. Ker. And that same day, The Committee of Estates, having seen and con∣sidered a Declaration of the Commission of the General Assembly, anent the stating the Quarrel wherein the Army is to fight, do approve the same, and heartily concur therein. Tho. Henderson. Whereupon thereafter, he encites that Declaration at Drumfermling, Wherein, Professing and appearing in the full perswasion and Love of the Truth, he repenteth (as having to do with and in the sight of God) his Fathers opposition to the Covenant and Work of God, and his own Reluctances against the same, hoping for Mercy through the Blood of Iesus Christ, and obtesting the Prayers of the Faithful to God, for his stedfastness; and then Protest∣ing
his Truth and Sincerity in entring into the Oath of God, resolving to prosecute the Ends of the Covenant to his utmost, and to have with it the same common Friends and Enemies, exhorting all to lay down their Enmity against the Cause of God, and not to prefer Mans Interest to Gods, which will prove an Idol of Iealousie to Provoke the Lord, and he himself account∣eth to be but selfish Flatteries. Then at his Coronation, the Action commenceth with his most solemn renewing of the National and So∣lemn League and Covenant. Thereafter in the Year 1651. followed the Ratification of all these preceding Treaties, Transactions, and Engagements, concluded and enacted by the King, and the Parliament; whereby the same did Pass into a Perpetual Law. And this Covenant, which from the beginning was and is the most sure and indispensible Oath of God, became at length the very Fundamental Law of the Kingdom, whereon all the Rights or Priviledges, either of King or People, are principally bot∣tomed and secured. After this it came to pass, that zeal for the cause rightly stated was suddenly contracted to a few; whereby a plain defection was vio∣lently carried on by the Publick Resolutioners, who relapsing into that most Sinful Conjunction with the Malignants, did bring them into places of Power and Trust, in Judicatories and Armies, in a more Politick than Pious way, requiring of them a constrained and dissembled Repentance, which Reflection did cause the first Division of that kind, and most permanent of any that ever was in the Church of Scotland; by reason of the surcease of General Assemblies, stopped and hindered by the Yoke of the Sectarian Usurpers: And it has been the spring and source of all our Reflections since. Upon this our Land was in∣vaded by Oliver Cromwell, who defeated our Army at Dunbar. Next, an Army being raised, according to these unhallowed Resolutions, was totally routed at Worcester; And the King forced to hide himself in the Oak, and thence to transport himself beyond Sea, where he con∣tinued in Exile, till the Year 1660. Yet there was still a faithful Remnant of Ministers and Professors, zealous for the Cause, keeping their Integrity; who in their Remon∣strances and Testimonies witnessed against both their Malignant Ene∣mies, and their backsliding Brethren the Resolutioners: And also a∣gainst the Sectarians their Invaders; whose vast Toleration and Li∣berty of Conscience, which they brought in to invade our Religion as they invaded our Land, and infect it with their Multifarious Errors, was particularly by the Synod of Fife, and other Brethren in the Mi∣nistry that joyned themselves to them, testified against, and demon∣strated to be wicked and intollerable. But in the mean time, the
Sectarian Army here prevailed, till after the Usurper Cromwell his Death; Monk then General, with a Combination of Malignants and publick Resolutioners, did bring home the King to England from his Banishment. Now comes the last Catastrophe of the Deformation of the Church of Scotland; which in a retrograde motion hath gradually been grow∣ing these 27 Years, going back through all the steps by which the Re∣formation ascended, till now she is reduced to the very Border of that Babilon, from whence she took her departure. Through all which steps notwithstanding, to this day, Scotland hath never wanted a Witness for Christ, against all the various steps of the Enemies advancings, and of professed Friends declinings. Though the Testimony hath had some Singularities, in that it hath been attended with more disadvan∣tages, by reason of the Enemies greater prevalency, and Friends de∣ficiency, and greater want of significant Assertors, than any formerly, in that it hath been intangled in more multifarious Intricacies of que∣stions and debates, and Divisions among the Assertors themselves: In that it hath been intended and extended to a greater measure, both as to matter and manner of contendings against the Adversaries, and stated upon nicer points, more earnestly Prosecuted and tenaciously main∣tain'd, than any formerly; to that it hath had more opposition and contradiction, and less Countenance from professed Friends to the Re∣formation, either at home or abroad, than any formerly. And yet it hath been both Active and Passive, both against Enemies and Friends; and in Cumulo stated against Atheism, Popery, Prelacy, and Erastian Supremacy, and extended in a particular manner against Tyranny. And not only against the substance and essence of these in the Abstract, but against Substance and Circumstance, Abstract and Concrete, Root and Branch, Head and Tail of them, and all complying with them, conforming to them, or countenancing of them, or any thing con∣ductive for them, or deduced from them, any manner of way, direct∣ly or indirectly, formally or interpretatively. This is that extensive and very comprehensive Testimony, which in all its parts, points, and particles is most directly relative, and dilucidly reducible, to a com∣plex Witness for the Declarative Glory of Christs Kingship and Head∣ship over All, as he is God, and as he is Mediator. The management of this Testimony was thus. King Charles the Second upon his Return directed a Letter to the Presbytery of Edinburgh, declaring he was resolved to protect and preserve the Government of the Church of Scotland, as it is settled by Law, without Violation. Wherein it was observed he spake never 8 word of the Covenant, our Magna Charta of Religion and Righteousness, but only of Law; by which he
meant the Prelatical Church, as it was settled by the Law of his Fa∣ther, since which time he reckoned there was no Law, but Rebellion. This was a piece and prelude of our base Defection, that we were so far from withstanding, that we did not so much as witness against the Readmission and Restauration of the Head and Tail of Malignants, but let them come in peaceably to the Throne, without any Security to the Covenanted Cause, and by piece-meal, at their own ease, lei∣sure, and pleasure, to overturn all the Work of God, and reintro∣duce the Old Antichristian Yoke of abjured Prelacy, and Blasphemous Sacrilegious Supremacy, and absolute Arbitrary Tyranny, with all their abominations: Which he, and with him the Generality of our Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and Commonality, did promote and propagate, un∣till the Nation was involved in the greatest Revolt from, and Rebel∣lion against God, that ever could be recorded in any Age or Genera∣tion: Nay, attended with greater and grosser Aggravations, than ever any could be capable of before us, who have had the greatest Privi∣ledges that ever any Church had, since the National Church of the Iews, the greatest light, the greatest effects of matchless magnified Love, the greatest Convictions of Sin, the greatest Resolutions and Solemn Engagements against it, and the greatest Reformation from it, that ever any had to abuse and affront: O Heavens! Be Astonished at this, and Horribly afraid! For Scotland hath changed her Glory, and the Crown hath faln from off her Head, by an unparallelled Apostacy, a free and voluntary, wilful and deliberate Apostacy, an avowed and declared and authorized Apostacy, a most universal and every way unprecedented Apostacy. These Enemies of God, having once got footing again, with the favour and fawnings of the Foolish Nation, went on fervently to fur∣ther and promote their foolish Design: And meeting with no opposition at first did encourage themselves to begin boldly. Wherefore, hearing of some Ministers peaceably Assembled, to draw up a Monitory Letter to the King, minding him of his Covenant, Engagements and Promises (which was tho' weak, yet the first Witness and Warning against that Heaven-daring Wickedness then begun) they Cruelly incarcerate them; Having hereby much daunted the Ministry from their Duty in that day, for fear of the like unusual and outragious usage. The Parliament convenes Ian. 1. 1661. without so much as a Protesta∣tion for Religion and Liberty given in to them. And there, in the first place, they frame and take the Oath of Supremacy, Examtorating Christ, and investing his usurping Enemy with the spoils of his rob∣bed Prerogative, acknowledging the King only Supreme Governour over all Persons and in all Causes, and that his Power and Iurisdiction must not
be declined. Whereby under all Persons and Causes, all Church-con∣cerns of Christ, are comprehended: And if the King shall take upon him to judge their Doctrine, Worship, Discipline or Government, he must not be declined as an Incompetent Judge. Which laid the Foun∣dation for all this Bable they have built since, and of all this War that hath been waged against the Son of God, and did introduce all this Tyranny and absolute Power which hath been since carried to its Com∣plement, and made the Kings Throne the Foundation of all the suc∣ceeding Perjury and Apostacy. Yet, tho' then our Synods and Presbyteries were not discharged, but might have had access in some Concurrence to witness against this horrid Invasion upon Christs Prerogative and the Churches Priviledge, no join Testimony was given against it, except that some were found Wit∣nessing against it in their Singular Capacity by themselves. As faithful Mr. Iames Gushire, who had been Honoured of God to be zealous and singularly faithful in carrying on the Work of Reformation, and for declining this usurped Authority in prejudice of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, and asserting the Kingly Authority of Christ in opposition to the Erastian Supremacy encroaching thereupon, suffered Death, and got the Martyrs Crown upon his Head; which being placed upon one of the Ports of Edinburgh, Preacheth, not only against the Enemies Re∣bellion against God, but against the defection of many Ministers since, who have Practically denyed that great Truth for which he suffered, viz. His Testimony against the Supremacy, and for declining the usurped Authority of him who Arrogated it. And some others, for refusing that Oath Arbirarily imposed, were Banished or Confin'd. At the same time, there was a Proclamation, which they caused to be Read at all the Church-Doors, discharging Ministers to speak against them or their Proceedings, whereby Prophane and Malicious Persons were encouraged to witness against their Ministers. By which means (tho' many were in no hazard, thinking it commendable Prudence, com∣mended indeed by the World, but hateful Unfaithfulness before God, to be silent at such a time) some faithful Ministers giving faithful and free warning and Protesting against the present Defection, were con∣demned of Treason, and Banished out of the three Dominions. O∣thers were Sentenced with Banishment, and furder were compelled to Subscribe a Bond, under pain of Death, to remove out of all the Do∣minions betwixt that and such a day. This was the Lot, and also the Blot of these Famous and Faithful Ministers, Mr. Iohn Eivingstoun, M. Robert Machward, Mr. Iohn Brown, &c. who spent the rest of their days in Holland.
When they had gained this Bulwark of Christs Kingdom, then they waxed more insolent, and set up their Ensigns for Signs, and broke down the Carved Work of Reformation with Axes and Hammers. In this Parliament 1661. they pass'd an Act Rescissory, whereby they annulled and declared void the National Covenant, the Solemn League and Covenant, Presbyterial Government, and all Laws made in favour of the work of Reformation, since the Year 1638. O horrid Wicked∣ness! To condemn and rescind what God did so signally Seal as his own Work, to the Conviction of the World. But O Holy and Astonishing Justice, thus to Recompence our way upon our own Head! to suffer this work and cause to be ruined under our unhappy hands, who suffered this Destroyer to come in before it was so effectually se∣cured, as it should not have been in the power of his hand (whatever had been in his Heart, swelled with enmity against Christ) to have raised and ruined that work as now he most wickedly did, and drew so many in to the Guilt of the same deed, that almost the whole Land not only consented unto it, but Applauded it; by approving and countenancing another wicked Act framed at the same time, by that same peridious Parliament, for an Anniversary Thanksgiving, commemorating every 29th of May, that Blasphemy against the Spirit and Work of God; and celebrating tha unhappy Restauration of the Rescinder of the Re∣formation, which had not only the Concurrence of the Universality of the Nation, but (alas for shame that it should be told in Gath, &c.) even of some Ministers, who afterwards accepted the Indulgence (one of which, a Pillar among them, was seen scandalously dancing about the Bonfires.) And others, who should have allarmed the whole Nation Quasi pro Aris & Focis, to rise for Religion and Liberty, to resist such Wickedness, did wink at it. Yet albeit, neither in this day, when the Covenant was not only broken, but Cassed and declared of no Obligation, nor afterward when it was Burnt (for which Turks and Pagans would have been ashamed, and afraid at such a terrible sight, and for which the Lords Anger is burning against these bold Burners, and against them who suffered it, and did not witness against it) was there any publick Testimony by Pro∣testation, or Remonstrance, or any publick Witness? Tho' the Lord had some then, and some who came out afterwards with the Trumpet at their Mouth, whose Heart then sorrowed at the sight: And some suffered for the Sense they shewed of that Anniversary Abomination, for not keeping which they lost both Church and Liberty. It's true, the ordinary Meetings of Presbyteries and Synods were about that time discharged, to make way for the Exercise of the new power conferred on the four Prelates who were at Court. But this
could not give a discharge from a necessary Testimony, then called from faithful Watchmen. However the Reformation being thus re∣scinded and razed, and the House of the Lord pulled down, then they begin to build their Bable. In the Parliament Anno 1662. by their first Act they restore and re∣establish Prelacy, upon such a Foundation as they might by the same Law bring in Popery; and setled its Harbinger, Diocesan and Erastian Pre∣lacy, by fuller enlargement of the Supremacy, The very Act begin∣ning thus: Forasmuch as the ordering and disposal of the external Govern∣ment of the Church, doth properly belong to his Majesty as an inherent Right of the Crown, by Virtue of his Royal Prerogative and Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastick, whatever shall be determined by his Majesty with advice of the Archbishops, and such of the Clergy as he shall nominate, in the Exter∣nal Government of the Church (the same consisting with the standing Laws of the Kingdom) shall be valid and effectual. And in the same Act all Laws are rescinded, by which the sole Power and Jurisdiction within the Church doth stand in the Church-Assemblies, and all which may be interpreted, to have given any Church-power, Jurisdiction or Go∣vernment to the Office-Bearers of the Church, other than that which acknowledgeth a dependence upon, and Subordination to the Soveraign Power of the King as Supream. By which Prelates are redintegrated o all their Priviledges and Preheminences that they possessed Anno 1687. And all their Church-Power (robbed from the Officers of Christ) is made to be derived from, to depend upon, and to be Subordinate to he Crown-Prerogative of the King: Whereby the King is made the only Fountain of Church-Power, and that exclusive even of Christ, of whom there is no mentioned Exception: And his Vassals the Bishops, as his Clerks in Ecclesiasticks, are accountable to him for all their Ad∣ministrations; a greater Usurpation upon the Kingdom of Christ, than ever the Papacy it self aspired unto. Yet, albeit here was another display of a Banner of defiance against Christ, in altering the Church-Government of Christs Institution in∣to the humane Invention of Lordly Prelacy, there was no publick, Ministerial, at least united Testimony against this neither. Therefore the Lord punished this sinful and shameful silence of Ministers; when by another wicked Act of the Council at Glasgow, above 300 Ministers were put from their Charges; and afterwards for their Non-confor∣mity in not countenancing their Diocesan Meeting, and not keeping the Anniversary Day, May 29. the rest were violenly thrust from their Labours in the Lords Vineyard, and Banished from their Parishes, and adjudged unto a strange and nice Confinement, twenty Miles from their own Parishes, six Miles from a Cathedral Church, as they called it,
and three Miles from a Burgh. Yet in this fatal Convulsion of the Church, generally all were struck with Blindness and Baseness, that a Paper-Proclamation made them all run from their Posts, and obey the Kings Orders for their ejection. Thus were they given up, because of their forbearing to sound an Allarm, charging the People of God, in point of Loyalty to Christ, and under the pain of the Curse of the Covenant, to awake and acquit themselves like Men, and not to suffer the Enemy to rob them of that Treasure of Reformation, which they were put in possession of, by the Tears, Prayers, and Blood of such as went before them; instead of those prudential fumblings, and fistlings then and since so much followed. Wherefore the Lord in his Holy Righteousness, left that Enemy to cast them out of the House of the Lord, and dissolve their Assemblies, and deprive them of their Priviledges, because of their not being so valiant for the Truth, as that a full and faithful Testimony against that Encroachment might be found upon Record. Nevertheless some were found faithful in that Hour and Power of Darkness, who kept the Word of the Lords Patience, and who there∣fore were kept in and from Tentation (which carried away many into sad and shameful Defections) tho' not from suffering hard things from the hands of Men; and only these who felt most of their violence, found Grace helping them to acquit themselves suitably to that days Testimony, being thereby prevented from an active yeilding to their impositions, when they were made passively to suffer force. However that season of a publick Testimony was lost, and as to the most part never recovered to this day. The Prelates being setled, and readmitted to voice in Parliament, they procure an Act, Dogmatically condemning several Material parts and points of our Covenanted Reformation, to wit, these Positions, That it was Lawful for Subjects, for Reformation or necessary self-defence, to enter into Leagues, or take up Arms against the King: And particularly declaring that the National Covenant, as explained in the Year 1688. and the solemn League and Covenant, were and are in themselves unlawful Oaths, and were taken by, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Kingdom, against the Fundamental Laws and Liberties thereof; That all such Gatherings and Petitions, that were used in the beginning of the late Troubles, were unlaw∣ful and seditious: And whereas People were then led into these things, by having disseminated among them such Principles as these, That it was law∣ful for People to come with Petitions and Representations to the King, That it was lawful for People to restrict their Allegiance under such and such Limitations, and suspend it until he should give security for Religion, &c. It was therefore enacted, that all such Positions and Practices founded there∣upon,
were Treasonable—And furder did enact, that no Person, by Writing, Praying, Preaching, or malicious or advised speaking, express or publish any Words or Sentences, to stir up the People to the dislike of the Kings Preroga∣tive and Supremacy, or of the Government of the Church by Bishops, or justifie any of the Deeds, Actings or things declared against by that Act. Yet notwithstanding of all this Subversion of Religion and Liberty, and restraint of asserting these Truths here trampled upon, either be∣fore Men by Testimony, or before God in Mourning over these Indig∣nities done unto him, in everting these, and all the parts of Refor∣mation, even when it came to Daniel's Case of confssion, Preaching and Praying Truths interdicted by Law, few had their Eyes open (let be their Windows in an open avouching them) to see the duty of the day calling for a Testimony. Tho' afterwards the Lord spirited some to assert and demonstrate the Glory of these Truths and Duties to the World. As that judicious Author of the Apologetical Relation. But this is not all: For these Men, having now, as they thought, sub∣verted the Work of God, they provided also against the fears of its revival; making Acts, declaring, that if outed Ministers dare to con∣tinue to Preach, and presume to exercise their Ministry, they should be punished as Seditious Persons; requiring of all a due acknowledgment of, and hearty complyance with the King's Government, Ecclesiastical and Civil; and that whosoever shall ordinarily and wilfully withdraw and absent from the ordinary Meetings for Divine Worship in their own Churches, on the Lord's Day, shall incur the Penalties there inserted. And thus none are allowed by Law to administer the Ordinances, but either Apostate Curates, who by their Perjury and Apostatize for∣faulted their Ministry, or other Hirlings, and Prelates Journey-men, who ran without a Mission, except from them who had none to give, ac∣ording to Christ's Institution, the Seal of whose Ministry could never yet be shewn in the Conversion of any Sinner to Christ; but if the Tree may be known by its Fruits, we may know whose Ministers they are; by their Conversions of Reformation into Deformation; of the Work and Cause of God, into the similitude of the Roman Beast; of Ministers into ielings; of the Power of Godliness into Formality; of Preaching Christ, into Orations of Morality; of the Purity of Christ's Ordinances, into the vanity of Men's Inventions; of the Beautiful Government of the House of God for Edification, to a Lordly Preeminence and Domina∣tion over Consciences: In a word, of Church and State, Constitutions for Religion and Liberty, all upside down into Wickedness and Slavery. But now this astonishing Blow to the Gospel of the Kingdom, intro∣ducing such a swarm of Locusts into the Church, and in forcing a com∣pliance of the People with this defection, and that so violently and ri∣gorously,
as even simple withdrawing was so severely punished by severe Edicts of Fining, and other Arbitrary Punishments at first (for at first they did not Imprison any for simple absenting themselves from the Curates, and only imprisoned those who at any time shewed more than ordinary Zeal against the Curate's Intrusion) what did it produce? The generality of Ministers and Professors both went and Conformed so far as to hear the Curates, contrary to many Points of the Refor∣mation formerly attained, contrary to their Covenant-Engagements, and contrary to their own Principles and Practices at that same time; scrupling and refusing to keep the Bishops Visitations, and to countenance their Discipline and Power of Iurisdiction, because it was required as a Testification of their acknowledgment of, and Compliance with the pre∣sent Government; and yet not scrupling to Countenance their Doctrine, and usurped Power of Order, required also by the same Law, as the same Test of the same compliance and submission. Other Ministers lay alto∣gether by in their retired recesses, waiting to see what things would turn to; others were hopeless, turned Farmers, and Doctors; others wylie staid at home, and Preached quietly in Ladies Chambers. But the Faithful found themselves under an indispensable necessity to Preach the Gospel, and witness for the freedom of their Ministry, and make full proof of it, in Preaching in Season, and out of Season; and thereupon as occasion offered, Preached to all such as were willing to hear; but at first, only in private Houses, and that for the most part, at such times when Sermons in publick surceased (a Superplus of Cau∣tion.) But afterwards, finding so great Difficulties and Persecutions for their House-Meetings, where they were so easily atrapped, were constrained at last to keep their Meetings in the Fields: Where testi∣fying both practically, and particularly against these Usurpati∣ons on their Master's Prerogatives, and witnessing for their Mi∣isterial freedom, contrary to all Law-Interdictions, without any Li∣censes or Indulgence from the Usurper, but holding their Ministry from Jesus Christ alone, both as to the Office and Exercise thereof; they had so much of their Master's Countenance, and success in their Labours, that they valued neither hazards or hardships, neither the contempt of pretended Friends, nor the Laws nor threatnings of Enemies, ad∣judging the Penalty of Death it self to Preachers at Field-Conventicles, a they called them. Now having thus overturned the Church-Government, by introducing Pelacy, to advance ane absolute Supremacy, the King proceeds in his Design, to pervert and evert the well modelled and moderated Con∣stitution of the State-Government also, by introducing and advancing ane Abitrary Tyranny. For effectuating which, he first procures a lasting
Imposition of intollerable Subsidies and Taxations; next a further recognisance of his Prerogative, in a Subjection of Persons, Fortunes, and whole strength of the Kingdom to his absolute Arbitriment, in a Levy of Militia of 20000 Footmen, and 2000 Horsemen, sufficiently armed, with Forty days Provision, to be ready upon the King's call to march to any part of his Dominions, for opposing whatsoever Invasion, or Insurrection, or for any other Service. The first sproutings of Ty∣ranny were cherished, by the cheerful and stupid Submission generally yeilded to these Exorbitancies; so that generally People did not so much as scruple sending out, or going out as Militia-men. After the fundamental Constitutions of both Church and State are thus razed and rooted up, he contrived to frame all Inferior Magistrates according to his Mould: And for this end appointed, that all Persons in any Publick Trust or Office whatsoever, should subscribe a Declaration, renouncing and abjuring the Covenant. But finding this not yet sufficient security for this unsettled Settlement; because he well understood, the People stood no ways obliged to acknowledge him, but only according to the Solemn Covenants, being the fundamental Conditions whereupon their Allegiance was founded; and well knowing, that he and his As∣sociates, by violating these Conditions, had loosed the People from all Sub∣jection to him, or deriving any Power from him, whereby the People might justly plead, That since he had kept no Condition, they were not now obliged to him; he therefore contriv'd a new Oath of Allegiance to be impos'd upon all in publick Trust, both in Church and State. Strange! can Presbyterians swear that Allegiance, which is substitute in the place of the broken and burnt Covenant? Or could they swear it to such a Person, who having buried the Covenant, that he might have another Right and another Allegiance than that of the Covenant, had then re∣mitted to us all Allegiance founded upon the Covenant? However, having prepared and furnished himself with Tools so qualified for his purpose, in Church and State, he prosecutes his Perse∣cution with such fervor and fury, that at length, in the Year 1666, a small Party were compelled to go to defensive Arms; which was occasi∣oned thus. Sir Iames Turner pursuing his Cruel Orders in Galloway, sent some Souldiers to apprehend a poor old Man; whom his Neighbours Compassionating, intreated the Souldiers to loose him as he lay bound; but were answered with drawn Swords, and necessitated to their own de∣fence: In which they relieve the Man, and disarm the Souldiers; and further attacked some others oppressing that Country, disarming Ten or Twelve more, and killing one that made resistance. Whereupon the Country being allarm'd, and fearing Sir Iames would certainly avenge this Affront upon the whole Country, without distinction of Free and
Unfree, they gather about Fifty four Horsemen, march to Dumfre, take Sir Iames Turner Prisoner, and disarm the Souldiers, without any more violence. Being thus by Providence engag'd, without any hope of retreat, and getting some Concurrence of their Brethren in the same condition, they come to Lanerk, where they renew the Covenant; and thence to Pentland-Hills, where, by the Holy disposal of God, they were routed, many killed, and 130 taken Prisoners, of which 35 were afterwards hanged, who had much of the Lords Presence at their deaths, and assurance of his Love, strengthening them to Seal a noble Testimony. After this conflict many were forefaulted of their Estates, and Intercommuned; Souldiers are permitted to take free Quarter in the Country; to Examine Men by Tortures; to strip them who did so much as resist the Fugitives, and thrust them into Prisons, &c. Hence we may see the Righteousness of God, how justly at that time he left us in such a damp, that like Asses we couched under all Burdens, and few came out to the help of the Lord against the Mighty, drawing on them Meroz's Curse, and the Blood of their butchered Brethren. But the King having now brought his only opposites, the few Faith∣ful Witnesses of Christ, to a low pass, he went on by Craft as well as Cruelty, to advance his own in promoting Antichrist's Interest. And therefore having gotten the Supremacy devolved upon him by Law, he would now exert that usurped Power, and work by insnaring Policy to effetuate the End which he could not do by other means. There∣fore seeing he was not able to suppress the Meetings of the Lord's Peo∣ple for Gospel-Ordinances, in Houses and Fields, but that the more he laboured by violent courses, the greater and more frequent they grew; h fell upon a more crafty Device, not only to overthrow the Gospel, and suppress the Meetings, but to break the Faithful, and to divide be∣tween the Mad-cap and the Moderate Fanaticks (as they phrased it) that he might the more easily destroy both, to confirm the Usurpation, and to settle People in a sinful silence, and stupid submission to all the In∣croachments made on Christ's Prerogatives, and more effectually to over∣turn what remained of the work of God. And knowing that nothing could more fortifie the Supremacy than Ministers their homologating and acknowledging it: Therefore he offered the first Indulgence An∣no 1669, signifying in a Letter, dated that Year Iune 7. His gracious Pleasure was, To appoint so many of the outed Ministers, as have lived peaceably and orderly, to return to Preach and exercise other Functions of the Ministry, in the Parish-Churches where they formerly served (provided they be vacant) to allow Patrons to present to other vacant Churches, such others of them as the Council should approve: That all who are so indulged, be enjoyned to keep Presbyteries, and the Refusers to be confined within the
bounds of their Parishes; and that they be enjoyned not to admit any of their neighbour Parishes unto their Communions, nor Baptize their Children, nor marry any of them, without the allowance of the Minister of the Parish; and if they Countenance the People deserting their own Parishes, they are to be silenced for shorter and longer time, or altogether turned out, as the Council shall see cause And upon complaint made and verified, of any Seditious Discourse, or Expressi∣ons in the Pulpit, uttered by any of the Ministers, they are immediately to be turned out, and further punished according to Law: And seeing by these Orders, all pretences for Conventicles were taken away; if any should be found hereafter to preach without Authority, or keep Conventicles, His Pleasure is, to proceed with all severity against them, as Seditious Persons, and Contemners of Auhtority. To salve this in point of Law, and to make the Kings Letter the Su∣preme Law afterwards, and a valid ground in Law, whereupon the Council might proceed, and enact, and execute what the King pleased in matters Ecclesiastick; He therefore caused frame a formal Statutory Act of Supremacy of this Tenor, That his Majesty hath the Supreme Au∣thority and Supremacy over all Persons and in all Causes Ecclesiastick, within his Dominions; and that by vertue thereof, the ordering and disposal of the External Government of the Church did properly belong to him and his Succes∣sors, as an inherent right to the Crown; and that he may Settle, Enact, and Emit such Constitutions, Acts and Orders, concerning the Administrating there∣of, and Persons employed in the same, and concerning all Ecclesiastical Meet∣ings and Matters, to be proposed and determined therein, as He in His Roy∣al Wisdom shall think fit; which Acts, Orders, and Constitutions, are to be observed and obeyed by all His Majesties Subjects, any Law, Act, or Cu∣stom to the Contrary notwithstanding. Whereupon, accordingly the Coun∣cil, in their Act Iuly 27. 1669, do nominate several Ministers, and ap∣point them to Preach, and exercise the other Functions of the Ministry, at their respective Churches there specified, with consent of the Patrons. The same day also, they Conclude and Enact the forementioned Restricti∣ons, conform to the King's Letter, and ordain them to be intimate to every person, who is by Authority foresaid allowed the exercise of the Mi∣nistry. These indulged Ministers having that Indulgence given only up∣on these terms, that they should accept these Injunctions, and having received it up these terms also (as ane Essential part of the Bargain and Condition, on which the Indulgence was granted and accepted, as many following Proclamations did expresly declare) do appoint Mr. Hutcheson one of the number, to declare so much; In acknowledging His Majesties Favour and Clemecy, in granting that Liberty, after so long a restraint; and howev they had received their Ministry from Iesus Christ, with full Pre∣ from him for regulating them therein, yet nothing could be more re∣feshing on Earth to them, th to have free liberty for the exercise of their Mnistry, under the Protection of Lawful Authority.
In the mean time, tho cruel Acts and Edicts were made against the meet∣ing of the Lord's People, in Houses and the Fields, after all these Midia∣nitish Wiles to suppress them; such was the Presence of the Lord in these Meetings, and so powerful was his Countenance and Concurrence with the Labours of a few, who laid out themselves to hold up the Standard of Christ, that the number of Converts multiplied daily, to the great encouragement of the few Hands that wrestled in that work, through all humane discouragement. Therefore King and Council was put to a new shift, which they supposed would prove more effectual; to wit, Be∣cause there was a great number of Nonconformed Ministers not yet In∣dulged, who either did or might hereafter hold Conventicles, there∣fore, to remede or prevent this in time coming, they appoint and or∣dain them to such places where Indulged Ministers were settled, there to be confined with Allowance, to Preach as the Indulged should employ them; thinking by this means to incapacitate many to hold Meetings there or elsewhere: And to these also they give Injunctions and Restri∣ctions to regulate them in the exercise of their Ministry. And to the end that all the outed Ministers might be brought under restraint, and the Word of God be kept under Bonds, by another Act of Council they Command, that all other Ministers (not disposed of as is said) were either to repair to the Parish-Church where they were, or to some other Pa∣rishes, where they may be ordinary hearers, and to declare and conde∣scend upon the Parishes, where they intend to have their Residence. Af∣ter this they assumed a Power, to dispose of these their Curates as they pleased, and transport them from place to place; whereof the only ground was a simple Act of Council, the Instructions always going along with them, as the constant companion of the Indulgence: By all which it is apparent, whatever these Ministers Alledge, viz. That it was but the removal of the Civil Restraint, and that they entred into their places by the Call of the People (a meer mock-pretence for a prelimited Impo∣sition, whereby that Ordinance of Christ was basely prostituted and a∣bused) and that their Testimony and Protestation was a Salvo for their Con∣sciences (a meer Utopian fancy, that the Indulgers with whom they bargained, never heard of, otherwise, as they did with some who were faithful in notifying against their Encroachments, they would soon have given them a Bill of ease.) It cannot be denied, that that doleful In∣dulgence, both in its Rise, Contrivance, Conveyance, Grant and Ac∣ceptance, End and Effects, was a grievous Encroachment upon the Princely Prergative of Jesus Christ, the only Head of the Church; whereby the Usurpers Supremacy was Homologated, bowed to, com∣plyed with, strengthened the Cause and Kingdom of Christ betrayed, his Churches Privileges Surrendred, his Enemies hardened, his Friends
stumbled, and the Remnant rent and ruined. And yet a great part of the Ministers took that Indulgence; and another part, did, instead of Remonstrating the Wickedness of that deed, Palliate, and Plaister, and Patronize it, in keeping up the Credit of the King and Councils Cu∣rtes. Yet the Lord had some Witnesses, who pretty early did give significa∣tions of their Resentment of this dishonour done to Christ; as Mr. Wil∣liam Wer, who having got the Legal Call of the People, and discharg∣ing his Duty honestly, was turned out: And Mr. Iohn Burnet, who wrote a Testimony directed to the Council, shewing why he could not submit to that Indulgence, inserted at large in the History of Indulgence; where also we have the Testimony of other Ten Ministers, who drew up their Reasons of Non-complyance with such a Snare: And Mr. A∣lex. Blaire, who, upon occasion of Citation before the Council for not observing the 29th of May, told the Council, That he could receive no Instructions from them in the Exercise of his Ministry, otherwise he should not be Christ's▪ Ambassador, but theirs. But afterwards the Lord raised up some more explicit Witnesses a∣gainst that defection. While the King thought he had by that Device utterly suppressed the Gospel in House and Field-Meetings, he was so far disappointed, that these very Means and Machins, by which he thought to bury it, did chiefly contribute to its revival: For, when by Persecution, many Ministers had been chased away by illegal Law-Sentences, many had been banished away, and by their ensnaring In∣dulgences many had been drawn away from their Duty, and others were now Sentenced with Confinements and Restraints, if they should not choose and fix their Residence where they could not keep their Christ and Conscience both; they were forced to wander and disperse through the Country; by whose Endeavours the Word of God grew exceeding∣ly, and went at least through the Southern Borders of the Kingdom, like Lightning. O! who can remember the Glory of that day, with∣out a melting Heart? A day of such Power, that it made the People willing to come out and venture upon the greatest of hardships, and the greatest of hazards, in pursuing after the Gospel; even when they could not have a probable expectation of escaping the Sword of the Wilderness, and the barbarous fury of bloody Burrio's raging for their Prey, sent out with Orders to take and kill them, it being now made Criminal by Law, especially to the Preachers and Convocaters of these Meetings. I will make bold to say, I doubt if ever there were great∣er days of the Son of Man upon the Earth since the Apostolick times, than we enjoyed for the space of Seven Years at that time. Now when Christ is gaining ground by the Preached Gospel in
Plenty, Purity and Power, the Usurpers Supremacy was like to stagger, and Prelacy came under contempt. Hence, to secure what he had pos∣sessed himself of by Law, and to prevent a dangerous Paroxism which he thought would ensue upon these Commotions, the King returned to exert his innate Tyranny, and to emit terrible Orders, and more terrible Exe∣cutioners, and bloody Emissaries against all Field-Meetings; which af∣ter long Patience, the People at length could not endure; but being first chased to the Fields, where they would have been content to have the Gospel, with all the Inconveniencies of it; and also expelled from the Fields, being resolute to maintain the Gospel, they resolved to defend it and themselves by Arms: To which, unavoidable necessity in unsup∣portable extremity did constrain them, as the only remaining Remedy. It is known, for several Years they met without any Arms, where fre∣quently they were disturbed and dispersed with Souldiers; some killed, others wounded, which they patiently endured withou Resistance: At length, the Ministers that were most in hazard, having a Price set up∣on their Heads to be brought in dead or alive, with some attending them in their wandrings, understanding they were thus appointed for death, judged it their duty to provide for the necessary defence of their Lives, from the Violence of their armed Assaulters. And as Meetings encreased, divers others came under the same hazard, which enforced them to endeavour the same Remedy, without the least intention of of prejudice to any. Thus the number of Sufferers increasing, as they joyned in the Ordinances at these persecuted Meetings, found themselves in some probable capacity to defend themselves, and these much endea∣red Gospel-Priviledges, and to preserve the Memory of the Lord's great Work in the Land, which to transmit to Posterity was their great design. Wherefore in these Circumstances, being redacted to that strait, either to be deprived of the Gospel, or to defend themselves in their Meetings for it; and thinking their turning their Backs upon it for hazard, was a cowardly deserting duty, and palpable breach of Co∣venant-Engagements, abandoning their greatest Interest, they thought it expedient, yea, necessary, to carry defensive Arms with them; it be∣ing an indissoluble obligation in their Covenants, to maintain and de∣fend the true Religion and one another in promoting the same. And hereunto they were encouraged by the constant experience of the Lord's countenancing their Endeavours in that posture, which always proved successful for several Years, their Enemies either turning their backs without disturbance when they observed them resolve Defence, or in their Assaultings repulsed; so that there was never a Meeting, which stood to their Defence, got any considerable harm thereby. Thus the Lord was with us while we were with him; but when we forsook him,
he forsook us, and left us in the hands of our Enemies. However, while Meetings for Gospel-Ordinances did continue, the Wicked Rulers did not cease from time to time to encrease their numerous Bands of Barba∣rous Souldiers, for suppressing the Gospel in these Field-meetings. But all this is nothing to what followed; when, thinking these Blood-Hounds were too favourable, they brought down from the wild High∣lands a Host of Salvages upon the Western Shires, more terrible than Turks, or Tartars; Men who feared not God, nor regarded Man; to wast and destroy a plentiful Country, which they resolved before they left it, to make as bare as their own. This Hellish Crew was adduced to work a Reformation, like the French Conversions, to press a Bond of Conformity, wherein every one Subscribed, was bound for himself, and all under him, Wife, Children, Servants, Tenants, to frequent their Parish Churches, and never to go to these Meetings, nor reset nor en∣tertain any that went, but to Inform against, Pursue, and Deliver up all vagrant Preachers, as they called them, to Tryal, and Judgment. Then for the maintenance of the Souldiers, there were imposed new, wicked, and arbitrary Cesses and Taxations, professedly required for suppressing Religion and Liberty, banishing the Gospel out of the Land, and preserving and promoting the King's Absoluteness over all Matters and Persons Sacred and Civil; which, under that tentation of great Sufferings threatned to Refusers, and under the disadvantage of the silence and unfaithfulness of many Ministers, who either did not condemn it, or pleaded for the peaceable payment of it; many did comply with it then, and far more since. Yet at that time there were far more Recusants in some places (espe∣cially in the Western shires) than Complyers: And there were many of the Ministers that did faithfully declare to the People the Sin of it; not only from the illegality of its Imposition, by a Convention of over∣awed and prelimited States; but from the nature of that imposed Com∣pliance, that it was a sinful Transaction with Christ's declared Ene∣mies; a strengthning the hands of the wicked, an obedience to a wicked Law, a consenting to Christ's expulsion out of the Land; and not only that, but (far worse than the Sin of the Gadarens) a formal Concur∣rence to assist his Expellers, by maintaining their force, a hiring our Oppressors to destroy Religion and Liberty; and from the declared end of it, expressed in the very Narrative of the Act, viz. To Levy and Maintain Forces for suppressing and dispersing Meetings of the Lord's People, and to shew unanimous affections for maintaining the King's Su∣premacy, as now Established by Law▪ Yet all this time Ministers and Professors were unite, and with one Soul and Shoulder followed the work of the Lord, 'till the Indulged
being dissatisfied with the Meetings in the Fields, whose Glory was like to over-cloud and obscure their Beds of ease; and especially, being of∣fended at the freedom and faithfulness of some, who set the Trumpet to their Mouth, and shewed Iacob his Sins, and Israel his Trans∣gressions, impartially, without Cloak, or Cover, they began to make a Faction among the Ministers, and to devise how to quench the fervour of their Zeal, who were faithful for God. But the more they sought to extinguish it, the more it brake out, and blazed into a flame. For several of Christ's Ambassadours, touched and affected with the affronts done to their Princely Master by the Supremacy, and the Indul∣gence of its Bastard-Brood and Brat, began after long silence to discover its iniquity, and to acquaint the People how the Usurper had inva∣ded the Mediator's Chair, in taking upon him to Depose, Suspend, Silence, Plant, and Transplant his Ministers, where, and when, and how he pleased, &c. Yet others, and the greater number of Dissenting Ministers, were not only deficient herein, but defended them, joyned with them, and (pretending Prudence, and prevention of Schism) in effect homologa∣ted that deed, and the Practice of these Priests, Ezek 22. 26. teach∣ing and advising the People to hear them, both by Precept, and going along with them in their Erastian Course: And not only so, but Con∣demned and Censured such who Preached against the sinfulness thereof; especially in the first place, worthy Mr. Walwood, who was among the first Witnesses against that Defection, and Mr. Kid, Mr. King, Mr. Cameron, Mr. Donald Cargil, &c. who Sealed their Testimony after∣wards by their blood; yet then, even by their Brethren, were loaden with the reproachful Nick-names of Schismaticks, Blind Zealots, Je∣suites, &c. But it was always observed, as long as Ministers were faithful in following the Lord in the way of their Duty, Professors were fervent, and under all their Conflicts with Persecutors, the Cou∣rage and Zeal of the Lovers of Christ was blazing, and never outbra∣ved by all the Enemies boastings, to undertake brisk Exploits, which from time to time they were now and then essaying, 'till defection de∣stroyed, and division diverted their Zeal against the Enemies of God, who before were always the Object against which they whetted the edge of their jus indignation. Especially the Arch-Prelate Sharp was judged intollerable by ingenuous Spirits. Therefore in Iuly, 1668. Mr Iames Mitchel thought it his duty to save himself, deliver his Bre∣thren, and attempted to cut him off; which failing, he then escaped, but afterwards was Apprehended, Tortured, Condemned, and Exe∣cuted. But Justice would not suffer the Arch-Prelate to escape Re∣markable Punishment; the severity whereof did sufficiently compen∣sate
sate its delay, after Ten Years respite. For upon the 3d of May, 167). several worthy Gentlemen, with some other Men of Courage and Zeal for the Cause of God, executed Righteous Judgment upon him in Magus Moore, near St. Andrews. And that same Month, on the Anniversary Day, May 29th. the Testimony at Rutherglen was Publi∣shed against that Abomination, Celebrating an Anniversary-Day, kept every year for giving thanks for the setting up an Vsurped Power, destroy∣ing the interest of Christ in the Land, and against all sinful and unlawful Acts, emitted and executed, published, and prosecuted against our Covenanted Reformation. Where also they burn the Acts of Supremacy, the Declara∣tion, the Act Recissory, &c. in way of retalition for the burning of the Covenants. On the Sabbath following, Iune 1. A Field-Meeting near to Lowden-Hill, was assaulted by Claverhouse, and with him three Troops of Horse and Dragoons, who had that Morning taken an honest Minster, and about 14 Countrymen out of their Beds, and carried them along with them; but they were repulsed at Drumclogg, and put to flight, the Pri∣soners relieved, about 30 of the Souldiers killed on the place, and three of the Meeting, and several wounded on both sides. Thereafter the People retreating from the pursuit, they judged it most safe in that extremity for some time not to separate. Which re∣solution coming abroad to the Ears of others of their Brethren, deter∣mined them incontinently to come to their assistance, considering their own liableness to the same common danger, upon the account of their endeavours of that nature to defend themselves, bing of the same judgment for maintaining of the same Cause, to which they were bound by the same Covenants. This was the Rise and Occasion of that ap∣pearance at Bothwel-Bridge, which the Lord did in his Holy Soveraignty confound, for former Defections by the means of Division, which broke that little Army among themselves, before they were broken by the E∣nemy. They continued together in amiable and amicable Peace, for the space of 8 or 9 days, while they endeavoured to put out and keep out every wicked thing from amongst them, and adhered to the Rutherglen Te∣stimony, and that short Declaration at Glascow confirming it; Representing their present Purposes and Endeavours were only in vindication and defence of the Reformed Religion, as they stood obliged thereto by the National and Solemn League and Covenant, and the Solemn Acknowledgment of Sins, and Engagement to Duties, declaring against Popery, Prelacy, Erastianism, and all things depending thereupon. Intending hereby to comprehend the De∣fection of the Indulgence, to witness against which all unanimously a∣greed: Until the Army encreasing, the Defenders and Daubers of that Defection, some Ministers and others came in, who broke all. The oc∣casion
of the Breach, was first, when an Overture was offered, to set times apart for Humiliation for the Publick Sins of the Land; and ac∣cordingly the complying with abjured Erastianism, by the acceptance of the ensnaring Indulgence, was condescended upon among the rest of the grounds of Fasting and Humiliation: The Sticklers for the Indulgence refused the Overture, upon Politick Considerations, for fear of offend∣ing the Indulged Ministers and Gentlemen, and provoking them to with∣draw their Assistance. And next; whereas the Cause was stated before, according to the Covenants, in the Rutherglen Testimony, and Glascow Declaration, wherein the King's Interest was waved; These Dividers drew up another large Paper (called the Hamiltown Declaration) wherein they assert the Kings Interest, according to the Third Article of the Solemn League and Covenant. Against which, the best affected contended, and protested they could not in Conscience put in his inte∣rest into the state of the quarrel, being now in stated opposition to Christ's Interests, and inconsistent with the meaning of the Covenant, and the Practices of the Covenanters, and their own Testimonies; while now he could not be declared for, as being in the defence of Religion and Liberty, when he had so palpably overturned and ruined the work of Reformation, and oppressed such as adhered thereunto, and had burnt the Covenant, &c. Whereby he had loosed the People from all obligation to him from it. Yet that contrary Faction prevailed, so far as to get it published in the name of all, whereby the Cause was per∣verted, and betrayed. And so in the Holy All-over-ruling Providence of God, that poor handful was signally discountenanced of God, depri∣ved of all Conduct, divested of all Protection, and laid open to the Raging Sword, the just punishment of all such tamperings with the E∣nemies of God, and espousing their Interest. About 300 were killed in the Fields, and 1000 and upwards taken Prisoners, stripped, and carried to Edinburgh, and there sentenced with Banishment, and sent away for America, and by the way (a few excepted) perished in Shipwreck; and two faithful and painful Ministers and Witnesses of Christ, Mr. Iohn Kidd, and Mr. Iohn King, received the Crown of Martyrdom, sealing their Testimony with their Blood, and many others after them for the same Cause. After this fearful and fatal stroak at Bothwell, the Universality of the Children of the Church of Scotland, which before espoused her Testi∣mony, was partly drawn by Craft, and partly by Cruelty, from a Conjunction with their Brethren in prosecuting the same, either into an open defection to the contrary side, or into a detestable indifferency and neutrality in the Cause of God. For first of all, the Duke of Mon∣mouth procured the emission of a pretended Indemnity, attended with a Bond of Peace for its Companion; wherein that Insurrection was ac∣knowledged
to be Rebellion, and ane Obligation never to rise in Arms a∣gainst the King, or any Commissionate by him, and to live peaceably, &c. Which were dreadful Snars fairded over with curious words and cozening names of living peaceably, &c. This course of defection carried away many at that time: And from that time, since the taking that Bond of peaceable living, there hath been an Universal preferring of Peace to Truth, and Ease to Duty. And the Generality have been left to swal∣low all Oaths and Bonds imposed since; many Ministers refusing to give their advice when required and requested thereunto, and some not being ashamed to perswade the People to take them. But then they not only raised more Forces to exhaust the strength and substance of the already wasted Country, and laid on and continued from one Term to another that wicked Exaction and cruel Oppression of the Cess, for the same declared ends of suppressing and banishing what remained of the Gospel, and imposed Localites for maintaining the Souldiers imployed in those Designs; for refusing which many Fa∣milies were Pillaged, Plundered, and quite Impoverished, besides the beating and abusing them: But also they went on unweariedly with pressing the Bonds of Peace, and dragging them like Dogs to the Prisons that would not subscribe them, and for taking up in their Porteous Rolls the Names of all that were suspected to have been at Bothwell Insurrecti∣on; which they gathered by the Informations of Sycophants, and re∣puted them Convict, if being summoned they did not appear, and forced others to Swear Super Inquirendis, and delate upon Oath whom they did either see or heard that they were in Arms, or went to Meet∣ings; and such as refused suffered Bonds of Banishment. Yea, having made it Criminal to reset, harbour, correspond or converse with those whom they declared Rebels, they thereupon imprisoned, fined, and ruined vast numbers, for having seen or spoken with some of them, or because they did not discover or apprehend them when they fancied they might, for which many Gentlemen and others were Indicted and im∣prisoned, and some Arraigned and Condemned to Death. For these Causes, the Country was Harrassed and destroyed by four extraordinary Circuit Courts, successively going about with their numerous Train, whereby many were grievously oppressed, and with their Oppressions tempted with many Impositions of Conscience-debauching Oaths, and Bonds to compear when called, and to keep the Church, and to re∣frain from going to Meetings, &c. and by these tentations involved in Complyances and Defections. And not only were they Condemned to Death, for being actually in Arms, or any overt Act of Transgressing their wicked Laws, but even for their extorted Opinion of things, or because they would not Condemn these necessitated risings in Arms to be Rebellion and a Sin against God, which they were forced to declare
by terrible menacings of Death; making their Arbitrary Laws to reach the Heart, Thoughts, and inward Sentiments of the Mind, as well as outward Actions. Whereupon this became a Criminal Question rob∣bing many of their Lives, Was the rising at Bothwell-bridge Rebellion and a Sin against God? And this, Was the killing of the Bishop of St An∣drews horrid Murther? Which if any answered negatively, or did not answer affirmatively, they were cruelly Condemned to Death. The Ministry then also were generally insnared with that Bonded In∣dulgence, the pretended benefit of that forementioned Indemnity. For, when a Proclamation was emitted, inveighing bitterly against Field-Meetings, and absolutely introducing all such for the future under highest pain, but granting Liberty to Preach in Houses upon the Terms of a Cautionany Bond given for their living peaceably: Yet excluding all these Ministers who were suspected to have been at the late Rebellion, and all those who shall afterwards be admitted by Non-Conform Mini∣sters: And certifying, that if ever they shall be at any Field-Conventicle, the said Indemnity shall not be useful to such Transgressours any manner of way: And requiring security that none under the colour of this favour con∣tinue to Preach Rebellion. Though there seems to be enough in the Proclamation it self to have scared them from this scandalous snare; Yet a Meeting of Ministers at Edinburgh made up of Indulged, avowed Applauders of the Indulgence, or underhand Approvers and favourers of the same, and some of them old Publick Resolutioners, assuming to themselves the name of a General Assembly, voted for the acceptance of it. And so formerly transacted and bargained upon base, dishonest and dishonourable Terms with the Usurper, by consenting and compacting with the People to give that Bond, wherein the People upon an humble Petition to the Counsel, obtaining their Indulged Minister, do bind and oblige that he shall live peaceably. And in order thereto to present him be∣fore his Majesty's Privy Council, when they shall be called so to do; And in case of failure in not presenting him, to be liable to the Sum of 6000 Merks. Whereby they Condemned themselves of former unpeaceableness. Many embraced this new Bastard Indulgence that had not the benefit of the former Brat, of the same Mother the Supremacy, and far more consented to it without a Witness, and most of all did some way homo∣legate it, in Preaching under the Sconce of it: Declining the many reiterated and urgent Calls of the zealous Lovers of Christ, to come out and maintain the Testimony of the Gospel in the open Fields, for the honour of their Master and the freedom of their Ministry. Whereupon, as many poor People were tumbled and jumbled into many confusions, so that they were so bewildered and bemisted in doubts and debates, that they knew not what to do, and were tempted
to question the Cause formerly so fervently contended for against all opposition, than so simply abandoned, by those that seemed sometimes valiant for it, when they saw them consulting more their onw ease than the Concerns of their Masters Glory, or the necessity of the poor Peo∣ple Hungering for the Gospel; so the more zealous and faithful, after several Addresses, Calls and Invitations to Ministers, finding them∣selves deserted by them, judged themselves under a necessity to dis∣countenance many of them, whom formerly they followed with plea∣sure; and to resolve upon a persuit and prosecution of Duty of the Day without them, and to provide themselves with faithful Ministers, who would not shun for all hazards, to declare the whole Counsel of God. And accordingly, the Lord sent them first Mr. Richard Cameron, with whom after serious solicitation his Brethren denied their Concur∣rence, and then Mr. Donald Cargill, who, with a zeal and boldness be∣coming Christs Ambassadours, maintained and prosecuted the Testi∣mony, against all the Indignities done to their Master and wrongs to the Cause, both by the encroachments of Adversaries, and Defections of their declining Brethren. And now the Lords Inheritance was a∣gain revived. But as Christ was then displaying his Beauty to his poor despised and persecuted People; the Duke of York came to Scotland, who did receive him in great Pomp and Pride. Against which, the forementi∣oned faithful Witnesses of Christ did find themselves obliged to testifie their just resentment, and to protest against his succeeding to the Crown, in their Declaration published at Sanquhair, Iune 22. 1680. Wherein also they disown Charles Stuart, as having any Right, Title, or Interest in the Crown of Scotland or Government thereof, because of his breath of Covenant, and Vsurpation on Christs Prerogatives, &c. And declare a War with him, and all the Men of these Practices, homologating the Testi∣mony at Rutherglen, and disclaiming that Declaration at Hamiltown. This Action was generally Condemned by the Body of lurking Mini∣sters; both for the matter of it, and the unseasonableness of it, and its apparent unfeasiblness, being done by a handful so inconsiderable, for number, strength, or significancy. But tho' it is not the prudence of the management, but the justness of the Action, that I would have vin∣dicated from Obloquies; yet it wanted nothing but success to justifie both, in the Conviction of many that made much outcry against it. In these dangerous Circumstances their difficulties and discourage∣ments dayly encreased, by their Enemies vigilancy, their enviers Trea∣chery, and their own inadvertency, some of their number falling into the hands of them that sought their lives. For two of the most emi∣nent and faithful Witnesses of Christ, Mr. Donald Cargill, and Henry
Hall, were surprized at Queens Ferrie. Mr. Cargill escaped at that time, but the other endeavouring to resist the Enemies, was Murdered by them. And with him they got a draught of a Covenant, declaring their present purposes and future Resolutions. The Tenor whereof was an Engagement, To free the Church of God of the Corruption of Prelacy on the one hand, and the Thraldom of Erastianism on the other: To persevere in the Doctrin of the Reformed Churches, especially that of Scot∣land, and in the Presbyterian Government, exercised in Sessions, Presbyte∣ries, Synods and General Assemblies, as a distinct Government from the Civil, and distinctly to be exercised, not after a Carnal manner, by plura∣lity of Votes, or Authority of a single Person, but according to the word of God making and carrying the sentence: To execute Righteous Iudgement im∣partially, according to the Word, and degree of Offence, upon the Committers of these things, especially, to wit, Blasphemy, &c. Oppression and Malignancy, &c. To reject the present Rulers; as the only speedy way of relaxation from the Wrath of God lying on the Land: Therefore easily solving the Objectious (1.) of our Ancestors obliging the Nation to this Race and Line; that they did not buy their Liberty with our Thraldom, nor could they bind their Chil∣dren to any thing so much to their prejudice: They could only bind to that Government which they esteemed the best for common good, which reason ceas∣ing, we are free to chuse another, if we find it more conducible for that end. (2) Of the Covenant binding to defend the King: That that Obligation is only in his maintenance of the true Covenanted Religion; which Homage they cannot now require upon the account of the Covenant, which they have re∣nounced and disclaimed; and upon no other ground we are bound to them, the Crown not being an Inheritance, that passeth from Father to Son, without the consent of Tenants. (3) Of the hope of returning from these Courses: That suppose they should dissemble a repentance, yet the Land cannot be cleansed from their Guiltness, but by executing Gods Righteous Iudgments upon them. Vpon these accounts they reject that King, and those associate with him in the Government, and declare them henceforth no lawful Rulers, as they had de∣clared them to be no lawful Subjects, they having destroyed the established Re∣ligion, taken away Christs Church Government, &c. And declare they shall, God giving power, set up Government and Governours according to the word of God, and the qualifications required, Exod. 18. v. 20. And shall not commit the Government to any single Person, or lineal succession. And moreover, that these Men set over them shall be engaged to govern Principally, by that Civil and judicial Law (not that which is any way typical) given by God to his People of Israel, especially in matters of Life and Death, and other things, so far as they reach, and are consistent with Christian Liberty, exempting Divorce and Poligamy. And seeing that the greatest part of Ministers, not only were defective in Preaching against the Acts of the Rulers for overthrowing Reli∣gion, &c. they declare they neither can nor will hear them. They are for a
standing Gospel-Ministry, rightly chosen and rightly ordained, and that no shall take upon them the Preaching of the Word, &c. unless called and ordained thereunto. And whereas separation might be imputed to them, they refell both the Malice, and the Ignorance of the Calumny: For if there be a Separa∣tion, it must be where the change is; and that was not to be found in them, who were not separating from the Communion of the true Church, not setting up a new Ministry, but cleaving to the same Ministers and Ordinances, that formerly they followed, when others have fled to new ways, and a new Au∣thority, which is like the new piece in the Old Garment. And that they shall defend themselves in their Civil, Natural and Divine Rights and Liberties; And if any assault them, they shall took on it as a declaring a War, and take all advantages that one Enemy does of another, but trouble and injure none but those that injure them. This is the Compend of that Paper which the Enemies seized and published, while it was only in a rude Draught, and not polished, digested, nor consulted by the rest of the Community. That poor Party continued together in a posture of defence, with∣out the Concurrence or countenance of their Covenanted Brethren, until the 22th of Iuly, 1680. Upon the which day they were attacqued at Airsemoss, by a strong party of about 120 Horse well armed, while they were but 23 Horse and 40 foot at most: And so fighting valiantly, were at length routed. Several of Sions precious Mourners, and faith∣ful Witnesses of Christ, were killed; and among the rest, that faithful Minister of Christ, Mr. Richard Cameron sealed and fulfilled his Te∣stimony with his Blood. And with others, the valiant and much Ho∣noured Gentleman, David Hackston of Rathillet, was after many re∣ceived Wounds apprehended, brought in to Edinburgh, and there, reso∣lutely adhering to the Testimony, and disowning the Authority of King and Council, and all their Tyrannical Judicatories, head and tail, and for being accessory to executing judgment upon the Arch-bishop of St. Andrews, was tortured alive, with the cutting off of his hands, and then Hanged, and before he was Dead, Ripped up his Heart, taken our, carried about upon the point of a Knife, and thrown into a Fre, and afterwards his Body Quartered. Then, not only such as were with that little handful at Airsemoss were Cruelly Murdered, but others against whom they could charge no matter of Fact, were questioned if they owned the Kings Authority; which if any did not answer affirmatively and positively, he was to look for nothing but exquisite Torments and Death. And if any de∣clared their judgment, that they could not in Conscience own such Authority as was then exercised; or if they declined to give their thoughts of it, as judging thoughts to be under no humane Jurisdiction;
or if they answered with such innocent Specifications as these, that they owned all Authority in the Lord, or for the Lord, or according to the word of God, or all just and lawful Authority, these underwent and suffered the Capital Punishment of Treason. And yet both declining and declaring their extorted Answers about this, they were Condem∣ned as unsufferable. Maintainers of Principles inconsistent with Go∣vernment. But chiefly they laboured to Murder the Soul, defile the Conscience, and only consult to cast a Man down from his excellency, which is his integrity; either by Hectoring or Flattering from the Testimony: which they endeavoured by proposing many offers, with many threat∣nings in subtile Terms; And pretending a great deal of tenderness, protesting they would be as tender of their Blood as of their own Soul, and purging themselves as Pilate did, and charging it upon their own Head. They would be very easie in their Accomodations, where they found the poor Man beginning to faint, and hearken to their overtures, where∣in they would grant him his life, yeilding to him, as cunning Anglers do with Fishes: And to perswade him to some length in complying, they would offer Conference sometimes, or reasoning upon the Point, to sa∣tisfie and inform his Conscience, as they pretended, but really to catch him with their busked Hook. If they had any hope of prevailing, they would change a Mans Prison, and take him out from among the more strict and fervent in the Cause, that might sharpen and strengthen his Zeal, and put him among the more cool and remiss. Sometimes they would stage several together, whereof they knew some would Comply, to tantalize the rest with the sight of the others Liberty, and make them bite the more eagerly at their Bait, to catch the Con∣science. But when they had done all they could, Christ had many Witnesses, who did retain the Crown of their Testimony in the smallest points, till they obtained the Crown of Martyrdom. But here, as in Egypt, the more they were afflicted, the more they grew: So that many were reclaimed from their Courses of Complyance, and others were daily more and more confirmed in the ways of the Lord, and so strengthned that they chose rather to endure all Torture, and embrace Death in its most terrible aspect, than to give the Tyrant and his Complices any acknowledgment: Yea, not so much as to say, God save the King, which was offered at the price of their Life; but they would not accept Deli∣verance on these Terms. Now remained Mr. Donald Cargil, deprived of his faithful Collegue, destitute of his Brethrens Concurrence; who prosecuted the Testi∣mony against the Universal Apostasie of the Church and Nation,
Tyranny of Enemies, Backsliding of Friends, and all the wrongs done to his Master on all hands: And considering, in the Zeal of God, and Sense of his holy Jealousie provoked, and threatning Wrath against the Land, for the Sins, especially of Rulers; that notwithstanding of all their Testimonies given against them, by publick Preachings, Protestations and Declarations, remonstrating their Tyranny, and dis∣owning their Authority; yet not only did they persist in their Sins and Scandals, but were owned also by Professours, not only as Magistrates, but as Members of the Christian and Protestant Church; and that how∣ever both the Defensive Arms of Men had been used against them, and the Christian Arms of Prayers, and the Ministerial Weapon of Preach∣ing, yet that of Ecclesiastical Censure had not been Authoritatively ex∣erted against them: Therefore that no Weapon which Christ allows his Servants under his Standard to manage against his Enemies might be wanting, tho' he could not obtain the Concurrence of his Brethren to strengthen the Solemnity and Formality of the Action; yet he did not judge that Defect, in this broken Case of the Church, could disable his Authority, nor demur the Duty, but that he might and ought to proceed to Excommunication. And accordingly in Sept. 1680. at the Torwood, he Excommunicated some of the most scandalous and principal Promoters and Abettors of this Conspiracy against Christ, as formally as the present Case could admit: After Sermon upon Ezek 21. 25, 26, 27. And thou profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose Day is come, &c. The Persons Excommunicated, and the Sentence against them, was gi∣ven forth as follows. I being a Minister of Iesus Christ, and having Authority and Power from him, do, in his Name and by his Spirit, Excom∣municate, cast out of the Church, and deliver up to Satan, Charles the Se∣cond, King &c. The Sentence was founded on these Grounds; For great Perjury in breaking and burning the Covenant; for his rescinding all Laws; for establishing the Reformation, end enacting Laws contrary thereunto; For commanding of Arms to destroy the Lords People; For his granting Re∣missions and Pardons for Murderers, which is in the power of no King to do, &c. Next by the same Authority, and in the same Name, he Ex∣communicated James Duke of York, for his Idolatry, and setting up in Scotland to defile the Land, and enticing and encouraging others to do With several other rotten Malignant Enemies. But about this time, when some in zeal for the Cause were endea∣vouring to keep up the Testimony of the day, in an abstraction from Complying Ministers; others were left to fall into fearful extravagan∣cies and delirious and damnable Delusions, being overdriven with ig∣norant and blind Zeal into untroden Paths, which led them into a Labyrinth of Darkness: When as they were stumbled at many Ministers
their unfaithfulness, so they came to be offended at Mr Cargill his Faithfulness, who spared neither left-hand Declensions, nor-right hand Extreams, and left him and all the Ministers, not only disowning all Communion with those that were not of their way, but Execrating and Cursing them; and kept themselves in desart places from all Company, where they persisted prodigiously in Fastings, and singing Psalms, pre∣tending to wonderful Raptures and Enthusiasms: And in fine, Iohn Gib with 4 more of them came to that height of Blasphemy, that they burnt the Bible and Confession of Faith. These were the Sweet Singers, as they were called, led away into these Delusions by that Impostor and Sorcerer, Iohn Gib, of which destructive way the approached Rem∣nant, adhering to the foresaid Testimony, had always an Abhorrence of. Wherefore that ignorant and impudent Calumny, of their Con∣sortship with Gibs Followers, is only the vent of viperous Envy: For they were the first that discovered them, and reclaimed them, and were always so far from partaking with them, that to this day these that have come off from that way, and have offered the Confession of their Scandal, do still complain of their over-rigid Severity, in not ad∣mitting them to their select Fellowships. Shortly after this, Mr. Donald Cargill finished his Testimony, being apprehended with other two faithful and zealous Witnesses of Christ, Mr. William Smith, and Mr. Iames Beeg, who with two more were al∣together at Edinburgh 27, Iuly 1681. Crowned with the Glory of Martyrdom. Then came the Day of the Remnants vexation; the Persecution vaxing on the one hand, and a violent Spirit of defection carrying down the most part of Ministers and Professours before it, driving them to Courses of sinful and scandalous Conformings with the Times Corruptions, Compearings before their Courts, Complyings with their Commands, paying of their Cesses and other Exactions, taking of their Oaths and Bonds, and countenancing their Prelatical Church-Services, which they were ashamed to do before: And thereupon on the other hand the Divisions and Confusions were augmented, and poor People that desired to cleave to the Testimony, were more and more of∣fended and troubled at the Ministers, who either left the Land, or lurked in their own retirements. But the remaining Contenders fell upon the expedient of corres∣ponding in General Meetings, to consult, inform and confirm one ano∣ther, about common Duties in common Dangers; Laying down this General Conclusion for a foundation of Order to be observed among them in incident doubtful Cases, and emergent Controversies, that nothing relative to the publick, and which concerns the whole of their Commu∣nity, be done by any of them, without harmonious consent sought after, and
rationally waited for, and sufficient deliberation about the best means and manner. In the mean time, the Duke of York, as Commissioner from his Bro∣ther, held a Parliament, in which he is declared legal and lineal Suc∣cessour; and a Test is framed for a Pest to Consciences, which turned out of all Places of Trust any that had any remaining measure of com∣mon Honesty. And to all the Cruel Acts then and before made against the People of God, there was one superadded, regulating the Execu∣tion of all the rest, whereby at one dash all Civil and Criminal Ju∣stice was overthrown, That the Right of Iurisdiction both in Civil and Criminal Matters is so inherent in the Crown, that his Majesty may judge all Causes by himself, or any other he thinks fit to Commissionate. Here was a Law for Commissionating Souldiers to take away the Lives of Inno∣cents, as was frequently exemplified afterwards. Against which encroachments on Religion and Liberty, the faithful thought themselves obliged to emit a Testimony. And therefore pub∣lished a Declaration at Lanerk, Ian. 12. 1682. Confirming the proceed∣ing at Sanquhair, and adding reasons of their Revolt from the Govern∣ment of Charles the Second: For his arrogantly arrogated Supremacy in all Causes Civil and Ecclesiastick, and oppressing the Godly for Conscience and Duty; for installing a Successour, such an one (if not worse) as himself, and framing the Test; &c. And in end offer to prove, they have only endea∣voured in this to extricate themselves from under a Tyrannous Yoke, and to reduce Church and State to what they were in the Years 1648 and 1649. After which Declaration they were more Condemned by them that were at ease, than ever. For which Cause, in the next General Meet∣ing, they resolved to delegate some of their number to Forreign Churches, on purpose to vindicate themselves from these Calumnies; And withal to provide for a Succession of Witnesses. Therefore by that means having obtained access for the instruction of some young Men, at an University in the united Provinces, in process of time, Mr. Iames Renwick, received Ordination there, and came home to take up the Standard of his Master, upon the ground where it was left. Which undertaking, notwithstanding all the Rage of Enemies, and all the Scourge of Tongues of incensed Professours, he Prosecuted by many weary wandrings, Night and Day, Preaching, Conferring and Catechising, until, not only was the faithful Witnessing Remnant that joyned in the Testimony, further cleared, confirmed and encouraged, and their number much encreased by the coming in and joyning of many others to the Fellowship of their setled Societies; but also many others, in other places of the Country were induced to the contracting
themselves in the like, to the setling such Fellowships in most of the Southern Shires. But then the fury of Persecutors began to flame more flagrantly than ever; not only in sending out Cruel Souldiers, Foot, Horse and Dra∣goons, to pursue after them, in the wildest and remotest recesses in the Wilderness; but emitting Edicts allowing them to kill, slay, hang, drown, and destroy such as they could apprehend of them pro libitu; and commanding the Country to assist them, &c. For which Cause, to preserve themselves from, and put a stop to that deluge of Blood, and demur and deter the Insolency of Intelligencers and Informers, they were necessitate to publish the Apologetick Declaration, and affix it upon several Mercat-Crosses, and Parish-Church Doors, Nov. 8. 1684. Wherein they declare their firm Resolution of constant adherence to their Covenants and Engagements, and to the Declarations disowning the Authority of Charles Stewart, and to testifie to the World, that they purpose not to injure or of∣fend any whomsoever, but to pursue the ends of their Covenants, in standing to the defence of the Work of Reformation, and of their own Lives; yet if any shall stretch forth their hand against them, by shedding their Blood actually, either by Authoritative commanding, or obeying such Commands, to search for them and deliver them up to the spilling of their Blood, to inform against them, to raise the Hue and Cry after them, and delate them before their Courts: All these shall be reputed by them Enemies to God and the Covenanted Reformation, and punished as such, according to their Power, and the degree of their offence, if they shall continue so malitiously to proceed against them: And declare, they abhor and condemn any personal attempts, upon any pretext whatsoever, without previous Deliberation, common or competent consent, without certain probation by sufficient Witnesses, the guilty Persons Confession, or the notoriousness of the deeds themselves: And in the end warn the bloody Doegs and flattering Ziphites informing against them, to be expect to be dealt with as they deal with them. This Declaration occasioned greater Tryals to them and trouble to the Country, by the pressing an Oath abjuring the same universaly up on all, as well Women as Men, and suffering none to Travel without a Pass, declaring they had taken that Oath; and giving power to all Hostlers and Inn-keepers to impose Oaths upon all Passengers, Travel∣lers, Gentlemen or Country-men, who were to Swear that their Passes were not forged. And Prisoners that would not take the Oath, were according to the foresaid Act, Condemned, and Executed. And after that, they gave Orders and Commands to the Souldiers to pursue the Chase after these Wanderers more violently, and shoot, or otherwise put them to Death wherever they could apprehend them. Hence fol∣lowed such a slaughter and seizure of them, that common People usually
date their common Occurrences since, from that beginning of killing time, as they call it. Yet that Declaration was so far effectual, as to scare many from their former diligence in informing against them, and to draw out some to joyn with the Wanderers more publickly, even when the danger was greatest of owning any respect to them. In the beginning of this killing time, the first Author and Authorizer of all these Mischiefs, Charles II. was removed by Death. And the Duke of York succeeding, immediately upon his mounting the Throne, the Executions and Acts prosecuting the Prosecution of the poor Wan∣derers, were more Cruel than ever. Now the Earl of Argyle having been Arraiged and Condemned for his Explanation of the Test, but escaped out of the Castle of Edinburgh; and after him several Gentle∣men being arbitrarily oppressed and troubled, upon the Act of Intercom∣muning with Rebels, and for a pretended Plot against the Government (as they called it;) and many other Gentlemen having lost either their Lives or Fortunes, many did resort to the United Provinces. From whence, as soon as they had provided themselves with Arms, after the ascending of Iames Duke of York, they returned to Scotland, under the conduct of the Earl of Argyle, their chosen Captain. And Argyle's Party perceiving that their Enemies were above ten times their num∣ber, dispersed, every Man shifting for himself. The Enemies search∣ing the Country, gleaned up the Earl of Argyle himself, Col. Rumbold, an English Man, Mr. Thomas Archer Minister, Gawin Russel, and David Law, who were all Condemned and Executed at Edinburgh; and many others who were Banished to America: And about some 20 in the High∣lands, who were Hanged at Ineravie. In the mean time, the Wanderers, tho' they did not associate with this Expedition, upon the account of the too promiscuous admittance of Persons to trust in that party, who were then, and since have dis∣covered themselves to be Enemies to the Cause, and because they could not espouse their Declaration as the State of their Quarrel, being not concerted according to the constant plea of the Scots Covenanters: Yet against this Usurpation of a Papist, they published another Declaration at Sanquhair, May 28. 1685. Wherein, approving and adhering unto all their former Declarations, and considering that James Duke of York, a pro∣fest and Excommunicate Papist, was proclaimed; to testifie their Resentment of that deed, and to make it appear unto the World, that they were free thereof, by Concurrence or Connivance; they protest against the foresaid Pro∣clamation of James Duke of York as King: In regard that is contrary to the Declaration of the General Assembly, July 27, 1649. And they protest against the Validity and Constitution of that Parliament, approving and ra∣tifying the foresaid Proclamation, &c. This was their Testimony against
Popery in the Season thereof? Which tho' it was not so much Con∣demned as any former Declarations, yet neither in this had they the Concurrence of any Ministers or Professours; who as they had been silent, and omitted a seasonable Testimony against Prelacy and the Supremacy, when these were introduced, so now also they were left to let slip this opportunity of a Testimony against Popery, to the re∣proach of the declining and far degenerate Church of Scotland. Yea to their shame, the very Rabble of ignorant People may be brought as a Witness against the Body of Presbyterian Ministers in Scotland, in that they testified their detestation of the first Erection of the Idolatrous Mass, and some of the Souldiery, and such as had no Profession of Re∣ligion, suffered unto Death for speaking against Popery, and the de∣signs of the King, while the Ministers were silent. And some of the Curats, and Members of the late Parliament, 1686. made some stickling against the taking away of the Penal Statutes against Papists; while Presby∣terians, from whom might have been expected greater opposition, were sleeping in a profound Submission. I cannot without confusion of Spirit touch these obvious and dolorous Reflections, and yet in Candour cannot for∣bear them. However the Persecution against the Wanderers went on; there were more Butchered and Slaughtered in the Fields, than in all the former Tyrants Reign; there have been more Banished to Forreign Plantations in this Mans time, than in the others; and there have been more cruel Acts of Parliament enacted in this Tyrants time, than the former made all his Reign. For not only was there an Act making it Treason to refuse the Oath of Abjuration, confirming all their procedure hereup∣on before; but an Act making it Criminal to own the Covenant, and another Act making it Criminal for any to be present at a Field-Meeting, which was only so to Preachers before. But a relenting abatement of severity was pretended against other Dissenters. At length what could not be obtained by Law at the late Parliament for taking off the Statutes against Papists, was effectuated by Prero∣gative, in a Proclamation dated Feb. 12, 1687. But this was so gross, and grievously griping in its restrictions, as to Persons, as to the place, as to the matter allowed the Presbyterians in Preaching, that it was disdained of all; and therefore he behoved to busk it better, and mend the matter, in a Letter to the Council, bearing date March 31. 1687. Of this Tenor, Whereas we did recommend to you to take care, that any of the Presbyterians should not be allowed to Preach, but such only as should have your allowance for the same, and that they at the receiving the Indulgence should take the Oath contained in the Proclamation; these are therefore to let you know, that thereby we meant such of them as did not so∣lemnly
take the Test. But if nevertheless the Presbyterian Preachers do scru∣ple to take the said Oath, or any other Oath what soever, and that you shall find it reasonable or fit to grant them or any of them our said Indulgence, so as they desire it upon these terms; It is now our Will and Pleasure to grant them the said Indulgence (during our Pleasure only) or so long as you shall find they behave themselves regularly and peaceably, without giving any cause of offence to us, or any in Authority or Trust under us in our Government. But at length to take of all difformity and disparity of the Proclama∣tion for the Toleration in Scotland, and the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in England; he added a third eke to the Liberty, in another Proclamation dated Iune 28, 1687. And this is the Royal Charter for curity of the Protestant Religion in lieu of all the Laws, Constitu∣tions, and Oaths wherewith it was formerly confirmed. This is the only Patent which the Royal Dalilees, the Moderate Presbyterians have now received to ensure their enjoyment of it durante beneplacito. But as for the poor Wanderers, while others are rejoycing under the Bramble-shadow of it, they think it a cause of weeping and matter of mourning, not because they do not share of the benefit of it, but because they are afraid to share of the Curse of it. For which Cause, they do look upon it as a seasonable Testimony for the Cause of Christ, and the Interest of the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of the Country, all overturned and subverted by this Toleration, to keep their Meetings as in former times; thinking it sinful, scandalous and inconvenient to seem to homologate this Toleration, the wicked∣ness whereof they are convinced of, from these Reasons (besides those for which they rejected the former Indulgencies, Indemnities and Tole∣rations, and those which regard the Granter, as to his Principles and Religion. For considering the Fountain whence it flows, they cannot defile them∣selves with it, it being refounded on Absolute Power, proclaiming by sound of Trumpet a Power Paramount to all Law; a Power to tole∣rate or restrain the Protestant Religion, according to his Royal Will or Pleasure. Now the acceptance of this Grant, would imply the re∣cognizance of this power that the Granter claims in Granting it: Which utterly dissolves all Government, and all security for Religion and Liberty.) Considering also the Channel in which it is conveyed, they cannot comply with it. Because it comes through such a Conveyance as Casses, annulls, stops, suspends and disables all Penal Laws against Papists, and thereby evets all the Securities and legal Bulwarks that Protestants can have for the establishment of their Religion; yea, in effect leaves no Laws in force against any that shall attempt the utter subversion of it;
but ratifies and leaves in full rigour all wicked Laws and Acts of Parlia∣ment, against such as would most avowedly assert it. Hence as he hath formerly by Absolute Power suspended all Laws made for the Protection of our Religion, so he may when he will dispense with all the Laws made for its establishment; and those who approve the one by such an Acceptance, cannot disallow the other, but must recognosce a Power in the King to subvert all Laws, Rights and Liberties. Considering the Ends of its contrivance, they dare not have any ac∣cession to accomplish such wicked Projects, to which this Accep∣tance would be so natively subservient. Which Project was discovered in the English Declaration, viz. That he heartily wishes that all the People of these Dominions were Members of the Catholick Church. Considering the Effects already produced thereby, they cannot but abhor it. Seeing the Papists are thereby encouraged, all places filled with Priests and Jesuits; yea, the executive Power of the Government put into the hands of the Romanists: And on the other hand a Tsti∣mony against Antichrist is abandoned and laid aside as unseasonable, the edge of Zeal for the Interest of Christ is blunted, they that should stand in the Gap and upon the Watch-Tower are laid aside from all opposition to the invasions of the Enemy, and lulled asleep by this be∣witching Charm and intoxicating Opium; Ministers and Professours are generally settling on their Lees and languishing in a fatal security. Considering the Extent of it, they cannot class themselves among the number of them that are Indulged thereby. Whereby the Profes∣sours of Christ come in as Partners in the same Bargain with Antichrists Vassals; and the Lords Ark hath a place with Dagon, and its Priests and Followers consent to it, and the Builders of Babel and Ierusalem are made to build together, under the same Protection; and a Sluce is opened to let the Enemy come in like a Flood, which to oppose, the Accepters cannot stand in a Gap, nor lift up a Standard against them. All which is contrary to the Confession of Faith Ch. 20. §. 4. And therefore to ac∣cept of this Toleration is inconsistent with the Principles of the Church of Scotland, with the National and Solemn League and Covenant, and Solemn Acknowledgment of Sins, and Engagement to Duties; in all which we are bound to extirpate Popery. With the whole Tract of Contendings between the years 1638 and 1660. and particularly by the Testimony of the Synod of Fife, and other Brethren in the Mini∣stry, against Cromwels vast Toleration and Liberty of Conscience, a∣bove related. For it is plain, if it be not to be suffered, then it is not to be accepted. Considering the Terms wherein it is offered, they cannot make such a shameful bargain. For by it the Matter of Preaching is so restricted
and limited, that nothing must be Preached or Taught, which may any way tend to alienate the Hearts of the People from him or his Government. Here is a Price at which they are to purchase their Freedom, which yet hard∣ly can be so exactly paid, but he may find a pretence for retrenching it when he pleases: For if a Minister shall Preach against the Kings Religion as Idolatry, and the Church of Rome as Babylon, &c. This shall be interpreted to be an alienation of the Peoples Hearts from the King and his Government. But who can be faithful, and Preach in Season and out of Season now, but he must think it his Duty to en∣deavour thus to alienate the Hearts of the People? Sure if any Preach the whole Counsel of God, he must Preach against Popery. And if he think that this Indulgence, granted and accepted on these Terms, can supersede him from this Faithfulness, then he is no more the Ser∣vant of Christ, but a pleaser of Men. Considering the Scandal of it, they dare not so offend the Generation of the Righteous by the Acceptance, and dishonour God, disgrace the Protestant Profession, wrong the Interest thereof, and betray their Native-Country, as thus to comply with the design of Antichrist. And it cannot but be very stumbling to see the Ministers of Scotland, whose Testimony used to be terrible to the Popish, and renowned through all the Protestant-Churches, purchasing a Liberty to themselves at the rate of burying and betraying the Cause into Bondage and restraint, and thus to be laid by from all active and open opposition to Antichrists Designs, in such a Season. The World will be tempted to think, they are not governed by Principles, but their own Interest in this Juncture, seeking their own things more than the things of Christ; And that it was not the late Usurpation upon, and overturning of Religion and Liberty that offended them, so much as the Persecution they sustained thereby; but that if Arbitrary Power had been exerted in their favours, tho' with the same prejudice of the Cause of Christ, they would have complyed with it, as they do now. Alas! Sad and dolorous have been the Scandals given and taken, by and from the Declining Ministers of Scotland heretofore, but none so stumbling as this. Lastly, considering the Addresses made thereupon, with such a strain of fulsom and Blasphemous Flatteries, to the dishonour of God, the reproach of the Cause, the betraying of the Church, and detriment o the Nation, and exposing themselves to the Contempt of all, the poor Persecuted Party dare not so much as seem to incorporate with them▪ I shall set down the first of their Addresses, and let the Reader judge whether there be not Cause of standing also off from every appearance of being of their number. It is Dated at Edinburgh, Iuly 21, 1687. Of this Tenor.
To the King's most Excellent Majesty, The Humble Address of the Presyterian Ministers of his Majesties Kingdom of Scotland. WE Your Majesties most Loyal Subjects, the Ministers of the Presbyterian Perswasion in your Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, from the due Sense we have of Your Majesties Gracious and surprising favour, in not only putting a stop to our long sad Sufferings for Non-Conformity, but granting the Liberty of the Publick and Peaceable Exercise of our Ministerial Function with∣out any hazard: As we bless the Great God, who hath put this in your Royal Heart, we do withal find our selves bound in Duty to offer our most Humble and Hearty thanks to Your Sacred Majesty, the Favour bestowed being to us, and all the Peo∣ple of our Perswasion, valuable above all our Earthly comfort; especially since we have ground from Your Majesty to believe that our Loyalty is not to be questioned upon the account of our being Presbyterians, who as we have amidst all former tentations endeavoured, so we are firmly resolved still to preserve an en∣tire Loyalty in our Doctrin and Practice (consonant to our known Principles, which according to the Holy Scriptures are contained in the Confession of Faith, generally owned by Pres∣byterians in all Your Majesties Dominions) and by the help of God so to demean our selves, as Your Majesty may find Cause rather to enlarge than diminish your Favours towards us; throughly perswading our selves from Your Majesties Iustice and Goodness, that if we shall at any time be otherwise represented,
Your Majesty will not give credit to such Information, until you have due cognition thereof: And Humbly beseeching, that those who promote any Disloyal Principles and Practices (as we disown them) may be looked upon as none of ours, whatsoever name they assume to themselves. May it please Your most Excellent Majesty Graciosly to accept of this ou most Humble Address, as proceeding from the plainness and sincerity of Loyal and Thankful Hearts, much engaged by Your Royal Favour▪ to con∣tinue our Fervent Prayers to the King of King's, for Divine Illumination and Conduct, with all other Blessings Spiritual and Temporal, ever to attend Your Royal Person and Govern∣ment, which is the greatest Duty can be rendred to Your Majesty by Your Majesties most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obedient Subjects. Subscribed in our Names, and in the Name of the rest of our Brethren of our Perswasion, at thei Desire.
The King's Letter to the Pres∣byterians in his Ancient King∣dom of Scotland. WE Love you well, and we heartily thank you for your Address: We re∣solve to protect you in your Liberty, Religion and Properties, all our Life: And we shall lay down such Methods as shall not be in the Power of any to alter hereafter. And in the mean time we desire you to pray for our Person and Government. To which may be added that kind Complement of the Chancellours. Gentlemen, My Master hath commanded me to tell you, that I am to serve you in all things within the compass of my Power. These Gentlemen needed not to have been sollicitous, that those who avouch an Adherence to the Covenanted Reformation, and avow an opposition to Antichristian Usurpers (which they call promoting Dis∣loyal Principles and Practices) might not be looked upon as of their Con∣federacy: For all that abide in the Principles and Practices of the Church of Scotland (which they have deserted) would count it a Sin and Scandal, to be reckoned of their Association who have thus betrayed the Cause and the Country. These mutual Complements between the professed Servants of Christ and the Vassals of Antichrist, if they be Cordial, would seem to import that they are in a fair way of com∣pounding their differences, and to accomodate their oppositions at length: But if they be only adulatory and flattering Complements, im∣porting only a Conjunction of Tails, like Samsons Foxes, with a Dis∣junction of Heads and Hearts, tending towards distinct and opposite interests; then, as they would suit far better the Dissimulations of Po∣liticians, than the Simplicity of Gospel-Ministers, and do put upon them the Brand of being Men-pleasers rather than Servants of Christ, so for their Dissemblings with Dissemblers, who know their Comple∣ments, to be and take them for such, they may look to be paid home in good Measure, heaped up and running over, when such Methods shall be laid down as shall not be in the Power of any to alter, when such designs
shall be obtained by this Liberty and these Addresses, that the after∣bought Wit of the Addressers shall not be able to disappoint. Howe∣ver the Address is such, as makes the thing addressed for to be odious, and the Addressers to forfeit the respects and merit the indignation of all that are Friends to the Protestant and Presbyterian Cause; as may ap∣pear from these obvious Reflections. 1. It was needful indeed they should have assumed the Name of Pres∣byterians, and call it the humble Address of Presbyterians Ministers: For otherwise it would never have been known to come from Men of the Presbyterian Perswasion; seeing the Contents of this Address are so clearly contrary to their known Principles. It is contrary to Presby∣terian Principles, to congratulate an Antichristian Usurper for under∣mining Religion, and overturning Laws and Liberties. It is contrary to Presbyterian Principles, to justifie the abrogation of the National-Covenant, in giving thanks for a Liberty whereby all the Laws are assed and disabled, therein confirmed. It is contrary to Presbyterian Principles, to thank the King for opening a door to bring in Popery, which they are engaged to exirpate in the Solemn League and Cove∣nant. It is contrary to Presbyterian Principles to allow or accept of such a vast Toleration for Idolaters and Hereticks, as is evident above. It is contrary to Presbyterian Principles to consent to any Restrictions, Limitations, and Conditions, binding them up in the Exercise of the Ministerial function, whereby this Liberty is loaded and clogged: So that they cannot enjoy it without great hazard of Sin, and incurring the Guilt of the Blood of Souls, for not declaring the whole Council of God, which Addressers cannot declare, if they Preserve an enire Loyalty in their Doctrin, as here they promise. 2. There is nothing sounds here like the Old Presbyterian strain; neither was there ever an Address of this stile seen before from Presby∣terian Hands. It would have looked far more Presbyterian like, in stead of this Address, to have sent a Protestation against the new openly de∣signed introduction of Popery, and subversion of all Laws and Liberties which they are Covenanted to maintain; or at least to have given an Address in the usual Language of Presbyterians, who used always to speak of the Covenants, and Work of Reformation: But here never a word of these, but of Loyalty to his Excellent, to his Gracious, and to his Sacred Majesty, of Loyalty not to be questioned, an Entire Loyalty in Doctrin, a resolved Loyalty in Practice, and a fervent Loyalty in Prayers: And all that they are Sollicitous about, is not lest the Prerogatives of
their Master be encroached upon, and the Liberties of the Church be supplanted, and Religion wronged; but lest their Loyalty be questiond, and they be otherwise represented: And all that they beseech for is, not that the Cause of Christ be not wronged, nor Antichristian Idolatry in∣troduced by this Liberty; but that these who promove any disloyal Princi∣ples and Practices may be looked upon as none of theirs, wherein all their en∣couragement is, that they perswade themselves from his Majestys Iustice and Goodness, that he will not give Credit to any other information until he take due cognition thereof. Here is a Lawless unrestricted Loyalty to a Tyrant, claiming an Absolute Power to be obeyed without reserve, not only professed, but solicitously sought to be the Principle of Presbyterians; whereas it is rather the Principle of Atheistical Hobbs exploded with indignation by all Rational Men. This is not the Presbyterian Loy∣alty to the King, in the defence of Christ his Evangel, Liberties of the Country, Ministration of Iustice, and punishment of iniquity, according to the National-Covenant; and in the preservation and defence of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms, according to the Solemn-League and Covenant: But an Erastian Loyalty to a Tyrant in his overturning Religion, Laws and Liberties. This Loyalty in Doctrin, will be found Disloyalty to Christ, in a sinful and shameful silence at the wrongs done to him, and not declaring against the Invasions of his open Enemies. This Loyalty in Practice is a plain betraying of Religion and Liberty, in lying by from all opposition to the open Destroyer of both. And this Loyalty in Prayers, for all Blessings ever to attend his Person and Go∣vernment, will be neither conformed to Presbyterian Prayers in reference to Popish Tyrants, nor consistent with the Zeal of Christians, nor founded upon any Scripture Promises, to pray for Blessings to a Papists Tyranny, which cannot be of Faith, and therefore must be Sin. 3. This Address is so stuffed with sheaking Flatteries, that it would more become Sycophants and Court-Parasites, than Ministers of the Gospel; and were more suitable to that Popish, Prelatical, and Ma∣lignant Faction to congratulate and rejoyce in their professed Patron and Head, and fill the Gazetts with their Adulatory Addresses, which heretofore used to be deservedly inveighed against by all Dissenters; than for Presbyterians to take a Copy from them, and espouse the Practice which they had condemned before, and which was never com∣mended in any good Government, nor never known in these British Nations, before Oliver's Usurpation; Flattery being always counted base among ingenuous Men. But here is a Rhapsodie of Flatteries, from the deep Sense they have of his Majesties Gracious and surprizing favour;
finding themselves bound in Duty to offer their most humble and hearty thanks to his Sacred Majesty, the favour bestowed being to them valuable above all Earthly comforts. One would think it behoved to be a very great fa∣vour, from a very great Friend, for very gracious ends: But what is it? In not only putting a stop to their long sad Sufferings; which were some ground indeed, if the way were Honest: But this not only supposes an also; what is that? But also granting us the Liberty; which is either a needless Tautology (for if all Sufferings were stopped, then Liberty must needs follow,) or it must respect the Qualifications of the Liberty; flowing from such a Fountain, Absolute Power; through such a convey∣ance, stopping all Penal Laws against Papists; in such a Form as a Tole∣ration; for such Ends, as overturning the Reformation and introducing Popery. This is the Favour for which they offer most humble and hearty Thanks, more valuable to them than all Earthly Comforts. Sure, if they thank him for the Liberty, they must thank him for the Procla∣mation whereby he grants it, and justifie all his claim there to Absolute∣ness, being that upon which it is superstructed, and from which it e∣mergeth; and so become a listed Faction to abet and own him in all his attemptings, engaged now to demean themselves as that he may find Cause rather to enlarge than to diminish his favours, which can be no other way but in assisting him to destroy Religion and Liberty, at least in suffering him to do what he will without controll. O what an indeliberate re∣proach is this for Ministers, who pretend to be yet for the defence of the Gospel, thus to be found betraying Religion, through justifying and magnifying a Tyrant, for his suspension of so many Laws, whereby it was established and supported! 4. It were more tolerable if they went no farther than Flatteries; but I fear they come near the Border of Blasphemy, when they say, that the Great God hath put this in his Royal Heart; which can bear no other Construction but this, that the Holy Lord hath put it in his Heart to assume to himself a Blasphemous and Absolute Power, whereby he stops and suspends all Penal Laws against Idolaters, and gives a Toleration for all Errors: If it be capable of any other Sense, it must be like that as the Lord is said to have moved David to number the People, or that Rev. 17. 17. God hath put it in their Hearts to fulfill his Will, and to agree and give their Kingdom to the Beast. But to bless God, and thank the Tyrant for this wicked Project, as deliberate and purposed by Men, I say is near unto Blasphemy. And again where they say, they are firmly resolved by the help of God so to demean themselves as his Majesty may find Cause rather to enlarge than to diminish his favours; this in effect is as
great Blasphemy, as if they had said, They resolved by the help of God to be as unfaithful Time-serving and silent Ministers as ever plagued the Church of God; for no otherwise can they demean themselves so as he may find cause to enlarge his Favours towards them, it being no way supposable that his enlarging his Favours can consist with their faithful∣ness; but if they discover any measure of Zeal against Antichrist, he will quickly diminish them. Thus far I have compendiously deduced the Account of the progress and Prosecution of the Testimony of this Church to the present State thereof. FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Io. Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball o∣ver against the Royal-Exchange in Corn∣hill. THE Antiquity of the Royal Line of Scotland farther Cleared and Defended, against the Exceptions lately offer'd by Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Vindication of the Bishop of St. Asaph. y Sir George Mackenzie, His Majesty's Ad∣vocate for the Kingdom of Scotland. The Moral History of Fru∣gality with its opposite Vices, Covetousness, Niggardliness, Pro∣digality, and Luxury. Writ∣ten by the Honourable Sir George Mackenzie, late Lord Advocate of Scotland. A Memorial for His High∣ness the Prince of Orange, in Relation to the Affairs of Scot∣land: Together with the Ad∣dress of the Presbyterian-Party in that Kingdom to His High∣ness; And some Observations on that Address. By two Per∣sons of Quality. An Account of the Present Persecuton of the Church in Scotland, in several Letters. The Case of the Present Af∣flicted Clergy in Scotland tru∣ly represented. To which is added for Probation, the at∣testation of many unexceptio∣nable Witnesses to every Par∣ticular; and all the Publick Acts and Proclamations of the Convention and Parliament relating to the Clergy. By a Lover of the Church and his Country. An Historical Relation o the late Presbyterian Genera Assembly, held at Edinburgh, from October 16 to November 13. In the Year 1690. In Letter from a Person in Edin∣burgh to his Friend in London.
