S5575 99832958 37433
A DISCOURSE Concerning the DOCTRINE OF Christ's Satisfaction; OR, The True Reasons of his Sufferings; WITH An ANSWER TO THE SOCINIAN OBJECTIONS. To which is added A Sermon concerning the Mysteries of the Christian Faith; Preached April 7. 1691. With a Preface concerning the True State of the Controversie about Christ's Satisfaction. By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester. The Second Edition. LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall, for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1697.
THE PREFACE. THE Design of the following Dis∣course, is to vindicate the Do∣ctrine of Christ's Satisfaction from the Socinian Objections. Which, that I might do more effectually, I set my self to consider the Force and Strength of all that Crellius had produ∣ced in his elaborate Answer to Grotius. For I have always endeavoured to under∣stand the right state of a Question, before I undertook it; and when I had done that, I have taken as much Care, as I could, to represent it truly to others. Which made me not a little surprized, when I found our modern Socinians in their late Pam∣phlets to charge Me as well as others,Considera∣tions on the Expli∣cations of the Trini∣ty in the Archbi∣shop's Ser∣mons, &c. p. 31. with not reading their Books upon this Questi∣on, and wholly mistaking the State of the Question between the Church and them. Whereas, if I had not read their Books
I might peradventure have entertained a more favourable Opinion of them, than I now have. But it was upon a diligent Consideration of the utmost I could find was said by their best Writers, that I so long since satisfied my self, that if the Books of the New Testament are to be our Rule of Faith, they were extreamly mistaken. In∣deed, our Unitarians (as they call them∣selves) seem to go another way to work; which is, by undermining the Authority of these Books, and so to introduce Deism a∣mong us; (of which I hope to give an Ac∣count in another Discourse.) But my pre∣sent business is to lay open the true state of this Controversie between us. In their Answer to my Sermon (which is here Re∣printed) they say,Answ. to Serm. p 12. That the Unitarians never denied, as I fancy, that Jesus Christ made himself a voluntary Sacri∣fice for Expiation of the Sins of Man∣kind. If this be true, I confess, I have mistaken them; but if the contrary prove very true from their own Writings, what do these Men deserve, for denying that which they know to be true? For it is hardly possible to suppose such bold Vnder∣takers, as they are, should be ignorant that Socinus absolutely denied, That Christ made himself a voluntary Sacrifice for
Expiation of the Sins of Mankind. For in his Answer to Volanus, he saith,Socin. Op. T. 1. p. 391. That he and most others are greatly mistaken when they say, that Christ offered up himself to God, when his Blood was shed upon the Cross: And he positively affirms, That the Sacrifice which Christ offered was not upon the Cross, but in Heaven. These Passages gave great of∣fence to one Niemojevius, a Friend of his, who in his first Epistle to him, calls it,Socin. E∣pist. p. 196. Ed. Racov. A horrid Paradox, and directly contrary to Scripture, and wonders what he meant to write so confidently against the plain Testimonies of Scripture. Socinus in answer to him, saith, It is no more than himself had asserted some Years before, in his Book De Servatore;p. 204. and others of their Party before him. And he lays down, as his Conclusion, which he desires his Friend to bring his Arguments against, viz. That the Expiatory Sacrifice of Christ for our Sins was not performed on the Cross, but in Heaven. Niemoje∣vius brings express places of Scripture a∣gainst this Opinion; and saith,p. 224. He could by no means excuse such plain Opposi∣tion to the words of Scripture. Soci∣nus in his Reply persists in saying,p. 226. That there was no Expiatory Sacrifice for Sin
in the Death of Christ; and that it ought to be considered as an Intervening Con∣dition in order to the Expiation in Hea∣ven,p. 254. p. 265. and not otherwise; but he will by no means allow any Proof of any Sacrifice of the Expiation on the Cross. And so the Dispute ended. With what face can they now say, That the Unitarians never de∣nied this, when Socinus not only doth it, but defends it, to the last, and saith, That others had done it before him: Which shews, that it was no singular Opi∣nion of his own, but that which had been received among the Unitarians before him. But say they, The Vnitarians ever ac∣knowledged that the Lord Christ was an Expiatory Sacrifice for our Sins, as may be seen in the Racovian Catechism. This is indeed a wonderfull Proof, they ever acknowledged it, as may be seen in the Racovian Catechism: Were there no Uni∣tarians before the Racovian Catechism? And was that always the same? Suppose the Unitarians before, were of another Opinion; suppose the Racovian Catechism it self hath been altered in this matter: how can any man of Sense be satisfied with such kind of Ar∣guments as these? One would think, they wrote onely for such as would take their Words; they joyn so much Confidence with
so very little appearance of Reason. All that know any thing of these Matters, know very well, that the Racovian Catechism was first framed by Smalcius, a strict Fol∣lower and Defender of Socinus, from whose Opinions he did not vary at all as to this matter, as will appear from all the old E∣ditions of it. In which the Question is put,Catech. Racov. c. 8. q. 4. What is the Reason of the Suffe∣rings of Christ? The Answer is two fold; 1. To be an Example of Patience. 2. To confirm the Truth of God's Promises. And after these are explained, another Question is asked,Q. 12. Is there no other Cause of the Death of Christ? The Answer is very short, Nulla prorsus, None at all. And in the Conclusion of that Chapter a Question is put about Sacrifices,Q. 38. and the Answer is, That the Death of Christ was no Sacrifice, but only a Preparation to it, and a kind of Introduction to it, for the Sacrifice was offered in Heaven and not before. Have we not now great E∣vidence to believe from the Racovian Ca∣techism, that Jesus Christ made himself a voluntary Sacrifice for Expiation of the Sins of Mankind? But besides the Ra∣covian Catechism, they referr me to Schlictingius and Ruarus. For what, I pray? For what the Unitarians always
held? That is impossible, when there is such evident Proof to the contrary. I sup∣pose their meaning is, That the Racovian Catechism, being reviewed by them speaks otherwise. And is this a good Proof, that they were always of that mind, because from hence it is evident they have changed it? And so it will appear to any one that will compare the latter Editions with the former.Catech. Racov. Staurop. A.D. 1680. In the last Edition I have seen, as it is review'd by Schlictin∣gius, Ruarus, and others, there is a Pre∣face, wherein they confess it is changed in several things from what it was, when it was first published by Moscorovius, A. D. 1609, and yet the Unitarians were still of the same mind, although some more softning Expressions were for meer shame thought fit to be inserted. In this Correct Editi∣on, the Question is put, Why was it ne∣cessary for Christ to suffer as he did? And the Answer is twofold;p. 141. 1. That Christ suffered for our Sins by God's ap∣pointment, and underwent a cruel Death as a Sacrifice of Expiation. Who could imagine this to be the Racovian Catechism still? 2. Because those who are to be saved by him are subject to the like Suffe∣rings. This is somewhat a dark Reason; but the former is that which we are to con∣sider.
Christ, say they, suffer'd for the sins of Mankind, and was a Sacrifice of Expia∣tion by his Death. What can we desire more? shall we always maintain disputes about Words, when we agree in Sense? No, that is not the Case, but we may seem to agree in Words and differ in Sense. That therefore must be more strictly exa∣mined. But because they sometimes seem to be displeased that we take their Opi∣nion from foreign Writers,Conside∣rations on the Expli∣cations of the Trini∣ty by Dr. W. &c. p. 32. (since they here set up for themselves and are so able to express their own Sense) and because they refer me to their own late Prints in the English Tongue, therefore I shall ap∣ply my self to them, to find out what their true Sense in this matter is. And they seem freely to tell us what they deny and what they affirm.Answer to my Serm. p. 12. 1. They deny that this Sacrifice was by way of true and proper Satisfaction or full and adequate Payment to the Justice of God. 2. They affirm, that this Sacrifice was only an Oblation, or Application to the Mercy of God. In another place they complain,Answ. to Milb. p. 58. that very few of their Adversaries have re∣ally understood what they affirm or de∣ny concerning the Causes or Effects of
our Saviour's death. And they say, the Question is only this, Whether the Lord Christ offer'd himself as such a Sacrifice, Oblation or Price as might be made to the Justice of God, by way of Equiva∣lent for what we should have suffer'd; or was an Oblation or Satisfaction as all former Sacrifices under the Law were, to the Mercy of God by way of Hum∣ble Suit and Deprecation? So that they will no longer Dispute with us, about the Death of Christ being an Expiatory Sacri∣fice for the sins of Mankind; and so this Point seems wholly gained. But we must have a Care of being deceived by them. For the Scripture was too clear and full to be born down by the Authority or Evasions of Socinus; and therefore they found it necessary to comply in Terms, as long as they could keep to their own Notions under them. But what is the true Meaning of an Expiatory Sacrifice to the Mercy of God? If it be no more but as a Condition intervening, Socinus would not allow that to make an Expiatory Sacrifice, and there∣in he was in the Right. The main Point then between us seems to be whether the Death of Christ had Re∣spect to the Justice or to the Mercy of God?Answ. to Milb. p. 53. And here we must consider what they
understand by the Justice of God. 1. They say, that Almighty God as King and Proprietor of all Persons and Things, can forgive any Offence or all Offences, even without Repentance or Amendment, nor is it contrary to his Justice so to do. 2. That it is not the Justice of God, by which he is prompted to punish sin∣ners, but his Holiness and Wisdom, and that Justice hath no other share or inte∣rest in Punishment, but only to see that Punishment be not misplaced, and that it do not exceed the Offence. 3. That God could not (justly or wisely) substitute an innocent and well deserving Person to undergo Punishment,p. 54. properly so called in the Place of the unrighteous and worthless, because it is of the Nature of Justice not to misplace Punishments. 4. That Christ could not offer him∣self freely for us to undergo the Punish∣ment due to us, nor could God accept of it, or allow it: because it is of the very Essence of Justice not to misplace Pu∣nishment and not to exceed the Desert of the Offence,p. 55. which they say are the two things that constitute the Nature of Punitive Justice.
Trinitari∣an Scheme of Relig. p. 18. In another place, they say, That Christ made himself an Oblation, an Expiatory Sacrifice on the Altar of the Cross for our Sins. But his Sufferings were not (as Trinitarians teach) designed as a Pu∣nishment laid on him in our stead, be∣cause Punishment is the evil of Suffer∣ing inflicted for the evil of Doing; but Christ having done no sin; what he un∣derwent was only labour and suffering and no Punishment. And again they say, the Oblation was not made to the Ju∣stice, but to the Mercy of God. But the Sufferings of Christ being graciously accepted by God,p. 19. as an Intercession on our behalf, God was satisfied with them, and this, they say, is the proper Notion of Satisfaction.Answ. to the Arch∣bishop, p. 32. The same they repeat in other places. And if no more were to be regarded but meer words, this Controver∣sie were at an End; for they own Christ's Death to be an Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of Mankind, and that he made by his Sufferings Satisfaction to God. But I shall now make it appear, that whatever they pretend, they do really own no such thing as the Death of Christ being an Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of Mankind. However, we have this Ad∣vantage by these Concessions, that the
Scriptures are yielded to be on our side, and that they are forced to speak as we do, whatsoever their meaning be. But that they do not own any proper Expiatory Sa∣crifice in the Death of Christ, will best appear by an Account of the Rise and Pro∣gress of this Controversie, and of the true State of it. The first Rise of it was from the Multi∣tudes of Places of Scripture, which Attri∣bute all the proper Effects of an Expiatory Sacrifice to the Death of Christ. And that by those who best understood for what End it was that Christ suffer'd, and had no Intention to deceive or to amuse Man∣kind, I mean our Saviour and his Apostles. Our Blessed Saviour himself saith, That the Son of Man came to give his Life a Ransom for many.Matt. 2.28. Mark 10.45. A Ransom as to what? Surely not as to the Mercy of God. But Christ's Death was a Ransom as it was an Expiatory Sacrifice; and if the one respects the Mercy of God, the other must do so too. They may say, the Ransom is from the Punishment of Sin, but this Ransom might be made as to the Mercy of God, which delivers from it. But a Ransom is something which is paid or laid down as a Price of Redemption; and was very well understood in that Sense among
the Jews; who all knew that by their Law, the Blood of the Sacrifices was appoin∣ted to be a Ransom for their Souls.Levit. 17.11. For it is the Blood that maketh an Atone∣ment for the Soul. To which the Apostle refers,Heb. 9.22. when he saith, that without shed∣ding of Blood there is no Remission. So that hereby the Jews understood these things, (1.) That there was a Punishment due to their Sins, from which they could ex∣pect no Deliverance but by the Blood of Sa∣crifices as a Ransom or Price of Redemption for them. (2.) That as the Punishment became due by the Law, and the Execu∣tion of it was by the Iustice of God, so the Ransom or Price of Redemption must be by way of Satisfaction to the Law, in such a manner as it had appointed. (3.) That they had no other Notion of an Expiato∣ry Sacrifice, but the Offering the Blood of the Sacrifice for an Atonement in or∣der to the Averting the just Displeasure of God against them for their Sins; and this was that, which they understood by Expia∣tion or Remission of Sins. (4.) That the Expiation did not depend upon the Sa∣crifice, as an intervening Condition, as to the Party who thereby performed an Act of Obedience, but upon the Nature of the Sacrifice which was offer'd to God. For,
whatever had been required, the Obedience had been the same; but here the great Force is laid on the Blood being offer'd for Expiation. (5.) That however the Mer∣cy of God was seen both in the Appointing and Accepting the Ransom; yet the Ex∣piatory Sacrifice was never understood by them to Respect the Mercy of God, but his Just Displeasure against their Sins. What strange Language would it have been thought among the Jews to offer an Expia∣tory Sacrifice to the Mercy of God? But Men that bring in New Doctrines, must make a New Sense of Words and Phrases; or else they can never reconcile them to each other. And it is a mighty Advantage to our Cause, that we under∣stand the Expressions of the New Testament with Respect to these Matters, no other∣wise than the Jews understood them, among whom they were spoken; and who had their own Law to interpret them by. Our pre∣sent Unitarians do not deny that the Sacri∣fices under the Law had an immediate Re∣spect to God; but they say, it Was not by way of Satisfaction to the Justice of God, but by way of Application to the Mercy of God, by way of humble Suit and De∣precation. But if there were such a Sanction of the
Law, whereby an Obligation to Punishment did follow the Offences forbidden by it; If the Iustice of God were concerned to see the Punishment executed, if the Law were not satisfied; If the Sacrifice of Atonement or Expiation were designed for satisfaction of the Law; and God did accept it for that End, then it follows, that these Sacri∣fices were intended not meerly as Rites of In∣tercession and Deprecation to the Mercy of God; but by way of Satisfaction to his Justice. For was it not Iustice in God to punish Offenders against his Law? Was it not Iustice in God to require a Satisfaction to his Law when it was broken? Was it not Iustice in God, when he had declared that he would accept a Sacrifice of Atone∣ment, to require that instead of the Punish∣ment of the Offenders, and to punish those who wilfully neglected or despised it? How then, can they pretend that these Sacrifices had no Respect to the Justice of God? We never read in Scripture any Expressions, as to the Methods of Suppli∣cation like this, That the Blood of the Sacrifices was to expiate for their Sins▪ and that it was given for an Atonement for the Soul. Is it ever said, that Prayer and Supplication was to make a Sacrifice of Atonement, and that it was appointed for
that End? Prayer is a Natural and Ne∣cessary Duty and a Condition in order to Pardon, but the Life and Force of that lies in a Man's own Breast, in the inward and fervent Desires of the Soul: but a Sacrifice of Atonement was a thing of another Na∣ture, the Blood was to be shed and then offer'd up to God, as a Sacrifice of Atone∣ment, which God himself had appointed for that End; and without which no Re∣mission of Sins was to be expected. But was not this from the Mercy of God to appoint such a Sacrifice of Atonement? No doubt of it, and so it was that he would accept it for such an End. But that is by no means the present Question; for it is, Whether the Sacrifice, which God appoint∣ed for an Atonement, was only a Rite of Supplication to the Mercy of God? In one Sense a Sacrifice of Atonement is a way of Deprecation: but then it relates to the Wrath and Displeasure of God; for it is that which God hath appointed as the Means of Averting his Wrath, and Pre∣venting the Execution of his Iustice. But the main Question is, Whether the Sacrifice of Atonement as to God's just Wrath and Displeasure, be not a Real Satisfaction to his Justice? For if he be justly displeased, and might justly punish, but doth accept a
Sacrifice of Expiation in stead of it, al∣though there be a Concurrence of Mercy, yet there is a Real Atonement to his Iustice: unless they will say, the Iustice of God is not concerned in preserving the Honour of his Laws. But of this more afterwards. If an Expiatory Sacrifice under the Law were nothing else but a Solemn Rite of Sup∣plication to the Mercy of God it would take away the Typical Nature of those Sa∣crifices, and especially those on the Day of Expiation. For what doth a Rite of Sup∣plication and Intercession represent as a Fi∣gure of something to come? Why were the Goat and the Bullock for the Sin-Offering to be presented alive before the Lord;Levit. 16.10, 11. then their Blood to be shed, and to be sprinkled before the Mercy-seat and upon the Altar?14, 15, 19. Why was the Scape-Goat to have the Sins of the People con∣fessed over him and put upon his head? Why was the Flesh of the Bullock and Goat that was Sacrificed burnt without the Camp?v. 21.27. Do these look like Applica∣tions to the Mercy of God, by way of humble Suit and Deprecation? But the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us,Heb. 9.9, 12, 13, 14. these things were a Figure representing Christ offering himself up to God by his own Blood, who having obtain'd eternal Redemption
for us enter'd into the Holy Place (in Heaven) whose Blood was far more effe∣ctual for the Purging away of Sin, than the Blood of Bulls and Goats could be; and to answer to the burning of the Flesh of the Sacrifices without the Camp,13 12. that he might Sanctify the People with his own Blood, he suffer'd without the Gate. Was all this nothing but an Oblation to the Mercy of God by way of Prayer and In∣tercession? Why all this Ceremony about an Oblation of Prayer, which depends on the hearty Devotion of him that makes it? Why did not the High-Priest enter with∣out Blood into the Holy of Holies, if it were nothing but a Rite of Supplication? Why was the Blood sprinkled upon the Altar for Atonement, after he came out from the Mercy-Seat? Why was the Flesh burnt without the Camp? Was that for Intercession too? But saith the Correct Racovian Catechism, all this doth not prove that the whole Expiatory Sacrifice of Christ was performed on the Cross, but only that it was begun there and perfected in Heaven. This doth evident∣ly prove, that the Blood of Christ was shed for the Expiation of Sins, and that as the High-Priest went into the Holy of Holies with the Blood of the Sacrifice of Atone∣ment
there to make Intercession; so Christ as our High-Priest with his Blood shed en∣ter'd in Heaven,Heb. 7.25. where he ever lives to make Intercession for us. But say they, the Sacrifices under the Law did not make any proper Satisfaction for Sin, there∣fore neither did Christ's Sacrifice. So that at last they confess that Christ's death was no proper Expiatory Sacrifice; for what∣soever is so, must make Satisfaction to the Law and Iustice of God. But say they, the Sacrifices were not offer'd for Pay∣ment but for Remission. I say, they were a Payment in order to Remission. I mean such a Payment as the Law appointed and God accepted, and that is true and proper Satisfaction. But we must distin∣guish a Legal Payment and Satisfaction, from Pecuniary Payment to a Creditor. And all the Confusion these Men have run into, hath been from want of distinguishing these; of which I have treated at large in the following Discourse. Thus far it appears that they have by no means allow'd the Death and Sufferings of Christ to have been an Expiatory Sacrifice in the Sense of the Iews, as it was a Ran∣som or Price of Redemption. But there is something farther to be con∣sider'd in an Expiatory Sacrifice, and that
is a Substitution in place of the Offen∣ders. For that the Jews and others under∣stood by a Sacrifice of Expiation; when the Punishment of one was laid upon another in order to his Deliverance. Not that the very same was to be undergone, as appears by the Sacrifice of Atonement on the Day of Expiation; which was not that which the People of Israel were to have suffer'd without it, but it was what God Appoin∣ted and Accepted instead of their Punish∣ment: and therefore the Scape-Goat is said to bear upon him all the Iniquities of the People,Levit. 16.22. which was supposed to be so much charged with them, that he that let him go was to Purify himself before he could come into the Camp.26. So in the Sin-offering for the Congregation,4.15. the Elders were to lay their hands upon the head of the Bullock before the Lord: and in other Sacrifices the Rule among the Jews was,1.4. that none but the Owner was to lay on his hands; to shew on whose Ac∣count he was offer'd up as a Sacrifice of A∣tonement. For here the Right of Dominion was sufficient for Substitution; but in a Rational Agent, Consent is necessary to make it Just. Having thus seen, what the true Na∣ture of an Expiatory Sacrifice was, we must
now consider, how far this can agreee with the Suffering of Christ for the Sins of Man∣kind. And we have already found our Saviour himself declaring that he gave his Life a Ransom for many. But that is not all; for, when he instituted his last Sup∣per for a Commemoration of his Suffering, he said,Matt. 26.28. For this is my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the Remission of Sins. His Disciples, to whom he spake these words, must under∣stand them as the Jews commonly did; when the Blood of a Sacrifice was offer'd for an Atonement in order to the Remission of Sins. And one great end of his Preaching was to declare that he came into the World with that design; that it was the Will of God he should suffer,Heb. 10.9, 10. and that he came to do his Will. And therefore speaking of laying down his Life, he saith, No man taketh it away from me but I lay it down of my self.John 10.17, 18. I have power to lay it down and I have power to take it again. This Commandment have I received of my Father. So that here we have God's Ap∣pointment of such a Sacrifice of Atonement for Mankind; Christ's free and voluntary Consent for the undertaking it, and a Tran∣slation of the Punishment of our Sins upon
him;2 Cor. 5.21. which St. Paul calls God's making him to be sin for us who knew no Sin; which shews that the Sufferings of Christ were on the Account of our Sins, being laid upon him by his own Consent as our Sin-offering; or a Sacrifice of Expiation for our Sins. And in another place saith, that he hath redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us.Gal. 3.1 How could he be made a Curse for us in order to the Redeeming us from the Curse of the Law; if his Sufferings were only a meer voluntary Condition in order to his Exaltation, without bearing the Burden of our Sins? But St. Paul adds, that we have Redemption through his Blood,Eph. 1.7. Coloss. 1.14. Rom. 3.25. the Forgiveness of Sins. That, God hath set him forth as a Propitiation through Faith in his blood, to declare his righte∣ousness for the Remission of Sins. That, when we were enemies,5.10. Eph. 5.2. we were recon∣ciled to God by the Death of his Son. That he hath given himself for us, an Offering and Sacrifice to God. That,Heb. 9.26, 28. he appeared to put away Sin by the Sacri∣fice of himself; and that he was once offer'd to bear the Sins of many. That,1 Tim. 2.6. he gave himself a Ransom for all. Neither was it St. Paul only who speaks after this manner; but St. Peter saith, that
his own self bare our Sins in his own body on the Tree.1 Pet. 2.24. 3.18. That Christ also hath once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust.1 John 1.7. 2.2. 4.10. And St. John, that the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin, and that God sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins. So that Christ and his Apostles agree in the same manner of expression; and great weight is laid upon Christ's being a Propitiation for us, and our Hopes of Remission of Sins and the Fa∣vour of God depend upon it. What now is to be said to all these places of Scripture? Were they designed only to humor and im∣pose upon the Credulity of Mankind by tel∣ling them of such an Expiatory Sacrifice in the Death of Christ, which never was, nor could be, being Repugnant to the Iustice of God? For Christ, say they, being Inno∣cent could not suffer the Punishment of our Sins, and God being Just could not accept of it, although he freely offer'd himself as a Sacrifice for our Sins. Doth this agree with the Force and Design of all these Expressions? Had not Christ the Power and Will to offer up himself as a Sa∣crifice of Propitiation to God? And where lies the Injustice of accepting such a Sacri∣fice which he freely offer'd? But it could not be, say they, by way of Punishment
for our Sins. What then is the meaning of all those places, wherein he is said to bear our Sins and to suffer in our stead, the just for the unjust? What is this but to contradict the Tenour and Scope of the New Testament with respect to the Death of Christ; and to turn their Sense quite another way from what they were thought to signifie at that time? which is no reaso∣nable way of interpreting Scripture. Do they deny that Christ suffered, what we say he did? No; that they dare not do. But they say, What he underwent was only Labour and Suffering; but not the Punishment of our Iniquities. Then, I say, it could be no Expiatory Sacrifice, which implies a Substitution, and the con∣trary appears by the many places of Scrip∣ture already mentioned, wherein our Sins and the Sufferings of Christ are joined to∣gether. Thus we see the true Rise of this Con∣troversie was from the many places of Scripture, which seem very plain and clear in this matter; and therefore I shall now give an account of the Progress of it. F. Socinus seeing the bent of the Scrip∣ture so much against him, sets himself to the finding out ways to avoid the force of them.
1. To those which speak of Christ's be∣ing a Ransom or Price of Redemption for us,Socin. de Serv. l. 2. c. 1. in fin. he answers, That these Expressi∣ons are to be understood only Metapho∣rically, and Christ's Death being an In∣tervening Condition in order to our De∣liverance, it is therefore called, a Price of Redemption. And to the same pur∣pose, the Correct Racovian Catechism; only there it is added, That God did ac∣cept of the Death of Christ as a most Ac∣ceptable Sacrifice. But not by way of Satisfaction or Payment of our Debts, because he as a Sacrifice was given by God himself; but that he might give us the greater Assurance of Pardon and Eternal Life. So that here we have the true state of this matter before us; viz. Whether the Death of Christ, when it is said to be a Ransom or Price of Redemption for us, is only to be looked on as a hard Condition on his side Intervening, or as a proper Sacri∣fice of Atonement, which God had appoint∣ed, for the Expiation of Sins? The Que∣stion is not, Whether God appointed or accepted him, for that we have allowed in all Sacrifices of Atonement by the Law of Moses; but whether his Sufferings were not required in order to the Satisfaction of
Divine Iustice for the Sins of Mankind; not by way of strict Payment, as in case of Debts; but by a Legal Satisfaction to the Justice of God as it is concerned in the Honour of his Laws. Our Unitarians grant,Answ. to Milb. p. 58. That Christ was a Ransom and Price of Redemption for us; but they deny, That he was an Adequate Price, or a Sacrifice to the Justice of God. But still they run upon the Notion of Debts and Payments, as though there were no other Notion of Justice and Satis∣faction but between Creditors and Debtors; or as if their Notions of these things were rather taken from the Shops than the Schools. And the monstrous Contradi∣ction they conclude the charge of our Do∣ctrine with, is, That God freely Pardons the whole Debt of Sin, and yet hath been infinitely over-paid for both in the Death and other Sufferings of the Lord Christ. But in the following Discourse,Ch. I. I have endeavoured to lay open this Mistake, by shewing, That Debts and Punishments are of a different Nature; and therefore the Satisfaction in one Case is not to be measured by the other. But I shall not here anticipate the Reader, as to what follows; but I shall take notice of what they
say, which seems to relate to this mat∣ter. Almighty God, say they, as King and Proprietor of all Persons and things, can forgive any Offence or all Offences even without Repentance or Amendment, nor is it contrary to his Justice so to do. This is a very strange Assertion. For then there is no Obligation on God's part in point of Iustice to punish the most Im∣penitent and Incorrigible Offenders. But there is a great deal of difference, between making the Exercise of Punitive or Vin∣dictive Justice necessary upon every Of∣fence, and saying that the Iustice of God doth not require that any Offences should be punished. The former makes Iustice in God to pro∣ceed by a natural Necessity, which would leave no place for Mercy, nor any Satis∣faction by a Mediator, for that must sup∣pose Liberty and Relaxation, as to the Executive Part of Iustice. And if God must punish Sinners as they deserve, there can be no stop to the Execution of Iustice short of Annihilation; for our very Beings are the Gift of God which we have deser∣ved to be deprived of. But on the other side, to say, that the Justice of God doth not require the Punishment of any Offences
without Repentance or Amendement, is to overthrow any such thing as Punitive Justice in God; by which I do not mean, the actual execution of it, and the due measures which belong to it, but the Will to punish Obstinate and Impenitent Sinners. And that results from his Hatred and Ab∣horrency of Evil, and his just Government of the World. For how can any Men, who believe that God is really displeased with the Wickedness of Men, and that he is a Iust and Righteous Governour, ever think that it is not Repugnant to his Iustice to forgive all Offences without Repentance or Amendment? How can his Hatred of Sin and the Iustice of his Government be recon∣ciled with the Impunity of the most Obsti∣nate Offenders? Is there no such thing as Iustice to himself and to his Laws; which lies in a just Vindication of his Honour and of his Laws from Contempt? And who can be guilty of greater Contempt of him, than those who persist in their Wickedness with∣out Repentance or Amendment? And after all, Is it not contrary to his Justice to forgive such as these, because he is absolute Lord and Proprietor of all Per∣sons and Things? This might signifie something, if we could imagine God to be nothing but Almighty Power without Ju∣stice:
but if his Justice be as Essential an Attribute as his Omnipotency, we must not so much as suppose the Exercise of one without the other. Answ. to Milb. p. 53.But they do not deny, That it is in∣consistent with the Wisdom and Holiness of God to let the Incorrigible and Impe∣nitent escape unpunished, or to forgive Sin without Repentance or Amendment. But if the Wisdom and Holiness of God will not permit the Impunity of Impeni∣tent Sinners, is it not just in God to pu∣nish them? Not barely as to the Degree and Desert of Punishment; but as to the Will of Punishing them according to their merits? Whence doth their Punishment come? Is it not from the Will of God? Is that Will just or not? If the Will to punish be just? whence comes it to be so? From the Wisdom and Holiness of God? Then Punitive Justice, when it is agreeable to God's Wisdom and Holiness, is a proper Divine Attribute as well as they. And they must have strange Notions of Puni∣tive Justice, who would separate it from them. But Justice, they say, hath no other share or interest in Punishment, but only to see that Punishment be not misplac'd, and that it do not exceed the Offence. We
are far from denying these things to belong to the Measures in the Exercise of Punitive Justice: But whence comes Punitive Justice to belong to God? Is it not because it is just in him to punish Offenders according to those measures? And whence comes this, but from that Universal Justice in God, which is always joyned with his Wisdom and Holiness: and implies an Universal Rectitude in all he doth? And from thence it comes that all the Measures of Iustice are observed by him in the Punishment of the greatest Offenders. Now this Universal Justice in God is that, whereby he not only punishes Obsti∣nate and Impenitent Sinners, but he takes care of preserving the Honour of his Laws. And therefore, although Almighty God out of his great Mercy were willing that Penitent Sinners should be forgiven; yet it was most agreeable thereto, that it should be done in such a manner as to discourage Mankind from the practice of Sin, by the same way by which he offers Forgiveness; and for this end, it pleased God in his In∣finite Wisdom and Goodness to send his Son to become a Sacrifice of Propitiation for the Sins of Mankind; which being freely un∣dertaken by him, there was no breach in the Measures of Punitive Justice with re∣spect
to him; and so by his Death he offe∣red up himself as a full, perfect and suffi∣cient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfacti∣on for the Sins of Mankind. And this is that Doctrine of the Satisfaction of Christ which we own and defend. But these bold Assertions, That God as absolute Lord may forgive all Offences without Repentance, and it is not con∣trary to his Justice so to do; that, it is not the Justice of God which prompts him to punish Sinners, arise from too mean and narrow a Conception of Divine Justice; as though it lay only in the man∣ner of the Execution of it. But that there is an Essential Attribute of Justice belong∣ing to the Divine Nature, appears from hence, that there are some things which are so disagreeable to the Divine Na∣ture that he cannot do them; he cannot break his Promises, nor deceive Mankind to their Destruction; he cannot deny himself, nor pervert that Order, or due Respects of things to each other, which he hath established in the World. He can∣not make it the Duty of Mankind to disho∣nour their Maker, or to violate the Rules of Good and Evil, so as to make Evil Good and Good Evil; he cannot make Mur∣der and Adultery to be Virtues, nor Im∣piety
and Wickedness not to deserve Pu∣nishment. But whence comes all this? Is it that God wants Almighty Power to do what he pleases? No doubt, he is supreme Lord over all, and hath all things under his Will. But there is an Essential Iu∣stice in God, which is a supreme Rule of Righteousness, according to which he doth always exercise his Power and Will. And so Moses saith of him,Deut. 32.4. All his ways are perfect, a God of Truth, and without Iniquity, just and right is he; and the Psalmist,Psal. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works. He not only is so, but he can be no otherwise, for this Vniversal Righteousness is as great a Perfection and Attribute of God, as his Wisdom, or Power. It is not one Name which stands for all; but it is a re∣al and distinct Attribute of it self: It is as a Rule and Measure to the Exercise of the rest. And he particularly shews it in all the Acts of Punitive Iustice: So Nehemiah;Neh. 9.33. Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly. And Daniel; Righteousness belongeth unto thee,Dan. 9.7, 14. but unto us confusion of Face: For the Lord our God is righte∣ous
in all his Works which he doth, for we obey'd not his Voice. And Zepha∣niah;Zeph. 3.5. The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will not do Iniquity. From whence it appears that the Exercise of Punitive Iustice is according to the Es∣sential Iustice or Righteousness of the Di∣vine Nature. And so Abraham pleaded with God,Gen. 18.25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? i. e. Will he not punish according to the Righteousness of his Na∣ture? And so Abimelech argues from the natural Notion he had of Gods righteous Nature, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous Nation?20.4. But here the main Difficulty which de∣serves to be cleared is this, How far Puni∣tive Justice is founded on that Universal Justice which is an Essential Attribute of God. For the want of understanding this, hath been the great occasion of so much Confusion in the Discourses about this mat∣ter. And for the clearing of it, these things must be considered; 1. That there is a difference between that Iustice in God, whereby he hates Sin, and that whereby he punishes the Sinner. The hatred of Sin doth necessarily follow the Perfection of his Nature. Therefore
God is said, To hate the Wicked;Psal. 11.5. Prov. 6.16. Psal. 45.7. Zech. 8.17. and Evil to be an Abomination to him; to love Righteousness and to hate Wick∣edness. But if the Punishment of the Of∣fender were as necessarily consequent as his Hatred of Sin, all Mankind must suf∣fer as they offend, and there would be no place for Mercy in God, nor for Repen∣tance in Men. But Sin in it self is per∣fectly hatefull to God, there being nothing like God in it; but Man was God's Crea∣ture and made after his Image and Like∣ness; and however God be displeased with Mankind on the account of Sin, yet the Workmanship of God still remains; and we continually see that God doth not exer∣cise his Punitive Iustice according to the Measures of their Iniquities. And they who plead most for the necessity of Punitive Iustice, are themselves a Demonstration to the contrary; for they cannot deny, that they are not punished as their Iniquities have deserved. And if Punitive Iustice be necessary in it self it must reach the Per∣sons that have deserved to be punished, if there be no Relaxation of the Severity of it. 2. That it is very agreeable to the Di∣vine Justice, to exercise the Severity of Punitive Iustice on obstinate and incorri∣gible
Offenders. And this is that where∣on the Iustice of the Punishments of Sinners in another World is founded; because God hath been so mercifull to them here, and used so many ways to reclaim them, and it is the Not exercising his Punitive Iustice upon them in this World, which makes it so much more reasonable in another. For thereby they have shewed their Contempt of God and his Laws, of his offers of Mercy and their wilfull obstinacy in offend∣ing him. And the reasonableness of the Punishment of such Offenders is not deny∣ed by any of our more Learned Adversa∣ries, as I have shewed in the following Discourse from Socinus and Crellius,Ch. I. p. 20. and might do from several others. But I need not mention any more, since in the late Correct Edition of the Racovian Cate∣chism there is this Note,Catech. Racov. p. 179. That they have always asserted, that the Wicked shall be raised up at the great Day to undergo the Punishment of their Sins, and to be cast into the Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And for this, besides their Publick Confessions, they quote Crel∣lius, Schlictingius, Volkelius, Wolzoge∣nius,Schlictin. in Joh 5.29. &c. And Schlictingius saith, The Doctrine of future Punishments was ne∣cessary to be preached, as being part of
the Christian Faith; and that God's Ve∣racity is concerned in the Execution of his Threatnings. Which is a part of Na∣tural Iustice. And those Learned Men, who have been thought most favourable to the Socinian Opinions have declared them∣selves very frankly as to the Justice of the Punishment of Impenitent Sinners. Curcellaeus, whom they often mention with respect, saith,Curcel. In∣stit. l. 2. c. 13. §. 5. The Justice of God requires, that he should inflict the Punishments he hath threatned on Contu∣macious Sinners. And Limborch (whom they sometimes appeal to) saith,Limborch. Theol. Christ. l. 2. c. 12. §. 35. That the Justice of God doth not permit the Im∣punity of Refractory and Impenitent Contemners of his Grace. Because, saith he, God by his declared Will hath tied himself up from the Exercise of his Ab∣solute Power; and his Laws would be trampled upon, and his Majesty slighted; nor would God's hatred of Sin ever be fully discovered. And therefore the Day of Wrath is called by St. Paul,Rom. 2.5. The Reve∣lation of the Righteous Judgment of God. Episcopius saith,Episcop. Inst. The∣ol. l. 4. c. 29. That although in such Punishments, which depend only on the Will of the Law-maker, he doth not think, that God in Justice is obliged to make good his Threatnings, as he is to per∣form
his Promises; (but that in such Cases God is not bound in Justice to ex∣ecute all that the Law threatens; but when he thinks fit to punish, then his Justice requires him not to punish beyond the Commination) yet in the Case of obstinate and incurable Offenders, he doth not deny, that the Justice of God requires the Rigour of the Law to be ex∣ecuted upon them. And he adds, That the Day of Judgment will fully mani∣fest the Justice of God in the Threat∣nings he hath made to Impenitent Sin∣ners.Vorst. de Attrib. Disp. 9. §. 38. Even Vorstius, who was supposed to be too much inclined to the Socinian Do∣ctrine, owns it to be a part of God's Ju∣stice to punish wicked and impenitent Persons; that his Patience and Goodness may not be always contemned with Im∣punity. And afterwards, That although God doth no Injury to the Offender,§. 47. if he doth not execute his Threatnings; yet out of regard to the Justice of his Word, he doth not recede from what he hath declared: But all Threatnings un∣der the Gospel are Conditional; and none are damned by it, but such as con∣tinue in Impenitency and Unbelief. And in his Explication he saith,§. 50. Not. ad §. 46. That where God hath absolutely declared his Will to
punish in such a manner, he cannot for∣give without Injustice. But our Unitarians speak without any Reserve, That it is not the Justice of God, which prompts him to punish Sinners, and so it is not contrary to his Justice to forgive all Offences without Repentance or Amendment. And thus the Justice of God is not con∣cerned in the Punishments of the great Day, although the Apostle calls it, The Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God. And by this the World may see how ve∣ry far our Modern Unitarians are from handling this Subject more Carefully, Judiciously and Exactly than others; However one of their own Party hath late∣ly affirmed it;Vindic. of S. R. H. p. 128. with as much Confidence and as little Ground as they have done o∣ther things. 3. That it is very agreeable to Divine Justice to accept of a Satisfaction on be∣half of the Sins of Mankind, who do not persist in their evil ways, so that their Sins shall be forgiven upon their Repen∣tance and Amendment. For since the Ex∣ercise of Punitive Iustice is not necessary on the Persons of the Offenders, and since God in this Life abates so much of his just
Severity against them; he thereby shews, that he doth not proceed with Mankind here according to the Rigor of his Iustice; but yet, since God hath given to them very just and righteous Laws, since those Laws have been broken and his Authority con∣temned, it is very just for God to require a Sacrifice of Atonement for the Sins of the World, that Manind may see that God was justly displeased at them, and that none take Incouragement to go on to commit them; but yet, that upon their hearty Re∣pentance and sincere Obedience, they may be assured of the Remission of Sins and the Promise of Eternal Life. All the Diffi∣culty now remaining is about Christ's Suffe∣ring in our stead, of which the Scripture speaks so fully in the places already men∣tion'd. But we must consider what is An∣swered to them. II. To those places of Scripture which speak of Christ's Suffering the Punishment of our Sins; all that Socinus saith, comes to these two things. Socin de Servat. Part. 2. c. 4. &c.1. That Christ suffer'd on the occa∣sion of our Sins, and with a Design to take away our Sins. 2. That by his Sufferings he came to have a Power to Forgive Sins; and that this is the proper Expiation of Sin. But
by no means that he suffer'd in our stead; for he hath these Words;C. 7. Ut nihil aliud sit Christum pro nobis mortuum esse, quam vice seu loco nostro mortem subiis∣se, id adeo à veritate abhorret ut nihil magis. Which in plain English is, that nothing is more false than that Christ suffer'd in our stead. The old Editions of the Racovian Ca∣techism follow Socinus, and there the An∣swer to the Places which speak of Christ's Dying for us, is, that they do not signify in our stead; but for our good. Which they are very careful to distinguish, be∣cause they think that the latter implies no more than a Condition in order to the Ex∣piation in Heaven; but the other makes him a true Propitiatory Sacrifice for our Sins. But if Christ did not suffer in our stead; how can they possibly Reconcile his undergoing this Condition with their own Measures of Divine Iustice? All they pre∣tend to say, is, that it was Labour and Suf∣fering but not Punishment. Which is to speak against the Common Sense of Mankind; and is a ridiculous piece of Stoicism. They say, it was a meer Act of Dominion as to Christ and not of Justice. But if there be such an Essential Attribute as Iustice in God, then the Exercise of Dominion must
be regulated by it; especially where there was nothing but perfect Innocency. The Case is very different as to the sinful Race of Mankind, who having the Guilt of Sin upon them, God may justly exercise his Dominion over them as he sees cause; but he always doth it justly, although the par∣ticular Reasons may not be within our reach. But here is no Guilt of Sin consider'd, ei∣ther of his own, or others; according to their Principles; and yet they make him to undergo as great Sufferings, as we do, who assert that he suffer'd for our sakes in our stead; which alone gives a Reasonable Account of it. But in the late correct Edition of the Racovian Catechism they say, the Sense of Christ's Suffering for our Sins is two∣fold, but both come to one at last, 1. That Christ suffered as a Sacrifice in our stead; tanquam victima pro nobis Succedanea. How can Socinus and the Racovian Catechism agree? 2. That he suffer'd for our good. But they deny any Commutation which they say, was not in the Expiatory Sacrifice among the Jews. What doth a Substitution differ from a Commutation in this Case? But how do suffering in our stead and for our good come all to one at last?
Either it must be, that Christ did truly suffer in our stead, when he underwent the Punishment of our Sins in order to our Re∣demption and Expiation; and that is a very good and true Sense; which we readily em∣brace, and are very well content that they should come all to one: Or if the mean∣ing be only, that Christ may be said to suffer in our stead, because we have Bene∣fit by the Consequences of his Death; then his dying is only consider'd as a bare Condition and not as a Sacrifice in our stead. As to make it plain by an Instance; we all agree that Joseph's Suffering in E∣gypt was designed by the Wise Provi∣dence of God for the good of his Brethren, which they received after his Advancement, to which his Suffering was an Antecedent Condition. But can any Man say, that he suffer'd in stead of his Brethren? But now if Joseph's Brethren had been sold for Slaves in Egypt, and Joseph had gone down thither and offer'd himself a Prisoner for their Deliverance; this had been truly Suffering in their stead, as well as for their Advantage. And suppose the King of E∣gypt had agreed with Joseph, that if he would become Prisoner for his Brethren, he would advance him, and he should himself deliver them by his own Power; this doth
not at all hinder his Suffering in their stead. But if it had no Relation to their Deliverance by his being made Captive himself; but was only a step to his Ad∣vancement; then it cannot be said to be in their stead, although it might turn to their Advantage. And so much for the Sense of the Racovian Catechism. But our Unitarians fly higher, for they say, 1. That God could not justly or wise∣ly substitute an Innocent Person to un∣dergo Punishment in place of the Guilty. 2. That Christ could not freely offer himself as a Sacrifice in our stead, nor could God accept of it, or allow it. So that here we have the true State of this Controversie between us, viz. whether Christ were a Real Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of Mankind. For, if he could not be Substituted in our stead, nor God accept of his offering up himself for us; all the other Expressions are meer Words given out on purpose to Amuse and Deceive us. And this is that which I have underta∣ken to make out in the following Dis∣course, viz.
1. That the Scripture doth as plainly set forth that Christ suffer'd the Punish∣ment of our Sins and in our stead,Chap. II. as it could do; and that no Expressions could be thought of to that purpose, but might be answered in the same way that they do these. And therefore it is in vain to con∣tend with such Men, who are resolved that Words and Phrases shall signify no other∣wise, than they would have them. And yet at last they cannot deny but a kind of Substitution is implied as a Victima Suc∣cedanea; but how? That he suffer'd for our good and by the occasion of our Sins, but not the Punishment of them. Thus far then we have gained, that the Words of Scripture are for us; but say they, what ever the Words are, they cannot mean any real Punishment, because he was an Innocent Person. Therefore I have shewed; 2. That there is no Repugnancy in Rea∣son,Chap. III. nor to the Iustice of God for an Inno∣cent Person to suffer by his own Consent and for so great an End, what the Scripture attributes to our Saviour. And I have fully answered the Arguments brought by our Adversaries to prove that God could not justly or wisely substitute an Inno∣cent Person to suffer for the Guilty.
Ch. IV. v. 4.3. That Christ did offer up himself, as an Expiatory Sacrifice to God in our stead; and that God did accept and al∣low of it. Which is the Design of the three last Chapters. And till an Answer be gi∣ven to what I have there discoursed at large, I shall refer the Reader to what is already said; and shall suppose those An∣swers to be sufficient, till I see some better Reasons for their Opinion in this matter, than I have yet met with, although I have been no stranger to their late Writings, as, God willing, they may see on another Oc∣casion. E. W. April 24. 1696.
ADVERTISEMENT. THere are already published Two Volumes of Sermons, Preached upon Several Occasions, by the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop of Worcester, in Octavo: Sold by Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church-yard. A Third Volume will speedily be pre∣pared for the Press.
A DISCOURSE Concerning the Sufferings of Christ. CHAP. I. I. Of the Socinian way of interpreting Scripture; and of the uncertainty it leaves us in as to the main Articles of Faith, manifested by an Exposition of Gen. 1. suitable to that way. II. The state of the Controversie in general con∣cerning the Sufferings of Christ for us. He did not suffer the same we should have done. III. The grand mistake in making punishments of the nature of Debts. IV. The difference between
them at large discovered, from the dif∣ferent reason and ends of them. V. The right of punishment in God, proved against Crellius, not to arise from mere domi∣nion. VI. The end of punishment not bare Compensation, as it is in Debts; what punishment due to an injured per∣son by the right of Nature; proper pu∣nishment a result of Laws. VII. Crellius his great mistake about the end of pu∣nishments. VIII. Not designed for sa∣tisfaction of Anger as it is a desire of Revenge. Seneca and Lactantius vin∣dicated against Crellius. IX. The Ma∣gistrates interest in punishment distinct from that of private persons. X. Of the nature of Anger in God, and the sa∣tisfaction to be made to it. Crellius his great arguments against satisfaction depend on a false Notion of God's anger. XI. Of the ends of divine punishments. XII. The different nature of them in this and the future state.
SIR, ALthough the Letter I received from your hands contained in it so many mistakes of my mean∣ing and design, that it seemed to be the greatest civility to the Writer of it, to give no answer at all to it; be∣cause that could not be done, without the discovery of far more weaknesses in him, than he pretends to find in my dis∣course: Yet the weight and importance of the matter may require a farther ac∣count from me, concerning the true reason of the Sufferings of Christ. Where∣in my design was so far from representing old Errors to the best advantage, or to rack my wits to defend them, as that per∣son seems to suggest; that I aimed at nothing more than to give a true ac∣count of what upon a serious enquiry, I judged to be the most natural and genu∣ine meaning of the Christian Doctrine contained in the Writings of the New Testament. I. For finding therein such multitudes of expressions,Of the So∣cinian way of interpre∣ting Scri∣pture. which to an unprejudi∣ced mind attribute all the mighty ef∣fects of the Love of God to us, to the obedience and sufferings of Christ, I be∣gan
to consider what reason there was why the plain and easie sense of those places must be forsaken, and a remote and Metaphorical meaning put upon them. Which I thought my self the more obliged to do, because I could not conceive if it had been the design of the Scripture, to have delivered the recei∣ved Doctrine of the Christian Church, concerning the reason of the sufferings of Christ, that it could have been more clearly and fully expressed than it is al∣ready. So that supposing that to have been the true meaning of the several pla∣ces of Scripture which we contend for; yet the same arts and subtilties might have been used to pervert it, which are imployed to perswade men that is not the true meaning of them. And what is e∣qually serviceable to truth and falshood, can of it self, have no power on the minds of men to convince them it must be one, and not the other. Nay, if e∣very unusual and improper acception of words in the Scripture, shall be thought sufficient to take away the natural and genuine sense, where the matter is capa∣ble of it, I know scarce any article of Faith can be long secure; and by these arts men may declare that they believe
the Scriptures, and yet believe nothing of the Christian Faith. For if the im∣proper, though unusual acception of those expressions of Christ's dying for us, of redemption, propitiation, reconciliation by his blood, of his bearing our iniquities, and being made sin and a curse for us, shall be enough to invalidate all the ar∣guments taken from them to prove that which the proper sense of them doth im∣ply, why may not the improper use of the terms of Creation and Resurre∣ction, as well take away the natural sense of them in the great Articles of the Creation of the world, and Resurection after death? For if it be enough to prove that Christ's dying for us, doth not im∣ply dying in our stead; because some∣times dying for others imports no more than dying for some advantage to come to them; if redemption being sometimes used for mere deliverance, shall make our redemption by Christ, wholly Metapho∣rical; if the terms of propitiation, recon∣ciliation, &c. shall lose their force, be∣cause they are sometimes used where all things cannot be supposed parallel with the sense we contend for: why shall I be bound to believe that the World was ever created in a proper sense, since those
persons against whom I argue, so earnest∣ly contend that in those places in which it seems as proper as any, it is to be un∣derstood only in a metaphorical? If when the world and all things are said to be made by Christ,John 1.3, 10. we are not to under∣stand the production but the reformation of the World and all things in it, although the natural sense of the Words be quite otherwise; what argument can make it necessary for me not to understand the Creation of the World in a metaphorical sense, when Moses delivers to us the hi∣story of it? Why may not I understand in the beginning, Gen. 1. for the beginning of the Mosaical Dispensation, as well as Socinus doth in the beginning, John 1. for the beginning of the Evangelical? and that from the very same argument used by him, viz. that in the beginning is to be understood of the main subject con∣cerning which the author intends to write, and that I am as sure it was in Mo∣ses concerning the Law given by him, as it was in St. Iohn concerning the Gospel delivered by Christ. Why may not the Creation of the Heavens and the Earth, be no more than the erection of the Jewish Polity? since it is acknowledged, that by New Heavens and New Earth
wherein dwelleth righteousness, no more is understood than a new state of things under the Gospel? Why may not the confused Chaos import no more than the state of Ignorance and Darkness under which the World was before the Law of Moses? since it is confessed that it signi∣fies in the New Testament such a state of the World before the Gospel appear∣ed? and consequently, why may not the light which made the first day be the first tendencies to the Doctrine of Moses, which being at first divided and scatte∣red, was united afterwards in one great Body of Laws, which was called the Sun, because it was the great Director of the Iewish Nation, and therefore said to rule the day; as the less considerable Laws of other Nations are called the Moon, because they were to govern those who were yet under the night of Igno∣rance? Why may not the Firmament be∣ing in the midst of the Waters, imply the erection of the Jewish State in the midst of a great deal of trouble, since it is confessed, that Waters are often taken in Scripture in a Metaphorical sense for troubles and afflictions? and the Earth appearing out of the Waters, be no more but the settlement of that State after its
troubles; and particularly with great elegancy after their passage through the Red Sea? And the Production of Herbs and living Creatures, be the great en∣crease of the People of all sorts, as well those of a meaner rank (and therefore called herbs) as those of a higher, that were to live upon the other, and some∣times trample upon them, and therefore by way of excellency called the Living Creatures? And when these were multi∣plied and brought into order, (which being done by steps and degrees, is said to be finished in several days) then the State and the Church flourished and en∣joyed a great deal of pleasure, which was the production of Man and Woman, and their being placed in Paradise: (for a perfect Man, notes a high degree of per∣fection, and a Woman is taken for the Church in the Revelations) but when they followed the Customs of other Nations which were as a forbidden tree to them, then they lost all their happiness and plea∣sure, and were expell'd out of their own Country, and lived in great slavery and misery, which was the Curse pronoun∣ced against them, for violating the rules of Policy established among them. Thus you see how small a measure of wit, by
the advantage of those ways of interpre∣ting Scripture, which the subtilest of our adversaries make use of, will serve to pervert the clearest expressions of Scri∣pture to quite another sense than was ever intended by the Writer of them. And I assure you, if that rule of interpreting Scripture be once allowed; that if words are ever used in a Metaphorical sense, there can be no necessity of understand∣ing them any where in a proper; there is scarce any thing which you look on as the most necessary to be believed in Scripture, but it may be made appear not to be so upon those terms. For by reason of the paucity, and therefore the ambiguity of the Original words of the Hebrew language, the strange Idioms of it, the different senses of the same word in several Conjugations, the want of se∣veral modes of expression which are used in other Languages, and above all the lofty and Metaphorical way of speaking used in all Eastern Countries, and the imitation of the Hebrew Idioms in the Greek Translation of the Old Testament, and Original of the New, you can hard∣ly affix a sense upon any words used therein, but a man who will be at the pains to search all possible significations
and uses of those words, will put you hard to it, to make good that which you took to be the proper meaning of them. Wherefore although I will not deny to our adversaries the praise of subtilty and diligence; I cannot give them that (which is much more praise-worthy) of discretion and sound judgment. For while they use their utmost industry to search all the most remote and Metapho∣rical senses of words, with a design to take off the genuine and proper meaning of them, they do not attend to the ill consequence that may be made of this to the overthrowing those things, the belief of which themselves make necessary to sal∣vation. For by this way the whole Gospel may be made an Allegory, and the Resur∣rection of Christ be thought as meta∣phorical as the Redemption by his Death, and the force of all the Precepts of the Gospel avoided by some unusual signifi∣cation of the words wherein they are de∣livered. So that nothing can be more un∣reasonable than such a method of proceed∣ing, unless it be first sufficiently proved that the matter is not capable of the pro∣per sense, and therefore of necessity the improper only is to be allowed. And this is that which Socinus seems after all
his pains to pervert the meaning of the places in controversie, to rely on most; viz.Socin. de Servat. Part. 2. Cap. 4. That the Doctrine of satisfaction doth imply an impossibility in the thing it self, and therefore must needs be false; nay, he saith, the infallibility of the Revealer had not been enough in this Case, supposing that Christ had said it, and risen from the dead, to declare his own Veracity; unless he had delivered it by its proper causes and ef∣fects, and so shewed the possibility of the thing it self. And the reason, he saith, why they believe their Doctrine true, is not barely because God hath said it, but they believe certainly that God hath said it, because they know it to be true; by know∣ing the contrary Doctrine to be impossi∣ble. The controversie then, concerning the meaning of the places in dispute is to be resolved from the nature and reasona∣bleness of the matter contained in them? for if Socinus his reason be answerable to his confidence, if the account we give of the sufferings of Christ, be repug∣nant not only to the Justice, Goodness and Grace of God, but to the nature of the thing; if it appear impossible, that mankind should be redeemed in a proper sense, or that God should be propitiated by the Death of his Son as a Sacrifice
for sin; if it enervate all the Precepts of Obedience, and tend rather to justifie sins than those who do repent of them; I shall then agree, that no industry can be too great in searching Authors, com∣paring places, examining Versions, to find out such a sense as may be agree∣able to the nature of things, the Attri∣butes of God, and the design of Christi∣an Religion. But if on the contrary, the Scripture doth plainly assert those things, from whence our Doctrine fol∣lows, and without which no reasonable account can be given either of the expres∣sions used therein, or of the sufferings of Christ; if Christ's death did immediate∣ly respect God as a sacrifice, and was paid as a price for our redemption; if such a design of his death be so far from being repugnant to the nature of God, that it highly manifests his Wisdom, Justice and Mercy; if it assert nothing but what is so far from being impossible, that it is very reconcileable to the com∣mon principles of Reason, as well as the Free-Grace of God in the pardon of sin; if, being truly understood, it is so far from enervating, that it advances high∣ly all the purposes of Christian Religion, then it can be no less than a betraying
one of the grand Truths of the Christi∣an Doctrine, not to believe ours to be the true sense of the places in controver∣sie. And this is that which I now take upon me to maintain. II. For our clearer proceeding herein, nothing will be more necessary, than to understand the true state of the Controver∣sie;The state of the Contro∣versie in general. which hath been rendred more ob∣scure by the mistakes of some, who have managed it with greater zeal than judgment; who have asserted more than they needed to have done, and made our Adversaries assert much less than they do: And by this means have shot over their Adversaries heads, and laid their own more open to assaults. It is easie to observe, that most of Socinus his Arguments are levelled against an o∣pinion, which few who have considered these things do maintain, and none need to think themselves obliged to do it; which is, That Christ paid a proper and rigid satisfaction for the sins of men, considered under the notion of debts, and that he paid the very same, which we ought to have done; which in the sense of the Law, is never called Satisfaction, but strict Payment. Against this Soci∣nus disputes from the impossibility of
Christ's paying the very same that we were to have paid; because our penalty was eternal Death, and that as the con∣sequent of inherent guilt, which Christ neither did nor could undergo. Neither is it enough to say, That Christ had un∣dergone eternul Death, unless he had been able to free himself from it; for the ad∣mission of one to pay for another, who could discharge the debt in much less time than the offenders could, was not the same which the Law required. For that takes no notice of any other than the persons who had sinned; and if a Mediator could have paid the same, the Original Law must have been disjunctive; viz. That either the Of∣fender must suffer, or another for him; but then the Gospel had not been the bringing in of a better Covenant, but a performance of the old. But if there be a relaxation or dispensation of the first Law; then it necessarily follows, that what Christ paid, was not the very same which the first Law required: for what need of that, when the very same was paid that was in the obligation? But if it be said, That the dignity of the person makes up, what wanted in the kind or degree of punishment; this is a plain confession
that it is not the same, but something equivalent, which answers the ends of the Sanction, as much as the same would have done, which is the thing we con∣tend for. Besides, if the very same had been paid in the strict sense, there would have followed a deliverance ipso facto; for the release immediately follows the payment of the same: and it had been injustice to have required any thing fur∣ther, in order to the discharge of the Offender, when strict and full payment had been made of what was in the obli∣gation. But we see that Faith and Re∣pentance, and the consequences of those two, are made conditions on our parts, in order to the enjoying the benefit of what Christ hath procured; So that the release is not immediate upon the pay∣ment, but depends on a new contract, made in consideration of what Christ hath done and suffered for us. If it be said, That by Christ's payment, we become his, and he requires these conditions of us; besides the contrariety of it to the Scri∣ptures, which make the conditions to be required by him to whom the pay∣ment was made; we are to consider, that these very persons assert, that Christ paid all for us, and in our name and
stead; so that the payment by Christ was by a substitution in our room; and if he paid the same which the Law required, the benefit must im∣mediately accrue to those in whose name the debt was paid. For what was done in the name of another, is all one to the Creditor, as if it had been done by the Debtor himself. But above all things, it is impossible to reconcile the freeness of remission, with the full payment of the very same which was in the obligation. Neither will it serve to say, That though it was not free to Christ, yet it was to us. For the satisfaction and remission must respect the same person; for Christ did not pay for himself, but for us, neither could the remission be to him. Christ therefore is not consider'd in his own name, but as acting in our stead; so that what was free to him, must be to us; what was exactly paid by him, it is all one as if it had been done by us: so that it is impossible the same debt should be fully paid and freely forgiven. Much less will it avoid the difficulty in this case to say, That it was a refusable payment: for it being supposed to be the very same, it was not in justice refusable; and how∣ever not in equity, if it answer the in∣tention
of the Law, as much as the suf∣fering of the offenders had done; and the more it doth that, the less refusable it is. And although God himself found out the way, that doth not make the pardon free, but the designation of the person who was to pay the debt. Thus when our Adversaries dispute against this opinion, no wonder if they do it successfully; but this whole opinion is built upon a mistake, that satisfaction must be the payment of the very same; which while they contend for, they give our Adver∣saries too great an advantage, and make them think they triumph over the Faith of the Church, when they do it only over the mistake of some particular per∣sons. But the foundation of this mi∣stake, lies in the consideration of punish∣ment, under the notion of debts, and that satisfaction therefore must be by strict payment in rigor of Law; but how great that mistake is, will appear in the subsequent discourse. But it cannot but be wondred at, that the very same per∣sons who consider sins, as debts which must be strictly satisfied for, do withal contend for the absolute necessity of this satisfaction: whereas Socinus his Argu∣ments would hold good, if sins were only
considered as debts, and God as the mere Creditor of punishment; he might as free∣ly part with his own right without satis∣faction, as any Creditor may forgive what summ he pleases to a person indebted to him; and no reason can be brought to the contrary, from that notion of sins, why he may not do it. But if they be considered, with a respect to God's Go∣vernment of the world, and the honour of his Laws, then some further account may be given, why it may not be con∣sistent with that, to pass by the sins of men, without satisfaction made to them. III. And because the mistake in this matter,Of the dif∣ference of debts and punish∣ments. hath been the foundation of most of the subsequent mistakes on both sides, and the discovery of the cause of errors, doth far more to the cure of them, than any Arguments brought against them; and withal, the true understanding of the whole Doctrine of satisfaction de∣pends upon it, I shall endeavour to make clear the notion under which our sins are considered; for upon that depends the nature of the satisfaction which is to be made for them. For while our Adver∣saries suppose, that sins are to be looked on under the notion of debts in this de∣bate, they assert it to be wholly free for
God to remit them, without any satis∣faction. They make the right of pu∣nishment merely to depend on God's ab∣solute Dominion; and that all satisfa∣ction must be considered under the no∣tion of compensation, for the injuries done to him, to whom it is to be made. But if we can clearly shew a considera∣ble difference between the notion of debts and punishments, if the right of punish∣ment doth not depend upon mere Domi∣nion, and that satisfaction by way of punishment, is not primarily intended for compensation, but for other ends, we shall make not only the state of the Con∣troversie much clearer, but offer some∣thing considerable towards the resoluti∣on of it. The way I shall take for the proof of the difference between debts and punishments, shall be using the other for the Arguments for it. For besides, that those things are just in matter of debts, which are not so in the case of punishments; as, that it is lawfull for a man to forgive all the debts which are owing him by all persons, though they never so contumaciously refuse pay∣ment, but our Adversaries will not say so in the case of sins; for although they assert, That the justice of God doth ne∣ver
require punishment in case of repentance,Non resipiscentibus vene∣am non concedere, id de∣mum naturae divinae, & de∣cretis ejus & propterea re∣ctitudini & quitati debi∣tum est ac consentaneum. Socin. de Servat. l. 1. c 1. Non resipiscentes poenà non liberare tum per se aequitati est admodum consntaneum, & positis quibusdam finibus quos Deus sibi in regendis hominibus prfixit facto ne∣cessarium. Crell. c. Grot. c. 2. sect. 29. yet with∣al they assert, That in case of impenitency, it is not only agreeable, but due to the na∣ture and decrees; and there∣fore to the rectitude and e∣quity of God not to give par∣don But if this be true, then there is an apparent difference between the no∣tion of debts and punish∣ments; for the Impeniten∣cy doth but add to the geatness of the debt: And will they say, it is only in God's power to remit small debts, but he must punish the greatest? what be∣comes then of God's absolute liberty to part with hs own right? will not this shew more of his kindness to pardon the greater, rather than lesser offenders? But if there be something in the nature of the thing, which makes it not only just, but necessary for impenitent sinners to be pu∣nished, as Crellius after Socinus frequent∣ly acknowledges, then it is plain, that sins are not to be considered merely as debts, for that obstinacy and impeni∣tency is only punished as a greater de∣gree of sin, and therefore as a greater
debt. And withal, those things are law∣full in the remission of debts, which are unjust in the matter of punishments; as it is lawfull for a Creditor, when two persons are considered in equal circum∣stances, to remit one, and not the other; nay, to remit the greater debt, without any satisfaction, and to exact the lesser to the greatest extremity; but it is un∣just in matter of punishments, where the reason and circumstances are the same, for a person who hath committed a crime of very dangerous consequence, to escape unpunished, and another who hath been guilty of far less to be severe∣ly executed. Besides these considerations, I say, I shall now prove the difference of debts and punishments, from those two things whereby things are best differen∣ced from each other; viz. The different Reason, and the different End of them. IV. (1.) The different Reason of debts and punishments:The reason of humane punishment is the pub∣lick inte∣rest. The reason of debts is dominion and property, and the ob∣ligation of them, depends upon volun∣tary contracts between parties; but the reason of punishments is Justice and Go∣vernment, and depends not upon mere contracts, but the relation the person stands in to that Authority to which
he is accountable for his actions. For if the obligation to punishment, did de∣pend upon mere contract, then none could justly be punished, but such who have consented to it by an antecedent contract: If it be said, That a contract is implied, by their being in society with o∣thers; that is as much as I desire to make the difference appear, for in case of debts, the obligation depends upon the voluntary contract of the person; but in case of punishments, the very relation to Government, and living un∣der Laws doth imply it. And the right of punishment depends upon the obli∣gation of Laws, where the reason of them holds, without any express con∣tract, or superiority of one over ano∣ther; as in the case of violation of the Law of Nations, that gives right to ano∣ther Nation to punish the infringers of it. Otherwise Wars could never be law∣full between two Nations, and none could be warrantable, but those of a Prince against his rebellious subjects, who have broken the Laws themselves consented expresly to. Besides, in case of debts every man is bound to pay, whether he be call'd upon or no; but in case of punishments, no man is bound
to betray or accuse himself. For the obligation to payment in case of debt ariseth from the injury sustained by that particular person, if another detains what is his own from him; but the ob∣ligation to punishment, arises from the injury, the Publick sustains by the impu∣nity of crimes, of which the Magistrates are to take Care; who by the dispen∣sing of punishments, do shew that to be true which Grotius asserts, that if there be any Creditor to be assigned in punish∣ment, it is the publick good: Which appears by this, that all punishments are proportioned, according to the influence the offences have upon the publick in∣terest; for the reason of punishment is not because a Law is broken, but be∣cause the breach of a Law tends to dis∣solve the community, by infringing the Authority of the Laws, and the honour of those who are to take care of them. For if we consider it, the measure of pu∣nishments is in a well ordered State, ta∣ken from the influence which crimes have upon the peace and interest of the community. No man questions, but that Malice, Pride and Avarice, are things really as bad as many faults, that are severely punished by humane
Laws, but the reason these are not pu∣nished is, because they do not so much injury to the publick interest, as Theft and Robbery do. Besides, in those things wherein the Laws of a Nation are con∣cerned, the utmost rigor is not used in the preventing of crimes, or the execu∣tion of them when committed, if such an execution may endanger the publick more than the impunity of the offenders may do. And there are some things which are thought sit to be forbidden, where the utmost means are not used to prevent them; as Merchants are forbid∣den to steal customs, but they are not put under an Oath not to do it. And when penalties have been deserved, the execution of them hath been deferred, till it may be most for the advantage of the publick: as Ioab's punishment till So∣lomon's Reign, though he deserved it as much in David's. So that the rule com∣monly talked of, Fiat justitia & pereat mundus, is a piece of Pedantry, rather than true Wisdom; for whatever pe∣nalty inflicted brings a far greater detri∣ment to the publick, than the forbea∣rance of it, is no piece of Justice to the State, but the contrary; the greatest Law, being the safety and preservation
of the whole Body. By which it ap∣pears, that in humane Laws, the reason of punishment is not, that such an acti∣on is done, but because the impunity in doing it, may have a bad influence on the publick interest; but in debts, the right of Restitution depends upon the injury received by a particular person, who looks at no more than the repara∣tion of his loss by it. V. We are now to consider, how far these things will hold in Divine Laws,The right of Divine punishment not mere Dominion. Crell. Re∣spons. ad Grot. cap. 2. sect. 1. &c. and what the right of punishment doth result from there. For Crellius, the sub∣tillest of our Adversaries, knowing of how great consequence the resolution of this is, in the whole Controversie of Sa∣tisfaction, vehemently contends, That the right of punishment doth result from God's absolute Dominion, and therefore he is to be considered as the offended party, and not as Governor in the right of inflict∣ing punishment; for which his first Ar∣gument is, That our obedience is due to God's Law, on the account of his Dominion;P. 144. but when that is not performed, the penal∣ty succeeds in its room, and therefore that doth belong to God on the same account: His other arguments are, from the compensation of injuries due to the offended party, and
from God's anger against sin, in which he is to be consider'd as the offended party: These two latter will be answered under the next head; the first I am to examine here. He therefore tells us, that the right of punishment belongs to God's Domi∣nion, because the reason of his Govern∣ment of mankind is, because he is the Lord of them. But, for our better un∣derstanding this, we are to consider, al∣though the original right of Govern∣ment doth result from God's Dominion; for therefore our obedience is due, be∣cause of his Sovereignty over us; yet when God takes upon him the notion of a Governour, he enters into a new rela∣tion with his creatures, distinct from the first as mere Lord. For he is equally Lord of all to whom he gives a being, but he doth not require obedience upon equal terms, nor governs them by the same Laws: Dominion is properly shew∣ed in the exercise of power; but when God gives Laws according to which he will reward and punish, he so far re∣strains the exercise of his Dominion to a subserviency to the ends of Government. If we should suppose, that God governs the world merely by his Dominion, we must take away all rewards and punish∣ments;
for then the actions of men, would be the mere effects of irresistable power, and so not capable of rewards and punishments; for there could be nei∣ther of these, where mens actions are capable of the differences of good and e∣vil, and that they cannot be, if they be the acts of God's Dominion, and not of their own. But if God doth not exercise his full Dominion over rational creatures, it is apparent that he doth govern them under another notion than as mere Lord, and the reason of punishment is not to be taken from an absolute right which God doth not make use of, but from the ends and designs of Government, which are his own Honour, the Authority of his Laws, and the good of those whom he doth govern. And Crellius is greatly mistaken, when he makes punishment to succeed in the place of the right of obe∣dience; for it is only the desert of pu∣nishment, which follows upon the vio∣lation of that right; and as we assert, that the right of obedience is derived from God's Sovereignty, so we deny not, but the desert of punishment is from the violation of it; but withal we say, that the obligation to punishment depends upon the Laws, and God's right to in∣flict
punishment (Laws being supposed) is immediately from that Government which he hath over mankind: For o∣therwise, if the whole right of punish∣ment did still depend upon God's Do∣minion, and the first right of Sovereign∣ty, then all sins must have equal punish∣ments, because they are all equal viola∣tions of the fundamental right of obe∣dience; then it were at liberty for God to punish a greater sin, with a less pu∣nishment; and a lesser sin, with a greater: And lastly, this would make the punish∣ment of sin, a mere Arbitrary thing in God; for there would be no reason of punishment, but what depended upon God's mere will; whereas the reason of punishment in Scripture is drawn from a repugnancy of sin to the divine purity and holiness, and not merely from God's power or will to punish; but if that were all the reason of it, there would be no repugnancy in the nature of the thing for the most vitious person to be re∣warded, and the most pious to be made everlastingly miserable. But who ever yet durst say or think so? From whence it appears that the relation between sin and punishment is no result of God's ar∣bitrary will; but it is founded in the
nature of the things; so that as it is just for God to punish offenders, so it would be unjust to punish the most innocent person without any respect to sin. But if the right of punishment depends mere∣ly on God's Dominion, I cannot under∣stand why God may not punish when and whom, and in what manner he pleaseth; without any impeachment of his Justice, and therefore it is to be won∣der'd at, that the same persons who as∣sert the right of punishment to be mere∣ly in God's Dominion, should yet cry out of the injustice of one person being punished for anothers faults; for why may not God exercise his Dominion in this case? yes, say they, he may his do∣minion, but he cannot punish, because pu∣nishment supposes guilt, and cannot be just without it; how far that reaches, will be examined afterwards; at present, we take notice of the contradiction to them∣selves which our Adversaries are guilty of, that they may serve their own hy∣pothesis, for when we dispute with them, against absolute remission without satis∣faction, then they contend that the right of punishment is a mere act of Domi∣nion, and God may part with his right, if he please; but when they dispute with
us against the translation of punishment from one to another, then they no lon∣ger say that the right of punishment is an act of Dominion, but that it is a ne∣cessary consequent of inherent guilt, and cannot be removed from one to another. And then they utterly deny that pu∣nishment is of the nature of debts; for one man's money,Soc. de Ser∣vat. l. 3. c. 3. Pra∣lect. c. 18. they say, may become a∣nothers, but one man's punishment cannot become anothers: Thus they give and take, deny and grant, as it serves for their present purposes. VI. (2.) The different ends of debts and punishments,2. The end of punish∣ments not bare com∣pensation as it is in debts. make it appear that there is a difference in the nature of them; for the intention of the obligation to pay∣ment in case of debt, is the compensa∣tion of the damage which the Creditor sustains; but the intention of punish∣ment, is not bare compensation, but it is designed for greater and further ends. For which we are to consider the diffe∣rent nature of punishments, as they are inflicted by way of reparation of some injury done to private persons, and as they do respect the publick good. I grant, that private persons in case of injuries, seek for compensation of the damage they sustain, and so far they
bear the nature of debts; but if we con∣sider them as inflicted by those who have a care of the publick, though they are to see that no private person suffers injury by another; yet the reason of that is not merely that he might enjoy his own, but because the doing injuries to others tends to the subversion of the ends of Government. Therefore, I can by no means admit that Position of Crel∣lius,Crell. c. Grot. cap. 2. Sect. 2. p. 147. Sect. 17. p. 162. that a Magistrate only punishes as he assumes the person of the particular men who have received injuries from others; for he aims at other ends than merely the compensation of those injured per∣sons. Their great end is according to the old Roman Formula, nè quid Resp. detrimenti capiat: the reason of exact∣ing penalties upon private men is still with a regard to the publick safety. Supposing men in a state of nature no punishment is due to the injured person, but restitution of damage, and compen∣sation of the loss that accrues to him by the injury sustained; and whatever goes beyond this, is the effect of Govern∣ment, which constitutes penalties for perservation of the Society which is un∣der Laws. But herein Crellius is our ad∣versary, but with no advantage at all to
his Cause; for he offers to prove against Grotius, That something more is due by an injury beyond bare compensation for what the other is supposed to lose by the right of nature; for saith he, in every injury there is not only the real damage which the per∣son sustains, but there is a contempt of the person implyed in it, for which as well as the former, he ought to have compensation. To which I answer, 1. That this doth not prove what he designs, viz. that pu∣nishment doth belong to the injured per∣son in a state of Nature, beyond bare restitution, but that it is necessary, that men should not continue in such a state, that so they may be vindicated from that contempt, and others compelled to restitution. Both which, as they are punishments, are not in the power of the offended party as such, but shew that it is very reasonable there should be Laws and Governours, that private persons may be preserved in their just rights, and offenders punished for the vindication not only of their honour, but of the Laws too. And Laws being established, the injured person hath right to no more, than the compensation of his loss; for that being forced upon the offending party, is a sufficient vindica∣tion
of his honour. 2. If the contempt of a private person makes a compensa∣tion necessary, how much more will this hold in a publick Magistrate; whose contempt by disobedience is of far worse consequence than that of a private person. And by this argument Crellius over∣throws his main hypothesis, viz. that God may pardon sin without satisfaction; for if it be not only necessary, that the loss be compensated but the dishonour too; then so much greater as the disho∣nour is, so much higher as the person is, so much more beneficial to the world as his Laws are, so much more necessa∣ry is it that in order to pardon there must be a satisfaction made to him, for the affronts he hath received from men. And if the greatness of the injury be to be measured as Crellius asserts,Crell. c. Grot. cap. 2. p. 174. from the worth and value of the thing, from the dig∣nity and honour of the person, from the dis∣plicency of the fact to him, which he makes the measure of punishment; this makes it still far more reasonable, that God should have satisfaction for the sins of men, than that men should have for the injuries done them by one another; especially consi∣dering what the same Author doth assert afterwards,Sect. 29. p. 198. that it is sometime repugnant
to justice, for one to part with his own right in case of injuries, and that either from the nature and circumstances of the things themselves or a decree or deter∣mination to the contrary: for the first he instanceth in case of notorious defamati∣on; in which he saith, it is a dishonest and unlawful thing for a man, not to make use of his own right for his vindication: and for the other, in case of great obstina∣cy and malice. By both which, it is most apparent, that Crellius puts a mighty dif∣ference between the nature of debts, and punishments, since in all cases he allows it lawful for a person free, to remit his debts; but in some cases he makes it utterly unlawful for a person not to make use of his right for punishment. And withal if a private person may not part with his own right in such cases, how unreasonable is it not to assert the same of the great Governour of the World? and that there may be a necessity for him upon supposition of the contempt of himself and his Laws, to vindicate himself and his honour to the world, by some remarkable testimony of his seve∣rity against sin.
VII. But Crellius yet urgeth another end of punishment,Of Crellius his great mistake a∣bout the end of pu∣nishments. Crell. cap. 2. sect. 2. sect. 28. which though the most unreasonable of all others, yet suf∣ficiently proves from himself the diffe∣rence of debts and punishments, which is, the delight which the injured person takes in seeing the offender punished. This he so much insists upon, as though he made it the most natural end of punish∣ment; for saith he, among the Punishments which a Prince or any other free Person can inflict, revenge is in the first place, and the more there is of that in any thing, the more properly it is called a punishment; and he tells us what he means by this ultio; viz. solatium ex alieno dolore, the content∣ment taken in anothers pain. But saith he,P. 191. no man must object, that this is a thing evil in it self; for although it be forbidden us under the New Testament, yet in it self it is not unlawful for one that hath suffered pain from another to seek for the ease of his own pain, by the miseries of him that injured him: and for this purpose, saith he, we have the Passion of Anger in us, which be∣ing a desire of returning injuries, is then satisfied when it apprehends it done. But how absurd and unreasonable this doctrine is, will be easily discovered, for this would make the primary intend∣ment
of punishment to be the evil of him that suffers it. Where the right of punishment is derived from an in∣jury received, and therefore that which gives that right, is some damage sustai∣ned, the reparation of which is the first thing designed by the offended party: Though it take not up the whole nature of punishment. And on this account no man can justly propose any end to him∣self in anothers evil, but what comes un∣der the notion of restitution. For the evil of another is only intended in pu∣nishment as it respects the good of him for whose sake that evil is undergone. When that good may be obtained with∣out anothers evil, the desire of it is un∣just and unreasonable: and therefore all that contentment that any one takes in the evil another undergoes, as it is evil to him, is a thing repugnant to humane nature, and which all persons condemn in others when they allow themselves in it. It will be hard for Crellius to make any difference between this end of pu∣nishment which he assigns, and the great∣est cruelty; for what can that be worse than taking delight in making others miserable, and seeing them so when he hath made them. I it be replyed, that
cruelty is without any cause, but here a just cause is supposed: I answer, a just cause is only supposed for the punishment, but there can be no just cause for any to delight in the miseries of others, and to comfort themselves by inflicting or beholding them. For the evil of ano∣ther is never intended, but when it is the only means left for compensation; and he must be guilty of great inhumanity, who desires anothers evil any further than that tends to his own good, i. e. the reparation of the damage sustained; which if it may be had without ano∣thers evil, then that comes not by the right of nature within the reason of pu∣nishment; and consequently where it doth not serve for that end, the comfort that men take in it is no part of justice, but cruelty. For there can be no reason at all assigned for it; for that lenimentum doloris which Crellius insists on is meerly imaginary, and no other than the Dog hath in gnawing the stone that is thrown at him; and for all that I know, that propension in nature to the retribution of evil for evil any further than it tends to our security, and the preservation for the future, is one of the most unreasona∣ble Passions in humane Nature.
Of the na∣ture of an∣ger and re∣venge in men, and whether punish∣ments are designed to satisfie them.VIII. And if we examine the nature of Anger, either considered Naturally or Morally, the intention of it is, not the returning evil to another, for the evil received, but the security and perserva∣tion of our selves; which we should not have so great a care of, unless we had a quick sense of injuries, and our blood were apt to be heated at the apprehen∣sion of them. But when this passion vents it self, in doing others injury to alleviate its own grief, it is a violent and unreasonable perturbation; but being governed by reason, it aims at no more, than the great end of our beings; viz. Self-Preservation. But when that cannot be obtained without anothers evil, so far the intendment of it is lawful, but no further. And I cannot therefore think those Philosophers, who have defined Anger to be ,Crell. c. 2. sect. 22. p. 177. by whose Authority Crellius defends himself, when he makes anger to be a desire of revenge, did throughly consider what was just and reasonable in it, but barely what was na∣tural, and would be the effect of that passion, if not governed by reason. For otherwise Iul. Scaliger's definition is much more true and justifiable,er. 313. that it is ap∣petitus depulsionis; viz. that whereby we
are stirred up to drive away from us, any thing that is injurious to us. But because Crellius alledgeth a saying of Se∣neca, that would make vindicta of the nature of punishment,Seneca de Clem. l. 1. c. 20. duabus de causis punire princeps solet, si aut se vindicet aut alium: We shall oppose to this the sense of the same Author in this matter, which may sufficiently clear the other passage: For, saith he,De Irâ, l. 2. c. 32. Inhumanum ver∣bum est, & quidem pro justo receptum, ul∣tio, & à contumelia non differt nisi ordi∣ne: qui dolorem regerit, tantum excusati∣us peccat. And no man speaks with great∣er vehemency against the delight in o∣thers punishments than he doth; for he always asserts, the only reason of punish∣ment, to be some advantage which is to come by it, and not meerly to satisfie anger, or to allay their own griefs, by seeing anothers: For, saith he, the pu∣nishment is inflicted,De Irâ, l. 1. c. 6. Non quia delectetur ullius poena (procul est enim à sapiente tam inhumana feritas) sed ut documentum om∣nium sint: So that it is only the useful∣ness of punishment according to him, which makes it become any wise man; and so far from a satisfaction of his grief by anothers punishment, that he makes that a piece of inhumanity, not inci∣dent
to any who pretend to wisdom. Nay, he denies, that a just punishment doth flow from Anger; for he that in∣flicts that, doth it non ipsius poenae avidus,De Ira, l. 1. c. 9. Cap. 12. sed quia oportet, not as desi∣ring the punishment, but because there are great reasons for it: And elsewhere, Exsequar quia oportet,Cap. 13. non quia dolet: he is far enough then from approving, that imaginary compensation of one mans grief by anothers. And he shews at large that the weakest natures, and the least guided by reason, are the most sub∣ject to this anger and revenge. And al∣though other things be pretended, the general cause of it is, a great infirmity of humane nature; and thence it is, that children and old men, and sick persons, are the most subject to it; and the bet∣ter any are, the more they are freed from it: —quippe minuti Semper & infirmi est animi, exiguique vo∣luptas Vltio— He makes Cruelty to be nothing else, but the intemperance of the mind in ex∣acting punishment;De Clem. l. 2, c. 4. and the difference be∣tween
a Prince and a Tyrant to lie in this, That one delights in punishing,De Clem. l. 1. c. 11, 12. the other never does it but in case of necessity, when the publick good requires it. And this throughout his discourse, he makes the measure of punishment. Who then could imagine, that he should speak so contradictory to himself, as to allow pu∣nishment for meer revenge, or the easing ones own griefs, by the pains of ano∣ther? In the places cited by Crellius, (if taken in his sense) he speaks what commonly is, not what ought to be in the world; for he disputes against it in that very place, therefore that cannot be the meaning which he contends for. The common design of punishments by a Prince, saith he, is either to vindicate himself or others. I so render his words, because vindicare, when it is joyned with the person injured, as here, vindicare se aut alium, doth properly relate to the end of punishment, which is asserting the right of the injured person; but when it is joyned with the persons who have done the injury, or the crimes whereby they did it, then it properly signifies to punish. Thus Sallust useth,Sallust. in Catalin. Cicero. 7. v. Vindicatum in eos; and Cicero, In milites nostros ve∣hementer vindicatum, and for the fact ve∣ry
frequently in him, maleficia vindicare: but when it relates to the injured person, as here it doth, it cannot signifie meer∣ly to punish; for then se vindicare would be to punish ones self, but to assert his own right in case of injury, though it be with the punishment of another: For Vindicatio,Cicero de Invent. 2. as Cicero defines it, est per quam vis & injuria & omnino quod obfu∣turum est defendendo aut ulciscendo pro∣pulsatur. So that the security of our selves in case of force or injury, is that which is called Vindication; which some∣times may be done by defence, and o∣ther times by punishment. And that Se∣neca doth mean no more here, is appa∣rent by what follows; for in case of pri∣vate injuries, he saith, poenam si tutò po∣terit donet, he would have the Prince forgive the punishment, if it may be done with safety; so that he would not have any one punished, to satisfie ano∣thers desire of revenge, but to preserve his own safety: And afterwards he saith, It is much beneath a Princes condition,De Irâ, l. 1. c. 21. to need that satisfaction which arises from ano∣thers sufferings: But for the punishments of others, he saith, The Law hath esta∣blished three ends, the amendment of the persons, or making others better by their
punishments, or the publick security, by taking away such evil members out of the body: So that in publick punishments, he never so much as supposes, that con∣tentment which revenge fansies in others punishments, but makes them wholly designed for the publick advantage. For the Laws in punishment do not look back∣ward but forward; for as Non prae∣terita sed futura in∣tuebitur; nam ut Plato ait, nemo pru∣dens punit quia pecca∣tum est, sed Sen. de Ira, ne peccetur. l. 1. c. 16. Lact. de ira Dei. c. 17. Plato saith, No wise man ever punished, meerly because men had offended, but lest they should: For past things cannot be recalled, but future are therefore forbidden, that they may be prevented. So to the same purpose is the saying of Lactantius, produced by Grotius, Surgimus ad vindictam, non quia laesi sumus, sed ut disciplina servetur, mo∣res corrigantur, licentia comprimatur: haec est Ira justa. To which Crellius answers, That this signifies nothing,Cap. 2. sect. 13. unless it can be proved, that no man may justly punish ano∣ther, merely because he is wronged. If he means of the right to punish, we deny not that to be, because the person is wronged; but if he understands it of the design and end of punishment, then we deny, that it is an allowable end of punishments, any further than it can come under the notion of restitution, of which we have spoken already. When
a Master (which is the instance he pro∣duceth) punisheth his servants because they have disobeyed him: The reason of that punishment, is not the bare disobedience, but the injury which comes to him by it; the reparation of which he seeks by punishment, either as to his authority, security or profit. But he adds, That where punishment is designed, for preser∣vation of discipline, and amendment of manners, and keeping persons in order, (which are the ends mentioned by La∣ctantius) it is where the interest of the persons lies, in the preservation of these, and is therefore offended at the neglect of them. To which I answer, That the in∣terest of such a one, is not barely the interest of an offended party, as such, but the interest of a Governour; and no body denies, but such a one may be an offended party: but the question is, Whether the design of punishment be meerly to satisfie him as the offended par∣ty, or to answer the ends of Govern∣ment? For Crellius hath already told us, what it is to satisfie one as an offended party, that is, to ease himself by the punishment of others; but what ever is designed for the great ends of Govern∣ment, is not to be considered under that
notion, although the Governour may be justly offended at the neglect of them. And there is this considerable difference between the punishment made to an of∣fended party, as such, and that which is for the ends of Government; that the former is a satisfaction to Anger, and the latter to Laws and the publick inte∣rest. For Crellius disputes much for the right of Anger in exacting punishments;Cap. 2. sect. 1. p. 143. Sect. 13. p. 161. the satisfaction of which, in case of real injury, he never makes unlawful, but in case that it be prohibited us by one, whose power is above our own: nay he makes it otherwise the primary end of punishment. So that anger is the main thing upon these terms to be respected in punish∣ment: but where it is designed for the ends before-mentioned, there is no ne∣cessity of any such passion as anger to be satisfied, the ends of punishment may be attained wholly without it:Sen. de ira, l. 1. c. 14, & 15. And pub∣lick punishment, according to Seneca, non ira sed ratio est, is no effect of an∣ger, but reason; for, saith he, nihil mi∣nus quam irasci punientem decet: nothing less becomes one that punisheth, than anger doth; for all punishments be∣ing considered as Medicines, no man ought to give Physick in anger, or to
let himself blood in a fury: A Magistrate, saith he,Chap. 16. when he goes to punish, ought to appear only vultu legis quae non irascitur, sed constituit, with the countenance of the Law, which appoints punishments without passion: The reason of which is, because the Law aims not primarily at the evil of the man that suffers pu∣nishment, but at the good which comes to the publick by such sufferings. For the first design of the Law was to pre∣vent any evil being done, and punish∣ment coming in by way of Sanction to the force of the Law, must have the same primary end which the Law it self had; which is not to satisfie barely the offended party for the breach, any fur∣ther than that satisfaction tends to the security of the Law, and preventing the violation of it for the future. The sub∣stance of what I have said upon this sub∣ject, may be thus briefly comprized, That antecedently to Laws, the offended party hath right to no more than bare reparation of the damage sustained by the injury; that the proper notion of punishment is consequent to Laws, and the inflicting of it is an act of Govern∣ment, which is not designed for meer satisfaction of the anger of the injured
person, but for the publick good, which lies in preserving the authority of the Laws, the preventing all injuries by the security of mens just rights, and the vin∣dication of the dignity and honour of him, who is to take care of the publick good. For these Crellius himself acknow∣ledgeth, to be the just ends of punishments, only he would have the satisfaction a man takes in anothers evil, to come in the first place; wherein how much he is mistaken,Quibus (sc. solatio & se∣curitati) addi possint hono∣ris ac dignitatis, per inju∣riam violatae, & aliquae ratione imminutae vindiciae, assertioque juris nostri. Crel. cap. 2. sect. 28. p. 191. I hope we have already manifested. Because the proper nature of punishment depending upon Laws, the Laws do not primarily design the bene∣fit of private persons (supposing that were so) but the advantage of that community which they are made for. IX. And in those cases wherein the Magistrate doth right to particular per∣sons in the punishment of those who have injured them,The Inte∣rest of the Magistrate in punish∣ment di∣stinct from that of private persons. he doth it not as ta∣king their person upon him, for he aims at other things than they do; they look at a bare compensation for the injury re∣ceived; but the Magistrate at the ill con∣sequence the impunity of injuries may be of to the publick: they, it may be at
the satisfaction of their displeasure; but he at the satisfaction of the Laws; they at their own private damage; he at the violation of the publick peace. And from hence among those Nations who valued all crimes at a certain rate, in matters of injury between man and man, the inju∣red person was not only to receive com∣pensation for his wrong; but a conside∣rable fine was to be paid to the Exche∣quer for the violation of the publick peace.De morib. German. c. 12. Grot. de leg. Goth. in Proleg. ad hist. Goth. p. 67. Lin∣denbrog. Gloss. ad Cod. Leg. Antiq. v. Freda. Spelman. Gloss. v. Freda. Thus Tacitus observes among the old Germans, Grotius of the old Go∣thick Laws, and from them (as most of our modern Laws and Customs are derived) Lindenbrogius of the Salick, Alemannick, Lombardick, Spelman of the Saxon, who tells us in case of murder there were three payments, one to the Kindred, which was called Megbote; the second to the Lord, called Manbote, the third to the King, cal∣led Freda, from the German Frid, which signifies peace, it being the consideration paid to the King for the breach of the publick peace. And this, saith he, in all actions, was anciently paid to the King, because the peace was supposed to be bro∣ken, not by meer force, but by any injuries; and if the action was unjust, the Plain∣tiff paid it; if just, the defendant. And
the measure of it, saith Bignonius,Bignon. not. in Maccul∣phi form. cap. 20. was the tenth part of the value of the thing as estimated by Law which by the Customs of the ancient Romans was deposited at the commencing of a suit by both, and only taken up again by him who over∣came; and was by them called Sacra∣mentum, as Varro tells us.Varro de L. L. lib. 4. And the same custom was observed among the Greeks too, as appears by Iulius Pollux,Iul. Pol∣lux. l. 8. who tells us it was called  among them, and in publick actions was the fifth part, in private the tenth. But that which was paid to the publick in case of murder, was among the Greeks called , the same with poena, for Hesychius tells us that is , and to the same purpose the Scho∣liast on Homer on those words, Iliad. 1. , by which the Original of the name poena, comes from a payment made to the publick, ac∣cording to that known rule, interest reip. delicta puniri, that persons may see how much the publick safety is concerned, that crimes be punished. From which and many other things which might be insisted on, Crellius his Hypothesis will appear to be false, viz. that when the Ma∣gistrate doth judge in the affairs of parti∣cular
men, he doth it only as assuming the person of those men; whereas it appears from the reason of the thing, and the Custom of Nations, that the interest of the Magistrate is considered as distinct from that of private persons, when he doth most appear in vindication of in∣juries. But all this is managed with a re∣spect to the grand hypothesis, viz. that the right of punishing doth belong only to the offended party as such, that the pu∣nishment is of the nature of debts, and the satisfaction by compensation to the anger of him who is offended. The falsity of which this discourse was de∣signed to discover. Having thus considered the nature of punishments among men, we come more closely to our matter, by examining how far this will hold in the punish∣ments which God inflicts on the account of sin. For which two things must be enquired into, 1. In what sense we at∣tribute anger to God. 2. What are the great ends of those punishments God in∣flicts on men on the account of sin.Of the na∣ture of Anger in God; the satisfacti∣on to be made to it. X. For the first, though our Adver∣saries are very unwilling to allow the term of punitive justice, yet they con∣tend for a punitive anger in God, and
that in the worst sense as it is appetitus vindictae:Crell. cap. sect. 1. p. 145. p. 177. for after Crellius hath con∣tended that this is the proper notion of anger in general; neither ought any one to say, he adds, that anger as other pas∣sions is attributed improperly to God; for setting aside the imperfections, which those passions are subject to in us, all the rest is to be attributed to him, taking away then that perturbation, and pain, and grief we find in our selves in anger, to which the abhorrency of sin answers in God, all the rest doth agree to him. I would he had a lit∣tle more plainly told us what he means by all the rest, but we are to guess at his meaning by what went before, where he allows of Cicero,Cicer. Tus∣cul 4. A∣rist. Rhet. l. 2. c. 2. and Aristotle's defi∣nition of Anger, whereof the one is, that it is libido, or (as Crellius would rather have it,) cupiditas puniendi, the other , &c. and him∣self calls it poenae appetitio, and in ano∣ther place, that it may be as properly defi∣ned cupiditas vindictae, as cupiditas poenae or affectus vindicandi, as well as puniendi:Crell. c. 2. sect. 22. p. 177. in all which places, he doth assert such an anger in God as supposes such a mo∣tion, or desire, or inclination to punish sin when it is committed, as there is in us when an injury is done us, on∣ly
the perturbation and pain excluded. But he hath not thought fit to explain how such new motions or inclinations in the divine nature every time sin is committed, are consistent with the im∣mutability and perfection of it; nor what such a kind of desire to punish in God imports, whether a meer inclina∣tion without the effect, or an inclination with the effect following: if without the effect, then either because the sin was not great enough, or God's honour was not concerned to do it, and in this case the same reasons which make the effect not to follow, make the desire of it in∣consistent with the divine wisdom and perfection: or else because the effect is hindred by the repentance of the person, or some other way which may make it not necessary to do it; then upon the same reason the effect is suspended, the inclination to do it should be so too; for that must be supposed to be governed by an eternal reason and counsel as well as his actions; unless some natural pas∣sions in God be supposed antecedent to his own wisdom and counsel, which is derogatory to the infinite perfection of God, since those are judged imperfecti∣ons in our selves: if it be taken only
with the effect following it, then God can never be said to be angry but when he doth punish, whereas his wrath is said to be kindled in Scripture, where the ef∣fect hath not followed; which if it im∣plies any more than the high provoca∣tion of God to punish (as I suppose it doth not) then this inclination to punish is to be conceived distinct from the ef∣fect following it. But that conception of anger in God seems most agreeable to the divine nature, as well as to the Scri∣ptures, which makes it either the punish∣ment it self,Crell. de verâ Relig· l. 1. c. 30. as Crellius elsewhere acknow∣ledges it is often taken so; or God's declaration of his will to punish, which is called the revelation of the wrath of God against all unrighteousness of men, God thereby discovering the just displeasure he hath against sin; or the great provo∣cation of God to punish, by the sins of men; as when his wrath is said, to be kindled, &c. By this sense we may ea∣sily reconcile all that the Scripture saith concerning the wrath of God; we make it agreeable to infinite perfection, we make no such alterations in God, as the appea∣sing of his anger must imply, if that imply any kind of commotion in him. And thus the grand difficulty of Crellius ap¦pears
to be none at all,Crell. cap. 7. sect. 3. p. 350. against all those passages of Scripture which speak of ap∣peasing God, of atonement, and reconci∣liation, viz. that if they prove satisfacti∣on, they must prove that God being actually angry with mankind before the sufferings of his Son, he must be presently appeased upon his undergoing them. For no more need to be said, than that God being justly provoked to punish the sins of mankind, was pleased to accept of the sufferings of his Son, as a sufficient sa∣crifice of Atonement for the sins of the world, on consideration of which he was pleased to offer those terms of par∣don, which upon mens performance of the conditions required on their part, shall be sufficient to discharge them from that obligation to punishment which they were under by their sins. And what absurdity, or incongruity there is in this to any principle of reason I cannot imagine. But our Adversaries first make opinions for us, and then shew they are unreasonable. They first sup∣pose that anger in God is to be consider∣ed as a passion, and that passion a desire of revenge for satisfaction of it; and then tell us, that if we do not prove, that this desire of revenge can be satis∣fied
by the sufferings of Christ, then we can never prove the doctrine of satisfa∣ction to be true; whereas we do not mean by God's anger any such passion, but the just declaration of God's will to punish upon our provocation of him by our sins; we do not make the design of satisfaction to be, that God may please himself in the revenging the sins of the guilty upon the most innocent person; because we make the design of punish∣ment, not to be the satisfaction of an∣ger as a desire of revenge, but to be the vindication of the honour and rights of the injured person, by such a way as him∣self shall judge most satisfactory to the ends of his Government. XI. (2.) Which is the next thing we are to clear:Of the ends of divine punish∣ments. Crell. c. 2. sect. 29. p. 129. For which end we shall make use of the Concession of Crellius, That God hath prefixed some ends to him∣self in the Government of mankind; which being supposed, it is necessary, that impe∣nitent sinners should be punished. What these ends of God are, he before tells us, when he enquires into the ends of Divine punishments, which he makes to be, security for the future,P. 195. by mens avoid∣ing sins, and a kind , or pleasure which God takes in the destruction of his
implacable enemies, and the asserting and vindicating his own right by punishing, and shewing men thereby, with what care and fear they ought to serve him; and so at∣tains the ends of punishment proposed by Lactantius, and manifestation of the Di∣vine Honour and Majesty, which hath been violated by the sins of men. All these we accept of, with this caution, That the de∣light which God takes in the punishing his implacable enemies, be not under∣stood of any pleasure in their misery, as such, by way of meer revenge; but as it tends to the vindication of his Right, and Honour, and Majesty; which is an end suitable to the Divine Nature: but the other cannot in it self have the notion of an end; for an end doth sup∣pose something desirable for it self, which surely the miseries of others can∣not have to us, much less to the Divine Nature. And that place which Crellius insists on to prove the contrary, Deut. 28.63. The Lord will rejoyce over you, to de∣stroy you; imports no more, than the sa∣tisfaction God takes in the execution of his Justice, when it makes most for his ho∣nour, as certainly it doth in the punish∣ment of his greatest enemies. And this is to be understood in a sense agreeable to
those other places, where God is said not to delight in the death of sinners;Ezek. 18. v. 23, 32. c. 33.11. which doth not (as Crellius would have it) meerly express God's benignity and mercy, but such an agreeableness of the exer∣cise of those attributes to God's nature, that he neither doth nor can delight in the miseries of his creatures in them∣selves, but as they are subservient to the ends of his Government, and yet such is his kindness in that respect too, that he useth all means agreeable thereto, to make them avoid being miserable, to ad∣vance his own glory.Grot de sa∣tisfact. c. 2. p. 43. Ed. 1617. Grot. de ju∣re belli, &c. l 2. c. 20. sect. 4. And I cannot but wonder that Grotius, who had asserted the contrary in his Book of Satisfaction, should in his Books De Iure belli ac pa∣cis, assert, That when God punisheth wick∣ed men, he doth it for no other end but that he might punish them: For which he makes use of no other arguments, than those which Crellius had objected against him; viz. The delight God takes in pu∣nishing, and the judgments of the life to come, when no amendment can be expected; the former hath been already answered, the latter is objected by Crellius against him, when he makes the ends of punish∣ment, merely to respect the communi∣ty, which cannot be asserted of the punish∣ments
of another Life, which must chiefly respect the vindication of God's glory, in the punishment of unreclaim∣able sinners. And this we do not deny to be a just punishment, since our Ad∣versaries themselves, as well as we, make it necessary. But we are not to understand, that the end of Divine pu∣nishments doth so respect the communi∣ty, as though God himself were to be excluded out of it; for we are so to un∣derstand it, as made up of God as the Governour, and mankind as the persons governed, whatever then tends to the vindication of the rights of God's Ho∣nour and Sovereignty, tends to the good of the whole, because the manifestation of that end is so great an end of the whole. The ends of Divine punish∣ments dif∣ferent in this and the future state.XII. But withal, though we assert in the life to come, the ends of punishment not to be the reclaiming of sinners, who had never undergone them, unless they had been unreclaimable; yet a vast diffe∣rence must be made between the ends of punishments in that, and in this present state. For the other is the Reserve, when no∣thing else will do, and therefore was not primarily intended; but the proper ends of punishment, as a part of Government,
are to be taken from the design of them in this life. And here we assert, that God's end in punishing, is the advancing his Honour, not by the meer miseries of his creatures, but that men by behold∣ing his severity against sin, should break off the practice of it, that they may e∣scape the punishments of the future state. So that the ends of punishment here, are quite of another kind, from those of ano∣ther life; for those are inflicted, because persons have been unreclaimable by ei∣ther the mercies or punishments of this life; but these are intended, that men should so far take notice of this severity of God, as to avoid the sins which will expose them to the wrath to come. And from hence it follows, That whatsoever sufferings do answer all these ends of Divine punishments, and are inflicted on the account of sin, have the proper no∣tion of punishments in them, and God may accept of the undergoing them as a full satisfaction to his Law, if they be such as tend to break men off from sin, and assert God's right, and vindicate his Honour to the world; which are the ends assigned by Crellius, and will be of great consequence to us in the following Dis∣course.
CHAP. II. I. The particular state of the Controver∣sie, concerning the sufferings of Christ. The Concessions of our Adversaries. II. The debate reduced to two heads: The first concerning Christs sufferings, being a punishment for sin, entred upon. In what sense Crellius acknowledgeth the sins of men, to have been the impulsive cause of the death of Christ. III. The sufferings of Christ proved to be a pu∣nishment, from Scripture. The impor∣tance of the phrase of bearing sins. IV. Of the Scape-Goats bearing the sins of the people into the Wilderness. V. Grotius his sense of 1 Pet. 2.24. vindicated against Crellius and himself.  never used for the taking a∣way a thing by the destruction of it. VI. Crellius his sense examined. VII. Isa. 53.11. vindicated. The argument from Matt. 8.17, answered. Grotius con∣stant to himself in his notes on that place. VIII. Isa. 53.5, 6, 7. cleared. IX. Whe∣ther Christ's death be a proper , and whether that doth imply, that it was a punishment of sin? How
far the punishments of Children for their Fathers faults, are exemplary among men. The distinction of calamities and punishments, holds not here. X. That God's hatred of sin could not be seen in the sufferings of Christ, unless they were a punishment of sin, proved against Crel∣lius. XI. Grotius his Arguments from Christ being made sin and a curse for us, defended. The liberty our Adver∣saries take in changing the sense of Words. XII. The particles , being joyned to sins and relating to sufferings do imply those sufferings to be a punishment for sin. According to their way of interpreting Scripture, it had been impossible for our doctrine to be clearly expressed therein. I. THESE things being thus far cleared concerning the na∣ture and ends of punishments,The parti∣cular state of the con∣troversie concern∣ing the sufferings of Christ for us. and how far they are of the nature of debts, and consequently what kind of satisfaction is due for them, the resolution of the grand Question concer∣ning the sufferings of Christ will appear much more easie; but that we may pro∣ceed with all possible clearness in a de∣bate of this consequence, we must yet a
little more narrowly examine the diffe∣rence between our Adversaries and us in this matter; for their concessions are in terms sometimes so fair, as though the difference were meerly about words with∣out any considerable difference in the thing it self. If we charge them with denying satisfaction,Crell. praef. p. 7. Crellius answers in the name of them, that we do it unjust∣ly; for they do acknowledge a satisfa∣ction worthy of God, and agreeable to the Scriptures. If we charge them with de∣nying that our salvation is obtained by the death of Christ, they assert the con∣trary, as appears by the same Author. Nay,Ruarus in Epistol. Crell. cap. 9. sect 2. Cap. 10. sect. 10. Cap. 7, 8, &c. Cap. 1. sect. 57. Ruarus attributes merit to the death of Christ too. They acknowledge, that Christ died for us, nay, that there was a commutation between Christ and us, both of one person for another, and of a price for a person; and that the death of Christ may be said to move God to redeem us; they acknowledge reconciliation, and ex∣piation of sins to be by the death of Christ. Nay, they assert, that Christ's death was by reason of our sins, and that God design∣ed by that to shew his severity against sin. And what could we desire more, if they meant the same thing by these words, which we do? They assert a satisfaction,
but it is such a one as is meerly fulfilling the desire of another: in which sense all that obey God may be said to satis∣fie him. They attribute our salvation to the death of Christ, but only as a con∣dition intervening, upon the performance of which the Covenant was confirmed, and himself taken into Glory, that he might free men from the punishment of their sins. They attribute merit to Christ's death but in the same sense that we may merit too, when we do what is pleasing to God. They acknowledge, that Christ died for us, but not in our stead, but for our advantage; that there was a commutation; but not such a one, as that the Son of God did lay down his blood as a proper price in order to our redemption as the purchase of it; when they speak of a moving cause, they tell us, they mean no more than the perfor∣mance of any condition may be said to move, or as our prayers and repentance do. The reconciliation they speak of, doth not at all respect God but us; they assert an expiation of sins consequent up∣on the death of Christ, but not depen∣ding upon it any otherwise, than as a con∣dition necessary for his admission to the office of a High Priest in Heaven, there
to expiate our sins by his power, and not by his blood; but they utterly deny, that the death of Christ is to be considered as a proper expiatory sacrifice for sin; or that it hath any further influence upon it, than as it is considered as a means of the confirmation of the truth of his Do∣ctrine, and particularly the promise of remission of sins, on which▪ and not on the death of Christ they say our remission depends; but so far as the death of Christ may be an argument to us to believe his Doctrine, and that faith may incline us to obedience, and that obedience be∣ing the condition in order to pardon, at so many removes they make the death of Christ to have influence on the remis∣sion of our sins. They assert, that God took occasion by the sins of men to ex∣ercise an act of dominion upon Christ in his sufferings, and that the sufferings of Christ were intended for the taking away the sins of men; but they utterly deny, that the sufferings of Christ were to be conside∣red as a punishment for sin; or that Christ did suffer in our place and stead; nay, they contend with great vehemency, that it is wholly inconsistent with the justice of God to make one mans sins the meritorious cause of anothers punishment; especially one whol∣ly
innocent, and so that the guilty shall be freed on the account of his sufferings. Thus I have endeavoured to give the true state of the controversie with all clearness and brevity. And the substance of it will be reduced to these two debates. 1. Whether the sufferings of Christ in general are to be considered as a punish∣ment of sin, or as a meer act of dominion? 2. Whether the death of Christ in particular were a proper expiatory sacri∣fice for sin, or only an antecedent condi∣tion to his exercise of the Office of Priest∣hood in Heaven? II. (1.) Whether the sufferings of Christ in general are to be considered as a punishment of sin,Whether the suffer∣ings of Christ are to be con∣sidered as a punish∣ment of sin. or as a meer act of dominion? for that it must be one or the other of these two, cannot be de∣nied by our Adversaries; for the inflict∣ing those sufferings upon Christ, must either proceed from an antecedent meri∣torious cause, or not. If they do, they are then punishments; if not, they are meer exercises of power and dominion; whatever ends they are intended for, and whatever recompence be made for them. So Crellius asserts,Crell. cap. 2. sect. 1. p. 142. that God as absolute Lord of all, had a right of absolute domi∣nion upon the life and body of Christ, and
therefore might justly deliver him up to death, and give his body to the Cross; and although Christ by the ordinary force of the Law of Moses, had a right to escape so painful and accursed a death, yet God by the right of dominion had the power of dispo∣sal of him, because he intended to compen∣sate his torments with a reward infinitely greater than they were: but because he saith, for great end the consent of Christ was necessary, therefore God did not use his utmost dominion in delivering him up by force as he might have done, but he dealt with him by way of command, and rewards proposed for obedience, and in this sence he did act as a righteous Gover∣nour, and indulgent Father, who encoura∣ged his Son to undergo hard, but great things. In which we see that he makes the sufferings of Christ an act of meer dominion in God, without any antecedent cause as the reason of them; only he qua∣lifies this act of dominion with the pro∣posal of a reward for it. But we must yet further enquire into their meaning, for though here Crellius attributes the sufferings of Christ meerly to God's do∣minion, without any respect to sin, yet elsewhere he will allow a respect that was had to sin antecedently to the suf∣ferings
of Christ,Crell. cap. 1. sect. 7. &c. Socin. de Christo servat. l. 3. c. 10. Crell. cap. 1. sect. 16. Socin. l. 2. c. 7. and that the sins of men were the impulsive cause of them. And although Socinus in one place utter∣ly denies any lawful antecedent cause of the death of Christ, besides the will of God and Christ, yet Crellius in his Vindication saith, by lawful cause, he meant meritori∣ous, or such upon supposition of which he ought to die; for elsewhere he makes Christ to die for the cause, or by the occa∣sion of our sins; which is the same that Crellius means by an impulsive, or pro∣catartick cause. Which he thus explains, we are now to suppose a decree of God not only to give salvation to Mankind,Crell. c. 1. sect. 11. but to give us a firm hope of it in this present state, now our sins by deserving eternal pu∣nishment, do hinder the effect of that decree upon us, and therefore they were an impulsive cause of the death of Christ, by which it was effected, that this decree should obtain not∣withstanding our sins. But we are not to un∣derstand as tho' this were done by any expia∣tion of the guilt of sin by the death of Christ; but this effect is hindred by three things, by taking away their sins, by assuring men that their former sins, and present infirmities upon their sincere obedience shall not be im∣puted to them, and that the effect of that decree shall obtain, all which, saith he, is
effected morte Christi interveniente, the death of Christ intervening, but not as the procuring cause. So that after all these words he means no more by making our sins an impulsive cause of the death of Christ, but that the death of Christ was an argument to confirm to us the truth of his Doctrine, which doctrine of his doth give us assurance of these things: and that our sins when they are said to be the impulsive cause, are not to be consi∣dered with a respect to their guilt, but to that distrust of God which our sins do raise in us; which distrust is in truth accor∣ding to this sense of Crellius the impulsive cause, and not the sins which were the cause or occasion of it. For that was it which the doctrine was designed to re∣move, and our sins only as the caes of that. But if it be said, that he speaks not only of the distrust, but of the punish∣ment of sin as an impediment which must be removed too, and therefore may be cal∣led an impulsive cause, we are to consider that the removal of this is not attributed to the death of Christ, but to the leaving of our sins by the belief of his Doctrine; therefore the punishment of our sins can∣not, unless in a very remote sense, be said to be an impulsive cause of that, which
for all that we can observe by Crellius, might as well have been done without it; if ny other way could be thought suffi∣ent to confirm his Doctrine, and Christ, without dying, might have had power to save all them that obey him. But we understand not an impulsive cause in so remote a sense, as though our sins were a meer occasion of Christs dying, because the death of Christ was one argument a∣mong many others to believe his Do∣ctrine, the belief of which would make men leave their sins; but we contend for a nearer and more proper sense, viz. that the death of Christ was primarily intended for the expiation of our sins, with a respect to God and not to us, and there∣fore our sins as an impulsive cause are to be considered as they are so displeasing to God, that it was necessary for the Vindication of God's Honour, and the deterring the world from sin, that no less a Sacrifice of Atonement should be offered, than the blood of the Son of God. So that we understand an impul∣sive cause here in the sense, that the sins of the people were, under the Law, the cause of the offering up those Sacrifices, which were appointed for the expiation of them. And as in those Sacrifices
there were two things to be considered, viz. the mactation, and the oblation of them, the former as a punishment by a substitution of them in place of the per∣sons who had offended; the latter as the proper Sacrifice of Atonement, although the mactation it self, considered with the design of it, was a Sacrificial act too: So we consider the sufferings of Christ with a two-fold respect, either as to our sins, as the impulsive cause of them, so they are to be considered as a punishment, or as to God, with a design to expiate the guilt of them, so they are a Sacrifice of Atonement. The first consideration is that we are now upon, and upon which the present debate depends, for if the suf∣ferings of Christ be to be taken under the notion of punishment, then our Ad∣versaries grant, that our sins must be an impulsive cause of them in another sense than they understand it. For the clear∣ing of this, I shall prove these two things. 1. That no other sense ought to be admitted of the places of Scripture which speak of the sufferings of Christ with a respect to sin, but this. 2. That this Account of the sufferings of Christ, is no ways repugnant to the Iustice of God.
III. That no other sense ought to be admitted of the places of Scripture,The suf∣ferings of Christ proved to be a pu∣nishment from Scri∣pture. 1 Pet. 2.24. Isa. 53.4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. Rom. 4.25. which speak of the sufferings of Christ with a respect to our sins, but that they are to be considered as a punishment for them. Such are those which speak of Christ bearing our sins, of our iniquities being laid upon him, of his making himself an offering for sin, and being made sin and a curse for us, and of his dying for our sins. All which I shall so far consider, as to vindicate them from all the exceptions which Socinus and Crellius have offered against them. 1. Those which speak of Christ's bear∣ing our sins. As to which we shall consi∣der, First, The importance of the phrase in general of bearing sin, and then the circumstances of the particular places in dispute. For the importance of the phrase, Socinus acknowledges,Soc. de ser∣vat. l. 2. cap. 4. that it generally signifies bearing the punishment of sin in Scripture: but that sometimes it signifies taking away.Crell. cap. 1. Sect. 32. The same is confessed by Crellius, but he saith, it doth not always signifie bearing proper punishment, but it is enough (says he) that one bears something burdensome on the occasion of others sins: and so Christ by undergoing his sufferings by occasion of sins, may be said to bear our
sins. And for this sense he quotes Numb. 14.33. And your Children shall wander in the Wilderness forty years, and bear your whoredoms, until your carcasses be wasted in the Wilderness. Whereby, saith he, it is not meant that God would punish the Children of the Israelites, but that by the occasion of their parents sins, they should undergo that trouble, in wandring in the Wilderness, and being deprived of the pos∣session of the promised Land. But could Crellius think that any thing else could have been imagined, (setting aside a to∣tal destruction) a greater instance of God's severity, than that was to the Children of Israel all their circumstan∣ces being considered?Psal. 95.11. Heb. 3.11. Is it not said, that God did swear in his wrath, they should not enter into his rest? Surely then the debarring them so long of that rest, was an instance of God's wrath, and so ac∣cording to his own principles must have something of Vindicta in it, and there∣fore be a proper punishment. The truth is, our Adversaries allow themselves in speaking things most repugnant to Hu∣mane Nature in this matter of punish∣ments, that they may justifie their own hypothesis. For a whole Nation to be for forty years debarred from the greatest
blessings were ever promised them; and instead of enjoying them, to endure the miseries and hardships of forty years travels in a barren wilderness, must not be thought a punishment, and only be∣cause occasioned by their Parents sins. But whatever is inflicted on the account of sin, and with a design to shew God's severity against it, and thereby to deter others from the practice of it, hath the proper notion of punishment in it; and all these things did concurr in this in∣stance, besides the general sense of man∣kind in the matter of their punishment, which was such, that supposing them preserved in their liberty, could not have been imagined greater. And there∣fore Vatablus, whom Socinus and Crellius highly commend, thus renders those words,Doctissimè & elegan∣tissimè Va∣tablus ut ferè solet. Soc. de serv. l. 1. c. 8. Crell. cap. 1. Sect. 31. dabunt poenas pro fornicationibus vestris quibus defecistis à Deo vestro: they shall suffer the punishment of your for∣nications. And that bearing the sins of Parents doth imply properly bearing the punishment of them, methinks they should not so earnestly deny, who con∣tend that to be the meaning of the words in Ezekiel,Ezek. 18.20. The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father; viz. that he shall not bear the punishment of his Fathers
sins. Where in bearing iniquity with a respect to their Parents sins, by their own confession, must be taken for the proper punishment; for otherwise they do not deny,Crell. cap. 4. sect. 15. but Children, notwith∣standing that sentence, may undergo much affliction on the occasion of their Parents sins. Of the Scape-Goats bearing away the sins of the people.IV. But Socinus further objects, that bearing sins doth not imply the punishment of them, because the Scape-Goat under the Law, is said to bear upon him the iniqui∣ties of the people, and yet could not be said to be punished for them. To which Grotius answers,Socin. 2. c. 4. Lev. 16.22. Grot. de sat. cap. 1. that Socinus takes it for granted without reason, that the Scape-Goat could not be said to be punished for the sins of the people; for punishment in ge∣neral, may fall upon beasts for the sins of men, Gen. 9.5. Exod. 21.28. Lev. 20.15. Gen. 8.21. and Socinus hath no cause to say, that the Scape-Goat was not slain; for the Iewish Interpreters do all agree that he was, and however the sending him into the Wilderness was intended as a pu∣nishment, and most probably by an unnatu∣ral death.Crell cap. 1. sect. 56. To which Crellius replies, That in the general, he denies not but pu∣nishment may fall upon beasts as well as men; but (that he might shew himself
true to his principle, that one cannot be punished for anothers faults,) he falls in∣to a very pleasant discourse, That the Beasts are not said to be punished for mens sins, but for their own, and therefore when it is said, before the flood, that all flesh had corrupted his way;Gen. 6.12. he will by no means have it understood only of men, but that the sins of the beasts at that time, were greater than ordinary, as well as mens. But he hath not told us what they were, whether by eating some forbidden herbs; or entring into conspiracies against man∣kind their lawful Sovereigns, or unlaw∣ful mixtures; and therefore we have yet reason to believe, that when God saith, the ground was cursed for man's sake,Gen. 8.21. that the beasts were punished for mans sin. And if all flesh,Isa. 40.5. must comprehend beasts in this place, why shall not all flesh see∣ing the glory of the Lord, take in the beasts there too? for Vatablus parallels this place with the other. But if, saith Crel∣lius, any shall contend that some beasts at least were innocent, then, he saith, that those though they were destroyed by the flood, yet did not suffer punishment, but on∣ly a calamity by occasion of the sins of men. I wonder he did not rather say, that the innocent beasts were taken into the Ark,
for the propagation of a better kind af∣terwards. But by this solemn distincti∣on of calamities and punishments, there is nothing so miserable, that either men or beasts can undergo, but when it serves their turn, it shall be only a calamity and no punishment, though it be said to be on purpose to shew God's severity a∣gainst the sins of the world. And this excellent notion of the beasts being pu∣nished for their own sins, is improved by him to the vindication of the Scape-Goat from being punished, because then, saith he, the most wicked and corrupt Goat should have been made choice of. As though all the design of that great day of expiation had been only to call the Children of Israel together with great solemnity; to let them see, how a poor Goat must be punished for breaking the Laws which we do not know were ever made for them. I had thought our Adversaries had maintained that the Sacrifices (on the day of expiation at least) had repre∣sented and typified the Sacrifice which was to be offered up by Christ; and so Socinus and Crellius elsewhere contend: he needed not therefore have troubled himself concerning the sins of the Goat,Lev. 16.21. when it is expresly said, That the sins of
the people were put on the head of the Goat; Whatever then the punishment were, it was on the account of the sins of the people, and not his own. But Crellius urgeth against Grotius, that if the Scape-Goat had been punished for the ex∣piation of the sins of the people, that should have been particularly expressed in Scri∣piure, whereas nothing is said there at all of it, and that the throwing down the Scape-Goat from the top of the rock, was no part of the Primitive Institution, but one of the superstitions taken up by the Iews in after-times, because of the Omi∣nousness of the return of it; and although we should suppose (which is not probable) that it should die by famine in the Wilder∣ness, yet this was not the death for expia∣tion, which was to be by the shedding of blood. To this therefore I answer, 1. I do not insist on the customs of the later Jews to prove from thence any punish∣ment designed by the primitive institu∣tion. For I shall easily yield, that ma∣ny superstitions obtained among them aftewards about the Scape-Goat; as the stories of the red list turning white up∣on the head of it, the booths and the causey made on purpose, and several o∣ther things mentioned in the Rabbinical
Writers do manifest. But yet it seems very probable from the Text it self,Cod. Ioma. tit. 6. that the Scape-Goat was not carried into the Wilderness at large, but to a steep moun∣tain there. For although we have com∣monly render'd Azazel by the Scape-Goat, yet according to the best of the Jewish writers, as P. Fagius tells us,  doth not come from  a Goat, and  abiit; but is the name of a Mountain very steep and rocky near Mount Sinai, and therefore probably called by the later Jews, , the name of a Rock: and to this purpose, it is observable that where we render it, and let him go for a Scape-Goat into the Wilderness, in the Hebrew it is,Lev. 16.12.  to send him to Azazel in the Wilderness: as the joyning the preposition  doth import, and the Arabick Version wherever Aza∣zel is mentioned, renders it by Mount Azaz: and the Chaldee and Syriack to Azazel; so that from hence, a carrying the Scape-Goat to a certain place may be inferred; but I see no foundation in the Text for the throwing it down from the rock when it was there; and therefore I cannot think, but that if the punish∣ment intended did lie in that, it would have been expresly mentioned in the so∣lemnities
of that day, which had so great an influence on the expiation of the sins of the people. 2. I answer, that the Scape-Goat was to denote rather the effect of the expiation, than the manner of ob∣taining it. For the proper expiation was by the shedding ef blood,Heb. 9.22. as the Apostle tells us; and thence the live Goat was not to have the sins of the people to bear away into the desart, till the High-Priest had made an end of reconciling the Holy Place,Lev. 16.20. and the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the Altar; and by the sprinkling of the blood of the other Goat which was the sin-offering for the people;V. 15. which being done, he was to bring the live Goat, and to lay his hands upon the head of it, and confess over it all the iniquities of the Children of Israel,V. 21. and all their trans∣gressions in all their sins, putting them up∣on the head of the Goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the Wil∣derness;V. 22. and so the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not in∣habited, and he shall let go the Goat in the Wilderness. So that the former Goat noted the way of expiation by the shed∣ding of blood, and the latter the effect of it, viz. that the sins of the people were declared to be expiated by the sending
the Goat charged with their sins into a desart place; and that their sins would not appear in the presence of God a∣gainst them, any more than they expe∣cted, that the Goat which was sent in∣to the Wilderness should return among them. Which was the reason that af∣terwards they took so much care that it should not, by causing it to be thrown off from a steep rock; which was no sooner done, but notice was given of it very suddenly by the sounding of horns all over the Land. But the force of Socinus his argument from the Scape-Goat's bearing the sins of the people, that therefore that phrase doth not always imply the bearing of punishment, is ta∣ken off by Crellius himself,Crell. c. 1. sect. 56. who tells us, that the Scape-Goat is not said to bear the sins of the people in the Wilderness; but only that it carried the sins of the people into the Wilderness, which is a phrase of another importance from that we are now discoursing of. As will now fur∣ther appear from the places where it is spoken of concerning our Saviour, which we now come particularly to examine.
V. The first place insisted on by Gro∣tius with a respect to Christ,Grotius his sense of 1 Pet. 2.24. vindica∣ted. Crell. c. 1. sect. 35. is 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins, in his own body on the tree, which, saith Crel∣lius, is so far from proving that Christ did bear the punishment of our sins, that it doth not imply any sufferings that he underwent on the occasion of them. He grants that  doth signifie to carry up, but with∣all (he saith) it signifies to take away; be∣cause that which is taken up, is taken away from the place where it was. Besides, he observes, that  doth answer to the Hebrew , he hath made to ascend, which is frequently rendred by it in the LXX. and sometime by ; but that Hebrew word doth often signifie to take a∣way, where it is rendred in the Greek by one of those two words, 2 Sam. 21.13. Iosh. 24.32. Psal. 102.25. Ezra 1.11. To which I answer, 1. That the signification of  in this place, must not be taken from every sense the word is ever used for, but in that which the words out of which these are taken do imply; and in Isa. 53.11. it doth not answer  but to , a word which by the confession of all is never properly used for taking away, but for bearing of a burden, and is used with a respect to the
punishment of sin, Lament. 5.7. Our fathers have sinned, and are not, and we have born their iniquities, where the same word is used; so that the signification of the word  here, must depend up∣on that in Isaiah, of which more after∣ward. 2. Granting that  doth answer sometimes to the Hebrew  yet it makes nothing to Crellius his pur∣pose, unless he can prove that  doth ever signifie the taking away a thing by the destruction of it; for where it answers to that word, it is either for the offering up of a Sacrifice, in which sense  is very frequently used, as is confessed by Crellius; and in that sense it is no prejudice at all to our cause; for then it must be granted, that Christ up∣on the Cross is to be considered as a sacri∣fice for the sins of men; and so our sins were laid upon him as they were supposed to be on the Sacrifices under the Law, in order to the expiation of them, by the shedding their blood; and if our Adver∣saries would acknowledge this, the diffe∣rence would not be so great between us; or else it is used for the removal of a thing from one place to another, the thing it self still remaining in being, as 2 Sam. 21.13. And he made Saul's bones to ascend,
, he took them away, saith Crellius; true, but it is such a taking away, as is a bare remo∣val, the thing still remaining; the same is to be said of Ioseph's bones, Iosh. 24.32. which are all the places where  is used; and although  may be sometimes taken in another sense, as Psal. 102.25. yet nothing can be more unreasonable than such a way of arguing as this is; , saith Crel∣lius, signifies taking away; we demand his proof of it; is it that the word signifies so much of it self? No; that he grants it doth not. Is it that it is frequently used in the Greek Version to render a word that properly doth signifie so? No; nor that neither. But how is it then? Crellius tells us, that it sometimes answers to a word that signifies to make to a∣scend: well, but doth that word signifie taking away? No; not constantly, for it is frequently used for a sacrifice: But doth it at any time signifie so? Yes; it signifies the removal of a thing from one place to another. Is that the sense then he contends for here? No; but how then? why  is used to render the same word that  doth, and , though it signifies too a bare re∣moval, as Ezra 1.11. yet Psal. 102.
25. it is used for cutting off, , the Hebr. is, make me not to a∣scend in the midst of my days. But doth it here signifie utter destruction? I suppose not; but grant it, what is this to , when the LXX useth not that word here, which for all that we know was purposely altered; so that at last  is far enough from any such sig∣nification as Crellius would fix upon it, unless he will assert, that Christ taking away our sins, was only a removal of them from Earth to Heaven. But here Grotius comes in to the relief of Crellius against himself; for in his Notes upon this place, though he had before said, that the word was never used in the New Testament in that sense, yet he there saith,  is abstulit, for which he referrs us to Heb. 9.28. where he pro∣ceeds altogether as subtilly as Crellius had done before him, for he tells us  is put for , Numb. 14.33. Deut. 14.24. Isa. 53.12. but , i. e.  is put for , Lev. 10.17. Numb. 14.18. A most excellent way of inter∣preting Scripture? considering the vari∣ous significations of the Hebrew words, and above all of that  which is here mentioned. For according to this way of arguing,  shall signifie the same
with , and , for  signifies all these, and is rendred by them in the Greek Version, so that by the same way that Grotius proves that  signifies , we can prove that  doth not signifie to take away, but to bear punishment; nay,  signifies the bearing punishment in the strictest sense, Ezek. 16.5, 54. and bear∣ing sin in that sense, Ezek. 16.58. Thou hast born thy leudness, and thy abomina∣tions, . So that when  is more frequently used in this than in the other sense, why shall its signifying  at any time make  be taken in the same sense with that? Nay, I do not remember in any place where  is joyned with sin, but it signifies the punishment of it, so , Lev. 19.8. to bear his iniquity▪ Lev. 20.17. , bearing their iniquity, in one verse, is explained by be∣ing cut off from among their people, in the next. And in the places cited by Gro∣tius, that Numb. 14.33. hath been al∣ready shewed to signifie bearing the pu∣nishment of sin, and that Deut. 14.24. is plainly understood of a Sacrifice, the other, Isa. 53.12. will be afterwards made appear by other places in the same
Chapter, to signifie nothing to this pur∣pose. So that for all we can yet see,  must be taken either for bear∣ing our sins as a sacrifice did under the Law, or the punishment of them; in ei∣ther sense it serves our purpose, but is far enough from our Adversaries meaning. VI. But supposing we should grant them,Crell. his sense exa∣mined. that  may signifie to take away, let us see what excellent sense they make of these words of St. Peter. Do they then say, that Christ did take away our sins upon the Cross? No; they have a great care of that, for that would make the expiation of sins to have been per∣formed there; which they utterly deny, and say, that Christ only took the Cross in his way to his Ascension to Heaven, that there he might expiate sins. But doth not S▪ Peter say, that what was done by him here, was in his body on the tree: and they will not say, he carried that with him to Heaven too. Well, but what then was the taking away of sin which belonged to Christ upon the Cross? is it only to perswade men to live vertuously, and leave off their sins? This Socinus would have,Soc. de serv. l. 2. cap. 6. Crell. cap. . Sect. 39. and Crellius is contented that it should be understood barely of taking away sins, and not of the pu∣nishment
of them, but only by way of accession and consequence: but if it be taken (which he inclines more to) for the punishment, then (he saith) it is to be understood not of the vertue and effica∣cy of the death of Christ,Sect. 44. but of the ef∣fect: and yet a little after he saith, those words of Christ bearing our sins, are to be understood of the force and efficacy of Christs death to do it, not including the effect of it in us; not as though Christ did deliver us from sins by his death, but that he did that by dying, upon which the taking away of sin would follow, or which had a great power for the doing it. So uncertain are our Adversaries, in affixing any sense upon these words, which may attribute any effect at all, to the death of Christ upon the Cross. For if they be under∣stood of taking away sins, then they are only to be meant of the power that was in the death of Christ, to perswade men to leave their sins; which we must have a care of understanding so, as to attri∣bute any effect to the death of Christ in order to it; but only that the death of Christ was an argument for us to believe what he said, and the believing what he said would incline us to obey him, and
if we obey him, we shall leave off our sins whether Christ had died or no: sup∣posing his miracles had the same effect on us, which those of Moses had upon the Iews, which were sufficient to per∣swade them to believe and obey without his death. But if this be all that was meant by Christ's bearing our sins in his body on the tree; why might not St. Peter himself be said to bear them upon his Cross too? for his death was an excellent example of patience, and a great argu∣ment to perswade men he spake truth, and that doctrine which he preached, was repentance and remission of sins: So that by this sense there is nothing peculiar attributed to the death of Christ. But taking the other sense for the taking away the punishment of sins, we must see how this belongs to the death of Christ: Do they then attribute our delivery from the punishment of sin, to the death of Christ on the Cross? yes, just as we may attribute Caesar's subduing Rome, to his passing over Rubicon, because he took that in his way to the doing of it: so they make the death of Christ only as a passage, in order to expiation of sins, by taking away the punishment of them. For that shall not be actually perfected,
they say, till his full deliverance of all those that obey him, from hell and the grave, which will not be till his second coming. So that if we only take the body of Christ for his second coming, and the Cross of Christ, or the tree, for his Throne of Glory, then they will acknow∣ledge, that Christ may very well be said to take away sins in his own body on the tree: but if you take it in any sense that doth imply any peculiar efficacy to the death of Christ, for all the plainness of St. Peter's words, they by no means will admit of it. VII. But because Crellius urgeth Gro∣tius with the sense of that place,Isa. 53.11. vindica∣ted. Crell. c. 1. sect. 35. Isa. 53.11. out of which he contends these words are taken, and Crellius conceives he can prove there, that bearing is the same with taking away sin: We now come to consider, what force he can find from thence, for the justifying his assertion, That the bearing of sins, when attributed to Christ, doth not imply the punishment of them, but the taking them away. The words are, for he shall bear their iniqui∣ties. As to which Grotius observes, That the word  which signifies iniquity, is sometimes taken for the punishment of sin, 2 King. 7.9. and the verb  is to bear,
and whenever it is joyned with sin or ini∣quity, in all languages, and especially the Hebrew, it signifies to suffer punishment; for although  may sometimes signifie to take away,  never does: so that this phrase can receive no other interpretation. Notwithstanding all which Crellius at∣tempts to prove, That  here, must be taken in a sense contrary to the natural and perpetual use of the word;Crell. c. 1. sect. 44. for which his first argument is very in∣firm, viz. because it is mentioned after the death of Christ, and is therefore to be considered as the reward of the other. Whereas it appears: 1. By the Prophets discourse, that he doth not insist on an exact methodical order, but dilates and amplifies things as he sees occasion: for Verse. 9. he saith, He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; and Verse 10. he said, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he hath put him to grief: Will Crellius therefore say, that this must be consequent to his death and burial? 2. The particle may be here taken causally, as we render it, very agreeably to the sense; and so it gives an account of the foregoing clause, By his knowledge, shall my righteous servant justifie many, for he shall bear their ini∣quities.
And that this is no unusual ac∣ception of that particle, might be easi∣ly cleared from many places of Scripture if it were necessary; and from this very Prophet, as Isa. 39.1. where  is the same with  2 King. 2.12. and Isa. 64.5. Thou art wroth, for we have sinned,  where the same particle is made the casual of what went before. But we need not insist upon this to answer Crellius,Crell. c. 9. sect. 7. p. 463. Soc. Prael. c. 14. sect. 6. who elsewhere makes use of it himself, and says, They must be very ig∣norant of the Hebrew Tongue, who do not know that the conjunction copulative is of∣ten taken casually; and so much is con∣fessed by Socinus also, where he explains that particle in one sense in the begin∣ning, and casually in the middle of the verse:2 Sam. 24.1. and the Lord's anger was kindled against Israel, , for he moved, &c. but if this will not do, he attempts to prove, That  in this very Chapter, hath the signification of taking away, v. 4. For he hath born our griefs, and carried our sor∣rows, which is applied by St. Matth. 8.17. to bodily diseases, which our Saviour did not bear, but took away, as it is said in the foregoing Verse; he healed all that were sick, on which those words come in, That it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by Isaias, &c. To which I answer: 1. It is granted by our Ad∣versaries, that St. Matthew in those words, doth not give the full sense of the Prophet, but only applies that by way of accommodation, to bodily dis∣eases, which was chiefly intended for the sins of men. And in a way of accom∣modation it is not unusual to strain words beyond their genuine and natural signi∣fication, or what was intended primari∣ly by the person who spake them. Would it be reasonable for any to say that  signifies to give, because that place, Psal. 68.18. where the word by all is ac∣knowledged to signifie to receive, is ren∣dred to give, Eph. 4.8. so that admit∣ting another sense of the word here, as applied to the cure of bodily diseases, it doth not from thence follow, that this should be the meaning of the word in the primary sense intended by the Pro∣phet. 2. The word as used by St. Mat∣thew, is very capable of the primary and natural sense; for St. Matthew retains words of the same signification, with that which we contend for,  and , neither of which doth signifie taking away, by causing a thing not to be. So that all that is implied hereby,
is the pains and trouble which our Savi∣our took in the healing of the sick. For to that end, as Grotius well observes up∣on that place, the circumstances are men∣tioned, That it was at even, and multi∣tudes were brought to him in St. Matthew,Mat. 8.16. that after Sun set all that were diseased were brought, and all the City was ga∣thered together at the door, in St. Mark;Mat. 1.32, 33. That he departed not till it was day, in St. Luke;Luk. 4.42. that we might the better un∣derstand how our Saviour did bear our griefs, because the pains he took in heal∣ing them were so great. And here I cannot but observe, that Grotius in his Notes on that place, continued still in the same mind he was in, when he writ against Socinus; for he saith, Those words may either refer to the diseases of the body, and so they note the pains he took in the cure of them; or to our sins, and so they were ful∣filled when Christ by suffering upon the Cross, did obtain remission of sins for us, as St. Peter saith, 1 Pet. 2.24. But upon what reason the Annotations on that place come to be so different from his sense expressed here, long after Crel∣lius his answer, I do not understand. But we are sure he declared his mind, as to
the main of that Controversie, to be the same, that it was when he writ his Book which Crellius answered; as appears by two Letters of his to Vossius, not long since published;Epist. Eccl. p. 747, 748. Discuss. p. 16, 17. and he utterly disowns the charge of Socinianism, as a calumny in his discussion, the last Book he ever writ. VIII. But we are no further obliged to vindicate Grotius, than he did the truth; which we are sure he did in the vindication of the 53 of Isaiah,Isa. 53.5, 6, 7. vin∣dicated. from Socinus his inter∣pretations, notwithstanding what Crel∣lius hath objected against him. We there∣fore proceed to other Verses in the same Chapter insisted on by Grotius, to prove, that Christ did bear the punishments of our sins, v. 6, 7. The Lord hath laid on him the iniquities of us all: It is requi∣red, and he was afflicted, as Grotius ren∣ders those words.De Servat. l. 2. c. 5. Socinus makes a two∣fold sense of the former clause; the first is, That God by or with Christ did meet with our iniquities; the latter, That God did make our iniquities to meet with Christ. The words saith Grotius, will not bear the former interpretation; for the verb  being in Hiphil, must import a double action, and so it must not be, That God by him did meet with our sins,
but that God did make our sins to meet up∣on him. To which Crellius replies,Crell. c. 1. sect. 52. That words in Hiphil are sometimes used in∣transitively; but can he produce any in∣stance in Scripture, where this word joyned with  and  is so taken? for in the last verse of the Chapter, the con∣struction is different: And what an un∣certain way of interpreting Scripture will this be, if every Anomalous signi∣fication, and rare use of a word, shall be made use of to take away such a sense as is most agreeable to the design of the place. For that sense we contend for, is not only enforced upon the most natural importance of these words, but upon the agreeableness of them with so many o∣ther expressions of this Chapter, that Christ did bear our iniquities, and was wounded for our transgressions, and that his soul was made an offering for sin: to which it is very suitable, that as the ini∣quities of the people were (as it were) laid upon the head of the Sacrifice; so it should be said of Christ, who was to offer up himself for the sins of the world. And the Iews themselves by this phrase do understand the punish∣ment either for the sins of the people, which Iosias underwent, or which the
people themselves suffered, by those who interpret this prophecy of them. To which purpose, Aben Ezra observes, that iniquity is here put for the punishment of it, as 1 Sam. 28.10. and Lam. 4.6. But Socinus mistrusting the incongruity of this Interpretation, flies to another; viz. That God did make our iniquities to meet with Christ: And this we are wil∣ling to admit of, if by that they mean, That Christ underwent the punishment of them; as that phrase must naturally import, for what otherwise can our ini∣quities meeting with him signifie? For the word  taken properly (as Socinus ac∣knowledgeth it ought to be, when he rejects Pagnin's Interpretation of making Christ to interceed for our iniquities) sig∣nifies, either to meet with one by chance, or out of kindness, or else for an en∣counter, with an intention to destroy that which it meets with. So Iudg. 8.21. Rise thou , LXX. irrue in nos, fall upon us; i e. run upon us with thy sword, and kill us. Iudg. 15.12. Swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me your selves; where the same word is used, and they explain the meaning of it in the next words, v. 13. We will not kill thee, Amos 5.19. as if
a man did flee from a Lyon, and a Bear met him, , i. e. with a design to kill him. Now I suppose they will not say that our sins met with Christ by Chance, since it is said, that God laid on him, &c. not out of kindness; it must be therefore out of enmity, and with a design to destroy him; and so our sins cannot be understood as Socinus and Crel∣lius would have them, as the meer occa∣sions of Christ's death: but as the proper impulsive cause of it. Whether the fol∣lowing word  be taken with a respect to sin, and so it properly signifies It is required, or with a respect to the person, and so it may signifie he was oppressed, is not a matter of that consequence, which we ought to contend about; if it be pro∣ved that Christ's oppression had only a respect to sin, as the punishment of it. Which will yet further appear from ano∣ther expression in the same Chapter, v. 5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. In which Grotius saith the word  doth not signifie any kind of affliction, but such as hath the nature of punishment, either for example or instruction; but since the latter cannot be intended in Christ, the former must.Crell. c. 1. sect. 57. Crellius
thinks to escape from this, by acknow∣ledging, that the sufferings of Christ have some respect to sin; but if it be such a re∣spect to sin, which makes what Christ underwent a punishment (which is only proper in this case) it is as much as we contend for. This therefore he is loth to abide by; and saith that chastisement imports no more than bare affliction with∣out any respect to sin, which he thinks to prove from St. Paul's words, 2 Cor. 6.9. We are chastised, but not given over to death; but how far this is from pro∣ving his purpose will easily appear, 1. Because those by whom they were said to be chastened, did not think they did it without any respect to a fault; but they supposed them to be justly punish∣ed; and this is that we plead for, that the chastisement considered with a respect to him that inflicts it, doth suppose some fault as the reason of inflicting it. 2. This is far from the present purpose, for the chastisement there mention'd is op∣posed to death, as chastened, but not killed; whereas Grotius expresly speaks of such chastisements as include death, that these cannot be supposed to be meerly design∣ed for instruction, and therefore must be conceived under the notion of punish∣ment.
The other place, Psal. 73.14. is yet more remote from the business; for though the Psalmist accounts himself in∣nocent in respect of the great enormities of others; yet he could not account him∣self so innocent with a respect to God, as not to deserve chastisement from him. IX. But Crellius offers further to prove that Christ's death must be consi∣dered as a bare affliction,Whether Christ's death be a proper , and whether that doth imply that it was a punish∣ment of sin. and not as a , or exemplary punishment, because in such a punishment the guil∣ty themselves are to be punished, and the benefit comes to those who were not guilty, but in Christ's sufferings it was quite contrary, for the inno∣cent was punished, and the guilty have the benefit of it: and yet (he saith) if we should grant that Christ's sufferings were a , that will not prove that his death was a proper punishment. To which I an∣swer, That whatever answers to the ends of an exemplary punishment, may properly be called so: but supposing that Christ suffered the punishment of our sins, those sufferings will answer to all the ends of an exemplary punish∣ment. For the ends of such a punish∣ment
assigned by Crellius himself, are, That others observing such a punish∣ment, may abstain from those sins which have brought it upon the per∣son who suffers. Now the question is, whether supposing Christ did suffer on the account of our sins, these suffer∣ings of his may deterr us from the pra∣ctice of sin or no? And therefore in opposition to Crellius, I shall prove these two things: 1. That supposing Christ suffered for our sins, there was a suffici∣ent argument to deterr us from the pra∣ctice of sin. 2. Supposing that his suf∣ferings had no respect to our sins, they could not have that force to deterr men from the practice of it: for he after as∣serts, That Christ's sufferings might be a  to us, though they were no punishment of sin. 1. That the death of Christ considered as a punishment of sin, is a proper , or hath a great force to deterr men from the practice of sin: and that because the same reason of punishment is supposed in Christ and in our selves, and because the example is much more considerable, than if we had suffered our selves. 1. The same reason of punishment is supposed. For why are men deterred
from sin, by seeing others punished; but because they look upon the sin as the reason of the punishment; and there∣fore where the same reason holds, the same ends may be as properly obtained. If we said that Christ suffered death meerly as an innocent person out of God's dominion over his life; what imaginable force could this have to de∣terr men from sin, which is asserted to have no relation to it as the cause of it? But when we say, that God laid our ini∣quities upon him, that he suffered not upon his own account but ours, that the sins we commit against God were the cause of all those bitter Agonies which the Son of, God underwent, what argument can be more proper to deterr men from sin than this is? For hereby they see the great abhorrency of sin which is in God, that he will not par∣don the sins of men without a compen∣sation made to his Honour, and a de∣monstration to the world of his hatred of it. Hereby they see what a value God hath for his Laws, which he will not relax as to the punishment of offen∣ders, without so valuable a consideration as the blood of his own Son. Hereby they see, that the punishment of sin is
no meer arbitrary thing depending bare∣ly upon the will of God; but that there is such a connexion between sin and pu∣nishment as to the ends of Government, that unless the Honour and Majesty of God, as to his Laws and Government ma be preserved, the violation of his Laws must expect a just recompence of reward▪ Hereby they see what those are to expect who neglect or despise these sufferings of the Son of God for them; for nothing can then remain, but a cer∣tain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour the Adversaries. So that, here all the weigh∣ty arguments concur which may be most apt to prevail upon men to deterr them from their sins. For if God did thus by the green tree, what will he do by the dry? If he who was so innocent in himself, so perfectly holy, suffered so much on the account of our sins; what then may those expect to suffer, who have no in∣nocency at all to plead, and add wilful∣ness and impenitency to their sins? But if it be replied by Crellius, that it is otherwise among men: I answer, that we do not pretend in all things to parallel the sufferings of Christ for us, with any sufferings of men for one another. But
yet we add, that even among men the punishments inflicted on those who were themselves innocent as to the cause of them, may be as exemplary as any o∣ther. And the greater appearance of severity there is in them, the greater terror they strike into all offenders. As Children's losing their estates and ho∣nours, or being banished for their Pa∣rents treasons in which they had no part themselves. Which is a proper punish∣ment on them of their Father's faults, whether they be guilty or no? and if this may be just in men▪ why not in God? If any say, that the Parents are only punished in the Children, he speaks that which is contradictory to the com∣mon sense of mankind; for punishment doth suppose sense or feeling of it; and in this case the Parents are said to be punished, who are supposed to be dead and past feeling of it, and the Children who undergo the smart of it must not be said to be punished; though all things are so like it, that no person can ima∣gine himself in that condition, but would think himself punished, and severely too. If it be said, that these are calamities in∣deed, but they are no proper punishments, it may easily be shewed that distinction
will not hold here. Because these pu∣nishments were within the design of the Law, and were intended for all the ends of punishments, and therefore must have the nature of them. For therefore the Children are involved in the Father's punishment on purpose to deterr others from the like actions. There are some things indeed that Children may fall in∣to by occasion of their Father's guilt, which may be only calamities to them, because they are neessary consequents in the nature of the thing, and not pur∣posely design'd as a punishment to them. Thus, being deprived of the comfort and assistance of their Parents, when the Law hath taken them off by the hand of justice: this was designed by the Law as a punishment to the Parents, and as to the Children it is only a necessary con∣sequent of their punishment. For other∣wise the Parents would have been pu∣nished for the Childrens faults, and not the Children only involved in that which unavoidably follows upon the Pa∣rents punishment. So that Crellius is very much mistaken either in the pre∣sent case of our Saviour's punishment, or in the general reason of exemplary punishments, as among men. But the
case of our Saviour is more exemplary, when we consider the excellency of his person, though appearing in our nature, when no meaner sufferings would satis∣fie, than of so transcendent a nature as he underwent, though he were the E∣ternal Son of God, this must make the punishment much more exemplary, than if he were considered only as our Adver∣saries do, as a mere man. So that the dignity of his person under all his suffer∣ings may justly add a greater considera∣tion to deterr us from the practice of sin, which was so severely punished in him, when he was pleased to be a Sa∣crifice for our sins. From whence we see that the ends of a  are ve∣ry agreeable with the sufferings of Christ considered as a punishment of sin. X. We now consider whether as Crel∣lius asserts,God's ha∣tred of sin could not be seen in the suffer∣ings of Christ, if they were no punish∣ment of sin. Crell. c. 1. p. 69. supposing Christ's death were no punishment, it could have these ef∣fects upon mens minds or no? Yes, he saith, it might, because by his sufferings we might see how severely God would pu∣nish wicked and obstinate persons. Which being a strange riddle at the first hearing it, viz. that by the sufferings of an in∣nocent person without any respect to sin as the cause of them: we should dis∣cern
God's severity against those who are obstinate in sin; we ought the more diligently to attend to what is said for the clearing of it. First, saith he, If God spared not his own most innocent and holy and only Son, than whom nothing was more dear to him in Hea∣ven or Earth, but exposed him to so cruel and ignominious a death; how great and severe sufferings may we think God will inflict on wicked men, who are at open defiance with him? I confess my self not subtle enough to apprehend the force of this argument, viz. If God dealt so severely with him who had no sin either of his own or o∣thers to answer for; therefore he will deal much more severely with those that have. For God's severity considered with∣out any respect to sin, gives rather en∣couragement to sinners, than any argu∣ment to deterr them from it. For the natural consequence of it is, that God doth act arbitrarily, without any regard to the good or evil of mens actions; and therefore it is to no purpose to be solli∣citous about them. For upon the same account that the most innocent person suffers most severely from him, for all that we know, the more we strive to be
innocent, the more severely we may be dealt with, and let men sin, they can be but dealt severely with; all the difference then is, one shall be called punishments, and the other calamities, but the severity may be the same in both. And who would leave off his sins meerly to change the name of punishments into that of calami∣ties? And from hence it will follow, that the differences of good and evil, and the respects of them to punishment and reward, are but airy and empty things; but that God really in the dis∣pensation of things to men, hath no re∣gard to what men are or do, but acts therein according to his own Dominion, whereby he may dispose of men how or which way he pleases. If a Prince had many of his Subjects in open rebellion against him, and he should at that time make his most obedient and beloved Son to be publickly exposed to all man∣ner of indignities, and be dishonoured and put to death by the hands of those rebels; could any one imagine that this was designed as an exemplary punish∣ment to all rebels, to let them see the danger of rebellion? No, but would it not rather make them think him a cruel Prince, one that would punish in∣nocency
as much as rebellion; and that it was rather better to stand at defiance, and become desperate, for it was more dangerous to be beloved than hated by him, to be his Son than his declared E∣nemy? so that insisting on the death of Christ as it is considered as a , (for of that we speak now) there is no comparison between our Adversaries hy∣pothesis and ours; but, saith Crellius, the consequence is not good on our side, if Christ suffered the punishment of our sins, there∣fore they shall suffer much more who conti∣nue in sin, for Christ suffered for the sins of the whole world; but they suffer only for their own, and what they have deserved themselves. To which I answer, that the argument is of very good force upon our hypothesis, though it would not be upon theirs. For if we suppose him to be a meer man that suffered, then there could be no argument drawn from his sufferings to ours, but according to the exact proportion of sins and punish∣ments: but supposing that he had a di∣vine as well as humane nature, there may not be so great a proportion of the sins of the world to the sufferings of Christ, as of the sins of a particular person to his own sufferings; and therefore the ar∣gument
from one to the other doth still hold. For the measure of punishments must be taken with a proportion to the dignity of the person who suffers them. And Crellius himself confesseth elsewhere,Crell. c. 8. sect. 43. that the dignity of the person is to be con∣sidered in exemplary punishment, and that a lesser punishment of one that is very great, may do much more to deterr men from sin, than a greater punishment of one much less. But he yet further urgeth,Crell. c. 1. sect. 57, 70. that the severity of God against sinners may be discovered in the sufferings of Christ, because God's hatred against sin is discovered therein. But if we ask how God's hatred against sin is seen in the sufferings of one perfectly innocent and free from sin, and not rather his hatred of innocency, if no respect to sin were had therein: he answers, That God's ha∣tred against sin was manifested, in that he would not spare his only Son to draw men off from sin. For answer to which, we are to consider the sufferings of Christ as an innocent person, designed as an exemplary cause to draw men off from sin; and let any one tell me, what ha∣tred of sin can possibly be discovered, in proposing the sufferings of a most inno∣cent person to them without any consi∣deration
of sin as the cause of those suf∣ferings? If it be said, That the Doctrine of Christ was designed to draw men off from sin; and that God suffered his Son to die to confirm this Doctrine, and thereby shew∣ed his hatred to sin. I answer, 1. This is carrying the dispute off from the pre∣sent business, for we are not now argu∣ing about the design of Christ's Doctrine, nor the death of Christ as a means to confirm that, but as a , and what power that hath without respect to our sins as the cause of them, to draw us from sin, by discovering God's hatred to it. 2. The Doctrine of Christ accor∣ding to their hypothesis, discovers much less of God's hatred to sin than ours doth. For if God may pardon sin without any compensation made to his Laws or Ho∣nour, if repentance be in its own nature a sufficient satisfaction for all the sins past of our Lives; if there be no such a Justice in God which requires punishment of sin commited; if the punishment of sin depend barely upon God's will; and the most innocent person may suffer as much from God without respect to sin as the cause of suffering, as the most guilty; let any rational man judge whether this Doctrine discovers as much God's abhor∣rency
of sin, as asserting the necessity of vindicating God's honour to the World, upon the breach of his Laws, if not by the suffering of the offenders themselves, yet of the Son of God as a sacrifice for the expiation of sin, by undergoing the punishment of our iniquities, so as upon consideration of his sufferings, he is plea∣sed to accept of repentance and sincere obedience, as the conditions upon which he will grant remission of sins, and eter∣nal life. So that if the discovery of God's hatred to sin be the means to re∣claim men from it, we assert upon the former reasons, that much more is done upon our Doctrine concerning the suffer∣ings of Christ, than can be upon theirs. So much shall suffice to manifest in what sense Christ's death may be a , and that this doth imply, that his sufferings are to be considered as a pu∣nishment of sin. XI. The next Series of places which makes Christ's sufferings to be a punish∣ment for sin,Grotius his arguments from Christ's being made sin and a curse for us de∣fended a∣gainst Crellius. are those which assert Christ to be made sin and a curse for us, which we now design to make clear, ought to be understood in no other sense, for as Grotius saith, As the Iews sometimes use sin, for the punishment of sin;
as appears, besides other places, by Zach. 14.9. Gen. 4.13. so they call him that suffers the punishment of sin, by the name of sin; as the Latins use the word Piaculum, both for the fault, and for him that suffers for it. Thence under the Law, an expiatory Sacrifice for sin, was called sin, Lev. 4.3.29—5, 6. Psal. 40.7. Which way of speaking Esaias followed, speaking of Christ, Isai. 53.10.  he made his soul sin, i. e. liable to the punishment of it. To the same pur∣pose St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.21. He made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righ∣teousness of God in him. To which Crellius replies, That as there is no necessity,Crell. c. 1. sect. 60. that by the name of sin, when applied to sufferings, any more should be implied, than that those sufferings were occasioned by sin, no more is there when it is applied to the person; nay, much less, for he saith, No more is required to this, but that he should be handled as sin∣ners use to be, and undergo the mat∣ter of punishment, without any re∣spect to sin, either as the cause or oc∣casion of it. So he saith, The name
Sinner is used, 1 King. 1.21. and in St. Paul, the name of sin in the first clause is to be understood, as of righ∣teousness in the latter; and as we are said to be righteousness in him, when God deals with us as with righteous persons, so Christ was said to be sin for us, when he was dealt with as a sinner. And the Sacrifices for sin un∣der the Law were so called, not with a respect to the punishment of sin, but because they were offered upon the account of sin, and were used for ta∣king away the guilt of it, or because men were bound to offer them, so that they sinned if they neglected it. So that all that is meant by Esaias and St. Paul is, That Christ was made an expiatory Sacrifice, or that he exposed himself for those afflictions which sin∣ners only by right undergo. But let Crellius or any others of them tell me, if the Scripture had intended to express, that the sufferings of Christ were a pu∣nishment of our sins, how was it possible to do it more emphatically than it is done by these Expressions (the custom of the Hebrew Language being considered) not only by saying, that Christ did bear our sins, but, that himself was made sin for
us? those phrases being so commonly used for the punishment of sin. Let them produce any one instance in Scri∣pture, where those expressions are ap∣plied to any without the consideration of sin: that place, 1 King. 1.21. is ve∣ry far from it; for in all probability, the design of Bathsheba in making Solomon King was already discovered, which was the reason that Adonijah his elder Bro∣ther declaring himself King, invited not him with the rest of the King's sons: All that she had for Solomon's succession, was a secret promise and oath of David; and therefore she urgeth him now to declare the succession, v. 20. Otherwise, she saith, when David should die, I and my son So∣lomon shall be accounted offenders; i. e. saith Crellius, we shall be handled as of∣fenders, we shall be destroyed: But sure∣ly not without the supposition of a fault; by them which should inflict that pu∣nishment upon them: The plain mean∣ing is, they should be accused of Treason, and then punished accordingly. But we are to consider, that still with a respect to them, who were the inflicters, a fault or sin is supposed as the reason of their punishment, either of their own or o∣thers. But of our Saviour it is not said,
That he should be counted as an offender by the Iews; for although that doth not take away his innocency, yet it supposeth an accusation of something, which in it self deserves punishment. But in Esai. 53.10. it is said, He made his soul sin; and 2 Cor. 5.21. That God made him sin for us, which must therefore imply, not being dealt with by men only as a sin∣ner, but that with a respect to him who inflicted the punishment, there was a consideration of sin as the reason of it. We do not deny but God's suffering him to be dealt with as a sinner by men, is implied in it, for that was the method of his punishment designed; but we say further, that the reason of that permissi∣on in God, doth suppose some antece∣dent cause of it: For God would ne∣ver have suffered his only Son, to be so dealt with by the hands of cruel men, unless he had made himself an offering for sin; being willing to undergo those sufferings, that he might be an expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the world. And although Socinus will not yield,Soc. l. 1. c. 8. That by being made sin for us should be understood Christ's being an expiatory Sacrifice for sin; yet Crellius is contented it should be so taken in both places: Which if he
will grant, so as by vertue of that Sa∣crifice, the guilt of sin is expiated, we shall not contend with him about the reasons, why those Sacrifices were called sins, although the most proper and genuine must needs be that, which is assigned by the Law, that the sins of the people were supposed to be laid up∣on them, and therefore they were in∣tended for the expiation of them: But it is very unreasonable to say, That expia∣tory Sacrifices were called sins, because it would have been a sin to neglect them: For on the same account, all the other Sacrifices must have been called so too; for it was a sin to neglect any where God required them, and so there had been no difference between Sacrifices for sin and others. To that reason of Crel∣lius, from our being made righteous, be∣cause dealt with as such, to Christ's being made sin only, because dealt with as a sin∣ner, we need no more than what this pa∣rallel will afford us; For as Crellius would never say, that any are dealt with as righteous persons, who are not ante∣cedently supposed to be so by his own Argument, Christ being dealt with as a sinner, must suppose guilt antece∣dent to it; and since the Apostle de∣clares
it was not his own, in those words, Who knew no sin, it follows that it must be the consideration of ours, which must make him be dealt with as a sinner by him, who made him to be sin for us. But to suppose that Christ should be said to be made sin, without any respect to sin, is as much as if the Latins should call any one Scelus, and mean thereby a very honest man; or a Piaculum, with∣out any supposition of his own or others guilt. But we are to consider, that the sufferings of Christ, seeming at first so inconsistent with that relation to God as his only Son, which the Apostles assert concerning him, they were obliged to vindicate his innocency, as to men, and yet withal to shew, that with a re∣spect to God, there was sufficient rea∣son for his permission of his undergoing these sufferings. That he knew no sin, was enough to clear his innocency as to men; but then the question will be asked, If he were so innocent, why did God suffer all those things to come up∣on him? Did not Abraham plead of old with God,Gen. 18.25. That he would not slay the righ∣teous with the wicked, because it was re∣pugnant to the righteousness of his na∣ture to do so; That be far from thee to
do after this manner, to slay the righte∣teous with the wicked, and that the righte∣ous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee; shall not the Iudge of all the Earth do right? How then comes God to suffer the most perfect innocency to be dealt with so, as the greatest sins could not have deserved worse from men? Was not his righteousness the same still? And Abraham did not think the distinction of calamities and pu∣nishments, enough to vindicate God's proceedings, if the righteous should have been dealt withal as the wicked▪ And if that would hold for such a measure of righteousness as might be supposed in such who were not guilty of the great abominations of those places, that it should be enough, not only to deliver themselves, but the wicked too; how comes it that the most perfect obedi∣ence of the Son of God, is not suffici∣ent to excuse him from the greatest suf∣ferings of Malefactors? But if his suf∣ferings had been meerly from men, God had been accountable only for the bare permission; but it is said, that he fore∣ordained and determined these things to be, that Christ himself complained, that God had forsaken him; and here, that he made
him sin for us: and can we imagine all this to be without any respect to the guilt of sin, as the cause of it? Why should such an expression be used of being made sin? might not many o∣thers have served sufficiently to declare the indignities and sufferings he under∣went, without such a phrase as seems to reflect upon Christ's innocency? If there had been no more in these expressions than our Adversaries imagine, the Apo∣stles were so careful of Christ's honour, they would have avoided such ill-sound∣ing expressions as these were; and not have affected Hebraisms, and uncouth forms of speech, to the disparagement of their Religion. But this is all which our Adversaries have to say, where words are used by them out of their pro∣per sense, That the Prophets and Apostles affected tricks of wit, playing with words, using them sometimes in one sense, and pre∣sently quite in another.Crell. cap. 1. Sect. 57. So Crellius saith of Isaiah, That he affects little elegancies of words and verbal allusions, which makes him use words sometimes out of their pro∣per and natural sense; thence he tells us, The sufferings of Christ are called chastise∣ments, though they have nothing of the nature of chastisements in them: And from
this liberty of interpreting, they make words (without any other reason, than that they serve for their purpose) be ta∣ken in several senses in the same verse: For Socinus in one verse of St. Iohn's Gospel, makes the World to be taken in three se∣veral senses:Socin. ex∣plicat. 1. cap. Iob. v. 10. He was in the World, there it is taken, saith he, for the men of the World in general: The world was made by him, there it must be understood only of the reformation of things by the Gospel: and, the world knew him not, there it must be taken in neither of the former senses, but for the wicked of the world: What may not one make of the Scripture, by such a way of interpreting it? But by this we have the less reason to wonder, that Socinus should put such an Interpre∣tation upon Gal. 3.13. Christ hath re∣deemed us from the curse of the Law, be∣ing made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree: In which he doth acknowledge by the curse, in the first clause to be meant, the punishment of sin, but not in the second: And the reason he gives for it is, amavit enim Paulus in execrationis verbo argutus esse.Socin. de Christo ser∣vat. l. 2. c. 1. St. Paul affected playing with the word curse, understanding it first in a proper, and then a Metaphorical sense.
But it is plain that the design of S. Paul and Socinus are very different in these words: Socinus thinks he speaks only Metaphori∣cally, when he saith, that Christ was made a curse for us; i. e. by a bare allusion of the name, without a correspondency in the thing it self; and so that the death of Christ might be called a curse, but was not so: But St. Paul speaks of this not by way of extenuation, but to set forth the greatness and weight of the punish∣ment he underwent for us. He there∣fore tells us, what it was which Christ did redeem us from, The curse of the Law; and how he did it, by being not only made a curse, but a curse for us; i. e. not by being hateful to God, or undergoing the very same curse, which we should have done; which are the two things object∣ed by Crellius against our sense; but that the death of Christ was to be consider∣ed, not as a bare separation of soul and body, but as properly poenal, being such a kind of death, which none but Male∣factors by the Law were to suffer; by the undergoing of which punishment in our stead, he redeemed us from that curse which we were liable to by the vio∣lation of the Law of God. And there can be no reason to appropriate this on∣ly
to the Iews, unless the death of Christ did extend only to the deliverance of them from the punishment of their sins; or because the curse of the Law did make that death poenal, therefore the intention of the punishment, could reach no further than the Law did; but the Apostle in the very next words speaks of the farther extension of the great bles∣sing promised to Abraham, That it should come upon the Gentiles also; and withal those whom the Apostle speaks to, were not Iews, but such as thought they ought to joyn the Law and Gospel toge∣ther:Cll An∣. in loc. that St Paul doth not mean as Crellius would have it, that Christ by his death did confirm the New Covenant, and so take away the obligation of the Law; (for to what end was the curse mention∣ed for that? What did the accursedness of his death add to the confirmation of the truth of his Doctrine? and when was ever the curse taken for the conti∣nuance of the Law of Moses?) but that Christ by the efficacy of his death as a punishment for sin hath redeemed all that believe and obey him from the curse deserved by their sins, whether in∣forced by the Law of Moses, or the Law written in their hearts, which tells the
consciences of sinners, that such who violate the Laws of God are worthy of death, and therefore under the curse of the Law. XII. We come now to the force of the particles which being joyned with our sins as referring to the death of Christ,The par∣ticles  being joyned to sins, and relating to suffer∣ings, do imply those suf∣ferings to be the pu∣nishment of sin. do imply that his death is to be consider∣ed as a punishment of sin. Not that we insist on the force of those particles  and , as though of themselves they did imply this (for we know they are of various significations according to the nature of the matter they are joyned with) but that these being joyned with sins and suffering together, do signifie that those sufferings are the punishment of those sins. Thus it is said of Christ, that he dyed, ,Rom. 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.3. 1 Pet. 3.18. Heb. 10.12. for our sins, , that he suffered once , that he gave himself , that he offered a Sacrifice .Crell. cap. 1. sect. 6. To which Crel∣lius replies, That if the force of these particles not being joyned with suffer∣ings, may be taken for the final and not for the impulsive cause, they may retain the same sense when joyn∣ed with sufferings, if those sufferings may be designed in order to an end;
but if it should be granted,Sect. 14. p. 17. that those phrases being joyned with sufferings, do always imply a meritorious cause, yet it doth not follow, it should be here so understood because the matter will not bear it. To this a short an∣swer will at present serve: for, It is not possible a meritorious cause can be ex∣pressed more emphatically than by these words being joyned to sufferings: so that we have as clear a testimony from these expressions as words can give; and by the same arts by which these may be avoided any other might; so that it had not been possible for our Doctrine to have been expressed in such a manner, but such kind of answers might have been given as our Adversaries now give. If it had been said in the plainest terms, that Christ's death was a punishment for our sins, they would as easily have avoided the force of them as they do of these; they would have told us the Apostles delighted in an Antanaclasis, and had expressed things different from the na∣tural use of the words by them; and though punishment were sometimes used properly, yet here it must be used only metaphorically because the mat∣ter would bear no other sense. And
therefore I commend the ingenuity of Socinus after all the pains he had taken to enervate the force of those places which are brought against his Doctrine;Socin. de Servat. l. 3. c. 6. he tells us plainly, That if our Doctrine were not only once, but frequently mentioned in Scripture? yet he would not therefore believe the thing to be so as we suppose. For, saith he, see∣ing the thing it self cannot be, I take the least inconvenient interpretation of the words; and draw forth such a sense from them, as is most consistent with itself and the tenor of the Scri∣pture. But for all his talking of the tenor of the Scripture; by the same reason he interprets one place upon these terms, he will do many, and so the tenor of the Scripture shall be never against him: and by this we find, that the main strength of our Adversaries is not pretended to lie in the Scriptures; all the care they have of them is only to reconcile them if possible with their hypothesis; for they do not deny but that the natural force of the words doth imply what we contend for; but because they say the Doctrine we assert is inconsistent with reason, therefore all their design is to find out any other possible meaning which they
therefore assert to be true, because more agreeable to the common reason of man∣kind. This therefore is enough for our present purpose, that if it had been the design of Scripture to have expressed our sense, it could not have done it in plainer expressions than it hath done, that no expressions could have been used, but the same arts of our Adversaries might have been used to take off their force, which they have used to those we now urge against them, and that setting aside the possibility of the thing, the Scripture doth very fairly deliver the Doctrine we contend for; or, supposing in point of reason there may be arguments enough to make it appear possible, there are Scriptures enough to make it appear true.
CHAP. III. I. The words of Scripture being at last ac∣knowledged by our Adversaries to make for us, the only pretence remaining is, that our Doctrine is repugnant to reason. The debate managed upon point of rea∣son. The grand difficulty enquired into, and manifested by our Adversaries con∣cessions, not to lie in the greatness of Christ's sufferings, or that our sins were the impulsive cause of them, or that it is impossible that one should be punished for anothers faults: or in all cases un∣just. II. The cases wherein Crellius al∣lows it, instanced. From whence it is proved that he yields the main cause. III. The arguments propounded whereby he attempts to prove it unjust for Christ to be punished for our sins. Crellius his principles of the justice of punish∣ments examined. Of the relation be∣tween desert and punishment. IV. That a person by his own consent may be pu∣nished beyond the desert of his own acti∣ons. V. An answer to Crellius his Ob∣jections. What it is to suffer undeser∣vedly. Crellius his mistake in the state
of the question. VI. The instances of Scripture considered. In what sense Chil∣dren are punished for their Parents sins. VII. Ezek. 18.20. explained at large. VIII. Whether the guilty being freed from the sufferings of an innocent person makes that punishment unjust or no? Crellius his shifts and evasions in this matter dis∣covered. Why among men the offenders are not freed in criminal matters though the sureties be punished. The release of the party depends on the terms of the sureties suffering, therefore delive∣rance not ipso facto. No necessity of such a translation in criminal, as is in pecuniary matters. I. HAving gained so considera∣ble concessions from our Ad∣versaries concerning the places of Scripture,The mat∣ter deba∣ted in point of reason. we come now to debate the matter in point of reason. And if there appear to be no∣thing repugnant in the nature of the thing, or to the justice of God, then all their loud clamours will come to no∣thing; for on that they fix, when they talk the most of our Doctrine being con∣trary to reason. This therefore we now come more closely to examine, in or∣der
to which we must carefully enquire what it is they lay the charge of inju∣stice in God upon, according to our belief of Christ's sufferings being a pu∣nishment for our sins. 1. It is not, That the offenders them∣selves do not undergo the full punishment of their sins. For they assert, that there is no necessity at all that the offenders should be punished from any punitive justice in God: for they eagerly con∣tend that God may freely pardon the sins of men: if so, then it can be no in∣justice in God not to punish the offen∣ders according to the full desert of their sins. 2. It is not, That God upon the sufferings of Christ doth pardon the sins of men: for they yield that God may do this with∣out any charge of injustice, and with the greatest demonstration of his kind∣ness. For they acknowledge, that the sufferings of Christ are not to be consi∣dered as a bare antecedent condition to pardon, but that they were a moving cause as far as the obedience of Christ in suffering was very acceptable to God.
3. It is not, in the greatness or mat∣ter of the sufferings of Christ. For they assert the same which we do.Crtum est Christum in∣nocentissimum a Deogravis∣sims cruciatibus, ipsaque morte fuisse affectum; cum non in materiâ poenae abso∣lute & per se consideratâ, adeoque etiam in e affli∣ctione à quà poenae forma abest, injuria residere à no∣bis dicatur. Crel. c. 4. Sect. 3. Potuit autem id Deus faere, atque adeo fe∣cit, jure dominii, quod in Christi vitam a corpus ha∣bebat; accedente praesertim ipsius Christi consensu. Id.  Sect 4. And therefore I cannot but wonder to meet sometimes with those strange out-crys of our making God cruel in the punishing of his Son for us: for what do we assert that Christ suffered, which they do not assert too? Nay, doth it not look much more like cruelty in God to lay those sufferings upon him without any consideration of sin? as upon their hypo∣thesis he doth; than to do it supposing he bears the punishment of our iniquities, which is the thing we plead for. They assert all those sufferings to be lawful on the account of Gods dominion, which according to them must cease to be so on the supposition of a meritorious cause. But however from this it appears, that it was not unjust that Christ should suf∣fer those things which he did for us: the question then is, whether it were unjust that he should suffer the same things, which he might lawfully do on the ac∣count of dominion with a respect to our sins as the cause of them.
4. As to this, they acknowledge, that it is not, that the sufferings of Christ were occasioned by our sins, or that our sins were the bare impulsive cause of those sufferings. For they both confess in ge∣neral, that one mans sins may be the oc∣casion of anothers punishment, so far that he might have escaped punishment, if the others sins had not been the im∣pulsive cause of it. And therefore Crel∣lius in the general state of this question,Quod si ex thesi speciale facere velis generalem, ea haec erit, injustum esse pu∣nire innocentem, quacunque tandem de causâ id fiat; non vero simpliciter, punire quempiam ob aliena deli∣cta; id enim concedi potest non semper esse injustum. Crel. c. 4. Sect. 3. would not have it, whether it be un∣just to punish one for ano∣thers sins; for that he ac∣knowledges it is not, but whether, for any cause what∣soever it be just to punish an innocent person? And like∣wise in particular of Christ, they con∣fess, that our sins were the impulsive cause, and the occasion of his sufferings. 5. It is not, that there is so necessary a relation between guilt and punishment, that it cannot be called a punishment which is inflicted on an innocent person. For Crellius, after a long discourse of the difference of afflictions and punishments, doth acknowledge, That it is not of
the nature of punishment,Cum ne il∣lud quidem ad natu∣ram poenae requiratur, ut is ipse, qui punien∣dus est poe∣nam reverà fuerit com∣meritus, Id. Sect 5. that the person who is to be punished, should really deserve the punishment; and afterwards when Grotius urgeth, that though it be essential to punishment, that it be inflicted for sin, yet it is not, that it be inflicted upon him who hath himself sinned, which he shews, by the similitude of rewards, which though necessary to be given in con∣sideration of service, may yet be gi∣ven to others besides the person him∣self upon his account. All this Crel∣lius acknowledgeth; who saith, They do not make it necessary to the na∣ture, but to the justice of punishment, that it be inflicted upon none but the person who hath offended. So by his own Confession, it is not against the nature of punishment,Poenae qui∣dem simpli∣citer in in∣nocentem cadit, justa non cadit, Crell. c. 4. Sect. 28. that no one man suffer for anothers faults. From whence it follows, that all Socinus his arguments signifie nothing, which are drawn from the impossibility of the thing, that one man should be punished for anothers faults; for Crellius grants the thing to be possible, but denies it to be just; yet not absolutely neither, but with some restrictions and limitations. For,
II. 6. It is not,In what cases Crel∣lius grants some may be lawful∣ly punish∣ed for the sins of o∣thers. but that there may be sufficient causes assigned in some parti∣cular cases; wherein it may be just for God to punish some for the sins of others. For Crellius himself hath assigned divers. When there is such a near conjunction between them, that one may be said to be punished in the punishment of another:Quia Deus hunc puni∣endo illum quoque al∣terum ob cujus pecca∣ti eum di∣citur puni∣re, simul pu∣nire possit, ob arctiorem quae inter illos inter∣cedat con∣junctionem. Crell. ib. Sect. 5. Crell. p. 242. as Parents in their Children and Posterity, Kings in their Subjects, or the body of a State in its Members, either in the most, or the most prin∣cipal, though the fewest: but we are to consider how far he doth extend this way of punishment of some in others. 1. At the greatest distance of time, if they have been of the same Nation; for he ex∣tends it to the utmost degree of God's patience towards a people; For, saith he, God doth not presently punish as soon as they have sinned; but spares for a great while, and forbears, in ex∣pectation of their repentance, in the mean while a great many guilty per∣sons die, and seem to have escaped pu∣nishment. But at last the time of Gods patience being past, he punisheth their Posterity by exacting the full pu∣nishment of their sins upon them, and by this means punisheth their Ance∣stors
too, and punisheth their sins in their punishment; for, saith he, all that people are reckoned for one man of several Ages, and that punishment which is taken of the last, may be for the sins of the first, for the con∣junction and succession of them: of which we have an example, saith he, in the destruction of Ierusalem. By which we see a very remote conjunction, and a mere similitude in comparing a succession of Ages in a people with those in a man, may (when occasion serves) be made use of to justifie God's punish∣ing one Generation of men for the sins of others that have been long before. 2. When sins are more secret or less remark∣able which God might not punish, unless an occasion were given from others sins impel∣ling him to it; but because God would punish one very near them, he therefore punisheth them, that in their punishment he might punish the other. Or in case sins spread through a Family or a peo∣ple, or they are committed by divers persons at sundry times, which God doth not severely punish, but sometimes then, when the Head of a People or Family hath done something which remarkably deserves punishment, whom he will pu∣nish
in those he is related to, and there∣fore generally punisheth the whole Fa∣mily or People. 3. That which may be a meer exercise of dominion as to some, may be a proper punishment to others; as in the case of Infants, being taken away for their Parents sins; For God, as to the Children, he saith, useth only an act of do∣minion, but the punishment only redounds to the Parents, who lose them; and though this be done for the very end of punish∣ment, yet he denies, that it hath the na∣ture of Punishment in any but the Parents.Crell. ib. sect. 11. sect. 19. 4. That punishment may be intended for those who can have no sense at all of it; as Crellius asserts in the case of Saul's sons, 2 Sam. 21.8, 14. that the punishment was mainly intended for Saul, who was already dead. From these concessions of Crellius in this case, we may take no∣tice, 1. That a remote conjunction may be sufficient for a translation of penalty, viz. from one Generation to another. 2. That sins may be truly said to be pu∣nished in others, when the offenders themselves may escape punishment, thus the sins of Parents in their Children, and Princes in their Subjects. 3. That an act of dominion in some may be design∣ed as a proper punishment to others.
4. That the nature of punishment is not to be measured by the sense of it. Now up∣on these concessions, though our Adver∣saries will not grant, that Christ was pro∣perly punished for our sins, yet they can∣not deny but that we may very proper∣ly be said to be punished for our sins in Christ, and if they will yield us this, the other may be a strife about words. For surely there may be easily imagined as great a conjunction between Christ and us, as between the several Generations of the Iews, and that last which was punished in the destruction of Ierusalem: and though we escape that punishment which Christ did undergo, yet we might have our sins punished in him, as well as Princes theirs in their Subjects, when they escape themselves; or rather as Subjects in an innocent Prince, who may suffer for the faults of his people; if it be said, that these are acts of meer domi∣nion as to such a one, that nothing hin∣ders but granting it, yet our sins may be said to be punished in him; as well as Parents sins are punished properly in meer acts of dominion upon their Chil∣dren; if it be said, that can be no punish∣ment where there is no sense at all of it, that is fully taken off by Crellius; for
surely we have as great a sense of the sufferings of Christ, as the first Genera∣tion of the Iews had of the sufferings of the last, before the fatal destruction of the City, or as Saul had of the punish∣ment of his Sons after his death. So that from Crellius his own concessions, we have proved, that our sins may very properly be said to be punished in Christ, although he will not say, that Christ could be properly punished for our sins; nay he and the rest of our Adversaries not only deny it, but earnestly contend, that it is very unjust to suppose it, and repugnant to the rectitude of God's na∣ture to do it. III. And so we come to consider the mighty arguments that are insisted on for the proof of this,Crellius his arguments propoun∣ded. which may be redu∣ced to these three; viz. 1. That there can be no punishment but what is deserved, but no man can deserve that another should be punished. 2. That punishment flows from revenge, but there can be no re∣venge where there hath been no fault. 3. That the punishment of one, cannot any ways be made the punishment of ano∣ther; and in case it be supposed possible, then those in whose stead the other is pu∣nished, must be actually delivered upon the
payment of that Debt which was owing to God. 1. That one man cannot deserve anothers punishment, and therefore one cannot be punished for another; for there is no just punishment, but what is deserved. This being the main Argument insisted on by Crellius, must be more carefully consi∣dered; but before an answer be made to it, it is necessary that a clear account be given in what sense it is he understands it, which will be best done, by laying down his principles, as to the justice of punishments, in a more distinct method than himself hath done; which are these following: 1. That no person can be justly punished, either for his own or ano∣thers faults, but he that hath deserved to be punished by some sin of his own: For he still asserts,Crell. c. 4. sect. 3. p. 239, 240. That the justice of punishment ariseth from a mans own fault, though the actual punishment may be from anothers: But he that is punished without respect to his own guilt, is punished undeservedly; and he that is punished undeservedly, is pu∣nished unjustly. 2. That personal guilt being supposed one man's sin may be the impulsive cause of another's punish∣ment, but they cannot be the meritori∣ous.
The difference between them he thus explains, The cause is that which makes a thing to be; the impulsive, that which moves one to do a thing, without any consideration of right that one hath to do it: Merit, is that which makes a man worthy of a thing, ei∣ther good or bad, and so gives a right to it; if it be good, to himself; if bad, to him at whose hands he hath deserved it. Now he tells us, that it is impossible. That one mans sins should make any other deserve punishment, but the person who committed them; but they may impell one to punish ano∣ther, and that justly, if the person hath otherwise deserved to be punished, un∣justly if he hath not. The reason he gives of it is, That the vitiosity of the act, which is the proper cause of pu∣nishment, cannot go beyond the per∣son of the offender; and therefore can oblige none to punishment, but him that hath committed the fault. And therefore he asserts, That no man can be justly punished beyond the desert of his own sins, but there may some∣times be a double impulsive cause of that punishment; viz. His own and other mens,Crell. ib. sect. 18. whereof one made that
they might be justly punished, the o∣ther that they should be actually: but the latter, he saith, always supposeth the former, as the foundation of just punishment; so that no part of pu∣nishment could be executed upon him, wherein his own sins were not suppo∣sed as the meritorious cause of it. These are his two main principles which we must now throughly examine, the main force of his Book lying in them. But if we can prove that it hath been generally received by the consent of mankind, that a person may be punish∣ed beyond the desert of his own acti∣ons; if God hath justly punished some for the sins of others, and there be no injustice in one mans suffering by his own consent for another, then these principles of Crellius will be found not so firm as he imagines them. IV. 1. That it hath been generally received by the consent of mankind,That a person by his own consent may be punished beyond the desert of his own actions. Grot. de Sa∣tisf. c. 4. that a person may be justly punished beyond the desert of his own actions. For which purpose Grotius objected against Socinus (who appealed to the consent of Nations, about one being punished for anothers fault) That the Heathens did agree, that Children might be punished for
their Parents faults, and People for their Princes, and that corporal pu∣nishment might be born by one for another, did appear by the Persians punishing the whole family for the fault of one. The Macedonians the near kindred in the case of Treason; some Cities of Greece, destroying the Children of Tyrants together with them; in all which, the mere con∣junction was supposed a sufficient reason without consent; but in case of consent, he saith, They all agreed in the Justice of some being punished for the faults of others. Thence the right of killing hostages among the most civilized nations; and of sure∣ties being punished in capital matters, if the guilty appear not, who were thence called , who were bound to answer body for body. In which cases, the punishment did extend beyond the desert of the person who suffered it; for no other reason is assign∣ed of these sufferings, besides the con∣junction of the person, or his consent; but no antecedent guilt is supposed as necessary, to make the punishment just. We are now to consider what Crellius doth answer to this: 1. As to their ac∣knowledgments
of God's punishing Chil∣dren for their Parents faults, he gives the same answer which he doth to the exam∣ples recorded in Scripture to that purpose, That either they were punished for the sins of others, but their own sins deserved the punishment; or that the Parents were pu∣nished in the Children, but the Children were not properly punished. 2. As to pu∣nishments among men, he answers two things;Crell c 4. sect. 5. p. 244. 1. That such persons were truly punished, but not justly: for he ac∣knowledges, That in such a case it is a proper punishment, and that it is enough in order to that, that any fault be charged upon a person, whether his own or anothers, whether true or false, on the account of which he is sup∣posed worthy to be punished: And that such a conjunction is sufficient for cruel, angry, or imprudent men: for where-ever there is a place, saith he, for anger, there is likewise for pu∣nishment. So that he confesseth, there may be a true punishment, and that which answers all the reason and ends of punishment assigned by him where there is no desert at all of it in the person who undergoes it. But then he adds, that this is an unjust punishment, to which I reply,
That then the reason of punishment assigned by Crellius before is insufficient; for if this answers all the ends of punish∣ments assigned by him, and yet be unjust, then it necessarily follows, that those ends of punishment are consistent with the greatest injustice. For he before made punishment to have a natural respect to anger, and makes the ordinary end of punishment to be a satisfaction of the de∣sire of revenge in men, yet now grants, that these may be in an unjust punish∣ment. Neither can it be said, that he considered punishment only naturally, and not morally; for he tells us, that this is the nature of divine punishments, which are therefore just, because designed for these ends; but in case there be no sup∣posal of a fault at all, then he denies that it is a punishment, but only an affliction, and an exercise of dominion. So that according to him, where-ever there is a proper punishment, it must be just, when ever God doth punish men: and the only difference between God and man supposable in this case is, that we have assurance God will never use his dominion unjustly; but that men do so when they make one to suffer for anothers fault, notwithstanding a consent and con∣junction
between the man that commit∣ted the fault, and the person that suffers for him. But this is begging the thing in question, for we are debating, whe∣ther it be an unlawful exercise of power or no? for we have this presumption, that it is not unlawful, because it may answer all the ends of punishments, and what way can we better judge, whether a punishment be just or no, than by that? Objecti∣ons an∣swered.V. But we are to consider, that we do not here take the person we speak of, abstractly as an innocent person, for then there is no question, but anger and pu∣nishment of one as such is unjust; but of an innocent person as supposed under an obligation by his own consent to suffer for another. And in this case we assert, since according to Crellius the natural and proper ends of punishments may be obtained, and the consent of the person takes away the wrong done to him in the matter of his sufferings, so far as he hath power over himself, that such a punish∣ment is not unjust. For if it be, it must suppose some injury to be done; but in this case let them assign where the in∣jury lies; it cannot be to the publick, if the ends of punishments may be obtained
by such a suffering of one for another by a valid consent of the suffering party, it cannot be to the person in whose room the other suffers, for what injury is that to escape punishment by anothers suffer∣ing; it cannot be to the suffering person, supposing that to be true, which the Heathens still supposed,Immerito quenquam punire est injustè pu∣nire. Crell. p. 240. viz. that every man had a power over his own life. If it be said still, that the injustice lies in this; that such a one suffers undeservedly, and therefore unjustly. I answer; if be meant by undeservedly without sufficient cause or reason of punishment, then we deny that such a one doth suffer undeser∣vedly. Immerito in the Greek Glosses is rendred by , and Merito by  and , and in Cicero, jure & merito are most commonly joyned toge∣ther. So that where there is a right to punish, and sufficient reason for it, such a one doth not suffer immerito, i. e. un∣deservedly. If it be said, that such a one is not dignus poena, that implies no more than the other, for dignus, or as the Ancients writ it dicnus, comes from the Greek  jus, as Vossius tells us, ut dig∣nus sit cui tribui aliquid aequum est: so that where there is an equity in the thing, there is a dignity in the person, or he
may be said to be worthy to undergo it. But doth not this lay open the greatest in∣nocency to as great a desert of sufferings, as the highest guilt? By no means. For we make a lyableness to punishment, the natural consequent of guilt: and he that hath committed a fault, cannot but de∣serve to be punished, so that no suffer∣ings of others can take away the natural consequence of a bad action, which is a desert of punishment; So that as we say, a wicked action cannot but deserve to be punished, i. e. there is an agreeableness in reason and nature, that he who hath done ill, should suffer ill; so we say like∣wise there is necessity in nature and rea∣son, that he that hath thus deserved it, must unavoidably suffer it. And on the other side, we say, no man by his inno∣cency can deserve to be punished, i. e. no man's innocency makes him by vertue of that obnoxious to punishment; but yet we add, that notwithstanding his inno∣cency, the circumstances may be such that he may be justly punished, and in that sense deservedly. So that the Que∣stion is strangely mistaken, when it is thus put, Whether an innocent person con∣sidered as such, may be justly punished; for no one asserts that, or is bound to do
it; but the true question is, whether a person notwithstanding his innocency may not by some act of his own will oblige him∣self to undergo that punishment which o∣therwise he did not deserve? which pu∣nishment, in that case is just and agreeable to reason. And this is that which we assert and plead for. So that innocency here is not considered any other ways, than whether that alone makes it an un∣lawfull punishment, which otherwise would be lawfull, i. e. whether the Ma∣gistrate in such cases, where substitution is admittable by the Laws of Nations (as in the cases we are now upon) be bound to regard any more than that the obliga∣tion to punishment now lies upon the person who by his own act hath sub∣stituted himself in the others room; and if he proceeds upon this, his action is justifiable and agreeable to reason. If it be said, that the substitution is unjust, unless the substituted person hath before∣hand deserved to be punished; it is easily answered, that this makes not the matter at all clearer; for either the person is punished for the former fault, and then there is no substitution; or if he be pu∣nished by way of substitution; then there is no regard at all had to his for∣mer
fault, and so it is all one as if he were perfectly innocent. The in∣stances of Scripture consider∣ed.VI. And by this Crellius his answer to the instances both in Scripture and elsewhere concerning Childrens being punished for their Parents faults, will appear to be insufficient, viz. That God doth never punish them for their Parents faults beyond the desert of their own sins, and therefore no argu∣ment can be drawn from thence, that God may punish an innocent person for the sins of others, because he hath punished some for what they were innocent: For the force of the ar∣gument doth not lie in the supposition of their innocency, as to the ground of punishment in general, for we do not deny, but that they may deserve to be punished for their own faults: but the argument lies in this, whether their own guilt were then considered as the reason of punishment, when God did punish them for their fathers faults? And whe∣ther they by their own sins did deserve to be punished not only with the pu∣nishment due to their own miscarriages, but with the punishment due to their fa∣thers too? If not, then some persons are justly punished, who have not deserved
that punishment they undergo; if they did deserve it, then one person may de∣serve to be punished for anothers sins. If it be said, as it is by Crellius, that his own sins make him capable of punishment, and God by occasion of others sins doth ex∣ecute that punishment, which he might not have done for his own. I answer, we are not enquiring into the bare capacity of punishing, but into the reason of it: was the reason of punishment his own or his fathers sins? If his own, then he was punished only for his own sins? if his fathers, then the punishment may be just which is inflicted without considera∣tion of proper desert of it; for no man (say they) can deserve to be punished, but for his own sins. But it's said, that the sins of Fathers are only an impulsive cause for God to punish the Children accor∣ding to the desert of their own sins which he might otherwise have forborn to punish. Then, the sins of the Fathers are no rea∣son why the Children should be punished; but their own sins are the reason, and their Fathers the bare occasion of being punished for them. But in Scripture, the reason of punishment is drawn from the Fathers sins, and not from the Chil∣drens: For then the words would have
run thus, if the Children sin, and deserve punishment by their own iniquities, then I will take occasion from their Fathers sins, to visit their own iniquities upon them: Whereas the words referr to the Fathers sins as the reason of the Childrens punish∣ment. So in the words of the Law, wherein the reason of punishment ought to be most expresly assigned, it is not, I will certainly punish the Children, if they continue in the Idolatry of their Fathers; but, I will visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children,Exod. 20.3. unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me. If it were only because of imitation of the Fathers sins by the Children, there could be no reason for the limitation to the third and fourth Generation; for then the reason of punishment would be as long as the imitation continued, whe∣ther to the fourth or tenth Generation: And as Alphonsus à Castro observes,Alph à Ca∣stro de justâ haeret. pu∣nit. l. 2. c. 10. If the reason of punishment were the imitation of their Fathers sins, then the Children were not punished for their Fathers sins, but for their own; for that imitation was a sin of their own, and not of their Fathers. Besides, if the proper reason of punishment were the sins of the Children, and the Fathers
sins only the occasion of it, then where it is mentioned that Children are punish∣ed for their Parents sins, the Childrens sins should have been particularly ex∣pressed, as the proper cause of the punish∣ment: But no other reason is assigned in the Law, but the sins of the Fathers, no other cause mentioned of Canaan's punish∣ment, but his Father's sin;Gen 9 25. nor of the punishment of the people in David's time, but his own sin; Lo,2 Sam. 24.17. I have sin∣ned, and I have done wickedly, but these sheep, what have they done? Which is no hyperbolical expression, but the assign∣ing the proper cause of that judgment to have been his own sin, as the whole Chap∣ter declares: Nor,2 Sam. 21.5. of the hanging up of Saul's sons by the Gibeonites, but, that Saul their Father had plotted their de∣struction. And in an instance more re∣markable than any of those which Crellius answers; viz. the punishment of the people of Iudah, for the sins of Manasses in the time of Iosias; when a through Reformation was designed among them, the Prince being very good, and all the places of Idolatry destroyed, such a Pass∣over kept as had not been kept before in the time of any King in Israel, yet it then follows, Notwithstanding the Lord
turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath,2 Kin. 23. v. 4 to v. 21. wherewith his anger was kindled against Iudah, because of all the provocati∣ons wherewith Manasses had provoked him withal. Who can say here, that the sins of Manasseh were only the occasion of God punishing the people in the time of Iosias for their own sins,Vers. 22. Vers. 26. when their sins were much less in the time of Iosias, than in any time mentioned before, af∣ter their lapse into Idolatry? Nay, it is expresly said,2 Chron. 4.33. That Iosiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that pertained to the Children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. And all his days they departed not from following the Lord God of their Fa∣thers: To say, that ths was done in hy∣pocrisie, and bare outward compliance, is to speak without book; and if the rea∣son of so severe punishments had been their hypocrisie, that ought to have been mentioned; but not only here, but afterwards it is said, that the reason of God's destroying Iudah, was for the sins of Manasseh; viz. his Idolatries and Murther,2 Sam. 24.3, 4. which it is said, the Lord will not pardon. And if he would not pardon, then he did punish for those sins, not
barely as the occasion, but as the merito∣rious cause of that punishment. What shall we say then? Did the people in Io∣siah's time, deserve to be punished for the sins of Manasseh, Grandfather to Io∣siah? Or was God so highly provoked with those sins, that although he did not punish Manasseh himself upon his re∣pentance, yet he would let the world see how much he abhrred them, by punishing those sins upon the people af∣terwards; although according to the u∣sual proportion of sins and punishments, the sins of the people in that age did not exceed the sins of other ages, as much as the punishments they suffered, did exceed the punishments of other ages: which is necessary according to Crellius his Doctrine; for if God never punisheth by occasion of their Fathers sins, the Children beyond the desert of their own sins; then it is necessary, that where judg∣ments are remarkably greater, the sins must be so too; the contrary to which is plain in this instance. By which we see, that it is not contrary to the Justice of God in punishing, to make the punish∣ment of some on the account of others sins, to exceed the desert of their own; measuring that desert, not in a way com∣mon
to all sin, but when the desert, of some sins is compared with the de∣sert of others: For it is of this latter we speak of, and of the method which God useth in punishing sin here, for the de∣monstration of his hatred of it, accor∣ding to which the greatest punishments must suppose the greatest sins, either of their own, or others which they suf∣fer for. Ezek. 18.20. ex∣plained. Ezek. 18.4.20.VII. But hath not God declared, That he will never punish the Children for the Fathers sins? for the soul that sinneth it shall die; the son shall not bear the ini∣quity of the Father, &c. To which I answer, These words are to be consider∣ed, as an answer to a complaint made by the Iews, soon after their going into Captivity, which they imputed to God's severity in punishing them for their Fa∣thers sins. Now the complaint was either true or false; if it were true, then though this was looked upon as great severity in God, yet it was no injustice in him; for though God may act severely, he cannot act unjustly: If it was false, then the answer had been an absolute denial of it, as a thing repugnant to the Justice of God. Which we do not find here, but that
God saith unto them, v. 3. Ye shall not have occasion any more to use this Pro∣verb in Israel: if the thing had been plainly unjust, which they complained of, he would have told them, they ne∣ver had occasion to use it. But we find the Prophets telling them before-hand, that they should suffer for their Fathers sins, Ier. 15.3, 4. where he threatens them with destruction and banishment, because of the sins of Manasseh in Ierusa∣lem; and in the beginning of the capti∣vity they complain of this, Lam. 5.7. Our Fathers have sinned, and are not, and we have born their iniquities. And Ier. 31.28. God saith by the Prophet, that he had watched over them to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to afflict: but that he would watch over them to build, and to plant,Jer. 31.29, 30. and in those days they shall say no more, the Fathers have eaten sowre grapes and the Childrens teeth are set on edge; but every one shall die for his own iniquity. Which place is exactly parallel with this in Ezekiel, and gives us a clear account of it, which is, that now indeed God had dealt very severely with them, by making them suffer beyond what in the ordinary course of his providence their sins had deserved; but he punished them
not only for their own sins, but the sins of their Fathers: But lest they should think, they should be utterly consumed for their iniquities, and be no longer a people enjoying the Land which God had promised them, he tells them by the Pro∣phets, though they had smarted so much, by reason of their Fathers sins, this se∣verity should not always continue upon them; but that God would visit them with his kindness again, and would plant them in their own Land, then they should see no reason to continue this Proverb among them, for they would then find, Though their Fathers had eaten sowre grapes, their teeth should not be always set on edge with it. And if we observe it, the occasion of the Proverb, was con∣cerning the Land of Israel,  supra terra Israel, as the Chaldee Para∣phrast renders it more agreeable to the Hebrew,Ezek. 18.2. than the other Versions do. So that the Land of Israel was the occasion of the Proverb, by their being banished out of it for their Fathers sins. Now God tells them, they should have no more occasion to use this Proverb concerning the Land of Israel; for they, notwith∣standing their Fathers sins, should return into their own Land. And even during
the continuance of their captivity, they should not undergo such great severities for the future, but they should find their condition much more tolerable than they imagined; only, if any were guilty of greater sins than others, they should themselves suffer for their own faults, but he would not punish the whole Nation for them or their own Posterity. This I take to be the genuine meaning of this place; and I the rather embrace it, be∣cause I find such insuperable difficulties in other interpretations that are given of it: For to say as our Adversaries do, That what God saith, should not be for the future, was repugnant to his nature and ju∣stice ever to do, is to charge God plain∣ly with injustice in what he had done: For the Prophets told them they should suffer for the sins of their Fathers: Which sufferings were the ground of their com∣plaint now, and the answer here given must relate to the occasion of the com∣plaint; for God saith, They should not have occasion to use that Proverb: Where∣in is implyed, they should not have the same reason to complain which they had then. I demand then, Do not these words imply, That God would not do for the future with them, what he had done be∣fore;
if not, the proper answer had been a plain denial, and not a promise for the future he would not; if they do, then either God properly punished them for the sins of their Fathers, and then God must be unjust in doing so, or it was just with God to do it, and so this place in∣stead of overthrowing will prove, that some may be justly punished, beyond the desert of their own sins: or else, God did only take occasion by their Fathers sins, to punish them according to the desert of their own iniquities: But then they had no cause to complain, that they were pu∣nished for any more than their own ini∣quities; and withal, then God doth ob∣lige himself by his promise here, never to punish men for the future by the occa∣sion of others sins: which is not only con∣trary to their own Doctrine, but to what is plainly seen afterwards in the punish∣ment of the Iews for their Fathers sins, mentioned by our Saviour after this:Matt. 23.35. And if this be a certain rule of equity which God here saith, that he would ne∣ver vary from, then the punishing of some on the occasion of others sins, would be as unjust, as our Adversaries suppose the punishing any beyond the desert of their own sins to be. But is it not
implyed, that Gods ways would be unequal,Ezek. 18.25. if he ever did otherwise than he there said he would do? No, it is not, if by equal he meant just, for his ways never were, or can be so unequal; but here if it be taken with a respect to the main dispute of the Chapter, no more is implied in them, but that they judged amiss concerning God's actions, and that they were just, when they thought them not to be so: or if at least they thought his ways ve∣ry severe, though just, God by remit∣ting of this severity, would shew that he was not only just, but kind; and so they would find his ways equal, that is, always agreeable to themselves, and ending in kindness to them, though they hitherto were so severe towards them in their ba∣nishment and captivity. Or if they be taken with a respect to the immediate occasion of them both, Ezek. 18.—33. They do not relate to this dispute about Childrens suffering for their Fathers sins;Ezek. 33.20. but to another, which was concerning a righteous mans sinning and dying in his sins, and a wicked mans repenting, and living in his righteousness; which were directly contrary to the common opinion of the Iews to this day, which is, that God will judge men according
to the greatest number of their actions good or bad: as appears by Maimonides and others. Now they thought it a ve∣ry hard case, for a man who had been righteous the far greatest part of his time, if he did at last commit iniquity, that his former righteousness should signifie no∣thing, but he must die in his iniquity. To this therefore God answers, that it was only the inequality of their own ways, which made them think God's ways in doing so unequal. This then doth not make it unequal, for God ei∣ther to punish men, upon the occasion, or by the desert of other mens sins, sup∣posing such a conjunction between them, as there is in the same body of people, to those who went before them. And Crellius himself grants,Crell. c 4. sect. 15. That Socinus never intended to prove, that one mans suffering for anothers sins was unjust in it self,The deli∣verance of the guilty by the suf∣ferings of an inno∣cent per∣son by his own con∣sent, makes not the punish∣ment un∣just. from this place: no, not though we take it in the strictest sense, for one suffering in the stead of another. VIII. Having thus far declared, how far it is agreeable to God's Justice, to punish any persons either by reason of his domi∣nion, or the conjunction of persons, for the sins of others, and consequently whe∣ther any punishment may be undergone
justly beyond the proper desert of their own sins, I now return to the consent of Mankind in it, on supposition either of a near conjunction, or a valid consent which must make up the want of domi∣nion in men without it. And the que∣stion still proceeds upon the supposition of those things, that there be a proper dominion in men over that which they part with for others sakes, and that they do it by their free consent; and then we justifie it not to be repugnant to the principles of Reason and Justice, for any to suffer beyond the desert of their own actions. And Crellius his saying, that such a punishment is true punishment, but not just, is no answer at all to the consent of Nations that it is so. And therefore finding this answer insufficient; he relies upon another,Crell. c. 4. sect. 30, 32, 34, &c. viz. That it was never received by the consent of Nations, that one man should suffer in the stead of another, so as the guilty should be freed by the others suffering. For, he saith, neither Socinus nor he do deny that one man may be punish∣ed for anothers sins; but that which they deny is, that ever the innocent were punished so as the guilty were freed by it; and so he answers, in the
case of Hostages and Sureties, their pu∣nishment did never excuse the offenders themselves. And to this purpose he saith, Socinus his argument doth hold good, that tho' one mans money may become anothers, yet one mans sufferings can∣not become anothers: For, saith he, if it could, then it would be all one who suf∣fered, as it is who pays the money due: And then the offender must be present∣ly released, as the Debtor is upon pay∣ment of the debt. This is the substance of what is said by him upon this Argu∣ment. To which I reply; 1. That this gives up the matter in dispute at present between us; for the present question is, Whether it be unjust for any one to suffer beyond the desert of his own actions? Yes, saith Crellius, it is, in case he suffers so, as that the guilty be freed by his sufferings. But we are not enquiring, Whether it be just for another person to be freed for a mans suffering for him? but whether it be just for that man to suffer by his own consent, more than his own actions, without that consent, deserved? The release of another person by vertue of his sufferings, is a matter of another consideration. Doth the freeing or not freeing of another by suffering, add any thing to the desert of
suffering? He that being wholly inno∣cent, and doth suffer on the account of anothers fault, doth he not suffer as un∣deservedly, though another be not freed, as if he were? As in the case of Hosta∣ges or Sureties, doth it make them at all the more guilty, because the persons they are concerned for, will be punished notwithstanding, if they come under the power of those who exacted the punish∣ment upon them, who suffered for them? Nay, is not their desert of punishment so much the less, in as much as the guil∣ty are still bound to answer for their own offences? If we could suppose the guil∣ty to be freed by the others sufferings, it would be by supposing their guilt more fully translated upon those who suffer, and consequently, a greater obli∣gation to punishment following that guilt. From whence it follows, that if it be just to punish, when the person is not deliver'd from whom the other suffers, it is more just when he is; for the tran∣slation of the penalty is much less in the former case, than in the latter; and what is just upon less grounds of punishment, must be more just upon greater. I look on this therefore but as a shift of Crelli∣us, hoping thereby to avoid the consent
of mankind in one mans suffering for another, without attending to the main argument he was upon; viz. The justice of one person suffering for another. 2. It is a very unreasonable thing, to make an action unjust for that, which of it self is acknowledged by our Adversaries to be very just; viz. The pardoning the offenders themselves. If it were just to suffer, if the other were not pardoned, and it were just to pardon, whether the other were punished or no, how comes this suffering to be unjust, merely by the others being pardoned by it: nay, is it not rather an argument, that those suf∣ferings are the most just, which do so fully answer all the ends of punishments; that there is then no necessity that the offender should suffer; but that the Su∣preme Governour having obtained the ends of Government, by the suffering of one for the rest, declares himself so well pleased with it, that he is willing to par∣don the offenders themselves. 3. Many of those persons who have had their sins punished in others, have themselves esca∣ped the punishment due to the desert of their sins: As is plain in the case of A∣hab, whose punishment was not so great as his sins deserved, because the full pu∣nishment
of them was reserved to his posterity. If it be said, as it is by Crel∣lius, That Ahab was not wholly freed,Crell. c. 4. sect. 25. 1 Kin. 21.19. his life being taken away for his own sins: That gives no sufficient answer; for if some part of the punishment was defer∣red, that part he was delivered from; and the same reason in this case will hold for the whole as the part. As is plain in the case of Manasseh, and several o∣thers, the guilt of whose sins were pu∣nished on their posterity, themselves e∣scaping it. 4 Our Adversaries confess, that in some cases it is lawful and just for some to suffer, with a design that others may be freed by their suffering for them. Thus they assert, That one Christian, not only may, but ought to lay down his life for another, if there be any danger of his de∣nying the truth, or he judges him far more usefull and considerable than himself: so likewise a Son for his Father, one Brother for another, or a Friend, or any,Crell cap. 6. sect. 39. whose life he thinks more usefull than his own. Now I ask, whether a man can be bound to a thing that is in its one nature unjust? if not, as it is plain he cannot, then such an obligation of one man to suffer for the delivery of another cannot be unjust, and consequently the suffering it
self cannot be so. But Crellius saith, The injustice in this case lies wholly upon the Magistrate who admits it: but I ask, wherefore is it unjust in the Magistrate to admit it? it is because the thing is in it self unjust? if so, there can be no obli∣gation to do it; and it would be as great a sin to undergo it, as in the Magistrate to permit it; but if it be just in it self, we have obtained what we contend for, viz. that it may be just for a man to suffer beyond the desert of his own actions; for he that lays down his life for his Brethren, doth not deserve by his own actions that very punishment which he undergoes. And if the thing be in it self just, how comes it to be unjust in him that permits it? 5. The reason why among men the offenders themselves are punished, is be∣cause those were not the terms, upon which the persons suffered. For if they had suffered upon these terms that the other might be freed, and their suffering was admitted of by the Magistrate on that consideration, then in all reason and justice the offenders ought to be freed on the account of the others suffering for them. But among men the chief reason of the obligation to punishment of one man for another, is not, that the other
might be freed, but that there may be security given by the publick, that the offenders shall be punished: and the rea∣son of the Sureties suffering is not to de∣liver the offender, but to satisfie the Law, by declaring that all care is taken that the offender should be punished, when in case of escape, the Surety suffers for him. But it is quite another thing when the person suffers purposely that others might be freed by his suffering, for then in case the suffering be admitted, the re∣lease of the other is not only not unjust, but becomes due to him that suffered, on his own terms. Not as though it follow∣ed ipso facto as Crellius fansies, but the manner of release doth depend upon the terms which he who suffered for them, shall make in order to it. For upon this suffering of one for another upon such terms, the immediate consequent of the suffering is not the actual discharge but the right to it which he hath purchased; and which he may dispense upon what terms he shall judge most for his honour. 6. Although one persons sufferings can∣not become anothers so as one mans Mo∣ney may; yet one mans sufferings may be a sufficient consideration on which a be∣nefit may accrue to another. For to
that end a Donation, or such a transfer∣ring right from one to another as is in Money, is not necessary, but the accep∣tation which it hath from him who hath the power to pardon. If he declare that he is so well pleased with the sufferings of one for another, that in consideration of them, he will pardon those from whom he suffered; where lies the impossibility or unreasonableness of the thing? For Crellius gants,Crell. ib. sect. 28. that rewards may be given to others than the persons who did the acti∣ons in consideration of those actions; and why may not the sufferings of one for others, being purposely undertaken for this end, be available for the pardon of those whom he suffered for? For a man can no more transfer the right of his good actions, than of his sufferings. From all which it follows, that one person may by his own consent, and being ad∣mitted thereto by him to whom the right of punishing belongs, suffer justly; tho' it be beyond the desert of his own acti∣ons; and the guilty may be pardoned on the account of his sufferings. Which was the first thing we designed to prove from Crellius, in order to the overthrow∣ing his own hypothesis. For it being con∣fessed by him that such sufferings have
all that belongs to the nature of punish∣ments, and since God hath justly punished some for the sins which they have not committed; since all Nations have al∣lowed it just for one man by his own consent to suffer for another; since it cannot be unjust for the offender to be released by anothers sufferings, if he were admitted to suffer for that end, it evidently follows, contrary to Crellius his main Principle, that a person may be justly punished beyond the desert of his own actions: And so that first argument of Crellius cannot hold, that one man can∣not by his own consent suffer for another, be∣cause no man can deserve anothers punish∣ment, and no punishment is just but what is deserved. His second argument from the nature of anger and revenge hath been already answered in the first Dis∣course about the nature and ends of pu∣nishments, and his third argument, that one mans punishment cannot become ano∣thers, immediately before. And so we have finished our first consideration of the sufferings of Christ in general, as a punishment of our sins, which we have shewed to be agreeable both to Scripture and Reason.
CHAP. IV. I. The Death of Christ considered as an Expiatory Sacrifice for sin. II. What the expiation of sin was by the Sacrifi∣ces under the Law; twofold, Civil and Ritual. The Promises made to the Iews under the Law of Moses, respected them as a People, and therefore must be tem∣poral. The typical nature of Sacrifices asserted. III. A substitution in the Ex∣piatory Sacrifices under the Law, proved from Lev. 17.11. and the Concession of Crellius about the signification of  joyned with . Lev. 10.17. ex∣plained. The expiation of uncertain murther proves a substitution. IV. A substitution of Christ in our room proved from Christ's being said to die for us; the importance of that phrase considered. V. In what sense a Surrogation of Christ in our room is asserted by us. VI. Our Re∣demption by Christ proves a substitution. VII. Of the true notion of Redemption: that explained, and proved against So∣cinus and Crellius. No necessity of pay∣ing the price to him that detains cap∣tive, where the captivity is not by
force, but by sentence of Law. Christ's death a proper : and therefore the  attributed to it, can∣not be taken for mere deliverance. WE come now to consider the death of Christ,The death of Christ considered as an Ex∣piatory Sa∣crifice for sin. as an Expia∣tory Sacrifice for the sins of mankind: Which is as much denied by our Adversaries, as that it was a punish∣ment for our sins. For though they do not deny, That Christ as a Priest did of∣fer up a Sacrifice of Expiation for the sins of men; yet they utterly deny, That this was performed on earth, or that the Expia∣tion of sins did respect God, but only us; or, that the death of Christ, had any pro∣per efficacy towards the expiation of sin, a∣ny further than as it comprehends in it all the consequences of his death, by a strange Catachresis. I shall now therefore prove, that all things which do belong to a proper Expiatory Sacrifice, do agree to the death of Christ. There are three things especially considerable in it: 1. A Substitution in the place of the Offenders. 2. An Oblation of it to God. 3. An Expiation of sin consequent upon it. Now these three, I shall make appear to agree fully to the death of Christ for us.
1. A Substitution in the place of the Offenders. That we are to prove, was designed in the expiatory Sacrifices un∣der the Law, and that Christ in his death for us, was substituted in our place. 1. That in the expiatory Sacrifices un∣der the Law, there was a Substitution of them in the place of the Offenders. This our Adversaries are not willing to yield us, because of the correspondency which is so plain in the Epistle to the Hebrews, between those Sacrifices, and that whch was offered up by Christ. We now speak only of those Sacrifices, which we are sure were appointed of old for the expia∣tion of sin, by God himself. As to which the great rule assigned by the Apostle was,Heb. 9.22. That without shedding of blood there was no remission. If we yield Crellius what he so often urgeth,Crell. c. 10. sect. 14. viz. That these words are to be understood, of what was done under the Law; They will not be the less serviceable to our purpose; for thereby it will appear, that the means of Expiation lay in the shedding of blood: Which shews, that the very mactation of the beast to be sacrificed, was de∣signed in order to the Expiation of sin. To an inquisitive person, the reason of the slaying such multitudes of beasts in
the Sacrifices appointed by God himself among the Iews, would have appeared far less evident than now it doth, since the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews hath given us so full an account of them. For it had been very unreasonable to have thought, that they had been merely in∣stituted out of compliance with the cu∣stoms of other Nations, since the whole design of their Religion, was to separate them from them: and on such a suppo∣sition the great design of the Epistle to the Hebrews signifies very little; which doth far more explain to us the nature and tendency of all the Sacrifices in use among them, that had any respect to the expiation of sins, than all the customs of the Egyptians, or the Commentaries of the later Iews. But I intend not now to discourse at large upon this subject of Sacrifices, either as to the nature and institution of them in general, or with a particular respect to the Sacrifice of Christ, since a learned person of our Church, hath already undertaken Crellius upon this Argument, and we hope e'er long will oblige the world with the bene∣fit of his pains. I shall therefore only insist on those things which are neces∣sary for our purpose, in order to the
clearing the Substitution of Christ in our sled, for the expiation of our sins by his death; and this we say was repre∣sented in the expiatory Sacrifices, which were instituted among the Iews. If we yield Crellius what he after Socinus con∣tends for;Crell. c. 10. sect. 13. viz. That the Sacrifice of Christ was only represented in the publick and solemn expiatory Sacrifices for the people, and especially those on the day of Atone∣ment; We may have enough from them to vindicate all that we assert, concern∣ing the expiatory Sacrifice of the blood of Christ. What the Expiation of sin was by the Sa∣crifices under the Law.II. For that those were designed by way of Substitution in the place of the offenders, will appear from the circum∣stances and reason of their Institution: But before we come to that, it will be necessary to shew what that Expiation was, which the Sacrifices under the Law were designed for; the not understand∣ing of which, gives a greater force to our Adversaries Arguments, than other∣wise they would have. For while men assert, that the expiation was wholly ty∣pical, and of the same nature with that expiation which is really obtained by the death of Christ, they easily prove, That all the expiation then, was only declara∣tive,
and did no more depend on the sacri∣fices offered, than on a condition required by God, the neglect of which would be an act of disobedience in them; and by this means it could represent, say they, no more than such an expiation to be by Christ; viz. God's declaring that sins are expia∣ted by him, on the performance of such a condition required in order thereto, as lay∣ing down his life was. But we assert another kind of expiation of sin, by ver∣tue of the Sacrifice being slain and offer∣ed; which was real, and depended up∣on the Sacrifice: And this was twofold a Civil, and a Ritual expiation, accord∣ing to the double capacity in which the people of the Iews may be considered, either as members of a Society, subsist∣ing by a body of Laws, which according to the strictest Sanction of it, makes death the penalty of disobedience, Deut. 27.26. but by the will of the Legislator, did admit of a relaxation in many cases, allowed by himself; in which he declares, That the death of the beast designed for a Sacrifice should be accepted, instead of the death of the offender; and so the offence should be fully expiated, as to the execution of the penal Law upon him. And thus far, I freely admit what
Grotius asserts upon this subject,Grot de Sa∣tisf. c. 10. and do yield that no other offence could be ex∣piated in this manner, but such which God himself did particularly declare should be so. And therefore no sin which was to be punished by cutting off, was to be expiated by Sacrifice; as wilful Idolatry, Murther, &c. Which it is impossible for those to give an ac∣count of, who make the expiation whol∣ly typical; for why then should not the greatest sins much rather have had sacri∣fices of expiation appointed for them: because the Consciences of men would be more solicitous for the pardon of greater than lesser sins; and the blood of Christ represented by them, was design∣ed for the expiation of all. From whence it is evident, that it was not a meer typical expiation; but it did relate to the civil constitution among them. But besides this, we are to consider the people with a respect to that mode of Divine Worship which was among them; by reason of which, the people were to be purified from the legal impurities which they contracted, which hindred them from joyning with others in the publick Worship of God, and many Sa∣crifices were appointed purposely for the
expiating this legal guilt, as particularly, the ashes of the red heifer, Numb. 19.9. which is there called a purification for sin. And the Apostle puts the blood of Bulls and of Goats,Heb. 9.12, 13. and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling the unclean, together; and the effect of both of them, he saith, was to sanctifie to the purifying of the flesh; which implies, that there was some pro∣per and immediate effect of these sacri∣fices upon the people at that time, though infinitely short of the effect of the blood of Christ upon the Consciences of men. By which it is plain, the Apo∣stle doth not speak of the same kind of expiation in those sacrifices, which was in the Sacrifice of Christ, and that the one was barely typical of the other; but of a different kind of expiation, as far as purifying the flesh is from purging the Con∣science. But we do not deny, that the whole dispensation was typical, and that the Law had a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things,Heb. 10.1. i. e. a dark and obscure representation, and not the perfect resemblance of them. There are two things which the Apostle asserts concerning the Sacrifices of the Law: First, that they had an effect up∣on the Bodies of men, which he calls
purifying the flesh; the other is, that they had no power to expiate for the sins of the soul, considered with a respect to the punishment of another life, which he calls purging the Conscience from dead works;Heb. 9.9.10.4. and therefore he saith, that all the gifts and sacrifices under the Law, could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, and that it was impossible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin. So that the proper expiation which was made by them, was civil and ritual, re∣lating either to corporal punishment, or to legal uncleanness, from whence the Apostle well proves the necessity of a higher Sacrifice to make expiation for sins, as pertaining to the Conscience: But that expiation among the Iews did relate to that Polity which was established a∣mong them, as they were a people un∣der the Government of a body of Laws distinct from the rest of the world. And they being considered as such, it is vain to enquire, whether they had only tem∣poral or eternal promises; for it was im∣possible they should have any other than temporal, unless we imagine, that God would own them for a distinct people in another World as he did in this. For
what Promises relate to a People as such, must consider them as a People, and in that capacity they must be the blessings of a Society, viz. peace, plenty, number of People, length of days, &c. But we are far from denying that the general Principles of Religion did remain among them, viz. that there is a God, and a re∣warder of them that seek him; and all the Promises God made to the Patriarchs, did continue in force as to another Coun∣try, and were continually improved by the Prophetical instructions among them. But we are now speaking of what did re∣spect the people in general, by vertue of that Law which was given them by Moses, and in that respect the punish∣ment of faults being either death or ex∣clusion from the publick Worship, the expiation of them, was taking away the obligation to either of these, which was the guilt of them in that considera∣tion. But doth not this take away the typical nature of these sacrifices? No, but it much rather establisheth it. For as Soci∣nus argues,Socin. de servat. l. 2. c. 10. Prae∣lect. Theo∣log. cap. 22. If the expiation was only typical, there must be something n the type correspondent to that which is typified by it. As the Brazen Ser∣pent
typified Christ, and the benefit which was to come by him, because as many as looked up to it were heal∣ed. And Noah's Ark is said to be a type of Baptism, because as many as entred into that were saved from the deluge. So Corinth. 10. the Apostle saith, that those things happened to them in types, v. 11. because the e∣vents which happened to them, did represent those which would fall upon disobedient Christians. So that to make good the true notion of a Type, we must assert an expiation that was real then, and agreeable to that dispen∣sation, which doth represent an expia∣tion of a far higher nature, which was to be by the Sacrifice of the Blood of Christ. A substi∣tution proved from Lev. 17.11▪ &c.III. Which being premised, I come to prove, that there was a substitution de∣signed of the Beast to be slain and sacri∣ficed in stead of the offenders themselves. Which will appear from Levit. 17.11. For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it you upon the Altar, to make an Atonement for your Souls; for it is the blood that maketh an Atonement for the Soul. The utmost that Crellius would have meant by this place is,Crell. c. 10. sect 9. that
there is a double reason assigned of the prohi∣bition of eating blood, viz. that the life was in the blood, and that the blood was designed for expiation; but he makes these wholly in∣dependent upon each other. But we say, that the proper reason assigned against the eating of the blood, is that which is else∣where given, when this precept is menti∣oned, viz. that the blood was the life, as we may see Gen. 9.4. Lev. 17.14. but to con∣firm the reason given, that the blood was the life; he adds, that God had given them that upon the Altar for an atonement for their Souls: So the Arabick Version ren∣ders it, and therefore have I given it you upon the Altar, viz. because the blood is the life. And hereby a sufficient reason is given, why God did make choice of the blood for atonement, for that is ex∣pressed in the latter clause, for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the Soul; why should this be mentioned here, if no more were intended but to give barely another reason why they should not eat the blood? what force is there more in this clause to that end, than in the foregoing? for therein God had said, that he had given it them for an atonement. If no more had been intend∣ed, but the bare prohibition of common
use of the blood, on the account of its being consecrated to sacred use, it had been enough to have said, that the blood was holy unto the Lord, as it is in the other instances mentioned by Crellius, of the holy Ointment and Perfume,Exod. 30.32, 33. for no other reason is there given, why it should not be profaned to common use,37, 38. but that it should be holy for the Lord; if therefore the blood had been forbidden upon that account, there had been no necessity at all of adding, that the blood was it that made atonement for the soul: which gives no peculiar rea∣son why they should not eat the blood, beyond that of bare consecration of it to a sacred use; but if we consider it as respecting the first clause, viz. For the life of the flesh is in the blood, then there is a particular reason why the blood should be for atonement, viz. because the life was in that; and therefore when the blood was offered, the life of the Beast was supposed to be given instead of the life of the offender. According to that of Ovid, Ovid. Fast. l. 6.Hanc animam vobis pro meliore damus. This will be yet made clearer by ano∣ther instance produced by Crellius to ex∣plain this, which is the forbidding the
eating of fat; which saith he, is joyned with this of blood, Levit. 3.17. It shall be a perpetual Statute for your Generations, throughout all your dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood. To the same pur∣pose, Levit. 7.23, 25, 26. Now no o∣ther reason is given of the prohibition of the fat, but this,Lev. 3.16. All the fat is the Lords. Which was enough to keep them from eating it. But we see here in the case of blood somewhat further is assigned, viz. that it was the life; and therefore was most proper for expiation, the life of the beast being substituted in the place of the offenders. Which was therefore called animalis hostia among the Romans, as Grotius observes upon this place, and was distinguished from those whose entrails were observed; for in those Sacrifices as Servius saith,Servius ad Aeneid. 4. sola anima Deo sacratur, the main of the Sa∣crifice lay in shedding of the blood, which was called the Soul; and so it is  in this place. From whence it ap∣pears that such a sacrifice was properly , for the same word  is used, both relating to the blood and the soul, that is expiated by it: and the LXX do accordingly render it, , and in the last
clause, .Euseb. de∣monst. E∣vang. l. 1. c. 10. From whence Eusebius calls these Sacrifices of living Creatures, , and afterwards saith they were .Crell. c. 8. sect. 23. De∣notat enim vox  eos quorum al∣ter pro al∣pero ani∣mam ponat aut de vo∣veat, & sic id malum quod alteri subcundum erat ejus lo∣o subire non detrectet. And Crellius else∣where grants, that where  is joyned with , it doth imply, that one doth undergo the punishment which another was to have undergone, which is all we mean by substitution, it being done in the place of another. From whence it follows, that the Sacrifices under the Law being said to be , doth necessarily in∣fer a substitution of them in the place of the offenders. And from hence may be understood, what is meant by the Goat of the Sin offering, bearing the ini∣quity of the Congregation, to make atone∣ment for them before the Lord, Levit. 10.17. for Crellius his saying, That bearing is as much as taking away, or declaring that they are taken away, hath been al∣ready disproved: And his other answer hath as little weight in it; viz. That it is not said, that the sacrifice did bear their iniquities, but the Priest: For, 1. The Chaldee Paraphrast, and the Syriack Ver∣sion, understand it wholly of the sacri∣fice.Socin. de servat. l. 3. c. 11. 2. Socinus himself grants, That if
it were said, the Priest did expiate by the sacrifices, it were all one as if it were said, that the sacrifices themselves did ex∣piate; because the expiation of the Priest was by the sacrifice. Thus it is plain in the case of uncertain murther, mention∣ed Deut. 21. from the first to the tenth; If a murther were committed in the Land, and the person not known who did it, a heifer was to have her head cut off by the Elders of the next City; and by this means they were to put away the guilt of the in∣nocent blood from among them: The rea∣son of which was, because God had said before, That blood defiled the Land,Numb. 35.33. and the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. From whence it ap∣pears, that upon the shedding of blood, there was a guilt contracted upon the whole Land wherein it was shed, and in case the Murtherer was not found to ex∣piate that guilt by his own blood, then it was to be done by the cutting off the head of a heifer instead of him: In which case, the death of the heifer was to do as much towards the expiating the Land, as the death of the Murtherer if he had been found: And we do not con∣tend, that this was designed to expiate
the Murtherers guilt (which is the Ob∣jection of Crellius against this instance) but that a substitution here was appoin∣ted by God himself,Crell. c. 10. sect. 9. for the expiation of the people: For what Crellius adds, That the people did not deserve punishment, and therefore needed no expiation; it is a flat contradiction to the Text: For the prayer appointed in that case is,Deut. 21.. Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy people Israels Charge, and the blood shall be expiated: for the same word  is used here, which is in the other places where Expiation is spoken of. So that here must be some guilt supposed, where there was to be an expiation, and this expiation was performed by the substitu∣tion of a sacrifice in the place of the of∣fender. Which may be enough at pre∣sent to shew, that a substitution was ad∣mitted by the Law, of a sacrifice in∣stead of the offender, in order to the ex∣piation of guilt; but whether the offen∣der himself was to be freed by that Sa∣crifice; depends upon the terms on which the sacrifice was offered; for we say still, that so much guilt was expiated, as the sacrifice was designed to expiate; if the sacrifice was designed to expiate the guilt
of the offender, his sin was expiated by it; if not his, in case no Sacrifice was allowed by the Law, as in that of mur∣ther, then the guilt which lay upon the Land was expiated, although the offen∣der himself were never discovered. IV. I now come to prove,A substi∣tution of Christ in our room proved by his dying for us. that in cor∣respondency to such a substitution of the sacrifices for sin under the Law, Christ was substituted in our room for the ex∣piation of our guilt; and that from his being said to die for us, and his death be∣ing called a price of Redemption for us. 1. From Christ's being said to die for us. By St. Peter, For Christ hath also once suffered for sins,1 Pet. 3.18. the just for the un∣just; by whom he is also said, to suffer , for us, and for us in the flesh:2.21.4.1. By St. Paul, he is said to die , for all, and , for the ungodly,2 Cor. 5.14. Rom. 5.6. 1 Tim. 2.6. Heb. 2.9. and to give himself , a ransom for all, and, to tast death , for every man: By Caiaphas, speak∣ing by inspiration,Joh. 11.50. he is said to die , for the people. So Christ him∣self instituting his last Supper, said,Luke 22.19, 20. This is my body which was given, and my blood which was shed , for you; and before he had said, That the Son of man came to give his life ,Matt. 20.28.
a ransom for many. We are now to con∣sider, what arts our Adversaries have made use of to pervert the meaning of these places, so as not to imply a substi∣tution of Christ in our room: 1. They say, That all these phrases do imply no more than a final cause; viz. That Christ died for the good of mankind;1 Joh. 3.16. for the A∣postle tells us,Col. 1.4. We are bound to lay down our lives for the Brethren, and St. Paul is said to suffer for the Church. To which I answer; 1. This doth not at all de∣stroy that which we now plead for, viz. That these phrases do imply a substitu∣tion of Christ in our room: For when we are bid to lay down our lives for our brethren, a substitution is implied there∣in; and supposing that dying for ano∣ther, doth signifie dying for some bene∣fit to come to him, yet what doth this hinder substitution, unless it be proved, that one cannot obtain any benefit for another, by being substituted in his room. Nay, it is observable, that although we produce so many places of Scripture, im∣plying such a substitution, they do not offer to produce one that is inconsistent with Christ's suffering in our stead; all that they say is, That  doth not al∣ways signifie so, which we never said it did,
who say, that Christ suffered , not instead of our sins, but by rea∣son of them; but we assert, that when one person is said to die for others, as in the places mentioned, no other sense can be so proper and agreeable, as dying in the stead of the other.Soc. de ser∣vat. l. 2. c. 8. 2. Socinus him∣self grants, That there is a peculiarity implied in those phrases, when attri∣buted to Christ, above what they have when attributed to any other. And therefore, he saith, it cannot be pro∣perly said, That one Brother dies for another, or that Paul suffered for the Colossians, or for the Church, as Christ may truly and properly be said to suffer and to die for us. And from hence, saith he, St. Paul saith,1 Cor. 1.13. was Paul cruci∣fied for you? implying thereby, that there never was or could be any, who truly and properly could be said to die for Men, but Christ alone. How unrea∣sonable then is it, from the use of a parti∣cle as applied to others, to inferr, that it ought to be so understood, when applied to Christ? when a peculiarity is acknow∣ledged in the death of Christ for us, more than ever was or could be in one mans dying for another. 3. It is not the bare force of the particle  that we
insist upon; but that a substitution could not be more properly expressed, than it is in Scripture, by this and other parti∣cles, for not only  is used, but  too: which Socinus saith, Although it may signifie something else besides in the stead of another,Socin. b. yet in such places, where it is spoken of a ransom or price, it signi∣fies the payment of something which was owing before, as Matt. 17.27. , and so he acknowledges, that where redemption is spoken of, there  doth imply a commutation, because the price is given, and the person received, which, he saith, holds in Christ only metaphorically: for the redemption according to him be∣ing only metaphorical, the commutati∣on must be supposed to be so too. In what sense a sur∣rogation of Christ in our room is as∣serted by us. Crell. c. 9. sect. 3. ib. sect. 2.V. And this now leads us to the lar∣ger Answer of Crellius upon this argu∣ment. Wherein we shall consider, what he yields, what he denies, and upon what reasons. 1. He yields, and so he saith doth Socinus, very freely, a commu∣tation; but it is necessary that we should throughly understand what he means by it: to that end he tells us, That they ac∣knowledge a twofold commutation; one of the person suffering, the kind of suffering being changed, not actually but intentionally,
because we are not actually freed by Christ dying for us, but only Christ died for that end, that we might be freed. And this commutation, he saith, that Socinus doth not deny to be implied in the particle , in the places where Christ is said to die for us. Another commutation, which he acknowledges, is, that which is between a price, and the thing or person which is bought or redeemed by it; where the price is paid, and the thing or person is recei∣ved upon it. And this kind of commuta∣tion, he saith, is to be understood in the places where  is mentioned; which price, he saith, by accident may be a person; and because the person is not presently delive∣red, he therefore saith,Ib. sect. 6. that the commu∣tation is rather imperfect than metaphori∣cal; and although, he saith,  doth not of it self imply a commutation, yet he grants, that the circumstances of the pla∣ces do imply it. 2. He denies, that there is any proper surrogation in Christ's dying for us, which, he saith,Ib. sect. . is such a commu∣tation of persons, that the substituted per∣son is in all respects to be in the same place and state wherein the other was; and if it refers to sufferings, then it is when one suffers the very same which the other was to suffer, he being immediately delivered
by the others sufferings. And against this kind of surrogation, Crellius needed not to have produced any reasons; for Gro∣tius never asserted it; neither do we say, that Christ suffered eternal death for us, or that we were immediately freed by his sufferings. But that which Grotius asserts, that he meant by substitution was this, that unless Christ had died for us, we must have died our selves, and because Christ hath died, we shall not die eternally. But if this be all,Ib sect. 3. saith Crellius, he meant by it, we grant the whole thing, and he complains of it as an injury for any to think otherwise of them. If so, they cannot de∣ny but that there was a sufficient capa∣city in the death of Christ to be made an expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the world. But notwithstanding all these fair words, Crellius means no more than So∣cinus did; and tho' he would allow the words which Grotius used, yet not in the sense he understood them in; for Crellius means no more by all this, but that the death of Christ was an antecedent condi∣tion to the expiation of sins in Heaven, Grotius understands by them, that Christ did expiate sins by becoming a Sacrifice for them in his death. However, from hence it appears, that our Adversaries
can have no plea against the death of Christ's being an expiatory Sacrifice (from want of a substitution in our room) since they proess themselves so willing to own such a substitution. But if they say, that there could be no proper substi∣tution, because the death of Christ was a bare condition, and no punishment, they then express their minds more freely; and if these places be allowed to prove a substitution, I hope the former dis∣course will prove that it was by way of punishment. Neither is it necessary, that the very same kind of punishment be under∣gone in order to surrogation, but that it be sufficient in order to the accomplish∣ing the end for which it was designed. For this kind of substitution being in or∣der to the delivery of another by it, whatever is sufficient for that end, doth make a proper surrogation. For no more is necessary to the delivery of ano∣ther person than the satisfying the ends of the Law and Government, and if that may be done by an equivalent suffering, though not the same in all respects, then it may be a proper surrogation. If Da∣vid had obtained his wish, that he had died for his Son Absolom, it had not been necessary in order to his Son's escape,
that he had hanged by the hair of his head, as his Son did; but his death, though in other circumstances, had been sufficient. And therefore when the Lawyers say, subrogatum, sapit naturam ejus in cujus locum subrogatur:Covarru. 3. To. 1. p. 1. sect. 4. n. 3. Covarruvias tells us, it is to be understood, secundum primordia∣lem naturam non secundum accidentalem; from whence it appears, that all circum∣stances, are not necessary to be the same in surrogation; but that the na∣ture of the punishment remain the same. Thus Christ dying for us, to deli∣ver us from death, and the curse of the Law, he underwent an accursed death for that end; although not the very same which we were to have undergone, yet sufficient to shew, that he under∣went the punishment of our iniquities in order to the delivering us from it. And if our Adversaries will yield us this, we shall not much contend with them about the name of a proper surrogation. Our Re∣demption by Christ proves a substituti∣on.VI. But in the matter of Redemption, or where  is used, Crellius will by no means yield that there was a commu∣tation of persons between Christ and us, but all the commutation he will allow here is only a commutation between a thing, or a prince,Crell. c. 9. sect. 2. and a person. Which he therefore
asserts, that so there may be no necessi∣ty of Christ's undergoing the punish∣ment of sin in order to redemption, be∣cause the price that is to be paid, is not supposed to undergo the condition of the person delivered by it. Which will evi∣dently appear to have no force at all, in case we can prove, that a proper re∣demption may be obtained by the pu∣nishment of one in the room of another; for that punishment then comes to be the  or price of redemption; and he that pays this, must be supposed to undergo punishment for it. So that the commutation being between the pu∣nishment of one, and the other redeemed by it, here is a proper commutation of persons implied in the payment of the price. But hereby we may see that the great subtilty of our Adversaries is de∣signed on purpose to avoid the force of the places of Scripture, which are so plain against them: For when these places where  and  are joyned toge∣ther, are so clear for a substitution, that they cannot deny it; then they say, by it is meant only a commutation of a price for a person; but when the word  is urged to prove a redemption purcha∣sed by Christ, by the payment of a price
for it, then they deny that  doth signifie a proper price, but is only taken metaphorically; and yet if it be so ta∣ken, then there can be no force in what Crellius saith, for a bare metaphorical price may be a real punishment: Two things I shall then prove against Crellius. 1. That the  as applied to Christ, is to be taken in a proper sense. 2. That although it be taken in a proper sense, yet it doth not imply a bare commuta∣tion of a price and a person, but a sub∣stitution of one person in the room of another. Of the true noti∣on of Re∣demption.VII. Both these will be cleared from the right stating the notion of redem∣ption between our Adversaries and us. For they will not by any means have any other proper notion of redemption but from captivity, and that by the pay∣ment of a price to him that did hold in captivity, and therefore because Christ did not pay the price to the Devil, there could be no proper sense either of the redem∣ption, or the price which was paid for it. This is the main strength of all the ar∣guments used by Socinus and Crellius,Socin. de servat. l. 2. c. 1, 2. Crell. c. 8. sect. 11. to enervate the force of those places of Scripture which speak of our redemption by Christ, and of the price which he paid in
order to it. But how weak these excep∣tions are, will appear upon a true exa∣mination of the proper notion of Re∣demption, which in its primary impor∣tance signifies no more, than the obtain∣ing of one thing by another as a valuable consideration for it. Thence redimere an∣ciently among the Latins signified bare∣ly to purchase by a valuable price, for the thing which they had a right to by it; and sometimes to purchase that which a man hath sold before, thence the pa∣ctum redimendi in contracts: still in whatever sense it was used by the Law∣yers or others, the main regard was, to the consideration upon which the thing was obtained, thence redimere delatorem pecunia, h. e. eum à delatione deducere;Ulpian l. 29. D. de jure sisci. so redimere litem; and redemptor litis was one that upon certain consideration took the whole charge of a suit upon himself: and those who undertook the farming of customs at certain rates, were called redemptores vectigalium, qui re∣dempturis auxissent vectigalia, saith Livy.Budaeus ad Pandect. p. 189. Liv. l. 23. Festus v. red. Ulpi∣an. l. 39. D. de rei vend. And all those who undertook any pub∣lick work at a certain price, redempto∣res antiquitus dicebantur, saith Festus and Vlpian. From hence it was applied to the delivery of any person from any in∣convenience
that he lay under, by some∣thing which was supposed a valuable con∣sideration for it. And that it doth not only relate to captivity, but to any other great calamity, the freedom from which is obtained by what another suffers; is apparent from these two remarkable expressions of Cicero to this purpose.Cic ep fam. l. 2. ep. 16. Quam quidem ego (saith he, speaking of the sharpness of the time) à rep. meis privatis & domesticis incommodis liben∣tissime redemissem.Orat. pro . And more expresly elsewhere, Ego vitam omnium civium, sta∣tum orbis terrae, urbem hanc denique, &c. quinque hominum amentium ac perditorum poena redemi. Where it is plain, that redemption is used for the delivery of some by the punishment of others; not from mere captivity, but from a great calamity which they might have fallen into, without such a punishment of those persons. So vain is that assertion of Socinus,Soc. de ser∣vat. l. 2. c. 1. Redimere, nihil aliud propriè significat, quam eum captivum è manibus illius, qui eum detinet, pretio illi dato liberare. No neces∣sity of pay∣ing the price to him that detains captive.VIII. And yet supposing we should grant that redemption as used in sacred Authors doth properly relate to captivi∣ty, there is no necessity at all of that
which our Adversaries contend so earnest∣ly for, viz. That the price must be paid to him that detains captive. For we may very easily conceive a double sort of captivity, from whence a redemption may be ob∣tained; the one by force, when a Cap∣tive is detained purposely for advantage to be made by his redemption: and the other in a judicial manner, when the Law condemns a person to captivity, and the thing designed by the Law is not a meer price, but satisfaction to be made to the Law, upon which a redemption may be obtained; now in the former case it is necessary, that the price be paid to the person who detains, because the reason of his detaining, was the expectation of the price to be paid; but in the latter, the detainer is meerly the instrument for execution of the Law, and the price of redemption is not to be paid to him; but to those who are most concerned in the honour of the Law.Crell. c. 8. sect. 11. But Crellius objects, that the price can never be said to be paid to God, because our redemption is attributed to God as the author of it, and because we are said to be redeemed for his use and service, now, saith he, the price can never be paid to him for whose service the person is redeemed. But all
this depends upon the former mistake, as though we spake all this while of such a redemption, as that is of a Captive by force▪ in whom the detainer is no fur∣ther concerned, than for the advantage to be made by him; and in that case the price must be paid to him who detains, because it would otherwise be unsuccess∣ful for his deliverance: but in case of captivity by Law, as the effect of diso∣bedience, the Magistrate who is concer∣ned in the life of the person, and his fu∣ture obedience may himself take care that satisfaction may be given to the Law for his redemption, in order to his future serviceableness. From hence we see both that the  is proper in this case of our redemption, and that it is not a meer commutation of a price for a person, but a commutation of one persons suffering for others, which suffering be∣ing a punishment in order to satisfaction is a valuable consideration, and therefore a price for the redemption of others by it. Which price in this sense doth imply a proper substitution; which was the thing to be proved. Which was the first thing to be made good concerning the death of Christ being a sacrifice for sin, viz. that there was a substitution of
Christ in our stead as of the sacrifices of old under the Law; and in this sense the death of Christ was a proper  or price of redemption for us. Nothing then can be more vain, than the way of our Adversaries, to take away the force of all this, because  is some∣times taken for a meer deliverance with∣out any price, which we deny not; but the main force of our argument is from the importance of , where the  is mentioned; and then we say that  when applied to sins, signifies expiation, (as Heb. 9.15. ,) but when applied to persons, it signifies the deli∣verance purchased by the , which is not to be considered as a bare price, or thing given, but as a thing undergone in order to that deliverance: and is there∣fore not only called , but  too, which Crellius confesseth doth im∣ply a commutation, and we have shewed, doth prove a substitution of Christ in our place.
CHAP. V. I. The notion of a sacrifice belongs to the death of Christ, because of the Oblation made therein to God. Crellius his sense of Christ's Oblation proposed. II. A∣gainst him it is proved, that the Priest∣ly office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and not to us. Expiatory Sacri∣fices did divert the wrath of God. III. Christ not a bare Metaphorical High-Priest. IV. Crellius destroys the Priesthood of Christ by confounding it with the exercise of his Regal Power. V. No proper expiation of sin belongs to Christ in Heaven, if Crellius his Doctrine be true. VI. Ephes. 5.2. proves the death of Christ an Expiato∣ry Sacrifice, and an Oblation to God. The Phrase of a sweet-smelling sa∣vour, belongs to expiatory Sacrifices; Crellius his gross notion of it. VII. His mistakes about the kinds of Sacrifices. Burnt-offerings were Expiatory Sacrifi∣ces both before and under the Law. A new distribution of sacrifices proposed. VIII. What influence the mactation of the Sacrifice had on Expiation. The
High Priest only to slay the Sin-offer∣ing on the day of Atonement; from whence it is proved that Christ's Priest∣hood did not begin from his entrance in∣to Heaven. The mactation in Expia∣tory Sacrifices no bare preparation to a Sacrifice, proved by the Iewish Laws, and the customs of other Nations. IX. Whether Christ's Oblation of himself once to God, were in Heaven, or on Earth? Of the proper notion of Obla∣tions under the Levitical Law. Se∣veral things observed from thence to our purpose. X. All things necessary to a legal Oblation, concurr in the death of Christ. XI. His entrance into Hea∣ven hath no correspondency with it; if the blood of Christ were no Sacrifice for sin. In Sin-offerings for the People, the whole was consumed; no eating of the Sacrifices allowed the Priests, but in those for private Persons. XII. Christ's exercise of Power in Heaven, in no sense an Oblation to God. XIII. Crellius, his sense repugnant to the cir∣cumstances of the places in dispute. XIV. Objections answered.
Of the Oblation made by Christ un∣to God.I. THE second thing to prove the death of Christ a Sacrifice for sin, is the Oblation of it to God for that end. Grotius towards the con∣clusion of his Book, makes a twofold oblation of Christ, parallel to that of the Sacrifices under the Law, the first of Mactation, the second of Repre∣sentation; whereof the first was done in the Temple, the second in the Ho∣ly of Holies; so the first of Christ was on Earth, the second in Heaven; the first is not a bare preparation to a Sa∣crifice, but a Sacrifice: the latter not so much a Sacrifice, as the commemo∣ration of one already past. Where∣fore, since appearing and interceeding are not properly sacerdotal acts, any further than they depend on the effi∣cacy of a sacrifice already offered, he that takes away that Sacrifice, doth not leave to Christ any proper Priesthood, against the plain authori∣ty of the Scripture, which assigns to Christ the office of a Priest distinct from that of a Prophet and a King. To which Crellius replies: That the ex∣piation of sin doth properly belong to what Christ doth in Heaven;Crell. c. 10. sect. 45. and may be ap∣plied
to the death of Christ only, as the condition by which he was to enjoy that power in Heaven,Ib. sect. 55. whereby he doth expiate sins; but the Priest was never said to ex∣piate sins when he killed the beast, but when the blood was sprinkled or carried into the Holy of Holies, to which the Ob∣lation of Christ in Heaven does answer: but mactation, saith he,Ib. sect. 47. was not proper to the Priests, but did belong to the Levites also. And Christ was not truly a Priest,Ib. sect. 53. while he was on Earth, but only prepared by his sufferings to be one in Heaven, where by the perpetual care he takes of his People, and exercising his power for them,Ib. sect. 54. Sect. 56. he is said to offer up himself, and inter∣cede for them, and by that means he dis∣chargeth the Office of a High Priest for them. For his Priestly Office, he saith, is never in Scripture mentioned as distinct from his Kingly, but is comprehended under it; and the great difference between them is, that one is of a larger extension than the other is, the Kingly Office extending to punish∣ing, and the Priestly only to expiation. This is the substance of what Crellius more at large discourseth upon this sub∣ject. Wherein he asserts these things. That the Priestly Office of Christ doth not in reference to the expiation of sins
respect God but us; his Intercession and Oblation wherein he makes the sacerdo∣tal function of Christ to consist, being the exercise of his power for the good of his People. 2. That Christ did offer up no Sacrifice of expiation to God upon Earth, because the mactation had no re∣ference to expiation, any other than as a preparation for it; and Christ not yet being constituted a High Priest till after his Resurrection from the dead. A∣gainst these two assertions I shall direct my following discourse, by proving; 1. That the Priestly Office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and not to us. 2. That Christ did exercise this Priestly Office in the Oblation of him∣self to God upon the Cross. That the Priestly Office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and not us. Crell. in Heb. 5.1.II. 1. That the Priestly Office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and not to us; which appears from the first Institu∣tion of a High Priest, mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 5.1. For every High Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins: Id est, saith Crellius elsewhere, ut procuret & peragat ea quae ad colendum ac propiti∣andum numen pertinent; i. e. That he may perform the things which apper∣tain
to the worshipping and propitiating God: We desire no more, but that the propitiating God, may as immediately be said to respect him, as the worshipping of God doth; or let Crellius tell us, what sense the propitiating God will bear; if all that the High-Priest had to do, did immediately respect the people: nay, he saith not long after, That it was the chief Office of a High-Priest, to plead the cause of sinners with God, and to take care, that they may find him kind and propitious, and not angry or dis∣pleased. In what sense God was said to be moved by the Expiatory Sacrifices, is not here our business to discuss; it is sufficient for our purpose, that they were instituted with a respect to God, so as to procure his favour, and divert his wrath. In which sense, the Priest is so often in the Levitical Law said, by the offering up of Sacrifices, to expiate the sins of the people. But Crellius saith,Crell. c. 1▪ sect. 3. This ought not so to be understood, as though God by Expiatory Sacri∣fices, were diverted from his anger, and inclined to pardon; which is a plain contradiction, not only to the words of the Law, but to the instances that are recorded therein; as when Aa∣ron
was bid in the time of the Plague to make an Atonement for the people,Numb. 16.46. for there is wrath gone out from the Lord: and he stood between the living and the dead,Vers 48. and the plague was stayed. Was not God's anger then diverted here, by the making this Atonement? The like instance we read in David's time, that by the offering burnt-offerings, &c. the Lord was in∣treated for the Land,2 Sam. 24.25. and the plague was stayed from Israel: By which nothing can be more plain, than that the primary intention of such Sacrifices, and conse∣quently of the Office of the Priest who offered them, did immediately respect the Atoning God: But yet Crellius urgeth, This cannot be said of all, or of the most proper Expiatory Sacrifices; but we see it said of more than the meer Sa∣crifices for sin, as appointed by the Law; viz of burnt-offerings, and peace-offerings, and incense, in the examples mentioned. So that these Levitical Sacrifices did all respect the atoning God; although in some particular cases, different Sacrifices were to be offered; for it is said, the burnt-offering was to make atonement for them,Lev. 1.4.4.20.5.7. as well as the sin and trespass-offer∣ings (excepting those sacrifices which were instituted in acknowledgment of
God's Sovereignty over them, and pre∣sence among them, as the daily Sacri∣fices, the meat and drink offerings, or such as were meerly occasional, &c.) Thus it is said,1 Chron. 6.49. that Aaron and his sons were appointed to make an Atonement for Israel:Grot. in Heb. 5.1. So that as Grotius observes out of Philo, The High-Priest was a Media∣tor between God and man, by whom men might propitiate God, and God dispense his favours to men. But the means whereby he did procure favours to men, was by atoning God by the Sacrifices, which he was by his Office to offer to him. We are now to consi∣der, how far this holds in reference to Christ, for whose sake the Apostle brings in these words; and surely would not have mentioned this as the primary Of∣fice of a High-Priest, in order to the pro∣ving Christ to be our High-Priest, after a more excellent manner than the Aa∣ronical was, unless he had agreed with him in the nature of his Office, and exceeded him in the manner of perfor∣mance. III. For the Apostle both proves, that he was a true and proper,Christ no barely me∣taphorical High-Priest. and not a bare Metaphorical High-Priest, and that in such a capacity, he very far exceeded
the Priests after the Order of Aaron. But how could that possibly be, if he ailed in the primary Office of a High-Priest; viz. In offering up gifts and sacri∣fices to God? If his Office as High-Priest did primarily respect men, when the Of∣fice of the Aaronical Priest did respect God? To avoid this, c. 10. sect 3. Crellius makes these words to be only an allusion to the Legal Priest∣hood, and some kind of similitude be∣tween Christ and the Aaronical Priests; but it is such a kind of allusion, that the Apostle designs to prove Christ to be n High-Priest by it; and which is of the greatest force, he proves the necessi∣ty of Christ's having somewhat to offer from hence:Heb 8 2. For every High-Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices; wherefore it is of necessity, that this man have somewhat also to offer. This is that which  looks at as the peculiar and distin∣guishing character of a High-Priest; for  for others, and having com∣passion upon them, might be done by others besides the High-Priest; but this was that, without which he could not make good his name, what order soever he were of. I Christ then had no proper sarifice to offer up to God, to what purpose doth the Apostle so industriously
set himself to prove, that he is our High-Priest? when he must needs fail in the main thing, according to his own asser∣tion? How easie had it been for the Iews, to have answered all the Apostles Argu∣ments concerning the Priesthood of Christ, if he had been such a Priest, and made no other Oblation than Crellius allows him? When the Apostle proves against the Iews, that there was no necessity, that they should still retain the Mosaical Dispensation, because now they had a more excellent High-Priest than the Aaro∣nical were; and makes use of that chara∣cter of a High-Priest, that he was one taken out from among men, in things per∣taining to God to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins: Well, say the Iews, we accept of this character, but how do you prove concerning Christ, that he was such a one? Did he offer up a Sacri∣fice for sin to God upon earth, as our High-Priests do? No, saith Crellius, his sufferings were only a preparation for his Priesthood in Heaven: But did he then offer up such a Sacrifice to God in Heaven? Yes, saith Crellius, he made an Oblation there. But is that Oblation such a Sacrifice to God for sin, as our High-Priests offer? Yes, saith
Crellius, it may be called so by way of al∣lusion. Well then, say they, you grant that your Iesus is only a High-Priest by way of allusion, which was against your first design to prove; viz. That he was a true High-Priest, and more excellent than ours. But suppose it be by way of allusion, doth he make any Oblation to God in Heaven or not? No, saith Crellius, really and truly he doth not: for all his Office doth respect us, but the benefits we enjoy coming originally from the kindness of God, you may call it an Oblation to God if you please. But how is it possible then, say the Iews, you can ever convince us, that he is any High-Priest, or Priest at all, much less, that he should ever exceed the Aaronical High-Priests in their Office? for we are assured, that they do offer Sacrifices for sin, and that God is a∣toned by them: but if your High-Priest make no atonement for sin, he falls far short of ours, and therefore we will still hold to our Levitical Priesthood, and not forsake that for one barely Metaphorical, and having nothing really answering the name of a High-Priest. Thus the force of all the Apostles Arguments is plainly taken
away, by what Crellius and his Brethren assert concerning the Priesthood of Christ. But Crellius thinks to make it good by saying,Crell. cap. 10. sect. 3. Id. sect. 56. p. 547. That things that are improper and figurative, may be far more excellent than the things that are proper, to which they are opposed; so that Christ's Priesthood may be far more excellent than the Aaroni∣cal, although his be only figurative, and the other proper. But the question is not, Whether Christ's Priesthood by any other adventitious considerations, as of greater Power and Authority than the Aaronical Priests had, may be said to be far more excellent than theirs was; but, Whe∣ther in the notion of Priesthood, it doth exceed theirs? Which it is impossible to make good, unless he had some pro∣per Oblation to make unto God, which in it self did far exceed all the Sacrifices and Offerings under the Law. IV. But what that oblation of Christ in Heaven was,Crellius de∣stroys the Priesthoo of Christ which had any correspon∣dency with the Sacrifices under the Law, our Adversaries can never assign; nay, when they go about it, they speak of it in such a manner, as makes it very evi∣dent they could heartily have wished the Epistle to the Hebrews had said as little of the Priesthood of Christ, as they
say, any other part of the New Testa∣ment doth.Smalc c. Smiglect. Crell. cap. . p. 544. Thence Smalcius and Crel∣lius insist so much upon the Priesthood of Christ, being distinctly mentioned by none but the Author to the Hebrews; which, say they, had surely been done, if Christ had been a proper Priest, or that Office in him distinct from his Kingly. Which sufficiently discovers what they would be at; viz. That the Testimony of the Author to the Hebrews, is but a single Testimony in this matter; and in truth, they do (as far as is consistent with not doing it in express words) wholly take away the Priesthood of Christ: For what is there which they say his Priesthood implies, which he might not have had, supposing he had never been called a Priest? His being in Heaven, doth not imply that he is a Priest, unless it be impossible for any but Priests ever to come there: His Power and Authority over the Church, doth not imply it; for that power is by themselves confessed to be a Regal power: his readiness to use that power, cannot imply it, which is the thing Smalcius insists on; for his being a King of the Church, doth neces∣sarily imply his readiness to make use of his power for the good of his Church.
His receiving his power from God, doth not imply that he was a Priest, although Crellius insist on that, unless all the Kings of the Earth are Priests by that means too, and Christ could not have had a subordinate power as King, as well as Priest. But his death is more implied, saith Crellius, in the name of a Priest than of a King; true, if his death be con∣sidered as a Sacrifice, but not otherwise: For what is there of a Priest in bare dy∣ing, do not others so too? But this re∣presents greater tenderness and care in Christ, than the meer title of a King: What kind of King do they imagine Christ the mean while, if his being so, did not give the greatest encouragment to all his subjects? nay, it is plain, the name of a King must yield greater com∣fort to his people, because that implies his power to defend them, which the bare name of a Priest doth not. So that there could be no reason at all given, why the name of a High-Priest should be at all given to Christ, if no more were implied in it, than the exercise of his power with respect to us, without any proper oblation to God: For here is no proper Sacerdotal act at all attributed to him; so that upon their hypothesis,
the name of High-Priest, is a meer in∣significant title used by the Author to the Hebrews, without any foundation at all for it. By no means, saith Crellius, for his expiation of sin is implyed by it, which is not implied in the name of King: True, if the expiation of sin were done by him in the way of a Priest by an oblation to God, which they deny; but though they call it Expiation, they mean no more than the exercise of his divine power in the delivering his people. But what parallel was there to this in the expiation of sins by the Levitical Priesthood? that was certainly done by a Sacrifice offer∣ed to God by the Priest,Levit. 4.26. v. 4, 35. who was there∣by said to expiate the sins of the people: how comes it now to be taken quite in another sense, and yet still called by the same name? No pro∣per expia∣tion of sin belongs to Christ in Hea∣ven, if Crelleus his doctrine be true▪V. But this being the main thing in∣sisted on by them, I shall prove from their own Principles, that no expiation of sin in their own sense can belong to Christ in Heaven, by vertue of his Ob∣lation of himself there, and consequent∣ly that they must unavoidably over∣throw the whole notion of the Priest∣hood of Christ. For this we are to con∣sider, what their notion of the expiati∣on
of sins is, which is set down briefly by Crellius in the beginning of his dis∣course of Sacrifices, There is a two∣fold power, saith he,Crell. c. 10. sect. 2. of the sacrifice of Christ towards the expiation of sin, one taking away the guilt and the pu∣nishment of sin, and that partly by declaring, that God will do it, and giv∣ing us a right to it, partly by actual deliverance from punishment; the o∣ther is by begetting Faith in us, and so drawing us off from the practice of sin: Now the first and last Crellius and Soci∣nus attribute to the death of Christ, as that was a confirmation of the Covenant God made for the remission of sin; and as it was an argument to perswade us to believe the truth of his Doctrine; and the other, viz. the actual deliverance from punishment, is by themselves attributed to the second coming of Christ; for then only, they say, the just shall be actual∣ly delivered from the punishment of sin, viz. eternal death; and what expiation is there now left to the Oblation of Christ in Heaven? Doth Christ in Heaven declare the pardon of sin any other way than it was declared by him upon Earth? What efficacy hath his Ob∣lation in Heaven upon perswading
men to believe? or is his second coming when he shall sit as Judge, the main part of his Priesthood; for then the expiation of sins in our Adversaries sense is most proper? And yet nothing can be more remote from the notion of Christ's Priest∣hood, than that is; so that expiation of sins according to them can have no re∣spect at all to the Oblation of Christ in Heaven, or (which is all one in their sence) his continuance in Heaven to his second coming.Crell. c. 10. sect. 3. p. 476. Yes, saith Crellius, his continuance there, is a condition in order to the expiation by actual deliverance, and therefore it may be said, that God is as it were moved by it to expiate sins. The utmost then, that is attributed to Christ's being in Heaven, in order to the expia∣tion of sins, is that he must continue there without doing any thing in order to it; for if he does, it must either respect God or us: but they deny (though con∣trary to the importance of the words, and the design of the places where they are used) that the terms of Christ's in∣terceding for us, or being an Advocate with the Father for us,Heb. 7.25. Rom. 8.3. 1 Joh. 2.1. do note any respect to God, but only to us; if he does any thing with respect to us in expiation of sin, it must be either declaring, perswa∣ding,
or actual deliverance; but it is none of these by their own assertions; and therefore that which they call Christ's Oblation, or his being in Heaven, signi∣fies nothing as to the expiation of sin: and it is unreasonable to suppose that a thing, which hath no influence at all up∣on it, should be looked on as a condition in order to it. From whence it appears, that while our Adversaries do make the exercise of Christ's Priesthood to respect us and not God, they destroy the very nature of it, and leave Christ only an empty name without any thing answer∣ing to it: But if Christ be truly a High-Priest, as the Apostle asserts that he is, from thence it follows that he must have a respect to God in offering up gifts and sacrifices for sin: which was the thing to be proved. VI. 2.Ephes. 5.2. Proves the death of Christ an Expiatory Sacrifice and an ob∣lation to God. That Christ did exercise this Priestly Office in the Oblation of him∣self to God upon the Cross. Which I shall prove by two things. 1. Because the death of Christ is said in Scripture to be an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God. 2. Because Christ is said to offer up him∣self antecedently to his entrance into Heaven. 1. Because the death of Christ is said to be an offering and a sacrifice to
God, which is plain from the words of St. Paul,Eph. 5.2. as Christ also hath loved us, and given himself for us, an offering and a sa∣crifice to God, for a sweet-smelling savour. Our Adversaries do not deny that the death of Christ is here called an Oblation, but they deny, That it is meant of an Expiatory Sacrifice, but of a Free-will offering;Crell. c. 10. sect. 47. and the reason Crellius gives is, because that phrase of a sweet-smel∣ling savour is generally and almost al∣ways used of sacrifices which are not Ex∣piatory; but if ever they be used of an Expiatory Sacrifice, they are not applied to that which was properly expiatory in it, viz. the offering up of the blood, for no smell, saith he, went up from thence, but to the burning of the fat, and the Kidneys, which although re∣quired to perfect the expiation, yet not being done till the High-Priest re∣turned out of the Holy of Holies, hath nothing correspondent to the expiato∣ry Sacrifice of Christ, where all things are perfected before Christ the High-Priest goes forth of his Sanctuary. How inconsistent these last words are with what they assert concerning the expiation of sin by actual deliverance at the great day, the former discourse hath
already discovered. For what can be more absurd, than to say, that all things which pertain to the expiation of sin are perfected before Christ goes forth from his Sanctuary, and yet to make the most pro∣per expiation of sin to lie in that act of Christ which is consequent to his going forth of the Sanctuary, viz. when he pro∣ceeds to judge the quick and the dead. But of that already. We now come to a punctual and direct answer, as to which two things must be enquired into. 1. What the importance of the phrase of a sweet-smelling savour is? 2. What the Sacrifices are to which that phrase is ap∣plied? 1. For the importance of the phrase. The first time we read it used in Scripture was upon the occasion of Noah's Sacrifice after the flood, of which it is said,Gen. 8.20, 21. that he offered burnt-offerings on the Altar, and the Lord smelled a savour of rest, or a sweet savour. Which we are not wont to imagine in a gross corpo∣real manner, as Crellius seems to under∣stand it, when he saith, the blood could not make such a savour as the fat and the Kidneys; for surely, none ever thought the smell of flesh burnt was a sweet-smel∣ling savour of it self, and we must least of all imagine that of God, which Por∣phyry
saith, was the property only of the worst of Daemons to be pleased, and as it were, to grow fat, , with the smell and vapours of blood,Porphyr. de abstinent. l. 2. sect. 42. and flesh, (by which testimony, it withal appears, that the same steams in Sacrifices were supposed to arise from the blood as the flesh:) But we are to understand that phrase in a sense agreeable to the divine nature, which we may easily do, if we take it in the sense the Syriack Version takes it in, when it calls it, Odorem placabilita∣tis, or the savour of rest, as the word pro∣perly signifies; for  is the word formed from the Verb  which is used for the resting of the Ark, v. 4. of the same Chapter, and so it imports a rest after some commotion, and in that sense is very proper to Atonement, or that whereby God makes his anger to rest; so Aben Ezra upon that place expounds the Savour of rest, to be such a one which makes God cease from his anger: Thence in Hiphil  signifies to appease, or to make peace; in which sense it is used by R. Solom. upon Isa. 27.5. Munster tells us the sense is, Deus nunc quievit ab ira & placatus fuit, and to the same pur∣pose Vatablus: which sense is most a∣greeable
to the design of the following words, in which God expresseth his great kindness, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for mans sake; which are words highly expressing, how much God was propi∣tiated by the Sacrifice which Noah offer∣ed,Ioseph. An∣tiq. Iud. l. 1. c. 4. and therefore Iosephus doth well in∣terpret this to be a proper Expiatory Sa∣crifice; that God would now be atoned, and send no more such a deluge upon the world; which he saith was the substance of Noah's prayer, when he offered this Burnt-offering, and that God would re∣ceive his Sacrifice, , That he would no more receive such displeasure against the earth: So that the first time ever this expression was used, it is taken in the proper sense of an Expiatory Sacrifice. VII.Crellius his mistakes a∣bout the kinds of sacrifices. And by that the second enquiry may be easily resolved; viz. What kind of Sacrifices it doth belong to, which we see in the first place is, to Expiatory, which Crellius denies by a great mistake of the sense of the phrase, and of the nature of the Offerings, concerning which this expression is most used; viz. Holo∣causts, as though those were not Expia∣tory Sacrifices: But if we can make it
appear, that the Holocausts were Expia∣tory Sacrifices, then it will follow, that this phrase doth most properly agree to a Sacrifice designed for Expiation. But Crellius here speaks very confusedly con∣cerning Sacrifices, opposing Holocausts and Freewill-offerings to Expiatory Sacri∣fices; whereas the Freewill-offerings might be Expiatory as well as Eucharistical; that denomination not respecting the end the Sacrifices were designed for, but that the precise time of offering them was not determined by the Law; as in the stated and solemn Sacrifices. For the general distribution of Sacrifices, seems proper into Propitiatory and Eucharistical; which distinction is thought by some to hold from the first time we read of Sa∣crifices in Scripture; because the Sacri∣fice of Cain was of the fruits of the ground,Gen. 4.3, 4. and of Abel, of the Firstlings of his flock. Although there seems to be nothing meant by this difference of Sacrifices, but the diversity of their imployments, either of them Sacrificing according to them; and I cannot say what some do, that the reason of God's rejecting Cain's Sacrifice, was because it was not designed for expiation. But the practice of after ages, wherein we have a fuller account of the grounds of the several Sacrifices,
makes it appear, that the Expiatory Sa∣crifices before the Law, were all Burnt-offerings; and of all those who were not under the particular obligation of that Law: As is plain in the Expiatory Sa∣crifices of Iob for hs Sons,Job 1.5.42.8. and for his frends, which were Burnt-offerings; and among the Iews, all the Sacrifices that were offered up before the Levitical Law, were, as the Iews themselves tell us, only Burnt-offerings: And after the setling of their Worship among them∣selves,Selden de jure nat. & gent. apud Ebrae. l. 3. c. 2. &c. 6. they did receive Burnt-offerings for expiation from strangers, as Mr. Sel∣den at large proves from the Iewish Wri∣ters. It seems then very strange, that since Burnt-offerings before the Law were Expiatory, and under the Law they con∣tinued so for strangers, they should be of another nature for the Iews them∣selves. But what reason is there for it in the Text? not the least that I can find, but expresly the contrary. For in the beginning of Leviticus, where the Law for Burnt-offerings is delivered, the words are,Levit. 1.. And he shall put his hand upon the head of the Burnt-offering, and it shall be accepted for him, to make atonement for him; which is as much as is ever said of any Expiatory Sacrifices: And in the
Verse before, where we render of his own voluntary will; it is by the vul∣gar Latin rendred, Ad placandum sibi Do∣minum; by the Syriack Version, Ad pla∣cationem sibi obtinendam à Domino; and to the same purpose by the Chaldee Pa∣raphrast; but no one Version considera∣ble that so renders it, as to make Burnt-offerings to be Free-will offerings here,Lev. 7.16.22.18 &c. Lev. 6.7. which are spoken of distinctly, and by themselves afterwards: And the Chaldee Paraphrast, Ionathan thus explains, This is the Law of the Burnt-offering; i. e. Quod venit ad expiandum pro cogitationi∣bus cordis; but although the Iews be not fully agreed what the Burnt-offerings were designed to expiate, yet they consent that they were of an Expiatory nature. Which might make us the more won∣der, that Crellius and others should ex∣clude them from it, but the only reason given by him is,Crell. c. 10. p. 530. because they are distin∣guished from Sacrifices for sin, as though no Sacrifices were of an Expiatory na∣ture but they, and then the Trespass-offerings must be excluded too, for they are distinguished from Sin-offerings as well as the other. The ignorance of the Iews in the reason of their own customs, hath been an occasion of great mistakes a∣mong
Christians, concerning the nature of them; when they judge of them ac∣cording to the blind or uncertain conje∣ctures which they make concerning them: So that the Text is oft-times far clearer than their Commentaries are. Setting aside then the intricate and un∣satisfactory niceties of the Iewish Wri∣ters, about the several reasons of the Burnt-offerings and Sin and Trespass-offerings, and the differences they make between them, which are so various and incoherent, I shall propose this conje∣cture concerning the different reasons of them, viz. That some Sacrifices were assumed into the Jewish Religion, which had been long in use in the world before, and were common to them with the Pa∣triarchs, and all those who in that age of the world did fear and serve God, and such were the Burnt-offerings for expia∣tion of sin, and the fruits of the earth by way of gratitude to God. Other Sa∣crifices were instituted among them, with a particular respect to themselves, as a people governed by the Laws of God: And these were of several sorts; 1. Sym∣bolical, of God's presence among them, such was the daily Sacrifice, instituted as a testimony of God's presence, Exod. 29.
from v 38. to the end. 2. Occasional, for some great mercies vouchsaed to them, as the Passover and the Solemn Fe∣stivals, &c. 3. Expiatory, for the sins committed against their Law: And these were of three sorts; 1. Such as were wholly consumed to the honour of God, which were the Burnt-offerings. 2. Such, of which some part was consumed upon the Altar, and some part sell to the share of the Priests; and these were either sins particularly enumerated by God himself, under the , or else generally com∣prehended under the  as being al∣lowed to be expiated, because commit∣ted through inadvertency. 3. Such, whereof a less part was consumed, as in the Peace-offerings of the Congregation, mentioned Levit. 23.19. whereof the blood was sprinkled, only the inwards burnt, and the flesh not eaten by the persons that offered them, as it was in the Peace-offer∣ings of particular persons (of which as being private Sacrifices, I have here no occasion to speak) but only by the Priests in the Court: and these had something of expiation in them: For thence, saith Vatablus, the Peace-offering was called by the Greeks , i. e. Expiatorium, and the LXX. commonly render it,
, and several of the Iews think the reason of the name was, That it made peace between God and him that offered it: But the great reason I insist on, is, Be∣cause all the things which were used in an Expiatory Sacrifice, were in this too; the slaying of the Beast, the sprinkling of the blod, and the consumption of some part of it upon the Altar as an Oblation to God, which are the three in∣gredients of an Expiatory Sacrifice; for the shedding of the blood, noted the bear∣ing the punishment of our iniquity; and, the sprinkling of it on the Altar, and the consuming of the part of the Sacrifice, or the whole there, that it was designed for the expiation of sin. From whence it follows, that the phrase of a sweet-smelling savour, being applied under the Law to Expiatory Sacrifices, is very pro∣perly used by St. Paul, concerning Christ's giving up himself for us. so that from this phrase, nothing can be infer∣red contrary to the Expiatory nature of the death of Christ, but rather it is fully agreeable to it. VIII.What in∣fluence the macta∣tion of th sacrifice had on ex¦piation. But Crellius hath yet a farther Argument, to prove that Christ's death cannot be here meant as the Expiatory Sacrifice; viz. That the notion of a sacri∣fice,
doth consist in the oblation whereby the thing is consecrated to the honour and service of God,Crell. c. 10 p. 533. to which the mactation is but a bare preparation, which he proves, Because the slaying the sacrifice might be∣long to others besides the Priests, Ezek. 44.10, 11. but the oblation only to the Priests. To this I answer, 1. The mactation may be considered two ways, either with a respect to the bare instrument of taking away the life, or to the design of the Offerer of that which was to be sacrificed: As the mactation hath a respect only to the instruments, so it is no otherways to be considered than as a punishment; but as it hath a respect to him that de∣signs it for a Sacrifice, so the shedding of the blood, hath an immediate influ∣ence on the expiation of sin. And that by this clear Argument, The blood is said to make an Atonement for the soul;Levit. 17.11. and the reason given is, because the life of the flesh is in the blood: So that which was the life, is the great thing which makes the Atonement; and when the blood was shed, the life was then given; from whence it follows, that the great efficacy of the sa∣crifice for Atonement lay in the shedding of the blood for that end. Thence the Apostle attributes remission of sins to
the , the shedding of the blood;Heb. 9.22. and not to the bare Oblation of it on the Altar, or the carrying it into the Holy of Holies, both which seem to be nothing else but a more solemn repre∣sentation of that blood before God, which was already shed for the expiation of sins, which was therefore necessary to be performed, that the concurrence of the Priest might be seen with the sacri∣fice in order to expiation. For if no more had been necessary but the bare slaying of the Beasts, which was the meanest part of the service, the people would never have thought the instituti∣on of the Priesthood necessary, and least of all that of the High-Priest, unless some solemn action of his had been per∣formed, such as the entring into the Holy of Holies, on the day of expiati∣on, and carrying it, and sprinkling the blood of the sin-offering in order to the expiation of the sins of the people. And it is observable, that although the Levi∣tical Law be silent in the common Sacri∣fices, who were to kill them whether the Priests or the Levites; yet on that day whereon the High-Priest was to ap∣pear himself for the expiation of sin, it is expresly said, that he should not only
kill the bullock of the sin-offering,Levit. 16.11, 15. which is for himself, but the goat of the sin offer∣ing, which is for the people. And al∣though the Talmudists dispute from their Traditions on both sides, whether any one else might on the day of expiation, slay the sin-offerings besides the High-Priest; yet it is no news for them to dispute against the Text, and the Talmud it self is clear, that the High-Priest did it. From whence it appears, there was something peculiar on that day as to the slaying o the sin-offerings; cap 4. sect.  cap.  sect. 4. and if our Adversaries opinion hold good, that the Sacrifices on the day of expiation did, if not alone, yet chiefly represent the Sacrifice of Christ, no greater argument can be brought against themselves than this is, for the office of the High-Priest did not begin at hs carrying the blood into the Holy of Holies, but the slaying the sacri∣fice did belong to him too: from whence it will unavoidably follow, that Christ did not enter into his Office of High-Priest, when he entred into Heaven, but when the Sacrifice was to be slain which was designed for the expiation of sins. It is then to no purpose at all, if Crellius could prove that sometimes in ordinary Sacrifices, (which he will not say, the
Sacrifice of Christ was represented by) the Levites might kill the beasts for Sa∣crifice; for it appears, that in these Sa∣crifices, wherein themselves contend that Christ's was represented, the office of the High-Priest did not begin with entring into the Sanctuary, but with the macta∣tion of that Sacrifice whose blood was to be carried in thither. Therefore if we speak of the bare instruments of ma∣ctation in the death of Christ, those were the Iews, and we make not them Priests in it, for they aimed at no more than ta∣king away his life (as the Popae among the Romans, and those whose bare Office it was to kill the beasts for Sacrifice a∣mong the Iews did:) but if we consider it with a respect to him that offered up his life to God, then we say, that Christ was the High-Priest in doing it; it be∣ing designed for the expiation of sin; and by vertue of this blood shed for that end, he enters into Heaven as the Holy of Holies, there ever living to make inter∣cession for us. But the vertue of the con∣sequent acts, depends upon the efficacy of the blood shed for expiation; other∣wise the High-Priest might have entred with the same effect into the Holy of Holies with any other blood besides that
which was shed on purpose as a sin-offer∣ing, for expiation of the sins of the peo∣ple; which it was unlawful for him to do. And from hence it is, that the Apostle to the Hebrews insists so much on the comparison between the blood of Christ, and the blood of the legal Sacrifices,Heb. 9.13, 14.10.4, 10. and the efficacy of the one far above the o∣ther, in its power of expiation; which he needed not to have done, if the shed∣ding of his blood, had been only a pre∣paration for his entrance on his Priest∣hood in Heaven. So that the proper no∣tion of a Sacrifice for sin, as it notes the giving the life of one for the expiation of the sins of another, doth properly lie in the mactation, though other sacrificial acts may be consequent upon it. So it was in the animales hostiae among the Romans,Macrob. Sa∣turn. l. 3. c. 5. in which, saith Macrobius, Sola anima Deo sacratur: of which he tells us Virgil properly speaks in those words, Hanc tibi Eryx meliorem animam pro morte Daretis. And that we may the better understand what he means by the anima here, he saith elsewhere (as Macrobius and Servi∣us
observe out of his excellent Skill and accuracy in the Pontifical rites) Sanguine placastis ventos & virgine caesa, Cum primum Iliacas Danai venistis ad oras: Sanguine quaerendi reditus, animaque litandum Argolica. Which shews, that the expiation was supposed to lie in the blood which they called the Soul, as the Scripture doth. And the Persians, as Strabo tells us, look∣ed upon the bare mactation as the Sacri∣fice, for they did not porricere as the Romans called it, they laid none of the parts of the Sacrifice upon the Altar to be consumed there,Strabo, l. 15. . For God regarded nothing but the Soul in the sacrifice:Eustath. in Hom. Iliad. 1. Strabo. l. 3. which words Eustathius like∣wise useth upon Homer, of the Sacri∣fices of the Magi. And Strabo affirms of the ancient Lusitani, that they cut off nothing of the Sacrifice, but consumed the entrails whole; but though such Sacrifices which were for divination were not thought expiatory, and there∣fore
different from the animales hostiae, yet among the Persians, every Sacrifice had a respect to expiation of the whole people. For Herodotus tells us, that every one that offers Sacrifice among them,Herod. l. 1. , prays for good to all Persians and the King. But thus much may serve to prove against Crellius, that the mactation in an Expiatory Sacrifice, was not a meer preparation to a Sacrifice, but that it was a proper Sacrificial act, and consequently that Christ acted as High-Priest, when he gave himself for us, an offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour. Whether Christ's Oblation of himself once to God, were in Heaven or on Earth.IX. But this will further appear from those places wherein Christ is said to offer up himself once to God: the places to this purpose are, Heb. 7.27. Who needeth not daily as those High-Priests to offer up Sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the Peoples, for this he did once, when he offered up himself. Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve the living God. V. 25, 26, 27, 28. Nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the High-Priest en∣treth
into the holy place every year with the blood of others; for then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the World: but now once in the end of the World hath he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. And as it is ap∣pointed to men once to die, but after this the Iudgment: so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. Heb. 10.10, 11, 12. By the which will we are san∣ctified through the offering of the Body of Iesus Christ once for all. And every High-Priest, standeth daily ministring and offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins: but this man af∣ter he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sate down on the right hand of God. To these places Crellius gives this an∣swer,Crell. cap. 10. sect. 54. That the name of Oblation as applyed to Christ, primarily signifies Christ's first entrance into Heaven, and appearance before the face of God, there, but consequently the continu∣ance of that appearance; so that when a thing is once actually exhibited and presented, it is said to be once offered, although being offered, it always re∣mains in the same place, and so may
be said to be a continual Oblation. But this first appearance, saith he, hath a peculiar agreement with the legal Oblation; and therefore the name of Oblation doth most properly belong to that, because Christ by this means obtained that power on which the perfect remission of our sins depends: but although the continuance of that appearance, seems only consequenti∣ally to have the name of Oblation belonging to it, yet in its own nature, it hath a nearer conjunction with the effect of the Oblation, viz. the remission of sins, or deliverance from punish∣ment, and doth of it self confer more to it than the other doth. And there∣fore in regard of that, Christ is said most perfectly to exercise his Priest∣hood, and to offer and intercede for us, from the time he is said to sit down at the right hand of God. Against this answer, I shall prove these two things, 1. That it is incoherent, and repugnant to it self. 2. That it by no means agrees to the places before menti∣oned. 1. That it is incoherent and re∣pugnant to it self in two things. 1. In making that to be the proper Oblation in correspondency to the Oblations of
the Law, which hath no immediate re∣spect to the expiation of sins. 2. In making that to have the most immedi∣ate respect to the expiation of sins, which can in no tolerable sense be called an Ob∣lation. For the first, since Crellius saith, that the proper notion of Oblation is to be taken from the Oblations in the Levi∣tical Law, we must consider what it was there, and whether Christ's first en∣trance into Heaven can have any corre∣spondency with it. An Oblation under the Law was in general, any thing which was immediately dedicated to God, but in a more limited sense it was proper to what was dedicated to him by way of Sacrifice according to the appointments of the Levitical Law. We are not now enquiring what was properly called an Oblation in other Sacrifices, but in those which then were for expiation of sin; And in the Oblation was, first of the persons for whom the Sacrifice was offer∣ed. So in the Burnt-offering, the person who brought it,Lev. 1.3▪ was to offer it at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation: i. e. as the Iews expound it, at the en∣trance of the Court of the Priests, and there he was to lay his hands upon the head of it,V. 4▪ and it shall be accepted for him
to make atonement for him. This Offer∣ing was made before the Beast was slain; after the killing the Beast, then the Priests were to make an Offering of the blood, by sprinkling it round about the Altar of Burnt-offerings; the rest of the blood, say the Iews, was poured out by the Priests, at the South-side of the Altar upon the foundation, where the two holes were for the passage into the Channel, which convey'd the blood into the valley of Kidron; thus the blood being offered, the parts of the beast, were by the Priests to be laid upon the Altar, and there they were all to be consumed by fire; and then it was called an Offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord. The same rites were used in the Peace-offerings, and Trespass-offerings, as to the laying on of hands, and the sprinkling the blood, and consuming some part by fire: and in the sin-offerings, there was to be the same imposi∣tion of hands: but concerning the sprink∣ling of the blood, and the way of consu∣ming the remainders of the Sacrifice, there was this considerable difference; that in the common sin-offerings for particular persons, the blood was sprinkled upon the horns of the Altar of Burnt-offerings,Lev. 4.25, 30. but in the sin-offerings for the High-Priest and
the Congregation, or all the People, he was to carry the blood within the San∣ctuary,V. 6. and to sprinkle of it seven times be∣fore the Veil of the Sanctuary; and some of the blood was to be put upon the horns of the Altar of Incense; but the remainder of the blood, and the same things (which were offered by fire in Peace-offerings) were to be disposed of accordingly, on the Altar of Burnt-offerings. And withal, there was this great difference, that in other sin-offerings the Priests were to eat the remainder of the sacrifice in the Holy place; but in these there was nothing to be eaten by them;Lev. 6.26. for the whole Bullock was to be carried forth without the Camp, and there he was to be burned till all were consumed. For it was an express Law, That no sin-offerings,Lev. 4.11, 12. whereof any of the blood is brought into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to reconcile withal in the Holy-place, shall be eaten:Lev. 6.30. it shall be burnt in the fire. All the difference that was on the great day of Atonement, was this, that the High-Priest himself was to slay the Sin-offerings, and then to carry the blood of them into the Holy of Holies,Lev. 16.14, 15. and there was to sprinkle the blood with his fin∣ger towards the mercy-seat seven times: af∣ter which, & the sending away the scape-goat,
the ceremonies were the same for the Atone∣ment of the people, which were at other solemn sin-offerings, for the Priest or the people. X. From all which being thus laid together, we shall observe several things, which are very material to our purpose: All things necessary to a legal oblation concur in the death of Christ.1. That in the Oblations which were made for expiation of sins, the difference between the mactation and the oblation, did arise from the difference between the Priest and the Sacrifice. For the Priest's Office was to atone, but he was to atone by the Sacrifice; on which account, al∣though the Priest were to offer the Sacri∣fice for himself, yet the oblation did not lie in the bare presenting himself before God, but in the presenting the blood of that Sacrifice, which was shed in order to expiation. If we could have suppo∣sed, that the High-Priest under the Law, instead of offering a Goat for a Sin-offer∣ing for the people, on the day of Atone∣ment, should have made an oblation of himself to God, by dying for the expia∣tion of their sins: In this case, his death be∣ing the Sacrifice, and himself the Priest, the mactation, as it relates to his own act, and his oblation had been one and the same thing. For his death had been nothing else, but the offering up himself to God,
in order to the expiation of the sins of the people; and there can be no rea∣son, why the oblation must be of neces∣sity something consequent to his death, since all things necessary to a perfect oblation do concur in it. For where there is something solemnly devoted to God, and in order to the expiation of sins, and by the hand of a Priest, there are all things concurring to a legal oblati∣on; but in this case, all these things do concur, and therefore there can be no imaginable necessity of making the obla∣tion of Christ, only consequent to his Ascension, since in his death all things concur to a proper oblation. In the Law, we grant that the oblation made by the Priest, was consequent to the death of the beast for Sacrifice; but the reason of that was, because the beast could not offer up it self to God, and God had made it necessary, that the Priest should expiate sins, not by himself, but by those Sacrifices, and therefore the oblation of the blood was after the Sacri∣fice was slain; neither could this have been solved barely by the Priest's slaying of the Sacrifices; for this being an act of violence towards the beasts that were thus killed, could not be a proper obla∣tion,
which must suppose a consent an∣tecedent to it. All which shewed the great imperfection of the Levitical Law, in which so many several things were to concur, to make up a sacrifice for sin; viz. The first offering made by the party concerned, of what was under his domi∣nion, viz. The beast to be sacrificed at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congre∣gation, but the beast not being able to offer up it self, if was necessary for the offering up its blood, that it must be slain by others; and for the better un∣derstanding, not only of the efficacy of the blood, but the concurrence of the Priest for expiation, he was to take the blood, and sprinkle some of it on the Altar, and pour out the rest at the foundation of it. But since we assert a far more noble and excellent Sacrifice, by the Son of God freely offering up himself, to be made a Sacrifice for the sins of the world, why may not this be as proper an obla∣tion made unto God, as any was under the Law, and far more excellent, both in regard of the Priest and the Sacrifice: why should his oblation of himself then be made only consequent to his death and resurrection? Which latter, being by our Adversaries made not his own
act, but God's upon him, and his entrance into Heaven, being given him (as they as∣sert) as a reward of his sufferings, in what tolerable sense can that be called an ob∣lation of himself, which was conferred upon him as a reward of his former suf∣ferings? From whence it follows, that upon our Adversaries own grounds, the death of Christ may far more properly be called the oblation of himself, than his entrance into Heaven; and that there is no necessity of making the oblation of Christ consequent to his death, there being so great a difference between the Sacrifice of Christ, and that of the Sacri∣fices for sin under the Levitical Law. 2. We observe, That the oblation as performed by the Priest, did not depend upon his presenting himself before God, but upon the presenting the blood of a Sacrifice, which had been already slain for the expiation of sins. If the Priest had gone into the Holy of Holies, and there only presented himself before the Mercy-seat, and that had been all requi∣red in order to the expiation of sins, there had been some pretence for our Adver∣saries making Christ's presenting himself in Heaven, to be the oblation of himself to God; but under the Law, the efficacy
of the High Priest's entrance into the Holy of Holies, did depend upon the blood which he carried in thither, which was the blood of the Sin-offering, which was already slain for the expiation of sins: And in correspondency to this, Christ's efficacy in his entrance into Heaven, as it respects our expiation, must have a re∣spect to that Sacrifice which was offered up to God antecedent to it. And I won∣der our Adversares do so much insist on the High Priest's entring into the most holy place once a year, as though all the expi∣ation had depended upon that; whereas all the promise of expiation, was not up∣on his bare entrance into it, but upon the blood which he carried along with him, and sprinkled there: In correspondency to which, our Saviour is not barely said to enter into Heaven,Heb. 9.12. and present himself to God, but that he did this by his own blood, having obtained eternal Redemption for us. 3. We observe, That there was some∣thing corresondent in the death of Christ, to somewhat consequent to the oblation under the Law, and therefore there can be no reason to suppose, that the oblation of Christ must be conse∣quent to his death: for that destroys the correspondency between them. Now this
appears in this particular, in the solemn Sacrifices for sin, after the sprinkling of the blood, which was carried into the Holy place to reconcile withall, all the remainder of the Sacrifice was to be burnt without the Camp, and this held on the day of Atone∣ment,Heb. 13.12. as well as in other Sin-offerings for the Congregation. Now the Author to the Hebrews tells us, That in correspon∣dency to this, Iesus that he might san∣ctifie the people with his own blood, suffer∣ed without the gate: What force is there in this, unless the blood of Christ did an∣swer to the Sin-offerings for the people, and his oblation was supposed to be made before; and therefore that he might have all things agreeable to those Sin-offerings, the last part was to be com∣pleated too; viz. That he was to suffer with∣out the gate; which after the peoples settle∣ment in Ierusalem, answered to the being burnt without the Camp in the Wilderness. 4. We observe, That the Oblation in Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, by the Priest, had always relation to the consumption of what was offered: Thus the offering of the blood, in token of the destruction of the life of the beast, whose blood was offered; for no blood was to be offered of a living creature, nor of one
killed upon any other account, but for that end to be a sacrifice for sin, and after the sprinkling and pouring out of the blood, the inwards of some, and all of the other, were to be consumed by fire. And it is observable, that the greater the Sacrifice for sin was, always the more was consumed of it; as appears plainly by the forementioned difference of the Sin-offerings for private persons, and for the people; of the former, the Priests were allowed to eat, but not at all of the lat∣ter. And so it was observed among the Egyptians, in the most solemn Sacrifices for expiation, nothing was allowed to be eaten of that part which was designed for that end. For Herodotus gives us an account why the Egyptians never eat the head of any living Crea∣tue;. Herodot. l. 2. c 39. which is, That when they offer up a Sacrifice, they make a solemn execration upon it, that if any evil were to fall upon the persons who Sa∣crificed, or upon all Egypt, it might be turned upon the head of that beast:. Plu∣tarch. de Iside. And Plutarch adds, that after this solemn execration, They cut off the head, and of old, threw it in∣to
the River, but then gave it to stran∣gers. From which custom we observe, that in a solemn Sacrifice for expiati∣on, the guilt of the offenders, was by this rite of execration supposed to be transferred upon the head of the Sa∣crifice, as it was in the Sacrifices among the Jews, by the laying on of hands;Xenoph. Cy∣ropaed. l. 7.8. Strab. l. 4. Plutarch Symp. l. 6. probl. 8. and that nothing was to be eaten of what was supposed to have that guilt trans∣ferred upon it. From hence all Expia∣tory Sacrifices were at first whole Burnt-offerings, as appears by the Patriarchal Sacrifices, and the customs of other Nations, and among the Jews themselves, as we have already proved in all solemn offerings for the people. And although in the sacrifices of private persons, some parts were allowed to be eaten by the Priests; yet those which were designed for expiation were consumed. So that the greater the offering was to God, the more it implied the Consumption of the thing which was so offered: How strange∣ly improbable then is it, That the Ob∣lation of Christ should not (as under the Law) have respect to his death and sufferings; but to his entrance into Hea∣ven, wherein nothing is supposed to be consumed, but all things given him with far greater power, as our Adver∣saries
suppose, than ever he had before. But we see the Apostle parallels Christ's suffering with the burning of the Sacrifices, and his blood with the blood of them, and consequently his offering up him∣self, must relate not to his entrance into Heaven, but to that act of his whereby he suffered for sins, and offered up his blood as a Sacrifice for the sins of the world. Christ's entrance into Hea∣ven could not be the Oblation of himself mention∣ed.XI. From all which it appears; how far more agreeably to the Oblations un∣der the Law, Christ is said to offer up himself for the expiation of sins by his death and sufferings, than by his entrance into Heaven; For it is apparent, that the Oblations in expiatory Sacrifices un∣der the Law, were such upon which the expiation of sin did chiefly depend; but by our Adversaries own confession, Christ's oblation of himself by his en∣trance into Heaven, hath no immediate respect at all to the expiation of sin: on∣ly as the way whereby he was to enjoy that power by which he did expiate sins, as Crellius saith; now, let us consider, what more propriety there is in making this presenting of Christ in Heaven to have a correspondency with the legal Oblations, than the offering up himself upon the Cross. For, 1. on the very same reason that
his entrance into Heaven is made an Ob∣lation, his death is so too; viz. Because it was the way whereby he obtained the power of expiation; and far more pro∣perly so than the other, since they make Christ's entrance and power the reward of his sufferings, but they never make his sitting at the right hand of God, the reward of his entrance into Heaven. 2. His offering up himself to God upon the Cross, was his own act, but his entrance into Heaven was God's, as themselves acknowledge, and therefore could not in any propriety of speech be called Christ's offering up himself. 3. If it were his own act, it could not have that respect to the expiation of sins, which his death had; for our Adversaries say, that his death was by reason of our sins, and that he suffer∣ed to purge us from sin; but his entrance into Heaven was upon his own account, to enjoy that power and authority, which he was to have at the right hand of God. 4. How could Christ's entrance into Heaven, be the way for his enjoying that power which was necessary for the expiation of sin, when Christ before his entrance into Heaven, saith,Mat. 28.18. that all pow∣er was given to him in Heaven and Earth: and the reason assigned in Scripture of that power and authority which GodPhil. 2.8, 9.
gave him is, because he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross: So that the entrance of Christ into Heaven, could not be the means of obtaining that power which was conferred before; but the death of Christ is mentioned on that account in Scripture. 5. If the death of Christ were no expiatory Sacrifice, the entrance of Christ into Heaven could be no Oblation proper to a High Priest; for his entrance into the Holy of Holies, was on the ac∣count of the blood of the sin-offering which he carried in with him. If there were then no expiatory Sacrifice before, that was slain for the sins of men; Christ could not be said to make any Oblation in Heaven, for the Oblation had respect to a Sacrifice already slain; so that if men deny that Christ's death was a pro∣per Sacrifice for sin, he could make no Oblation at all in Heaven, and Christ could not be said to enter thither, as the High Priest entred into the Holy of Holies with the blood of the Sacrifice; which is the thing which the Author to the Hebrews asserts concerning Christ.Christ's exercise of power in Heaven in no sense an Oblati∣on to God. XII. 2. There is as great an inconsi∣stency in making the exercise of Christ's power in Heaven, an oblation in any sense, as in making Christ's entrance into Hea∣ven,
to be the Oblation which had corre∣spondency with the Oblations of the Law. For what is there which hath the least re∣semblance with an Oblation in it? Hath it any respect to God, as all the legal Oblati∣ons had? no, for his intercession and power, Crellius saith, respect us, and not God. Was there any Sacrifice at all in it for expiation? how is it possible, that the mere exercise of power should be called a Sacrifice? What analogy is there at all between them? And how could he be then said most per∣fectly to exercise his Priesthood, when there was no consideration at all of any Sacri∣fice offered up to God? so that upon these suppositions the Author to the Hebrews must argue upon strange similitudes, and fancy resemblances to himself, which it was impossible for the Iews to understand him in, who were to judge of the nature of Priesthood and Oblations in a way a∣greeable to the Institutions among them∣selves. But was it possible for them to understand such Oblations and a Priest∣hood which had no respect at all to God, but wholly to the People; and such a entrance into the Holy of Holies without the blood of an expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the people? But such absurdities do men betray themselves into, when they are forced to strain express places
of Scripture to serve an hypothesis, which they think themselves oblig'd to maintain. XIII. We now come to shew that this interpretation of Crellius doth not agree with the circumstances of the places be∣fore mentioned,Crellius his sense re∣pugnant to the cir∣cumstan∣ces of the places. Heb. 7.27.9.26.10.10., which will easily appear by these brief considerations. 1. That the Apostle always speaks of the offering of Christ as a thing past and once done, so as not to be done again; which had been very improper, if by the Oblation of Christ, he had meant the continual ap∣pearance of Christ in Heaven for us, which yet is, and will never cease to be till all his enemies be made his footstool. 2. That he still speaks in allusion to the Sacrifices which were in use among the Iews,Heb 9.12, 13 10 4.5. and therefore the Oblation of Christ must be in such a way as was a∣greeable to what was used in the Leviti∣cal Sacrifices, which we have already at large proved he could not do in our Ad∣versaries sense. 3. That the Apostle speaks of such a Sacrifice for sins to which the sitting at the right hand of God was conse∣quent; so that the Oblation antecedent to it must be properly that Sacrifice for sins which he offered to God; and there∣fore the exercise of his power for expiati∣on of sins, which they say is meant by sit∣ting
at the right hand of God,Heb. 10.12. cannot be that Sacrifice for sins: Neither can his entrance into Heaven be it, which in what sense it can be called a Sacrifice for sins, since themselves acknowledge it had no immediate relation to the expiation of them, I cannot understand. 4. The A∣postle speaks of such an Offering of Christ once, which if it had been repeated, doth imply, that Christ's sufferings must have been repeated too. For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the World:Heb. 9.26. but the repeated exercise of Christ's power in Heaven doth imply no necessity at all of Christ's frequent suffering, nor his frequent entrance into Heaven; which might have been done without suffering, therefore it must be meant of such an offering up himself as was implyed in his death and sufferings. 5.Heb. 10.5, 10. He speaks of the offering up of that body which God gave him when he came into the World; but our Adversaries de∣ny, that he carried the same Body into Heaven, and therefore he must speak not of an offering of Christ in Heaven, but what was performed here on Earth. But here our Adversaries have shewn us a tryal of their skill, when they tell us with much confidence that the World
into which Christ is here said to come, is not to be understood of this World,Crell cap. 10 sect 53. but of that to come, which is not only con∣trary to the general acceptation of the word when taken absolutely as it is here, but to the whole scope and design of the place. For he speaks of that World wherein Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings were used, and the Levitical Law was obser∣ved, although not sufficient for perfect expiation, and so rejected for that end; and withal he speaks of that World wherein the chearful obedience of Christ to the will of his Father was seen, for he saith,Heb 10.7, 9. Lo I come to do thy will, O God, which is repeated afterwards; but will they say, that this World was not the place into which Christ came to obey the Will of his Father? and how could it be so properly said of the future World, Lo I come to do thy will; when they make the design of his ascension to be the receiving the reward of his doing and suffering the will of God upon Earth? Objecti∣ons an∣swered. Heb. 7.26.8.4.7.16.XIV. But yet they attempt to prove from the same Author to the Hebrews, that Christ's entrance into Heaven, was necessary to his being a perfect High-Priest; for he was to be made higher than the Heavens; and if he were on earth,
he should not be a Priest; but he was a Priest after the power of an endless life: Neither could he, say they, be a perfect High-Priest, till those words were spoken to him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee;5.5. which as appears by other places, was after the Resurrection: But all the sufferings he underwent in the world, were only to qualify him for this Office in Heaven; therefore it is said,2.17. That in all things it behoved him to be made like un∣to his brethren, that he might be a mer∣ciful and faithful High-Priest, &c. This is the substance of what is produced by Crellius and his Brethren,Crell. c. 10. sect. 53. to prove that Christ did not become a perfect High-Priest, till he entred into Heaven: But it were worth the knowing, what they mean by a perfect High-Priest; Is it that Christ did then begin the Office of a High-Priest, and that he made no of∣fering at all before? No, that they dare not assert at last, but that there was no perfect Sacrifice offered for sin, otherwise Socinus contends, That Christ did offer upon earth, and that for himself too:Socin. prae∣lect. c. ult. So that all kind of offering is not excluded by themselves, before Christ's  into Heaven▪ But if they mean by per∣fect High-Priest in Heaven, that his Of∣fice
of High-Priest was not consummated by what he did on earth, but that a very considerable part of the Priesthood of Christ was still remaining to be perform∣ed in Heaven; it is no more than we do freely acknowledge, and this is all we say is meant by those places: For the Apostles design is to prove, the excellency of the Priesthood of Christ above the Aaronical; which he doth, not only from the ex∣cellency of the Sacrifice which he offer∣ed, above the blood of Bulls and Goats; but from the excellency of the Priest, who did excel the Aaronical Priests; both in regard of his calling from God, which is all the Apostle designs, Heb. 5.5. not at all intending to determine the time when he was made, but by whom he was made High-Priest, even by him that had said, Thou art my Son, &c. and in regard of the excellency of the Sanctuary which he entred into, which was not an earth∣ly, but a heavenly Sanctuary; and in re∣gard of the perpetuity of his function there, Not going in once a year, as the High-Priests under the Law did, but there ever living to make intercession for Vs; Now this being the Apostles design, we may easily understand why he saith, That he was to be a heavenly High-Priest,
and if he had been on earth, he could not have been a Priest: The meaning of which is only this, that if Christ's Of∣fice had ended in what he did on earth, he would not have had such an excel∣lency as he was speaking of; for then he had ceased to be at all such a High Priest, having no Holy of Holies to go into, which should as much transcend the earthly Sanctuary, as his Sacrifice did the blood of Bulls and Goats: Therefore in correspondency to that Priesthood, which he did so far excell in all the parts of it, he was not to end his Priesthood merely with the blood which was shed for a Sacrifice, but he was to carry it into Heaven, and present it before God, and to be a perpetual intercessor in the behalf of his people: And so was in regard of the perpetuity of his Office, a Priest after the Law of an endless Life: But lest the people should imagine, that so great and excellent a High Priest, being so far ex∣alted above them, should have no sense or compassion upon the infirmities of his people, therefore to encourage them to adhere to him, he tells them, That he was made like to his Brethren; and therefore they need not doubt, but by the sense which he had of the infirmi∣ties
of humane nature, he will have pi∣ty on the weaknesses of his people; which is all the Apostle means by those expressions. So that none of these pla∣ces do destroy the Priesthood of Christ on earth, but only assert the excellency, and the continuance of it in Heaven: Which latter, we are as far from deny∣ing, as our Adversaries are from grant∣ing the former. And thus much may suffice for the second thing, to prove the death of Christ a proper sacrifice for sin; viz. The Oblation which Christ made of himself to God by it.
CHAP. VI. I. That the effects of proper Expiatory Sa∣crifices belong to the death of Christ, which either respect the sin or the person. Of the true notion of expiation of sin, as attributed to Sacrifices. Of the im∣portance of , as applied to them. Socinus his proper sense of it examined. II. Crellius his Objections answered. III. The Iews notion of . The Sa∣crifices not bare conditions of pardon, nor expiated merely as a slight part of obedience. IV. God's expiating sin, de∣stroys not expiation by Sacrifice. V. The importance of  and , relating to Sacrifices. VI. Expiation attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ, in the same sense that it was to other Sa∣crifices. VII. And from thence, and the places of Scripture which mention it, proved not to be merely declarative. If it had been so, it had more properly belonged to his Resurrection than his death. VIII. The Death of Christ not taken Metonymically for all the Consequents of it; because of the peculiar effects of the death of Christ in Scripture. IX. And
because Expiation is attributed to him antecedently to his entrance into Hea∣ven. X. No distinction in Scripture of the effects of Christ's entrance into Hea∣ven from his sitting at the right hand of God. XI. The effects of an Expia∣tory Sacrifice, respecting the person, be∣long to the death of Christ, which are Atonement and Reconciliation. Of the signification of  and . XII. The Reconciliation by Christ's death, doth not merely respect us, but God; why the latter less used in the New Testament. A twofold Reconcilia∣tion with God mentioned in Scripture. Crellius his evasion answered. XIII. The Objections from God's being reconciled in the sending his Son. XIV. And the inconsistency of the Freeness of Grace with the Doctrine of Satisfaction answer∣ed, and the whole concluded. Of the true noti∣on of Ex∣piation, as attributed to Sacrifi∣ces.I. THE last thing to prove the death of Christ a proper Ex∣piatory Sacrifice, is, That the effects of a proper Sacrifice for sin are attributed to it. Which do either re∣spect the sins committed, and are then called Expiation and Remission, or the persons, who were guilty of them, as they
stand obnoxious to the displeasure of God, and so the effect of them is Atone∣ment and Reconciliation. Now these we shall prove do most properly and imme∣diately refer to the death of Christ; and are attributed to it, as the procuring cause of them; and not as a bare condi∣tion of Christ's entrance into Heaven, or as comprehending in it the consequents of it. I bgin with the Expiation and Remission of sins; as to which Socinus doth acknowledge,Socin. de Christo ser∣vat. p. 2. l. 13. Crell. cap. 10▪ sect. 26. That the great cor∣respondency doth lie between Christ's and the Legal Sacrifices. We are therefore to enquire: 1. What respect the Expia∣tion of sins had to the Sacrifices under the Law. 2. In what sense the Expia∣tion of sins is attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ: For the due explication of the respect which Expiation of sins had to the Legal Sacrifices, we are to con∣sider in what sense Expiation is under∣stood, and in what respect it is attribu∣ted to them. For this we are to en∣quire into the importance of the several phrases it is set forth by, which are  and  in the Old Testament,  in the New; all which are acknowledged by our Ad∣versaries to have a peculiar respect to the
Expiation made by a Sacrifice.Crell. c. 10. sct. 38. We shall begin with the former, because Crellius objects this against Grotius, That he im∣ployed his greatest diligence in the expli∣cation of the Greek and Latin words for Expiation of sin, and was contented only to say, that the Hebrew words would bear the same signification: Whereas, saith he, he ought to have proved, that the Hebrew words do require that sense which he takes them in. But by Crellius his leave, Gro∣tius took the best course was to be taken in words, whose signification is so ob∣scure as those are in the Hebrew Lan∣guage. For  being so very rarely used in Scripture in that which Socinus and Crellius contend to be the proper and natural signification of it; viz. To hide or cover, and so frequently in the sense of Expiation, what better way could be taken for determining the sense of it, as applied to Sacrifices, than by insisting up∣on those words which are used in the New Testament, to the very same pur∣pose that  is used in the Old? For they cannot pretend that which they say is the most proper sense, can be applied to this subject, viz. To cover with pitch, or a bituminous matter, which is called , Gen. 6.14. therefore it must of ne∣cessity
be taken in another sense here. But Socinus contends, That it ought to be taken in a sense most agreeable to that, which is, saith he, that the Expiation of sin be nothing else, but the covering of it,Socin. de Servat. p. 2. c. 11. by God's grace and benignity. Thence, saith he, David saith, Blessed is the man whose iniquity is covered.Psal. 32.1. But how can this prove, that the proper signification of  as applied to sin, is covered by God's Grace, when neither the word  is here used, nor is there any respect at all men∣tioned of an Expiation by Sacrifice, which is the thing we are discoursing of? And is the covering of sin such an easie and intelligible phrase, that this should be made choice of to explain the diffi∣culty of  by? What is it that they would have us understand by the cover∣ing sin? surely not to make it stronger and more lasting, as the Ark was cover∣ed, with that bituminous matter for that end, and yet this would come the near∣est to the proper sense of . So that from their own interpretation it appears, that  as applied to the expiation of sin by Sacrifices, cannot be taken so much as in allusion to that other sense; for their sense of Expiation, is either by the destruction of sin, or deliverance of the
sinner from the punishment of it, but what resemblance is there between the covering of a thing, in order to its pre∣servation, and the making it not to be, or at least destroying all the power of it? But supposing we should grant that it hath some allusion to the sense of cover∣ing, why must it necessarily be supposed to be done by the meer Grace of God, as excluding all antecedent causes which should move to it? would not the pro∣priety of the sense remain as well, sup∣posing a moving cause, as excluding it? What should hinder, but that God may be said as well to cover sin upon a Sacri∣fice as to forgive it, and this is very fre∣quently used upon a Sacrifice, That the sin shall be forgiven?Lib. 4.26. Ver. 31, 5. But yet them∣selves acknowledge, that the Sacrifices were conditions required in order to ex∣piation; if then  hath an immediate respect to God's immediate favour and benignity, how comes it to be used where a condition is necessarily supposed in or∣der to it? Had it not been more agreea∣ble to this benignity of God to have pardon'd sin without requiring any sa∣crifice for it, than so strictly insisting up∣on the offering up Sacrifice in order to it, and then declaring that the sin is expia∣ted,
and it should be forgiven? from hence we see that there is no necessity why  should be use as applied to sacrifices in a sense most agreeable to that of cover∣ing with pitch, nor that it is not possi∣ble it should have such a sense when ap∣plied to sins; and withal that it is very consistent with an antecedent condition to it, and therefore can by no means de∣stroy satisfaction. II. Yes, saith Crellius, it doth,Crellius his Objecti∣ons an∣swered. for ex∣piation is explained in the Law by non im∣putation, Deut. 21.8. Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel whom thou hast re∣deemed, and lay not innocent blood unto thy people of Israel's charge; and the blood shall be forgiven them. But not to im∣pute, saith he,Crell. c. 10. sect. 9. and to receive true and full satisfaction overthrow each other: and so expiation being the same with that, will overthrow it too. To this I answer, 1. I grant that  is here used both as applied to God, and to the sin, and that the sense of it is used as to the people, when the prayer is that God would not lay it to their charge, which is the same with ex∣piating of it. 2. We are to consider, what the foundation of this Prayer was, viz. the slaying of the Heifer for expiation of the uncertain murder; and when the
Elders had washed their hands over the head of the Heifer, then they were to protest their own innocency, and to use this prayer.  Expiate thy people Israel, &c. i. e. accept of this Sacrifice as an expiation for them, and so charge not on them the innocent blood, &c. and upon doing of this it is said, , and the blood shall be expiated, i. e. as the Vulgar Latin explains it, the guilt of the blood shall be taken from them. But how then should the expiating sin upon a Sacrifice slain in order thereto, destroy that satisfaction which we assert by the blood of Christ being shed in order to the expiation of our sins? Nay, it much rather sheweth the consistency and agreeableness of these one with another. For we have before proved, that the Sacrifice here did expi∣ate the sin by a substitution, and bear∣ing the guilt which could not have been expiated without it. But Crellius further urgeth, That God himself is here said to expiate, and therefore to expiate cannot signifie to atone or satisfie; in which sense Christ may be said to expiate too, not by atoning or satisfying, but by not imputing sins, or taking away the punishment of them by his power. To which we need no
other answer than what Crellius himself elsewhere gives, viz.Cum non neget, So∣cinus hoc verbum placandi significati∣onem habe∣re. Crell. c. 20. sect. 38. That Socinus never denies but that  doth signifie to appease or atone; which is most evidently proved from the place mention'd by Grotius, Gen. 32.20.  Expiabo fa∣ciem ejus in munere, saith the interlineary Version, placabo illum muneribus, the Vulg. Lat. , the LXX. and all the circumstances of the place make it appear to be meant in the proper sense of appeasing the anger of a person by something which may move him to shew favour. And if Crellius will yield this to be the sense of expiati∣on as applied to the sacrifice of Christ, he need not quarrel with the word satis∣faction. But why should he rather at∣tribute that sense of expiation to Christ, which is alone given to God, wherein the expiation is attributed to him that receives the Sacrifice, rather than to him that offers the sacrifice in order to the atonement of another? since it is ac∣knowledged that Christ did offer a sa∣crifice; and therefore there can be no reason why that sense of expiation should not belong to him, which was most pe∣culiar to that; which we shall now shw to be of the same kind with what
is here mentioned, viz. an appeasing by a gift offered up to God. So we find the word used to the same sense, 2 Sam. 21.3. , and wherewith shall I make the atonement, i. e. wherewith shall I satisfie you for all the wrong which Saul hath done unto you? and we see afterwards it was by the death of Saul's sons. In which place it cannot be denied but that  not on∣ly signifies to appease, but such a kind of satisfaction as is by the death of some for the faults of others; and so comes home, not only to the importance of the expiation belonging to a Sacrifice in general; but to such a kind of expiation as is by the suffering of some in the place of others. Which though it be more clear and distinct, where one man suffers for others, yet this was suffici∣ently represented in the sacrifices under the Law, in which we have already proved that there was a substitution of them in the place of the offenders. The Iews notion of III. And in this sense the Iews them∣selves do understand , viz. such an expiation as is made by the substitution of one in the place of another.Buxtorf Lexic Tal∣mud. v.  Of which many instances are collected by Buxtorf, wherein  is taken by the Rabbinical
Writers for such an expiation, whereby one was to undergo a punishment in the place of another. So when in the title Sanhedrin the people say to the High-Priest  simus nos expiatio tua, let us be for an expiation for you, the Gloss explains it thus, hoc est, in nobis fiat expiatio tua, nos{que} subeamus tuo loco quic∣quid tibi evenire debet. And when they tell us how Children ought to honour their Parents after their death, they say when they recite any memorable speech of their Fathers, they are not barely to say, My Father said so: but my Lord and Father said so, would I had been the ex∣piation of his death: i. e. as they explain it themselves, would I had undergone what he did, and they give this general rule, where ever it is said, behold I am for ex∣piation, it is to be understood, behold I am in the place of another to bear his ini∣quities. So that this signifies the same with  or a price of redemption for others. Hence  is taken for a price of redemption of the life of another, and rendred by , Exod. 21.30. — 30.12. Numb. 35.31, 32. where we render it satisfaction, and by , Psal. 48.7. and thereby we fully understand, what our Saviour meant when he said, that he
gave his Soul,Matth. 20.28. , a ran∣some for many, and to this day the Iews call the Cock which they kill for Expia∣tion on the day of Atonement, by the name of Cappara; and when they beat the Cock against their heads thrice, they every time use words to this purpose, Let this Cock be an exchange for me, let him be in my room, and be made an Expiation for me: let death come to him, but to me and all Israel life and happiness. I insist on these things, only to let us under∣stand, that the Iews never understood  in the sense our Adversaries contend for, when applyed to an Expiatory Sa∣criice, but as implying a Commutation, and a Substitution of one in the place of another, so as by the punishment of that, the other in whose room he suffers, may obtain deliverance. Which is the sense we plead for. But the utmost which Socin. l 2. c. 11. Dct Socinus vi∣ctimarm oblationm obedienti∣am quan∣dam Do praestan∣dam, quan∣quam le∣vem con∣tinuisse, quam ex promiss Dei le vium qorundam erratorum ▪ So∣cinus and Crellius will allow to the Sacri∣fices in order to Expiation, is barely this, That the offering of them is to be consider∣ed s a meer condition (that hath no o∣ther respect to the expiation of sins, than the paring a mans nails would have had, if God had required it) upon which slight obediene, the pardon of some light sins migt be obained. But can any one
imagine, that this was all that was de∣signed by the Sacrifices of old, who considers the antiquity and universality of them in the world in those elder times before the Law, the great severity by which they were requir'd under the Law, the punctual prescriptions that were made in all circumstances for them, the vast and almost inestimable expence the people were at about them, but above all, the reason that God himself assigns in the Law, That the blood was given for expiation, because it was the life, and the correspondency so clearly expressed in the New Testament, between the Sa∣crifice of Christ, and those Levitical Sa∣crifices? Can any one, I say, imagine upon these considerations, that the Sacri∣fices had no other respect to the expiation of sin, than as they were a slight testi∣mony of their obedience to God? Why were not an inward sorrow for sin, and tears and prayers rather made the only conditions of Expiation than such a burthensome and chargeable service im∣posed upon them, which at last signifi∣ed nothing, but that a command being supposed, they would have sinned if they had broken it? But upon our supposition a reasonable account is given of all the
expiatory Sacrifices; viz. That God would have them see, how highly he esteemed his Laws, because an expiation was not to be made for the breach of them, but by the sacrificing of the life of some Creature which he should ap∣point instead of the death of the Offen∣der; and if the breach of those Laws which he had given them must require such an expiation, what might they then think would the sins of the whole world do, which must be expiated by a Sacri∣fice infinitely greater than all those put together were; viz. The death and suffer∣ings of the Son of God for the sins of men? But if the offering Sacrifice had been a bare condition required of the person who committed the fault, in order to expiation; Why is it never said, That the person who offered it, did expiate his own fault thereby? For that had been the most proper sense; for if the expiation did de∣pend on the offering the Sacrifice, as on the condition of it, then the performing the condition, gave him an immediate right to the benefit of the promise. If it be said, That his own act was not only ne∣cessary in bringing the Sacrifice, but the Priests also in offering up the blood: This will not make it at all the more reasona∣ble;
because the pardon of sin should not only depend upon a man's own act, but upon the act of another, which he could not in reason be accountable for, if he miscarried in it. If the Priest should refuse to do his part, or be unfit to do it, or break some Law in the doing of it, how hard would it seem that a mans sins could not be expiated, when he had done all that lay in his own power in order to the expiation of them, but that another person, whose actions he had no command over, neglected the doing his duty? So that if the Sacrifice had no other influence on expiation, but as a part of obedience, in all reason the ex∣piation should have depended on no o∣ther conditions but such as were under the power of him, whose sins were to be expiated by it. IV. But Crellius urgeth against our sense of Expiation,Gods expi∣ating sin, destroys not expia∣tion by sa∣crifices. Crell. ib. sect. 39▪ That if it were by Substitution, then the Expiation would be most properly attributed to the Sacrifices themselves; whereas it is only said, that by the Sacrifices the Expiation is obtained; but that God or the Priest do expiate and to God it belongs properly, because he takes away the guilt and punishment of sin; which is, saith he, all meant by expiation;
to the Priest only consequently, as doing what God requires in order to it; and to the Sacrifices only as the conditions by which it was obtained. But if the Expia∣tion doth properly belong to God, and implies no more than bare pardon, it is hard to conceive that it should have any necessary relation to the blood of the Sacri∣fice: but the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, that Remission had a necessary respect to the shedding of blood, so that without that there was no remission.Hb 9 22. How impro∣perly doth the Apostle discourse through∣out that Chapter, wherein he speaks so much concerning the blood of the Sacri∣fices purifying, and in correspondency to that,Ver 13, 14. Ver. 18, 19, 20, 21, 23. the blood of Christ purging our Con∣sciences; and that all things under the Law, were purified with blood; Had all this no other signification, but that this was a bare condition that had no other importance, but as a mere act of obe∣dience when God had required it? why doth not the Apostle rather say, without Gods favour there is no remission, than without the shedding of blood; if all the expiation did properly belong to that, and only very remotely to the blood of the Sacrifice? What imaginable necessi∣ty was there, that Christ must shed his
blood in order to the expiation of our sins, if all that blood of the Legal Sacri∣fices did signifie no more than a bare condition of pardon, though a slight part of obedience in it self? Why must Christ lay down his life in correspondency to these Levitical Sacrifices? for that was surely no slight part of his obedience. Why might not this condition have been dispensed with in him, since our Adversaries say, that in it self it hath no proper efficacy on the expiation of sin? And doth not this speak the greatest repugnancy to the kindness and Grace of God in the Gospel, that he would not dispense with the ignomi∣nious death of his Son, although he knew it could have no influence of it self on the expiation of the sins of the world? But upon this supposition, that the blood of Sacrifices under the Law had no proper influence upon Expiation, the Apostles discourse proceeds upon weak and insufficient grounds. For what ne∣cessity in the thing was there, because the blood of the Sacrifices was made a condition of pardon under the Law, therefore the blood of Christ must be so now; although in it self it hath no pro∣per efficacy for that end? But the Apo∣stles
words and way of Argumentation doth imply, that there was a peculiar efficacy both in the one and the other, in order to Expiation; although a far grea∣ter in the blood of Christ, than could be in the other; as the thing typified, ought to exceed that which was the represen∣tation of it. From hence we see, that the Apostle attributes what Expiation there was under the Law, not immedi∣ately to God, as belonging properly to him, but to the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the unclean. Which he had very great rea∣son to do, since God expresly saith to the Iews, that the blood was given them  ad expiandum, to expiate for their souls,Lev. 17.11. for the blood  shall expi∣ate the soul. Than which words, no∣thing could have been more plainly said to overthrow Crellius his assertion, that Expiation is not properly or chiefly attributed to the Sacrifices, but prima∣rily to God, and consequentially to the Priest: who is never said to expiate, but by the Sacrifice which he offered, so that his Office was barely Ministerial in it. But from this we may easily understand, in what sense God is said to expiate sins, where it hath respect to a Sacrifice
(which is that we are now discoursing of, and not in any larger or more im∣proper use of the word) for since God himself hath declared, that the blood was given for Expiation, the Expiation which belongs to God, must imply his accep∣tance of it for that end, for which it was offered. For the execution or dis∣charge of the punishment belonging to him, he may be said in that sense to ex∣piate, because it is only in his power to discharge the sinner from that obligation to punishment he lies under by his sins. And we do not say, that where expia∣ting is attributed to him that accepts the Atonement, that it doth imply his under∣going any punishment which is impossi∣ble to suppose; but that where it is attri∣buted to a Sacrifice, as the means of Atone∣ment, there we say it doth not imply a bare condition, but such a Substitution of one in the place of another, that on the account of that, the fault of the of∣fender himself is expiated thereby. V. And to this sense the other word  doth very well agree;The im∣portance of , and , relating to sacrifices. for Socinus and Crellius cannot deny, But that Gen. 31.39. it properly signifies Luere, or to bear punishment; although they say, it no where else signifies so, and the reason is,
because it is applied to the Altar, and such other things, which are not capable of it; but doth it hence follow, that it should not retain that signification where the matter will bear it, as in the case of Sa∣crifices. And although it be frequently rendred by , yet that will be no prejudice to the sense we plead for in respect of Sacrifi∣ces, because those words when used con∣cerning them, do signifie Expiation too. Grotius proves, that they do from their own nature and constant use in Greek Authors, not only signifie an antecedency of order, but a peculiar efficacy in order to Expiation. Thence expiatory Sacrifices among the Greeks were called  and , frequently in Homer, applied to Sacrifices,  in Plutarch, and  used in the same sense; an Expiatory Sacri∣fice in Herodotus is call'd , and to the same purpose it is used in Her∣mogenes, Plato and Plutarch: as among the Latins, placare, purgare, purificare, conciliare, lustrare in the same sense, and piare when used in Sacrifices, he proves to signifie Luere per successionem rei alterius in locum poenae debitae.
Thence piaculum used for an Expiatory Sacrifice, and expiare is to appease by such a Sacrifice, so Cereris numen expi∣are is used in Cicero; filium expiare in Livy. So that all these Sacrifices a∣mong them were supposed still to per∣tain to the atoning the Deity, and ob∣taining a remission of sins committed by them. And from hence (because where there was a greater equality and nearness, there might be the greater efficacy of the Sacrifice for expiation) came the custom of sacrificing men, which Grotius at large shews to have almost universally obtained before the coming of Christ. We are now to con∣sider what Crellius answers to this; the substance of which lies in these two things. 1. He denies not but that  and  do in their proper use in the Greek Tongue signifie the purging of guilt,Crell. c. 10. sect. 23, & 24. and the aversion of the wrath of God and punishment, but that those and such other words are attributed to Sacrifices, because those were supposed to be the effects of them among the Heathen; but the attributing such effects to them, did arise from their superstition, whereby greater things were attributed to Sacrifices, than God would have given to them, either be∣fore
or under the Law.Ita{que} quod ad voces Grae∣cas  &  attinet, quibus in hoc argumento non semel utitur D. scriptor ad Heb. eae ad Christi Sacrificium & Sa∣cerdoti functionem relatae eo etiam sensu usurpantur quem Graeca lingua recepe∣rat, he. de expurgatione reatus & aversione irae numinis aut paenae. Crell. c. 10. p. 499. 2. He denies not, but that those words,  and , be∣ing used by the Author to the Hebrews more than once with respect to the Sacrifices and Priesthood of Christ, were ta∣ken in the same sense in which they are used in the Greek Tongue, viz. For the purgig of guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God, and the punishment consequent upon it: But all that he contends for is, That there is a difference in the manner of effecting it, which he acknowledges the words themselves do not imply; and the reasons he gives for it are, That the other were proper, but Christ's an improper Sacrifice; and that the other Sacrifices were offered by men to God, but the Sacrifice of Christ was given by God to men, and therefore he must be supposed to be re∣conciled before. From whence he would at least have other senses of these words joy∣ned together with the former; viz. Either for purging away the filth of sin, or for a decla∣ration of a deliverance from guilt and punish∣ment, in imitation of the Idiom of the He∣brew, in which many words are used in the New Testament. From hence it follows, that Crellius doth yield the main cause,
if it appear, that Christ did offer up an expiatory Sacrifice to God in his death, for then he grants that  and  being applied to the Sacfice of Christ, are to be taken for the purging a∣way of guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God, and the punishment of sin. And it is to no purpose to say, that it is not a proper Sacrifice, for if the effects of a proper Sacrifice do belong to it, that proves that it is so; for these words be∣ing acknowledged to be applied to the Sacrifice of Christ by the Author to the Hebrews, what could more evince that Christ's was a proper Sacrifice, than that those things are attributed to it, which by the consent of all Nations, are said to belong to proper Sacrifices, and that in the very same sense in which they are used by those who understood them in the most proper sense. And what rea∣son could Crellius have to say, that it was only the superstition of the Heathens, which made them attribute such effects to sacrifices; when himself acknowledges that the very same sense doth belong to the Sacrifice of Christ under that notion? and as to the Iews we have already proved that the sense of expiation among them was by vertue of the Law to be taken
in as proper a sense as among the Hea∣thens, for the purging of guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God. And why should Crellius deny that effect of the Sa∣crifice of Christ as to the atonement of God, because God's love was seen in giving him who was to offer the Sacrifice? since that effect is attributed to those Sacrifi∣ces under the Law which God himself appointed to be offered, and shewed his great kindness to the people in the Insti∣tution of such a way, whereby their sins might be expiated, and they delivered from the punishment of them. But of the consistency of these two, I shall speak more afterwards, in the effect of the Sa∣crifices as relating to Persons. Expiation attributed to the Sa¦crifice of Christ in the same sense that it was to other Sa∣crifices.VI. We now come to consider in what sense the expiation of sins is in Scripture attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ, and therein I shall prove these two things. 1. That the Expiation is attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ in the same sense that it is attributed to other Sacrifices, and as the words in themselves do signifie. 2. That what is so attributed doth be∣long to the Sacrifice of Christ in his death, antecedent to his entrance into Heaven. 1. That the expiation is to be taken in a proper sense, when it is attributed to the
Sacrifice of Christ. Crellius tells us, The controversie is not about the thing,Crell. c. 10. sect. 24. viz. whe∣ther expiation in the sense we take it in for purging away guilt, and aversion of the wrath of God, doth belong to the Sacrifice of Christ, for he acknowledges it doth, but all the question is about the manner of it: which in the next Section he thus ex∣plains: There are three senses in which Christ may be said to expiate sins; either by begetting Faith in us, whereby we are drawn off from the practice of sin, in which sense, he saith, it is a remoter antecedent to it; or as it relates to the expiation by actual deliverance from punishment, so he saith, it is an immediate antecedent to it: or as he declares that they are expiated, but this, he saith, doth not so properly re∣late to Christ as a Sacrifice, but as a Priest. But never a one of these senses comes near to that which Crellius grants to be the proper importance of  and , as applied to a Sacrifice, viz. the purging away guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God, and punishment, not any way, but by the means of the Sa∣crifice offered. For in the Legal Sacri∣fices nothing can be more plain than that the expiation was to be by the Sacrifice offered for Atonement: supposing then
that in some other way (which could be by no means proper to those Sacrifi∣ces) Christ may be said to expiate sins, what doth this prove that there was an expiation belonging to his Sacrifice a∣greeable to the Sacrifices of old? But as I urged before in the case of Christ's being High Priest, that by their asser∣tions the Iews might utterly deny the force of any argument used by the Au∣thor to the Hebrews to prove it: so I say as to the expiation by Christ's Sacri∣fice, that it hath no analogy or corre∣spondency at all with any Sacrifice that was ever offered for the expiation of sins. For by that they always under∣stood something which was immediate∣ly offered to God for that end, upon which they obtain'd remission of sins; but here is nothing answerable to it in their sense of Christ's Sacrifice; for here is no Oblation at all made unto God for this end; all the efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, in order to expiation doth whol∣ly and immediately respect us; so that if it be a proper Sacrifice to any, it must be a Sacrifice to us, and not to God: for a Sacrifice is always said to be made to him whom it doth immediately respect; but Christ in the planting Faith, in actual
deliverance, in declaring to us this de∣liverance, doth wholly respect us, and therefore his Sacrifice must be made to men, and not to God. Which is in it self a gross absurdity, and repugnant to the nature and design of Sacrifices from the first institution of them; which were always esteemed such immediate parts of divine worship, that they ought to respect none else but God, as the ob∣ject to which they were directed, though for the benefit and advantage of mankind. As well then might Christ be said to pray for us, and by that no more be meant but that he doth teach us to understand our duty; as be made an expiatory Sa∣crifice for us, and all the effect of it only respect us and not God. And this is so far from adding to the perfe∣ction of Christ's Sacrifice above the Legal (which is the thing pleaded by Crellius) that it destroys the very nature of a Sa∣crifice,Crell. c. 10. sect. 26. if such a way of expiation be at∣tributed to it (which though conceived to be more excellent in it self) yet is wholly incongruous to the end and design of a Sacrifice for Expiation. And the ex∣cellency of the manner of expiation ought to be in the same kind, and not quite of another nature; for, will any one say,
that a General of an Army hath a more excellent conduct that all that went before him, because he can make finer speeches; or that the Assomanaean Family discharg'd the Office of Priesthood best, because they had a greater power over the people; or that Nero was the most excellent Em∣perour of Rome because he excelled the rest in Musick and Poetry: by which we see that to assert an excellency of one above another, we must not go to ano∣ther kind, but shew its excellency in that wherein the comparison lies: So that this doth not prove the excellency of the Sacrifice of Christ, because he hath a greater power to perswade, deliver and govern, than any Sacrifice under the Law; for these are things quite of ano∣ther nature from the consideration of a Sacrifice: But therein the excellency of a Sacrifice is to be demonstrated, that it excells all other in the proper end and design of a Sacrifice, i. e. if it be more effectual towards God for obtaining the expiation of sin; which was always thought to be the proper end of all Sa∣crifices for expiation. Although then Christ may be allowed to excel all other Sacrifices in all imaginable respects but that which is the proper intention of a
Sacrifice; it may prove far greater ex∣cellency in Christ, but it doth withall prove a greater imperfection in his Sacri∣fice, if it fail in that which is the proper end of it. So that if we should grant that the expiation attributed to Christ's Sacrifice signified no more than reclaim∣ing men from their sins, or their deli∣verance by his power, or a declaration of God's decree to pardon, this may prove that there are better arguments to believe the remission of our sins now under the Gospel; but they do not in the least prove that Christ is to be consider'd as a Sacri∣fice; much less that he doth far excell in the notion of an Expiatory Sacrifice all those which were offered up to God for that end under the Law. VII.Expiation by Christ not meer∣ly declara∣tive. But we must now further con∣sider, whether this be all attributed to Christ in order to expiation in Scripture; i. e. Whether those words which of them∣selves do imply the aversion of the wrath of God, when used concerning other Sa∣crifices, when applied to the Sacrifice of Christ, do only imply the begetting faith in us, or a declaration of pardon. The words which are used to this pur∣pose, are , which are all applied to the blood
of Christ, and the dispute is, whether they signifie no more but a declaration of pardon, or a means to beget faith in us. The first words  and  Crellius acknowledgeth do frequently signi∣fie deliverance from guilt and punishment;Crell cap. 10 sect. 28 p 506. but, he saith, they may likewise signifie a declaration of that deliverance, as decreed by God, or a purging from the sins them∣selves, or from the custom of sinning. So that by Crellius his own confession, the sense we contend for is most proper and usual, the other are more remote, and only possible; why then should we for∣sake the former sense, which doth most perfectly agree to the nature of a Sacri∣fice, which the other senses have no such relation to, as that hath? For these be∣ing the words made use of in the New Testament, to imply the force and effi∣cacy of a Sacrifice, why should they not be understood in the same sense which the Hebrew words are taken in, when they are applied to the Sacrifices under the Law? We are not enquiring into all possible senses of words, but into the most natural and agreeable to the scope of them that use them: and that we shall make it appear to be the same, we plead for in the places in dispute between us;
as, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Iesus Christ his Son, , purgeth us from all sin, Heb. 9.13, 14. If the blood of bulls, and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean, , sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh, How much more shall the blood of Christ purge your consciences from dead works, ? Heb. 1.3. , when he had by himself purged our sins. So  and  are used with a respect to the blood of Christ, Heb. 10.22. Apocalyp. 1.5. And because remission of sin was looked on as the consequent of expiation by Sacrifice under the Law; therefore that is likewise attributed to the blood of Christ, Matth. 26.28. This is the blood of the New Testa∣ment which was shed for many, , for the remission of sins, Eph. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the remission of sins, and to the same purpose, Coloss. 1.14. And from hence we are said to be justified by his blood, Rom. 5.9. and Christ is said to be a propitiation through faith in his blood, Rom. 3.25. The substance of all that Crellius replies to these places is,Crell. c. 10. sect. 28. That
those words which do properly signifie the thing it self, may very conveniently be ta∣ken only for the declaration of it, when the performance of the thing doth follow by ver∣tue of that declaration: which then happens, when the declaration is made of the thing decreed by another, and that in the name and by the command of him who did decree it. And in this sense, Christ by his blood may be said to deliver us from the punish∣ment of our sins, by declaring or testifying to us the will and decree of God for that purpose. But this answer is by no means sufficient, upon these considerations; 1. Because it doth not reach the proper and natural sense of the words, as Crel∣lius himself confesseth; and yet he as∣signs no reason at all, why we ought to depart from it, unless the bare possibility of another meaning be sufficient. But how had it been possible for the efficacy of the blood of Christ for purging away the guilt of our sins, to have been expres∣sed in clearer and plainer terms than these, which are acknowledged of them∣selves to signifie as much as we assert? If the most proper expressions for this purpose, are not of force enough to per∣swade our Adversaries, none else could ever do it: so that it had been impossible
for our Doctrine to have been delivered in such terms, but they would have found out ways to evade the meaning of them. It seems very strange, that so great an efficacy should not only once or twice, but so frequently be attributed to the blood of Christ for expiation of sin, if nothing else were meant by it, but that Christ by his death did only declare that God was willing to pardon sin? If there were danger in understand∣ing the words in their proper sense, why are they so frequently used to this pur∣pose? why are there no other places of Scripture that might help to undeceive us, and tell us plainly, that Christ dyed only to declare his Father's will? but what ever other words might signifie, this was the only true meaning of them. But what miserable shifts are these, when men are forced to put off such Texts which are confessed to express our Do∣ctrine, only by saying that they may be otherwise understood? which destroys all kind of certainty in words; which by reason of the various use of them, may be interpreted to so many several senses, that if this liberty be allowed, upon no other pretence, but that another mean∣ing is possible, men will never agree about
the intention of any person in speaking. For upon the same reason, if it had been said, That Christ declared by his death God's readiness to pardon, it might have been interpreted, That the blood of Christ was therefore the declaration of God's rea∣diness to pardon, because it was the consi∣deration upon which God would do it: So that if the words had been as express for them, as they are now against them, according to their way of answering places, they would have been recon∣cileable to our opinion. 2. The Scri∣pture in these expressions, doth at∣tribute something peculiar to the blood of Christ; but if all that were meant by it were no more, than the declaring God's will to pardon, this could in no sense be said to be peculiar to it. For this was the design of the Doctrine of Christ, and all his miracles were wrought to confirm the truth of that part of his Doctrine, which concerned remission of sins as well as any other: but how absurd would it have been to say, that the miracles of Christ purge us from all sin, that through Christ healing the sick, raising the dead, &c. we have redemption, even the forgiveness of sins, which are attributed to the blood of
Christ? but if no other respect, than as a testimony to the truth of the Do∣ctrine of Remission of sins, they were equally applicable to one as to the other. Besides, if this had been all intended in these expressions, they were the most in∣congruously applied to the blood of Christ; nothing seeming more repug∣nant to the Doctrine of the Remission of sins, which was declared by it, than that very thing by which it was declared, if no more were intended by it: For how unsuitable a way was it to declare the pardon of the guilty persons, by such severities used towards the most Inno∣cent! Who could believe, That God should declare his willingness to pardon others, by the death of his own Son; unless that death of his be considered as the meritorious cause for procuring it? And in that sense we acknowledge, That the death of Christ was a declaration of God's will and decree to pardon, but not meerly as it gave testimony to the truth of his Doctrine (for in that sense the blood of the Apostles and Martyrs might be said to purge us from sin, as well as the blood of Christ) but because it was the consideration upon which God had de∣creed to pardon. And so as the accep∣tance
of the condition required, or the price paid, may be said to declare or ma∣nifest, the intention of a person to re∣lease or deliver a Captive: So God's ac∣ceptance of what Christ did suffer for our sakes, may be said to declare his rea∣diness to pardon us upon his account. But then this declaration doth not belong properly to the act of Christ in suffer∣ing; but to the act of God in accept∣ing: and it can be no other ways known, than God's acceptance is known; which was not by the Sufferings, but by the Resurrection of Christ. And therefore the declaring Gods will and decree to par∣don, doth properly belong to that: and if that had been all which the Scripture had meant, by purging of sin by the blood of Christ, it had been very incongruously applied to that, but most properly to his Resurrection. But these phrases being ne∣ver attributed to that which most pro∣perly might be said to declare the will of God; and being peculiarly attributed to the death of Christ, which cannot be said properly to do it; nothing can be more plain, than that these expressions ought to be taken in that which is con∣fessed to be their proper sense; viz. That Expiation of sin, which doth belong to
the death of Christ, as a Sacrifice for the sins of the world. VIII. But yet Socinus and Crellius have another subteruge,The death of Christ not taken Metony∣mically for all the conse∣quents of it. (for therein lies their great art, in seeking rather by any means to escape their enemies, than to overcome them.) For being sensible, that the main scope and design of the Scri∣pture is against them, they seldom, and but very weakly assault: but shew all their subtlety in avoiding by all imagi∣nable arts, the force of what is brought against them. And the Scripture being so plain in attributing such great effects to the death of Christ, when no other answer will serve turn, then they tell us, That the death of Christ is taken Metony∣mically for all the consequents of his death;Crell c. 1. sect. 103. sect. 119. c. 10. sect 45. p. 527. viz. His Resurrection, Exaltation, and the Power and Authority which he hath at the right hand of his Father. But how is it possible to convince those, who by death, can understand life▪ by sufferings, can mean glory; and by the shedding of blood, sitting at the right hand of God? And that the Scripture is very far from giving any countenance to these bold Interpretations, will appear by these considerations; 1. Because the effect of Expiation of our sins, is attributed to the
death of Christ, as distinct from his Re∣surrection; viz. Our reconciliation with God, Rom. 5.10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of h Son; much more being recon∣ciled, we shall be saved by his life. To which Crellius answers, That the Apostle doth not speak of the death of Christ alone,Crell. c 1. sect. 112. or as it is considered distinct from the con∣sequences of it; but only that our Reconci∣liation was effected by the death of Christ intervening. But nothing can be more evident to any one, who considers the design of the Apostles discourse, than that he speaks of what was peculiar to the death of Christ:Rom 5.6. for therefore it is said, that Christ died for the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous man will one die:7. but God commendeth his love towards us,8. in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.9. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved through him; upon which those words follow,10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, &c. The Reconciliation here men∣tioned, is attributed to the death of Christ in the same sense, that it is men∣tioned before; but there it is not mentio∣ned as a bare condition intervening in or∣der
to something farther; but as the great instance of the love both of God and Christ; of God, in sending his Son; of Christ, in laying down his life for sinners, in order to their being justified by his blood. But where is it that St. Paul saith, that the death of Christ had no o∣ther influence on the expiation of our sins, but as a bare condition intervening in order to that power and authority whereby he would expiate sins? what makes him attribute so much to the death of Christ, if all the benefits we enjoy depend upon the consequences of it; and no otherwise upon that, than meerly as a preparation for it? what pe∣culiar emphasis were there in Christ's dy∣ing for sinners, and for the ungodly; un∣less his death had a particular relation to the expiation of their sins? Why are men said to be justified by his blood, and not much rather by his glorious Resurrection, if the blood of Christ be only consider∣ed as antecedent to the other? And that would have been the great demonstrati∣on of the love of God which had the most immediate influence upon our ad∣vantage: which could not have been the death in this sense, but the life and glory of Christ. But nothing can be more ab∣surd
than what Crellius would have to be the meaning of this place, viz. that the Apostle doth not speak of the proper force of the death of Christ distinct from his life; but that two things are opposed to each other for the effecting of one of which the death of Christ did intervene, but it should not intervene for the other; viz. it did intervene for our reconciliation, but it should not for our life. For did not the death of Christ equally intervene for our life as for our reconciliation? was not our eternal deliverance the great thing designed by Christ, and our reconcilia∣tion in order to that end? what oppo∣sition then can be imagined, that it should be necessary for the death of Christ to intervene in order to the one than in or∣der to the other? But he means, that the death of Christ should not intervene any more; what need that, when it is ac∣knowledged by themselves, that Christ died only for this end before, that he might have power to bestow eternal life on them that obey him? But the main force of the Apostles argument lies in the comparison between the death of Christ having respect to us as enemies in order to reconciliation, and the life of Christ to us considered as reconciled; so that if
he had so much kindness for enemies, to die for their reconciliation, we may much more presume that he now living in Hea∣ven will accomplish the end of that re∣conciliation, in the eternal salvation of them that obey him. By which it is apparent that he speaks of the death of Christ, in a notion proper to it self, ha∣ving influence upon our reconciliation; and doth not consider it Metonymically as comprehending in it, the consequents of it. IX. 2.Expiation attributed to Christ antece∣dently to his en∣trance in∣to heaven. Because the expiation of sins is attributed to Christ antecedently to the great consequents of his death, viz. his sitting at the right hand of God, Heb. 1.3. When he had by himself purged our sins, sate down on the right hand of his Maje∣sty on high, Heb. 9.12. But by his own blood he entred in once into the Holy Place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. To these places Crellius gives a double answer. 1.Crell. c. 10. sect. 50. That indefinite particles ( and ) being joyned with Verbs of the preterperfect tense do not always require that the action expres∣sed by them, should precede that which is designed in the Verbs to which they are joyned; but they have sometimes the force of particles of the present or imperfect
tense; which sometimes happens in particles of the preterperfect tense, as Matth. 10.5. , so ; and several other instances produ∣ced by him: according to which man∣ner of interpretation the sense he puts upon those words, Heb. 9.12. is Christ by the shedding of his blood entred into the Holy of Holies, and in so doing he found eternal redemption, or the expiation of sins. But not to dispute with Crellius concerning the importance of the Aorist being joyned with a Verb of the preter∣perfect tense, which in all reason and common acceptation doth imply the action past by him who writes the words antecedent to his writing of it, as is plain in the instances produced by Crel∣lius; but according to his sense of Christ's expiation of sin, it was yet to come af∣ter Christ's entrance into Heaven, and so it should have been more properly  than ; not I say to insist upon that, the Apostle manifests, that he had a respect to the death of Christ in the obtaining this eternal re∣demption, by his following discourse: for v. 14. he compares the blood of Christ in point of efficacy for expiation of sin, with the blood of the Legal Sacrifices:
whereas if the expiation meant by him had been found by Christ's Oblation of himself in Heaven, he would have com∣pared Christ's entrance into Heaven in or∣der to it, with the entrance of the High-Priest into the Holy of Holies, and his argument had run thus. For if the High-Priest under the Law did expiate sins by entring into the Holy of Holies; How much more shall the Son of God entring into Heaven expiate the sins of Man∣kind? but we see the Apostle had no sooner mention'd the redemption obtain∣ed for us; but he presently speaks of the efficacy of the blood of Christ in order to it, and as plainly asserts the same, v. 15. And for this cause he is the Media∣tor of the New Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgres∣sions which were under the first Testament, they which were called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Why doth the Apostle here speak of the , the expiation of sins by the means of death; if he had so lately asserted before that the redemption or ex∣piation was found not by his death, but by his entrance into Heaven? and withal the Apostle here doth not speak of such a kind of expiation as wholly respects the
future, but of sins that were under the first Testament, not barely such as could not be expiated by vertue of it, but such as were committed during the time of it, although the Levitical Law allowed no expiation for them. And to confirm this sense, the Apostle doth not go on to prove the necessity of Christ's entrance into Heaven; but of his dying, v. 16, 17, 18. But granting that he doth allude to the High Priest's en∣tring into the Holy of Holies, yet that was but the representation of a Sacrifice already offer'd, and he could not be said to find expiation by his entrance; but that was already found by the blood of the Sa∣crifice, and his entrance was only to ac∣complish the end for which the blood was offer'd up in Sacrifice. And the be∣nefit which came to men is attributed to the Sacrifice, and not to the sprinkling of blood before the Mercy-seat: and what∣ever effect was consequent upon his en∣trance into the Sanctuary, was by ver∣tue of the blood which he carried in with him, and was before shed at the Altar. Neither can it with any reason be said, that if the redemption were ob∣tained by the blood of Christ, there could be no need of his entrance into Hea∣ven;
since we do not make the Priest∣hood of Christ to expire at his death; but that he is in Heaven a merciful High-Priest in negotiating the affairs of his People with God, and there ever lives to make intercession for them. X. Crellius answers, That granting the Aorist being put before the Verb,No distin∣ction in Scripture of the ef∣fects of Christ's entrance into Hea∣ven from his sitting at the right hand of God.  should imply such an action which was an∣tecedent to Christ's sitting at the right hand of God, yet it is not there said, that the expiation of sins was made before Christ's entrance into Heaven; for those, saith he, are to be considered as two different things; for a Prince first enters into his Palace, before he sits upon his throne. And therefore, saith he, Christ may be said to have made expiation of sins,Crell. c. 10. sect. 50. p. 537. before he sate down at the right hand of his Father, not that it was done by his death, but by his entrance into Heaven, and offering him∣self to God there, by which means he ob∣tained his sitting on the right hand of the Majesty on high, and thereby the full Power of remission of sins, and giving eternal life. To which I answer, 1. That the Scri∣pture never makes such a distinction be∣tween Christ's entrance into Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God; which latter implying no more but the glori∣ous
state of Christ in Heaven, his en∣trance into Heaven doth imply it: For therefore God exalted him to be a Prince and a Saviour: and the reason of the power and authority given him in Hea∣ven is no where attributed to his entrance into it as the means of it; but our Sa∣viour before that tells us,Matth. 28. 18. that all power and authority was committed to him; and his very entrance into Heaven was a part of his glory; and given him in conside∣ration of his sufferings; as the Apostle plainly asserts;Phil. 2 8, 9. and he became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, wherefore God hath highly exalted him, &c. There can be then no imaginable reason to make the entrance of Christ into Heaven, and presenting himself to God there, a condition or means of ob∣taining that power and authority which is implyed in his sitting at the right hand of God. 2. Supposing, we should look on these as distinct, there is as lit∣tle reason to attribute the expiation of sin to his entrance, considered as distinct from the other: For the expiation of sins in Heaven being by Crellius himself confessed to be by the exercise of Christ's power, and this being only the means to that power, how could Christ expiate
sins by that power which he had not? But of this I have spoken before, and shewed that in no sense allowed by themselves the expiation of sins can be attributed to the entrance of Christ into Heaven as distinct from his sitting at the right hand of God. Thus much may suffice to prove, that those effects of an Expiatory Sacrifice, which do respect the sins committed, do properly agree to the death of Christ. XI.Of the A∣tonement made by Christ's death. I now come to that which re∣spects the person, considered as obnoxi∣ous to the wrath of God by reason of his sins; and so the effect of an Expiatory Sacrifice is Atonement and Reconciliation. By the wrath of God, I mean, the reason which God hath from the holiness and justice of his nature, to punish sin in those who commit it: by the means of Atonement and Reconciliation, I mean, that in consideration of which, God is wil∣ling to release the sinner from the obli∣gation to punishment he lies under by the Law of God, and to receive him into fa∣vour upon the terms which are decla∣red by the Doctrine of Christ. And that the death of Christ was such a means of Atonement and Reconciliation for us, I shall prove by those places of
Scripture which speak of it. But Crellius would seem to acknowledge,Crell. c. 7. sect. 3. That if Grotius seem to contend for no more, than that Christ did avert that wrath of God which men had deserved by their sins, they would willingly yield him all that he pleads for: but then he adds, That this delive∣rance from the wrath to come, is not by the death, but by the power of Christ. So that the question is, Whether the death of Christ were the means of Atonement and Reconciliation between God and us? and yet Crellius would seem willing to yield too, that the death of Christ may be said to avert the wrath of God from us, as it was a condition in order to it; for in that sence it had no more influence up∣on it than his birth had: but we have already seen, that the Scripture attri∣butes much more to the death and blood of Christ, in order to the expiation of sin. We do not deny, that the death of Christ may be called a condition, as the performance of any thing in order to an end, may be called the condition upon which that thing is to be obtained; but we say, that it is not a bare condition, but such a one as implies a consideration, up∣on which the thing is obtained, being such as answers the end of him that grants
it: by which means it doth propitiate or atone him, who had before just reason to punish, but is now willing to forgive and be reconciled to them, who have so highly offended him. And in this sense we assert, that Christ is said to be , a propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2.—4.10. which we take in the same sense that , is taken for the Sin-offering for atonement, Ezek. 44.27. , they shall offer a sin-offering; for so  there signifies and in the same sense  is taken, Ezek. 45.19. and the Ram for Atonement is called , Numb. 5.8. And thence the High-Priest when he made an Atonement, is said , 2 Maccab. 3.33. which is of the greater consequence to us, be∣cause Crellius would not have the sense ei∣ther of  or ,Crell. 7. sect. 10. to be taken from the common use of the word in the Greek Tongue; but from that which some call the Hellenistical use of it; viz. That which is used in the Greek of the New Te∣stament, out of the LXX. and the Apo∣cryphal Greek; in both which we have found the word  in a sense fully correspondent to what we plead for. But he yet urges, and takes a great deal of pains to prove, that  and
do not always signifie to be appeased by another, but sometimes signifies to be propitious and merciful in pardoning; and sometimes to expiate, and then signifies the same with  and : which if it be granted, proves nothing against us, having already proved, that those words do signifie the aversion of the wrath of God by a Sacrifice, and that there is no reason to recede from that signification, when they are applied to the blood of Christ. And we do not contend, that when the word  or  is applied to him that doth forgive, it doth imply appeasing; but the effect of it, which is pardoning; but that which we assert, is, that when it is applied to a third person, or a thing made use of in order to forgiveness, then we say it sig∣nifies the propitiating him that was just∣ly displeased: so as by what was done or suffered for that end, he is willing to pardon what he had just reason to punish. So Moses is said, to make Atonement for the people by his prayers, , Exod. 34.14. and we may see Verse 11. how much God was dis∣pleased before. And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people? and
Verse 12. Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people, and then it is said, Verse 14. The Lord was atoned for the evil which he thought to do unto his people. I would therefore wil∣lingly know, why Moses might not here properly be said, , as it is said , and there∣fore since it is so very often said in the Levitical Law,  and , as , and the accusative case scarce ever put but in two cases; (viz. When these words are applied to inani∣mate things, as the Altar, &c. or when to God himself, implying forgiveness) what reason can we assign more probable for this different construction, than that when  is used, the verb hath a respect to the offended party as the accusative understood? as Christ is said in the pla∣ces mentioned to be , which ought in reason to be under∣stood as those words after Moses his inter∣cession, . But Crellius asks, Why then do we never read once concerning the Priest, that he did  or , but we read that he did
, and God is said, . To this I an∣swer, 1. That the reason why the per∣son propitiated, is not expressed, is, because it was so much taken for granted, that the whole Institution of Sacrifices did immediately respect God, and therefore there was no danger of mistaking, con∣cerning the person who was to be atoned. 2. I wonder Crellius can himself produce no instance where  is used with respect to the Sacrifices, and the persons whose offences are remit∣ted by the Atonement; but where  hath a relation to that, it is still joyn∣ed with a Preposition relating either to the person or to the offences; if no more were understood when it is so used, than when God himself is said to do it, why is not the phrase , as well said of the Priest, as it is of God? From whence Grotius his sense of Heb. 2.17.  for , is far more agreeable to the use of the phrase in the Old Testament, than that which Crellius would put upon it. There∣fore since the  is attributed to Christ, we ought to take it in the sense proper to a Propitiatory
Sacrifice: so it is said by Moses, where God is left out, but is necessarily under∣stood, after the people had provoked God by their Idolatry; Ye have sinned a great sin: And now I will go up unto the Lord, , That I may make an Atonement for your sin: What way could Moses be said to make this Atonement, but by propiti∣ating God; yet his name is not there ex∣pressed, but necessarily understood. So  is used in the most proper sense for appeasing the anger of a person, Gen. 32.20. and , 2 Sam. 21.3. which places have been al∣ready insisted on, in the signification of the word . And that those places wherein Christ is said to be a propitia∣tion for our sins, are capable of no other sense, will appear from the consideration of Christ, as a middle person between God and us; and therefore his being , cannot be parallel with that phrase, where God himself is said, , for Christ is here considered as interposing between God and us, as Mo∣ses and the Priests under the Law did be∣tween God and the people, in order to the averting his wrath from them. And when one doth thus interpose in
order to the Atonement of the offended party, something is always supposed to be done or suffered by him, as the means of that Atonement. As Iacob suppo∣sed the present he made to his Brother would propitiate him; and David ap∣peased the Gibeonites by the death of Saul's Sons, both which are said . So the shedding of the blood of Sacri∣fices before and under the Law, was the means of atoning God for the sins they committed. What reason can there be then why so receiv'd a sense of Atonement, both among the Iews, and all other Na∣tions at that time when these words were written, must be forsaken; and any o∣ther sense be embraced, which neither agrees with the propriety of the expressi∣on, nor with so many other places of Scripture, which make the blood of Christ to be a Sacrifice for the Expiation of sin? XII. Neither is it only our Atone∣ment,Of Recon∣ciliation by Christ's death. but our Reconciliation is attribu∣ted to Christ too, with a respect to his Death and Sufferings. As in the place be∣fore insisted on.Rom. 5 10. For if when we were ene∣mies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; and more largely in the second Epistle to the Corinthians.2 Cor. 18, 19.21 And all things are of God, who hath reconciled
us to himself by Iesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation: To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and hath committed to us the word of reconciliation. For he hath made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righte∣ousness of God in him. And to the Ephe∣sians,Eph. 2.16. And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by his Cross, having slain the enmity thereby. To the same purpose to the Colossians,Col. 1.20, 21, 22. And having made peace through the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself, by him I say whether they be things in Heaven or in Earth; and you that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wick∣ed works, yet now hath he reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death. Two things the substance of Crellius his answer may be reduced to concerning these places. 1.Crell. c. 7. sect. 15, 16, 17, 18, &c. That it is no where said that God was reconciled to us, but that we are recon∣ciled to God, and therefore this reconcilia∣tion doth not imply any averting of the an∣ger of God. 2. That none of these places do assert any reconciliation with God ante∣cedent to our conversion, and so that the Reconciliation mention'd implies only the
laying aside our enmity to God by our sins. I begin with the first of these, concern∣ing which we are to consider not barely the phrases used in Scripture, but what the nature of the thing implies; as to which a difference being supposed be∣tween God and man on the account of sin, no reconciliation can be imagined but what is mutual. For did man only fall out with God, and had not God just rea∣son to be displeased with men for their Apostasie from him? If not, what made hm so severely punish the first sin that ever was committed by man? what made him punish the old World for their im∣pieties by a deluge? what made him leave such Monuments of his anger against the sins of the World in succeeding Ages? what made him add such severe sancti∣ons to the Laws he made to the people of the Iews? what made the most up∣right among them so vehemently to de∣precate his wrath and displeasure upon the sense of their sins?Psal. 6.1.38.1. Psal. 5.5.7.11.11.5. Levit. 26.30. what makes him declare not only his hatred of the sins of men, but of the persons of those who commit them; so far as to express the greatest abhorrency of them? Nay, what makes our Adversaries themselves to say,Crell de Deo & Attrib. l 1. c. 30. that impiety is in its own nature hateful to
God, and stirs him up to anger against all who commit it? what means, I say, all this, if God be not angry with men on the account of sin? Well then; suppo∣sing God to be averse from men by rea∣son of their sins, shall this displeasure al∣ways continue or not? if it always con∣tinues, men must certainly suffer the desert of their sins; if it doth not always continue, then God may be said to be reconciled in the same sense that an of∣fended party is capable of being reconci∣led to him who hath provoked him. Now there are two ways whereby a par∣ty justly offended may be said to be re∣conciled to him that hath offended him. First, when he is not only willing to ad∣mit of terms of agreement, but doth declare his acceptance of the mediation of a third person, and that he is so well satisfied with what he hath done in order to it, that he appoints this to be pub∣lished to the World to assure the offen∣der, that if the breach continues, the fault wholly lies upon himself. The second is, when the offender doth accept of the terms of agreement offered, and submits himself to him whom he hath provoked, and is upon that received in∣to favour. And these two we assert
must necessarily be distinguished in the reconciliation between God and us. For upon the death and sufferings of Christ, God declares to the World he is so well satisfied with what Christ hath done and suffered in order to the reconciliation be∣tween himself and us, that he now pub∣lishes remission of sins to the World upon those terms which the Mediator hath declared by his own doctrine, and the Apostles he sent to preach it: But because remission of sins doth not immediately follow upon the death of Christ, with∣out supposition of any act on our part, therefore the state of favour doth com∣mence from the performance of the con∣ditions which are required from us. So that upon the death of Christ God decla∣ring his acceptance of Christ's mediation, and that the obstacle did not lie upon his part; therefore those Messengers who were sent abroad into the world to per∣swade men to accept of these terms of agreeement, do insist most upon that which was the remaining obstacle, viz. the sins of Mankind, that men by laying aside them, would be now reconciled to God, since there was nothing to hin∣der this reconciliation, their obstinacy in sin excepted. Which may be a very
reasonable account why we read more frequently in the Writings of the Apo∣stles, of mens duty in being reconci∣led to God; the other being supposed by them as the foundation of their preaching to the world, and is insisted on by them upon that account, as is clear in that place to the Corinthians,2 Cor. 5.19▪ 20. That God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not imputing unto men their trespasses, and hath committed to us the word of Reconciliation; and therefore adds, Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconci∣led to God: And least these words should seem dubious, he declares that the recon∣ciliation in Christ was distinct from that reconciliation he perswades them to; for the reconciliation in Christ he supposeth past, v. 18. All things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Iesus Christ, and v. 21. he shews us how this Reconciliation was wrought: For he hath made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.Crell. c. 1. sect. 118. cap. 7. sect. 24. Crellius here finds it neces∣sary to acknowledge a twofold Reconci∣liation, but hopes to escape the force of this place by a rare distinction of the Re∣conciliation
as preached by Christ, and by his Apostles; and so God's having reconci∣led the world to himself by Iesus Christ is nothing else but Christ's preaching the Go∣spel himself, who afterwards committed that Office to his Apostles. But if such shifts as these will serve to baffle mens understandings, both they were made, and the Scripture were written to very little purpose; for if this had been all the Apostle had meant, that Christ preach∣ed the same Doctrine of Reconciliation before them, what mighty matter had this been to have solemnly told the World, that Christ's Apostles preached no other Doctrine, but what their Ma∣ster had preached before? especially if no more were meant by it, but that men should leave their sins, and be reconci∣led to God. But besides, why is the Ministry of Reconciliation, then attribu∣ted only to the Apostles, and not to Christ, which ought in the first place to have been given to him, since the Apostles did only receive it from him? Why is that Ministry of Reconciliation said to be, viz. that God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself? was this all the subject of the Apostles preaching, to tell the World, that Christ perswaded men to
leave off their sins? how comes God to reconcile the World to himself by the preaching of Christ, since Christ himself saith, he was not sent to preach to the world; but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel? Was the World reconciled to God by the preaching of Christ, before they had ever heard of him? Why is God said not to impute to men their trespasses by the preaching of Christ, rather than his Apostles; if the not imputing were no more than declaring God's readiness to pardon; which was equally done by the Apostles as by Christ himself? Lastly, what force or dependance is there in the last words, For he made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, &c. if all he had been speaking of before had only related to Christ's preaching? How was he made sin more than the Apostles, if he were only treated as a sinner upon the account of the same Doctrine which they preach∣ed equally with him? and might not men be said to be made the righteousness of God in the Apostles, as well as in Christ, if no more be meant, but being perswa∣ded to be righteous, by the Doctrine de∣livered to them? In the two latter places, Eph. 2.16. Coloss. 1.20. &c. it is plain, that a two∣fold
reconciliation is likewise mentioned, the one of the Iews and Gentiles to one another, the other of both of them to God. For nothing can be more ridicu∣lous than the Exposition of Socinus, who would have  not to be joyned with the Verb, , but to stand by it self, and to signifie that this reconcilia∣tion of the Iews and Gentiles did tend to the glory of God.Crell. c 7 sect. 30. And Crellius, who stands out at nothing, hopes to bring off Socinus here too; by saying, that it is very common, for the end to which a thing was appointed to be expressed by a Dative case following the Verb; but he might have spared his pains in proving a thing no one questions; the shorter answer had been to have produced one place where  ever signifies any thing but to be reconciled to God as the offended party; or where-ever the Dative of the person following the Verb impor∣ting reconciliation, did signifie any thing else but the party with whom the recon∣cilation was to be made. As for that ob∣jction concerning things in Heaven being reconciled: that phrase doth not import such a Reconciliation of the Angels as of Mn, u that Men and Angels upon the reconciliation of Men to God, become
one body under Christ, and are gather∣ed together in him, as the Apostle ex∣presseth it, Eph. 1.10. XIII. 1. Having thus far proved,Objecti∣ons an∣swered. that the effects of an Expiatory Sacrifice do belong to the death of Christ, nothing now remains but an answer to be made to two Objections, which are common∣ly insisted on by our Adversaries. The first is, That God was reconciled before he sent his Son, and therefore Christ could not die to reconcile God to us. The second is, That the Doctrine of Satisfaction asserted by us, is inconsistent with the freeness of God's grace in the remission of sins: Both which will admit of an easie Solution upon the principles of the foregoing dis∣course. To the first I answer, That we as∣sert nothing inconsistent with that love of God, which was discovered in send∣ing his Son into the world; we do not say, That God hated mankind so muh on the account of sin, that it was im∣possible he should ever admit of any terms of Reconciliation with them, which is the only thing inconsistent with the greatness of God's love, in sending Christ into the world; but we adore and mag∣nifie the infiniteness and unexpressible greatness of his love, that nothwithstand∣ing
all the contempt of the former kind∣ness and mercies of Heaven, he should be pleased to send his own Son to die for sinners, that they might be reconciled to him. And herein was the great love of God manifested, that while we were enemies and sinners, Christ died for us, and that for this end, that we might be reconciled to God by his death. And therefore surely, not in the state of favour or Reconciliation with God then. But it were worth the while, to under∣stand what it is our Adversaries mean, when they say, God was reconciled when he sent his Son, and therefore he could not die to reconcile God to us. Either they mean, that God had decreed to be recon∣ciled upon the sending his Son, or that he was actually reconciled when he sent him: if he only decreed to be reconciled, that was not at all inconsistent with Christ's dying to reconcile God and us in pursuance of that decree: if they mean, he was actually reconciled, then there was no need for Christ to die to recon∣cile God and us; but withal, actual Re∣conciliation implies pardon of sin; and if sin were actually pardoned before Christ came, there could be no need of his coming at all, and sins would have
been pardoned before committed; if they were not pardoned, notwithstand∣ing that love of God, then it can imply no more, but that God was willing to be reconciled. If therefore the not-remis∣sion of sins were consistent with that love of God, by which he sent Christ in∣to the world, then notwithstanding that he was yet capable of being reconciled by his death. So that our Adversaries are bound to reconcile that love of God, with not presently pardoning the sins of the world, as we are to reconcile it with the ends of the death of Christ, which are asserted by us. XIV. To the other Obejction,The free∣ness of Grace as∣serted in Scripture, destroys not satis∣faction. Con∣cerning the inconsistency of the Freeness of God's Grace with the Doctrine of Satis∣faction. I answer, Either God's Grace is so free as to exclude all conditions, or not: If it be so free, as to exclude all conditi∣ons, then the highest Antinomianism is the trust Doctrine; for that is the highest degree of the Freeness of Grace, which admits of no conditions at all. If our Adversaries say, That the Freeness of Grace is consistent with conditions required on our part, Why shall it not admit of conditions on God's part? especially, when the condition required, tends so
highly to the end of God's governing the world, in the manifestation of his ha∣tred against sin, and the vindication of the honour of his Laws by the Sufferings of the Son of God in our stead, as an Ex∣piatory Sacrifice for our sins. There are two things to be considered in sin, the dishonour done to God, by the breach of his Laws, and the injury men do to them∣slves by it; now remission of sins, that respects the injury which men bring up∣on themselves by it; and that is Free, when the penalty is wholly forgiven, as we assert it is by the Gospel to all peni∣tent sinners: but shall not God be free to vindicate his own Honour, and to de∣clare his righteousness to the world, while he is the Iustifier of them that believe? Shall men in case of Defamation, be bound to vindicate themselves, though they freely forgive the Authors of the slander, by our Adversaries own Doctrine? and must it be repugnant to God's Grace, to admit of a Propitiatory Sacrifice, that the world may understand, that it is no such easie thing to obtain pardon of sin committed against God; but that as of∣ten as they consider the bitter Sufferings of Christ, in order to the obtaining the forgiveness of our sins, that should be
the greatest Argument to disswade them from the practice of them? But why should it be more inconsistent with the Sacrifice of Christ, for God freely to par∣don sin, than it was ever presumed to be in all the Sacrifices of either Iews or Gen∣tiles? who all supposed Sacrifices neces∣sary in order to Atonement; and yet thought themselves obliged to the good∣ness of God in the Remission of their sins? Nay we find that God himself,Gen. 20.7. in the case of Abimelech, appointed Abra∣ham to pray for him, in order to his par∣don; And will any one say, this was a derogation to the Grace of God in his pardon?Job 42.7. Or to the pardon of Iob's Friends, because Iob was appointed to Sa∣crifice for them? Or to the pardon of the Israelites, because God out of kind∣ness to them, directed them by the Pro∣phets, and appointed the means in order to it? But although God appointed our High-Priest for us, and out of his great love sent him into the world, yet his Sacrifice was not what was given him, but what he freely underwent himself; he gave us Christ, but Christ offered up himself a full, perfect and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the sins of the world.
Thus, Sir, I have now given you a larger account of what I then more briefly discoursed of, concerning the true Reason of the Sufferings of Christ; and heartily wishing you a right understand∣ing in all things, and requesting from you an impartial consideration of what I have written, I am, SIR, Your, &c. E. S. Ian. 6. 166.
THE MYSTERIES OF The Christian Faith ASSERTED and VINDICATED: IN A SERMON Preached at S. Laurence-Jewry in London, APRIL the 7th. 1691. By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester. LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1697.
A SERMON Preached at S. Laurence-Jury, APRIL the 7th. 1691. 1 TIM. I.15. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation, That Christ Iesus came in∣to the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief. IF these Words were to be under∣stood without any Restriction or Limitation that Christ Iesus came into the World to save sinners, they would overthrow the great Design of the Gospel, and make its Excellent Pre∣cepts Useless and Ineffectual. For, to what purpose should men be put upon the severe Practice of Repentance, Mor∣tification
and a continued Course of a Holy Life, if the meer being Sinners did sufficiently qualifie them for Salvation? This indeed would be thought a Do∣ctrine worthy of all Acceptation by the greatest Sinners; but it could not be a faithful saying, being not agreeable either to the Nature of God, or Revelation of his Will by Christ Iesus. But S. Paul speaks of such Sinners as himself had been, i. e. such as had been great Sia∣ners, but had truly and sincerely repen∣ted. Of whom I am chief. What then? Must we look on him as the Standard and Measure of such Sinners whom Christ Iesus came to save? What will then be∣come of all those who have been Sin∣ners of a higher Rank than ever he was? It's true in the Verses before the Text, he sets out his Sins, as a humble Peni∣tent is wont to do, with the worst Co∣lours and deepest Aggravations,Ver. 13. Who was before a blasphemer and a persecutor, and injurious; but yet he adds, that he obtained Mercy because he did it ignorantly, in un∣belief. How then is S. Paul the Chief of Sinners? Are Sins of Ignorance and Mistake the greatest of Sins, for which Christ died? Is there no Expiation for any other by Iesus Christ? What will
become then of all such who sin against Knowledge and Conscience, and not in Ignorance and Vnbelief? Can none of these hope for Mercy by Christ Iesus, although they do truly Repent? But the Blood of Christ is said elsewhere to cleanse us from all Sin; not,1 Joh. 1.7. while we continue in them,Ch. 2. v. 2. but if we repent and forsake them. And Iesus Christ is said to be a Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World. And therefore this Expression of S. Paul notes his great Humility and deep Sense of his own Sins; but doth not ex∣clude others from the hopes of Pardon whose Sins have other Aggravations than his had. For, if we leave out the last words as peculiar to his Case, yet the other contain in them a true Proposition and of the greatest Importance to Man∣kind; This is a faithful saying and wor∣thy of all acceptation, that Christ Iesus came into the world to save sinners. This, you may say, is a matter out of all doubt among all such who hope for Salvation by Christ Iesus; for all are agreed, that one way or other we are to be saved by him. But there is great Difficulty as to the Way of saving sin∣ners by Christ Iesus; whether by the Do∣ctrine
and Example of the Man Christ Ie∣sus, by the Power he attained through his Sufferings; Or, by the Eternal Son of God's assuming our Nature and suffering in our stead in order to the Reconciling God to us and making a Propitiation for our Sins. These are two very different Hypotheses or Notions of Christ's coming to save Sin∣ners; and the former seems more easie to be understood and believed; and the other seems to have Insuperable Difficul∣ties in point of Reason; and to run our Religion into Mysteries, which expose our Faith and make Christianity appear Contemptible to Men of Sense and Un∣derstanding. Is it not therefore much better to embrace such a Scheme of it, as will have the least Objection against it, that so Men of Reason may not be tempted to Infidelity, and Men of Super∣stition may not under the Colour of My∣steries bring in the most Absurd and Un∣reasonable Doctrines? These are plausible Insinuations, and would be apt to prevail on considering Mens minds, if they were to form and make a Religion that might be most ac∣commodated to the Genius and Humour of the Age they live in. And truly no Men (by their own Authority) can
pretend to a Right to impose on others any Mysteries of Faith, or any such things which are above their Capacity to un∣derstand. But that is not our case; for we all profess to believe and receive Christianity as a Divine Revelation; and God (we say) may require from us the belief of what we may not be able to comprehend, especially if it relates to Himself, or such things which are Consequent upon the Union of the Di∣vine and Human Nature. Therefore our business is to consider, whether any such things be contained in that Revela∣tion which we all own; and if they be, we are bound to believe them, although we are not able to comprehend them. Now here are two Remarkable Cha∣racters in these Words, by which we may examin these different Hypotheses concerning the way of Salvation by Iesus Christ. I. It is a faithfull saying, and therefore must be contained in that Revelation which God hath made concerning our Salvation by Christ. II. It is worthy of all Acceptation; i. e. most useful and beneficial to Mankind.
Now by these two I shall procceed in the Examination of them. I. Which is most agreeable to the Revealed Will of God. II. Which doth offer fairest for the Benefit and Advantage of Man∣kind. I. Which is most agreeable to the re∣vealed Will of God. For that we are sure is the most faithfull saying; since Men of Wit and Reason may deceive us, but God cannot. When the Apostles first preached this Doctrine to the World, they were not bound to believe what they affirmed to be a faithfull saying till they gave sufficient Evidence of their Authority from God, by the wonder∣full Assistance of the Holy Ghost. But now this faithfull saying is contained in the Books of the New Testament, by which we are to judge of the Truth of all Christian Doctrines. And when two different Senses of Places of Scripture are offer'd, we are to consider, which is most Reasonable to be preferr'd. And herein we are allow'd to Exercise our Rea∣son as much as we please; and the more
we do so, the sooner we shall come to Satisfaction in this matter. Now according to Reason we may judge that Sense to be preferr'd, (1.) Which is most plain and easie and agreeable to the most receiv'd Sense of Words; not that which is forced and intricate, or which puts improper and metaphorical Senses upon Words which are commonly taken in other Senses; especially when it is no Sacramental thing, which in its own Nature is Figu∣rative. (2.) That which suits most with the Scope and Design not only of the parti∣cular Places, but of the whole New Testa∣ment; which is, to magnifie God and to depress Man? to set forth, the Infinite Love and Condescension of God in giving his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins; to set up the Worship of one true God in Opposition to Creatures; to Represent and Declare the mighty Advantages Mankind receive by the Sufferings of Christ Iesus. (3.) That which hath been generally receiv'd in the Christian Church to be the Sense of those places. For, we are certain, this was always look'd on as a matter of great Concernment to all Christians;
and they had as great Capacity of under∣standing the Sense of the Apostles: and the Primitive Church had greater Helps for knowing it than others at so much greater Distance. And therefore the Sense is not to be taken from modern Inventions, or Criticisms, or pretences to Revelation; but that which was at first deliver'd to the Christian Church and hath been since received and embraced by it in the several Ages; and hath been most strenuously asserted, when it hath met with Opposition, as founded on Scripture and the general Consent of the Christian Church. (4.) That which best agrees with the Characters of those Persons from whom we recive the Christian Faith; and those are Christ Iesus and his holy Apostles. For, if their Authority be lost, our Religion is gone; and their Authority depends upon their Sincerity and Faithfulness, and Care to inform the World aright in matters of so great Importance. (1.) I begin with the Character which the Apostles give of Christ Iesus himself; which is, that he was a Person of the greatest Humility and Condescension, that he did not assume to himself that
which he might justly have done. For let the Words of S. Paul be understood either as to the Nature, or Dignity of Christ, it is certain that they must im∣ply thus much, that when Christ Iesus was here on Earth, he was not of a vain assuming humour, that he did not boast of himself, nor magnifie his own Great∣ness, but was contented to be look'd on as other Men; although he had at that time far greater and Diviner Excellency in him than the World would believe. Less than this, cannot be made of those Words of the Apostle,Phil. 2.6, 7. Who being in the form of God, he thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant. Now this being the Character given of him, let us consider what he doth affirm concerning himself. For although he was far from drawing the People after him, by setting forth his own Perfecti∣ons; yet upon just Occasions, when the Iews contested with him, he did Assert such things, which must savour of Vanity and Ostentation, or else must imply that he was the Eternal Son of God. For, all Mankind are agreed that the highest degree of Ambition lies in Affe∣cting
Divine Honour, or for a meer Man to be thought a God. How severely did God punish Herod for being pleased with the Peoples folly in crying out, the Voice of God and not of Man?Act. 12 22. And there∣fore he could never have born with such positive Assertions and such repeated Defences of his being the Son of God in such a manner as implied his being so from Eternity. This in his Disputes with the Iews he affirms several times, that he came down from Heaven,Joh 6. 32, 33. not in a Me∣taphorical but in a proper Sense, as ap∣pears by those words, What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before?38.50.58.62 In another Conference he assert∣ed,Joh 8.58. that he was before Abraham. Which the Iews so literally understood, that without a Metaphor they went about to stone him;v. 59. little imagining that by Abra∣ham the calling of the Gentiles was to be understood. But above all, is that Ex∣pression which he used to the Iews at ano∣ther Conference,Joh. 10.30. I and my Father are one; which they understood in such a manner that immediately they took up stones to have stoned him.v. 31. What means all this Rage of the Iews against him? What? for saying that he had Vnity of Consent with his Father? No certainly.
But the Iews misunderstood him. Let us suppose it; would not our Saviour have immediately explained himself to pre∣vent so dangerous a Misconstruction? But he asked them, what it was they stoned him for? They answer him di∣rectly and plainly,v. 32, 33. because that thou be∣ing a man makest thy self God. This was home to the purpose. And here was the time for him to have denied it, if it had not been so. But doth he deny it? Doth he say, it would be Blasphemy in him to own it? No; but he goes about to de∣fend it; and proves it to be no Blasphemy for him to say that he was the Son of God;v. 36. i. e. so as to be God, as the Iews under∣stood it. Can we imagine that a meer Man knowing himself to be such, should As∣sume this to himself; and yet God to bear witness to him not only by Miracles but by a Voice from Heaven, wherein he was called his beloved Son in whom he was well pleased?Mat. 3.17. Could God be pleased with a mortal, finite, despicable Creature, as the Iews thought him, that assumed to himself to be God, and maintained and defended it among his own People, in a solemn Conference at a very Publick Place, in one of the Portico's of the Temple? And this he persisted in to the last. For,
when the High Priest adjured him by the living God to tell,Matth. 26.63. whether he were the Christ the Son of God, (for he, no doubt, had heard of the Result of this Conference in Solomon's Porch) Iesus said unto him,v. 64. Mark 14.62. Thou hast said, S. Mark, more expresly, Iesus said, I am. And this was the Blas∣phemy, for which they put him to death; as appears by the Evangelists.v. 64. So that this ought to be a Dispute only between Iews and Christians;Matth 26.66. since it was the very point, for which they condemned him to death. And in his last most divine Prayer just before his suffering, he owns the Glory which he had with the Father before the World had a being. And now, O Fa∣ther,Luk. 22.71. Joh. 17.5. glorifie thou me with the glory which I had with thee, before the World was. Was this nothing but the Glory which God had designed to give him? This is so far from being peculiar to Christ, that it is common to all whom God designs to glorifie; and takes away the distin∣ction between the Decree and the Exe∣cution of it. (2.) As to the Apostles, the Reason we believe their Testimony is, that they were Men of great Sincerity and Plain∣ness, and of great Zeal for the Honour and Glory of God. And according to
this Character, let us examine what they say concerning Christ Iesus. He that was most conversant with him, and beloved by him, and lived to see his Divinity contested by some, and denied by others, is most ample in set∣ting it forth in his Admirable, Sublime,Joh. 1.1, 2. &c. and Divine Introduction to his Gospel. Which all the Wit of Mankind can never make tolerable Sense of, if they deny Christ's being the Eternal Son of God; and it is he, that hath preserved those Conferences with the Iews, wherein he asserts his own Divinity. S. Paul was a Stranger to him while he lived; but at the same time when he was so zealous to perswade the Gentiles to the Worship of God and not of Crea∣tures, he calls him God over all,Rom. 9.5. blessed for evermore. And when he saith, that the Eternal Power and Godhead are known by the Creation of the World,Rom. 1.20. Col. 1.16. he attributes the Creation of all things to Christ, apply∣ing to him those words of the Psalmist,Heb. 1.2▪ 10. Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the Foundation of the Earth and the Heaven, the Work of thy hands. Which cannot be understood of any Metaphorical Crea∣tion. And after the strictest Examination
of Copies, those will be found the best, which have that Reading on which our Translation is grounded. And without Controversie great is the Mystery of God∣liness,1 Tim. 3.16. God ws manifest in the Flesh. So that God's being manifest in the Flesh is made a great Part of the Mystery of Chri∣stianity. But here arises a Difficulty, which deserves to be considered; i. e. If there were nothing in the Christian Do∣ctrine, but the Way of Saving sinners by the Doctrine and Example of Christ, there would be little Objecti∣on to be made to it; since the obtain∣ing Eternal Life is certainly the best thing can be proposed to Mankind, and the Precepts of Christ are Divine and Spiritual, Plain and Easie to be Under∣stood, and Agreeable to the Reason of Mankind; but many other things are imposed on Men as necessary to be be∣lieved concerning Christ Iesus, as to his Divinity, Incarnation, and the Hypo∣statical Vnion of both Natures, which perplex and confound our Understand∣ings; and yet these things are not only deliverd as Mysteries of the Christian Faith; but the Belief of them is re∣quired as necessary to the Salvation
of Sinners; whereas, if they are Re∣vealed they are no longer Mysteries; and if they are not Revealed, how come they to be made Articles of Faith? The Scripture knows of no other My∣steries of Faith but such as were hid∣den before the Revelation of them, but since they are Revealed they are plain and open to all mens Capacities; and therefore it is a great Injury to the Plainness and Simplicity of the Gospel to impose such incomprehensible My∣steries, as Necessary Articles of Faith; and it is abusing the Credulity of Man∣kind, to make such things necessary to be believed, which are impossible to be understood. But those who have ever loved to deceive and abuse the rest of the World, have been always fond of the Name of Mysteries; and therefore all such things are to be sus∣pected, which come under that Name. For, all such Points which will not bear Examination, must be wrapt up and Reverenced under the Name of Mysteries, that is,Discourse of the Word My∣stery, &c. p. 5. of things to be swal∣low'd without being understood. But the Scripture never calls that a Myste∣ry which is Incomprehensible in it self, though never so much revealed.
This is the main force of the Obje∣ction, which I shall endeavour to re∣move by shewing, (1.) That God may justly require from us in general, the Belief of what we cannot comprehend. (2.) That which way soever the Way of Salvation by Christ be explain∣ed, there will be something of that Nature found in it; and that those who reject the Mysteries of Faith run into greater Difficulties than those who assert them. (3.) That no more is required as a Ne∣cessary Article of Faith than what is plainly and clearly Revealed. (1.) That God may justly require from us in general, the Belief of what we cannot comprehend. It is to very little purpose to enquire whether the Word Mystery in Scripture be applied to such particular Doctrines, whose Sub∣stance is revealed, but the manner of them is incomprehensible by us; for why may not we make use of such a Word whereby to express things truely revealed, but above our Comprehensi∣on?
We are certain the Word Mystery is used for things far less difficult and ab∣struse; and why may it not then be fit∣ly applied to such matters, which are founded on Divine Revelation, but yet are too deep for us to go to the bottom of them? Are there not Mysteries in Arts, Mysteries in Nature, Mysteries in Provi∣dence? And what Absurdity is there to call those Mysteries, which in some Mea∣sure are known, but in much greater unknown to us? Although therefore in the Language of Scripture it be granted, that the word Mystery is most frequently applied, to things before hidden, but now revealed, yet there is no Incongruity in calling that a Mystery, which being re∣vealed, hath yet something in it which our understandings cannot reach to. But it is meer Cavilling to insist on a Word, if the Thing it self be granted. The chief thing therefore to be done is, to shew that God may require from us the belief of such things which are incom∣prehensible by us. For, God may re∣quire any thing from us, which it is rea∣sonable for us to do; if it be then rea∣sonable for us to give Assent where the manner of what God hath revealed is not comprehended, then God may certainly
require it from us. Hath not God re∣vealed to us, that in six days he made Heaven and Earth and all that is there∣in? But is it not reasonable for us to believe this, unless we are able to com∣prehend the manner of God's producti∣on of things? Here we have something revealed and that plainly enough, viz. that God created all things, and yet, here is a Mystery remaining as to the manner of doing it. Hath not God plainly re∣vealed that there shall be a Resurrection of the dead? and must we think it un∣reasonable to believe it, till we are able to comprehend all the changes of the Particles of Matter from the Creation to the General Resurrection? But it is said that there is no Contradiction in this, but there is in the Mystery of the Trinity and Incarnation. It is strange Boldness in Men to talk thus of Monstrous Contradi∣ctions in things above their Reach.Observati∣ons on Dr. Wallis his four Let∣ters, p. 4. The Atheists may as well say, Infinite Power is a Monstrous Contradiction; and Gods Immensity and his other unsearchable Per∣fections are Monstrous Paradoxes and Contradictions. Will Men never learn to distinguish between Numbers and the Na∣ture of Things? For three to be one is a Contradiction in Numbers; but whether
an Infinite Nature can communicate it self to three different Subsistences with∣out such a Division as is among Created Beings, must not be determined by bare Numbers, but by the Absolute Perfecti∣ons of the Divine Nature; which must be owned to be above our Comprehen∣sion. For let us examine some of those Per∣fections which are most clearly revealed and we shall find this true.Psal. 90.2. Revel 1.4. c. 11. v. 17. The Scri∣pture plainly reveals, that God is from everlasting to everlasting; that he was and is and is to come; but shall we not believe the Truth of this till we are able to fa∣thom the Abyss of God's Eternity?Bister field c. Crell. p. 50. I am apt to think (and I have some thoughtful Men concurring with me) that there is no greater Difficulty in the Conception of the Trinity and Incarnati∣on, than there is of Eternity. Not,Petav. de Trinit. l. 3. c. 9. sect. 15. but that there is great Reason to believe it; but from hence it appears that our Rea∣son may oblige us to believe some things which it is not possible for us to compre∣hend. We know that either God must have been for ever, or it is impossible he ever should be; for if he should come into Being when he was not, he must have some Cause of his Being; and that
which was the first Cause would be God. But, if he was for ever he must be from himself; and what Notion or Concepti∣on can we have in our Minds concern∣ing it? And yet, Atheistical men can take no Advantage from hence; because their own most absurd Hypothesis hath the very same Difficulty in it. For some∣thing must have been for ever. And it is far more reasonable to suppose it of an Infinite and Eternal Mind, which hath Wisdom and Power and Goodness to give Being to other things, than of dull, stupid and sensless Matter, which could never move it self, nor give Being to a∣ny thing besides. Here we have there∣fore a thing which must be owned by all; and yet such a thing which can be conceived by none. Which shews the narrowness and shortness of our Under∣standings, and how unfit they are to be the Measures of the Possibilities of things. Vain men would be wise; they would fain go to the very bottom of things, when alas! they scarce understand the very Surface of them. They will allow no Mysteries in Religion; and yet every thing is a Mystery to them. They cry out of Cheats and Impostures under the Notion of Mysteries; and yet there is
not a Spire of Grass but is a Mystery to them; they will bear with nothing in Re∣ligion which they cannot comprehend, and yet there is scarce any thing in the World which they can comprehend. But above other things the Divine Perfecti∣ons, even those which are most Abso∣lute and Necessary are above their Reach. For let such Men try their Imaginations about God's Eternity, not meerly how he should be from himself, but how God should coexist with all the Differences of Times, and yet there be no Succession in his own Being. I do not say there is such Difficulty to conceive a Rock stan∣ding still when the Waves run by it; or the Gnomon of a Dial when the Shadow passes from one Figure to another; be∣cause these are gross unactive things; but the Difficulty is far greater where the Being is Perfect and always Active. For, where there is Succession there is a passing out of not being in such a dura∣tion into being in it; which is not con∣sistent with the Absolute Perfection of the Divine Nature. And therefore God must be all at once what he is, without any Respect to the Difference of Time past, present or to come. From whence Eternity was defined by Boethius to be a
perfect and complete Possession all at once of everlasting Life.De Con∣sol. l. 3. But how can we from any Conception in our Minds of that being all at once, which hath such different Acts as must be measur'd by a long Succession of Time? As, the Crea∣ting and Dissolving the Frame of the World; the promising and sending the Messias; the Declaring and Executing a general Judgment; how can these things be consistent with a Permanent Instant, or a Continuance of being without Suc∣cession? For, it is impossible for us in this Case, as to God's Eternity, to form a clear and distinct Idea in our Mind, of that which both Reason and Revelation convince us must be. The most we can make of our Conception of it is, that God hath neither Beginning of Being, nor End of Days; but that he always was and always must be. And this is ra∣ther a necessary Conclusion from Reason and Scripture, than any distinct Notion or Conception of Eternity in our Minds. From whence it evidently follows, that God may reveal something to us, which we are bound to believe, and yet after that Revelation the Manner of it may be incomprehensible by us, and consequent∣ly a Mystery to us.
Hath not God Revealed to us in Scri∣pture the Spirituality of his own Nature?S. Joh. 4.24. That he is a Spirit, and therefore will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; For, that is a true Reason why Spiritual Wor∣ship should be most agreeable to him. Now, if we could have a clear, distinct, positive Notion in our minds of God's Spiritual Nature, we might then pre∣tend that there is nothing mysterious in this, since it is revealed. But let such men Examine their own thoughts about this matter; and try, whether the utmost they can attain to, be not something Negative, viz. because great Absurdities would follow if we at∣tributed any thing Corporeal to God; for, then he must be compounded of Parts, and so he may be dissolved; then he must be confined to a certain place, and not every-where present; he can∣not have the Power of Acting and Self-determining which a meer Body hath not. For the clearest Notion we can have of Body, is, that it is made up of some things as parts of it, which may be separated from each other; and is confined to a certain place, and hath no Power to move or act from it self. But some of these men who cry down My∣steries
and magnifie Reason, to shew how slender their pretences to Reason are, have asserted a Corporeal God, with Shape and Figure. It was indeed, well thought of by those who would make a Man to be God, to bring God down as near to Man as might be. But how to Recon∣cile the Notion of a Body with Infinite Perfections, is a Mystery to me, and far above my Comprehension. But if it be no Mystery to such Men, they must either deny God's Infinite Perfections or shew how a bodily Shape can be capable of them. But some men can confound Finite and Infinite, Body and Spirit, God and Man, and yet are for no Mysteries; whereas these things are farther from our Reach and Comprehension, than a∣ny o those Doctrines which they find fault with▪ But to proceed. If we believe Prophecy, we must be∣lieve God's fore-knowledge of future events: For, how could they be fore-told if he did not fore-know them? And if he did fore-know those which he did fore-tell, then it was either because those only were revealed to him which is incon∣sistent with the Divine Perfections; or that he doth fore-know all other Events and only thought fitting to Reveal these:
But how can they solve the Difficulties about Divine Prescience? Is there no My∣stery in this? Nothing above their Com∣prehension? What then made their great Master deny it,Socin. Prael. c. 11. as a thing above his Comprehension? Because nothing can be fore-known but what hath a cer∣tain Cause, and therefore, if evil Acti∣ons be fore-told, God must be the Cause of them, and Men will not be free A∣gents in them. And yet it is most cer∣tain, that the Sufferings of Christ by the Wickedness of Men, were fore-told. What then? Must we make God the Au∣thor of Sin? God forbid. Will the righteous Judge of all the Earth, punish Mankind for his own Acts, which they could not avoid? Then we must yield, that there is something in the manner of the Divine Prescience, which is above our Comprehension. And the most Searching and Inquisitive Men have been forc'd to yield it at last, as to the Con∣nection between the Certainty of Pre∣science and the Liberty of humane Acti∣ons. Is it not then much better to sit down quietly at first, Adoring the Infi∣niteness of God's incomprehensible Per∣fections, than after all the huffings and disputings of Men to say,Cajetan in 1. q. 22▪ art. 4▪ In Ignorantiâ
solà quietem invenio, as the great School∣man did? Surely then, here is some∣thing plainly revealed, and yet the man∣ner of it is still a Mystery to us. I shall not now insist on any more of the particular Attributes of God, but only in general I desire to know, whe∣ther they believe them to be finite or in∣finite? If to be finite, then they must have certain bounds and limits which they cannot exceed; and that must ei∣ther be from the imperfection of Na∣ture, or from a Superiour Cause, both which are repugnant to the very Being of God. If they believe them to be in∣finite, how can they comprehend them? We are strangely puzled in plain, ordi∣nary, finite things; but it is madness to pretend to comprehend what is Infinite; and yet if the Perfections of God be not Infinite they cannot belong to Him. I shall only add, in Consequence to this Assertion, That if nothing is to be be∣lieved, but what may be comprehended, the very Being of God must be rejected too. And therefore I desire all such who talk so warmly against any Mysteries in Religion, to consider whose work it is they are doing; even theirs who under
this pretence go about to overthrow all Religion. For, say they, Religion is a Mystery in its own Nature; not this or that, or the other Religion; but they are all alike, all is Mystery; and that is but another Name for Fraud and Imposture. What were the Hea∣then Mysteries but tricks of Priest-craft; and such are maintained and kept up in all kinds of Religion. If therefore these men, who talk against Mysteries understand themselves, they must in pursuance of their Principles reject one God, as well as three Persons; For, as long as they believe an Infinite and Incomprehensible Being, it is Nonsense to reject any other Doctrine, which relates to an Infinite Being, be∣cause it is Incomprehensible. But yet these very Men, who seem to pursue the Consequence of this Prin∣ciple to the utmost, must assert some∣thing more incomprehensible than the Being of God. For, I appeal to any man of common Understanding, whether it be not more agreeable to Reason to sup∣pose Works of Skill, Beauty and Order to be the Effects of a Wise and Intelli∣gent Being, than of Blind Chance and Unaccountable Necessity; whether it
be not more agreeable to the Sense of Mankind to suppose an Infinite and E∣ternal Mind endued with all possible Perfections to be the Maker of this vi∣sible World; than, that it should start out from it self, without Contrivance, without Order, without Cause? Cer∣tainly such men have no Reason to find fault with the Mysteries of Religion be∣cause they are incomprehensible, since there is nothing so Absurd and Incomprehen∣sible, as their darling Hypothesis; And, there is nothing which can make it pre∣vail, but to suppose Mankind to be as Dull and Insensible as the first Chaos. Thus I have shewn that it is not un∣reasonable for God to require from us the Belief of something which we can∣not comprehend. (2.) I now come to consider, whe∣ther those who are so afraid of incom∣prehensible Mysteries in our Faith, have made it so much more easie in the Way they have taken. And notwithstanding all the Hectoring talk against Mysteries and things incomprehensible in Religion, I find more insuperable Difficulties in point of Reason in their Way than in ours. As for instance.
(1.) It is a more Reasonable thing to suppose something Mysterious in the Eternal Son of Gods being with the Fa∣ther before the World was made by him; (as S. Iohn expresses it in the beginning of his Gospel) than in supposing that although Iohn the Baptist were born six Months before Iesus Christ; that yet Christ was in Dignity before him. What a wonderful Mystery is this? Can Men have the Face to cry down Myste∣ries in deep Speculations, and matters of a high and abstruse Nature, when they make such Mysteries of plain and easie things? and suppose the Evangelist in profound Language and lofty Expressi∣ons to prove a thing, which was never disputed, viz. although Christ Iesus were born six Months after Iohn, yet he was in Dignity before him? (2.) It is a more Reasonable thing to suppose that a Divine Person should as∣sume humane Nature, and so the Word to be made Flesh; than to say, that an Attribute of God, his Wisdom or Power is made Flesh, which is a Mystery be∣yond all Comprehension; There may be some Difficulties in our Conception of the other, but this is a thing beyond all Conception or Imagination; For an
Accident to be made a Substance is as ab∣surd, as to imagine it to subsist without one. (3.) It is more Reasonable to suppose that the Son of God should come down from Heaven and take our Nature upon him, than that a man should be rapt up into Heaven, that it might be said that he came down from thence. For in the fomer Supposition we have many o∣ther places of Scripture to support it, which speak of his being with God, and having Glory with him before the World was; whereas there is nothing for the other, but only that it is necessary to make some tolerable Sense of those words. (4.) It is more Reasonable to believe that God should become Man by taking our Nture upon him, than that Man should become God. For in the former, there is nothing but the Difficulty of conceiving the Mar of the Union, which we all grant to be so between Soul and Body; but in the other there is a Repugnancy in the very Conception of a Created God, of an Eternal Son of Adam, of Omnipotent Infirmity, of an Infinite finite Being. In the former Case, an Infinite is united to a Finite;
but in the other a Finite becomes Infi∣nite. (5.) It is more Reasonable to believe that Christ Iesus should suffer as he did for our sakes than for his own. We are all agreed that the Sufferings of Christ were far beyond any thing he deserved at God's hands; but what Account then is to be given of them? We say that he made himself a voluntary Sacrifice for Expiation of the Sins of Mankind; and so there was a great and noble End designed, and no Injury done to a wil∣ling Mind; and the Scripture as plainly expresses this, as it can do in Words. But others deny this, and make him to suffer as one wholly Innocent; for what Cause? To make the most Innocent Per∣sons as apprehensive of Suffering as the most Guilty; and the most righteous God to put no difference between them, with Respect to Suffering. (6.) It is more Reasonable to suppose such a Condescension in the Son of God to take upon him the Form of a Ser∣vant for our Advantage; than that a meer Man should be Exalted to the Ho∣nour and Worship which belongs only to God. For, on the one side, there is no∣thing but what is agreeable to the Di∣vine
Nature, viz. Infinite Love and Con∣descension and Pity to Mankind; on the other, there is the greatest Design of Self-Exaltation that ever was in Hu∣mane Nature, viz. for a meer Man to have the most Essential Attributes and Incommunicable Honour which belongs to God. And whether of these two is more agreeable to the Spirit and Design of the New Testament, let any man of understanding judge. For as it is evi∣dent, that the great Intention of it is to magnifie the wonderful Love of God in the sending of his Son; so it is as plain that one great End of the Christian Doctrine was to take Mankind off from giving Divine Worship to Creatures; and can we then suppose that at the same time it should set up the Worship of a meer Man with all the Honour and Adoration which belongs to God? This is to me an incomprehensible Mystery in∣deed, and far beyond all that is implied in the Mysteries of the Trinity and Incar∣nation. For it subverts the very Foun∣dation of the Design of Christianity as to the Reforming Idolatry then in being; it lays the Foundation for introducing it in∣to the Wold again; for since the Distance between God and his Creatures is taken
away, in the matter of Worship, there is nothing left but the Declaration of his Will; which doth not exclude more Mediators of Intercession but upon this Ground, that the Mediation of Redem∣ption is the Foundation of that of Interces∣sion. And it is far more easie for us to suppose there may be some things too hard for us to understand in the Mystery of our Redemption by Iesus Christ, than that at the same time it should be both a Duty and a Sin to worship any but the true God with proper Divine Wor∣ship. For if it be Idolatry to give it to a Creature, then it is a great Sin; for so the Scripture still accounts it; but if we are bound to give it to Christ who is but a Creature, then that which in it self is a Sin, is now become a Ne∣cessary Duty; which overthrows the Natural Differences of Good and Evil, and makes Idolatry to be a meer Arbi∣trary thing. And I take it for granted, that in Matters of Religion, Moral Dif∣ficulties are more to be regarded than Intellectual; because Religion was far more designed for a Rule of our Acti∣ons, than for the Satisfaction of our Curiosity. And upon due Examination we shall find that there is no such fright∣full
Appearances of Difficulties in the Mystery of the Incarnation, as there is in giving Divine Worship to a Creature. And it ought to be observed, that those very Places which are supposed to exclude Christ from being the true God;S. Joh. 17.3. must, if they have any force, ex∣clude him from Divine Worship. For they are spoken of God,1 Cor. 6.6. as the Object of our Worship;Socin. ad Eutrop. p. 96. c Wick. c. 11. Ca∣tech. Ra∣cov. p. 65. but if he be not exclu∣ded from Divine Worship, then neither is he from being the true God; which they grant he is by Office, but not by Nature. But a God by Office who is not so by Nature is a new and incomprehensible Mystery. A Mystery hidden from Ages and Generations as to the Church of God; but not made known by the Gospel of his Son. This is such a kind of Mystery as the Heathen Priests had, who had Gods many and Lords many,1 Cor. 8.5. as the Apostle saith, i. e. many by Office although but one by Na∣ture. But if the Christian Religion had owned one God by Nature and only one by Office, the Heathens had been to blame chiefly in the Number of their Gods by Office, and not in the Divine Worship which they gave to them. But S. Paul
blames the Heathens for doing Service to them which by Nature are no Gods;Gal. 4.8. not for doing it without Divine Authority, nor for mistaking the Person who was God by Office, but in giving Divine Worship to them who by Nature were no Gods; which he would never have said, if by the Christian Doctrine, Divine Worship were to be given to one who was not God by Nature. But these are indeed incomprehensible Mysteries how a Man by Nature can be a God really and truly by Office; how the Incommunicable Perfections of the Divine Nature can be communicated to a Creature; how God should give his Glory to another, and by his own Com∣mand require that to be given to a Crea∣ture, which himself had absolutely for∣bidden to be given to any besides him∣self. It is said by a famous Iesuit (I will not say how agreeably to their own Do∣ctrines and Practices about Divine Wor∣ship) that the Command of God cannot make him worthy of Divine Worship,Smiglec. de Divin. Verb. In∣carn. Nat. p. 45. who without such a Command is not worthy of it. And it is very absurd to say, that he that is un∣worthy of it without a Command, can be∣come worthy by it; for it makes God to command Divine Honour to be given to one
who cannot deserve it. (For no meer Man can deserve to be made God.Nva Mon∣stra, &c. p. 42.) But it is more agreeable to the Divine Nature and Will not to give his Honour to a Crea∣ture. (3.) But after all the Invectives of these Enemies to Mysteries, we do not make that which we say is Incomprehen∣sible to be a Necessary Article of Faith as it is Incomprehensible; but we do assert that what is Incomprehensible as to the Manner, may be a Necessary Article as far as it is plainly Revealed. As in the Instances I have already mentioned of the Creation and Resurrection of the Dead; would they in earnest have Men turn Infidels as to these things till they are able to comprehnd all the difficulties which relate to them? If not, why should this suggestion be allow'd as to the My∣steries which relate to our Redemption by Iesus Christ? If it be said, the Case is not alike for those are clearly Revealed and these are not; this brings it to the true and proper Issue of this matter, and if we do not prove a clear Revelation, we do not assert their being Necessary Articles of Faith; but my present business was only to take off this Objection, That the Mysteries were Incomprehensible
and therefore not to be received by us. II. And so I come to the second Way, by which we are to Examine the several Senses of Christ Iesus coming to save Sin∣ners: Which of them tends more to the Benefit and Advantage of Mankind; or which is more worthy of all Acceptation. And that will appear by considering these things; (1.) Which tends most to the rai∣sing our Esteem and Love of Christ Iesus. (2.) Which tends most to the beget∣ting in us a greater Hatred of Sin. (3.) Which tends most to the streng∣thening our Hope of Salvation by Iesus Christ. (1.) As to the raising in us a greater Esteem and Love of Christ. We are cer∣tain that the Infinite Love and Conde∣scension of Christ Iesus in undertaking such a Work as the saving of Sinners makes it most worthy of all Acceptation. Some Men may please themselves in thinking that by taking away all Myste∣ries
they have made their Faith more easie, but I am certain they have extreme∣ly lessen'd the Argument for our Love, viz. the Apprehensions of the wonderfull Love and Condescension of Christ in coming into the World to save Sinners. And yet this is the great Argument of the New Testament to perswade Man∣kind to the Love of God and of his Son: God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son,Joh. 3.16. &c. This is indeed a mighty Argument of Love, if by the only begotten Son be meant the Eternal Son of God,v. 13. who came down from Heaven, as S. Iohn speaks just before; but if no more be meant but only that God made a meer Man to be his Son, and after he had preached a while here on Earth and was ill used and crucified by his own People, he Exalted him to be God and gave him Divine Attributes and Honours; this were an Argument of great Love to the Person of Christ, but not to the rest of Mankind. But God's Love in Scripture is magnified with Respect to the World in the sending of his Son. In this was mani∣fested,1 Joh 4.9. saith the Apostle, the Love of God towards us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the World that we should live through him.v. 10. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins. The great Love we still see is to∣wards us, i. e. towards Mankind; but ac∣cording to the other Sense it must have been, Herein was the Love of God mani∣fested to his Son, that for his Sufferings he exalted him above all Creatures. He that spared not his own Son, saith S. Paul,Rom. 8.32. but delivered him up for us all. If he were the Eternal Son of God who came to suffer for us, there is a mighty force and Emphasis in this Expression, and very apt to raise our Admiration and our Love; But what not sparing his own Son is there, if nothing were meant but that he de∣signed by Sufferings to Exalt him? For not Sparing him supposes an Antecedent Relation of the highest Kindness, but the other is only designing extraordinary Kindness for the sake of his Sufferings. Therefore, the Argument for the Love of God is taken from what his Son was, when he deliver'd him up for us all; he was his own Son; not by Adoption as o∣thers are; S. Iohn calls him,John 1.14. ch. 3. v. 16. Luk. 3.22. his only be∣gotten Son; and God himself, his beloved Son in the Voice from Heaven; and this before his Sufferings, immediately after his Baptism, when as yet, there was no∣thing
extraordinary done by him, as to the great Design of his coming. Which shews, that there was an Antecedent Re∣lation between him and the Father; and that therein the Love of God and of Christ was manifested, that being the only begot∣ten Son of the Father, he should take our Nature upon him and for our sakes do and  what he did. This is indeed an Argument great enough to raise our Adration, to excite our Devotion, to inme our Aections; but how flat and low doth it appear, when it comes to no more  this, that there was a Man, wom▪ after his Sufferings God raised from the Dead and made him a God by Office? Doth this carry any such Argu∣ment in it for our Esteem and Love and Devotion to him as the other doth upon the mo serious Consideration of it? (2.) Which tends most to beget in  a greater Hatred of Sin. For that is so contrary to the Way of our Salvation by Iesus Christ, that what tends most to ou Hatred of it, must conduce most to our happiness, and therefore be most worthy of all Acceptation. It is agreed on all hand, that Christ did suffer very much both in his Mind and in his Body. In his Mind,Joh. 13.21. when it is said, that he was
troubled in Spirit;Matt. 26.37, 38. that he began to be sor∣rowfull and very heavy; and soon after, My Soul is exceeding sorrowfull, even un∣to death. S. Luke saith,Mark 14.33, 34. Luke 22.44. that he was in an Agony; wherein he not only prayed more earnestly, but his sweat was as it were great Drops of Blood falling to the Ground. What made this Amazement, and dreadfull Agony in the mind of the most innocent Person in the World? Was it meerly the Fear of the Pains of Death which he was to undergo? That is impossible, considering the Assurance which he had of so glorious a Reward so soon following after; when so many Martyrs endured such exquisite Torments for his sake without any such Disturbance or Consternation. But the Apostles give us another Account of it. S. Peter saith,1 Pet. 2.24. he was to bear our Sins in his own bo∣dy on the tree;3.18. that Christ suffered for Sins, the just for the unjust. S. Paul,2 Cor. 5.21. that God made him to be Sin for us who knew no Sin, that he might be made the righte∣ousness of God in him. Hereby we un∣derstand how so innocent a Person came to suffer; he stood in our stead; he was made Sin for us; and therefore was to be treated as a Sinner; and to suffer that on our Account, which he could not de∣serve
on his own. If he suffer'd on his own Account, this were the way to fill our Minds with perplexity concerning the Justice of Providence with Respect to his dealings with the most innocent and holy Persons in this World; If he suffer'd on our Account, then we have the Benefit of his Sufferings, and therein we see how displeasing to God sin is, when even his own Son suffer'd so much by taking the guilt of our Sins upon him. And what can tend more to the beget∣ting in us a due hatred of sin, than to consider what Christ himself suffer'd on the Account of it? What can make us have more dreadful thoughts of it, than that the great and merciful God, when he designed to save sinners, yet would have his own Son to become a Propi∣tiation for the Sins of Mankind? And unless we allow this, we must put force upon the plainest Expressions of Scri∣pture; and make Christ to suffer meer∣ly to shew God's Power over a most innocent Person, and his Will and Plea∣sure to inflict the most severe Punish∣ment without any Respect to Guilt. And surely such a Notion of God, can∣not be worthy of all Acceptation.
(3.) Which tends most to strengthen our Hope of Salvation by Christ Iesus. If we believe that he suffer'd for our Sins, then we have great Reason to hope for the Forgiveness of them; al∣though they have been many and great, if we sincerely Repent; because the most prevailing Argument for Despair will be removed; which is taken from the Iustice of God, and his declared Ha∣tred of Sin and Displeasure against Sin∣ners. If God be so much in earnest dis∣pleased with the Sins of Mankind, and his Justice be concerned in the Punish∣ment of Sinners, how can they ever hope to escape, unless there be a way for his Displeasure to be removed, and his Justice to be satisfied? And this the Scripture tells us is done by Christ, who died that he might be a Sacrifice of A∣tonement to Reconcile us to God by his Death; as S. Paul expresly affirms.Rom. 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.19. Heb. 9.15. And by this means, we may have strong Con∣solation from the Hopes of Forgiveness of our Sins. Whereas, if this be taken away, either Men must believe that God was not in earnest displeased with the Sins of Mankind; which must exceed∣ingly lessen our Esteem of the Holiness and Iustice of God; or if he were so
displeased, that he laid aside his Displea∣sure, without any Atonement or Sacri∣fice of Expiation. And so, as many as look on God's Iustice and Holiness as necessary and essential Attributes of God, will be in danger of sinking into the Depths of Despair, as often as they Re∣flect seriously on the Guilt of their Sins. But on the other side, if we believe that while we were Enemies we were reconci∣led to God by the death of his Son; then we may have Peace with God through our Lord Iesus Christ; and have reason to believe that there will be no Condemnati∣on to them that are in Christ Iesus by a lively Faith and sincere Repentance; then they may with Comfort look up to God as a Reconciled Father, through Iesus Christ our Mediator: then they may with inward Satisfaction look be∣yond the Grave, and stedfastly hope for that Salvation which Christ purchased on Earth and will at last bestow on all such as Love and Obey him. To which God of his Infinite Mercy bring us all through Iesus Christ. For, This is a faithfull Saying and worthy of all Ac∣ceptation, that he came into the World to save Sinners. FINIS.
Books Written by the Right Reverend Fa∣ther in God Edw. L. Bishop of Wor∣cester, and sold by H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church-Yard. A Rational account of the Grounds of the Protestant Religion; being a Vindication of the Lord Arch∣bishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference, &c. from the pretended Answer of T. G. 2d. Edit. Fol. Origines Britannica, or the Antiquities of the British Churches, with a Preface concerning some pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in Vindication of the Bishop of St. Asaph. Folio. Irenicum, A Weapon-Salve for the Churches Wounds. Quarto. Origines Sacrae, Or a Rational account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as to the Truth and Divine Authori∣ty of the Script and the matters therein contained. 4to. A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practised in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it. Octavo. An Answer to several late Treatises occasioned by a Book entituled, A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practised in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it; Part I. Octavo. A Second Discourse in Vindication of the Protestant Grounds of Faith, against the pretence of Infallibility in the Roman Church, in Answer to the Guide in Contro∣versie, by R. H. Protestancy without Principles, and Reason and Religion; or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a particular enquiry into the Miracles of the Roman Church. Octavo. An Answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle apologetical to a Person of Honour, touching his Vindication of Dr. Stillingfleet. Octavo. A Defence of the Discourse concerning the Idolatry practised in the Church of Rome, in answer to a Book entituled, Catholicks no Idolaters: Octavo. Several Conferences between a Romish Priest, a Fana∣tick Chaplain, and a Divine of the Church of England; being a full Answer to the late Dialogues of T. G. Octavo.
A Discourse concerning Bonds of Resignation of Be∣nefices in point of Law and Conscience, in Octavo. A Discourse concerning the Illegality of the Eccle∣siastical Commission, in Answer to the Vindication and Defence of it: wherein the true notion of the Legal Supremacy is cleared; and an Account is given of the Nature, Original and Mischief of the Dispen∣sing Power. The Council of Trent Examin'd and Disprov'd by Catholick Tradition, in the main Points in Contro∣versie between Us and the Church of Rome; with a particular Account of the Times and Occasions of In∣troducing them. The Unreasonableness of Separation, or an Impar∣tial account of the History, Nature and Pleas of the present Separation from the Communion of the Ch. of England. Quarto. The Grand Question concerning the Bishops Right to vote in Parliament in Cases Capital stated and ar∣gued, from the Parliament-Rolls and the History of former times; with an Enquiry into their Peerage, and the Tree Estates in Parliament. Octavo. Twelve Sermons preached upon several Occasions. Vol. I. Octavo. Ten Sermons preached upon several Occasions. Vol. II. Octavo. A Third Volume will be shortly published. A Discourse in Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity: with an Answer to the late Socinian Ob∣jections against it, from Scripture, Antiquity and Reason. And a Preface concerning the different Ex∣plication of the Trinity, and the Tendency of the present Socinian Controversie. The second. Edition. Octavo. The Bishop of Worcester's Answer to Mr. Lock's Letter concerning some Passages relating to his Essay of Humane Understanding, mentioned in the late Discourse in Vindication of the Trinity. With a Postscript in Answer to some Reflections made on that Treatise in a late Socinian Treatise.
