V305 12083579 53654
Former Ages never Heard of, AND After Ages will Admire. Or a Brief Review of the most Materiall PARLIAMENTARY TRANSACTIONS. Beginning, Nov: 3. 1640. WHEREIN The Remarkeable Passages both of their Civil and Martial Affaires, are continued unto this present Year. Published as a Breviary, leading all along successively, as they fell out in their severall years: So that if any man will be in∣formed of any remarkeable Passage, he may turne to the year, and so see in some measure, in what Moneth thereof it was accomplished. For Information of such as are altogether ignorant of the rise and progresse of these Times. A Work worthy to be kept in Record, and communicated to Posterity. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know them? for the wayes of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them: but the transgressors shall fall therein. Hosea 14. 9. LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Tho: Jenner, at the South-Entrance of the Royal EXCHANGE, 1654.
The Chronology. IN the first year of King Charls his Reign, a Parliament being called at Oxford, two Subsidies were granted, no grievances removed, but the said Parliament soon dissolved. The sad effects which the dissolution of this Parliament produced, were the losse of Rochel, by the unhap∣py help of Englands ships. The diversion of a most facile and hopeful war from the West Indies, to a most expensive and succeslesse attempt on Cales. The attempt on the Isle of Ree, and thereby a precipitate breach of peace with France, to our great losse. A peace concluded with Spain, without consent of Parliament, contrary to a promise formerly made to the King∣dome by King James, a little before his death; whereby the cause of the Palatinate was altogether most shamefully deserted by us. The Kingdome suddenly billetted with Souldiers, and a concomitant project set on foot for Germane Horses, to force men by fear to fall before arbitrary and tyran∣nical Taxations, continually to be laid upon them. 2d Parliament. The dissolution of a second Parliament at Westminster, in the second year, after a declarative grant of no lesse then five Subsidies, and the sad issues that flowed to the Kingdom thereupon. As first, the vi∣olent exacting from the people that mighty sum of the five Subsidies, or a sum equal to it by a Commission for a Royal Loan. Many worthy Gen∣tlemen imprisoned and vexed, that refused to pay it. Great sums extor∣ted by Privy Seals and Excises, and the most hopeful Petition of Right blasted. 3d A third Parliament called, and quickly broken in the fourteenth year of the King, the best Members clapt up close Prisoners, denied all ordina∣ry and extraordinary comforts of life; and so that Parliament was dissol∣ved. Opprobrious Declarations published to asperse the proceedings of the last Parliament, yea Proclamations set out to those effects, thereby ex∣treamly to dishearten the Subjects, yea, and plainly forbidding them once to name a Parliament, or to desire them any more. Whence immediately gushed out the violent inundations of mighty sums of money, got by that strange project of Knight hood, yet under a colour of Law. The most bur∣thensome Book of Rates, the unheard of Taxation of Ship-money, the en∣largement of Forrests, contrary to Magna Charta, the injurious Taxation of Coat and Conduct money, the forcible taking away of the Trained Bands Arms, ingrossing Gunpowder into their hands in the Tower of Lon∣don. The destruction of the Forrest of Dean, which was sold to Papists,
whence we had all our timber for Shipping. Monopolies of Sope, Salt, Wine, Leather, and Sea Coal; yea, almost of all things in the Kingdome of most necessary and common use. Restraint in trades and habitations, for resall of which foresaid heavy pressures, many were vext with long and languishing suis, some fined and confined to Prisons, to the losse of health in many, of life in some; some having their Houses broken open, their Goods leized on, their Studies or Closets searched for Writings, Books, and papers to undo them: some interrupted also in their Sea-Voyages, and their Ships taken from them. The crushing cruelties of the Star-Chamber Court, and Councel Table, where the Recorder of Salisbury was greatly fined for demolishing the Pi∣cture of the first person in the Trinity, in their great Cathedrall. Thus far for the miseries of the Common-wealth; Popish Ceremonies, Romish in∣novations, and such like outrages of the Arch Prelate of Canterbury, and his Prelaticall Agents and Instruments, over the whole Kingdome, in mat∣ters of Religion, Divine worship, and spiritual cases of conscience. Addi∣tions in the Oath administred to the King, at his first inauguration to the Crown, by the Arch-Bishop. Fines, Imprisonments, stigmatizings, mu∣tilations, whippings, pillories, gagges, confinements, and banishments; yea, and that into perpetual close imprisonments, in the most desolate, re∣mote, and (as they hoped and intended) remotest parts of the King∣dome, Mr. Burton, Mr. Bastwicke, Mr. Prin. The ruinating of the eoffees for buying in of Impropriations, and the advancing to Ecclesiasticall li∣vings Arminians, silencing with deprivations, degradations, and excommu∣nications, almost all the most pious Pastors over the Land, whom they could catch in their snares, and all this under a pretence of peace, unity, and conformity Printing Presses set open for the Printing and publishing of all Popish and Arminian Tenets, but shut up and restrained from print∣ing sound Doctrines. Nay, not only thus lamentably molested in England, but attempted the like in Scotland, indeavouring to impose upon them a New Liturgy, and a Book of Canons. They refusing of them, were called and counted Rebels and Traytors; yea, so proclaimed in all Churches in England, and an Ar∣my was also raised to oppresse and suppresse them. A mighty and tu∣multuous rising of Apprentices and young men in Southwark and Lambeth side, with Clubs and other weapons, especially at the Arch Bishops house, which put him in such a fright, as made him flye to Croyden, to convey himselfe to some more private and remote place: And although Pharoahs Magicians were so honest, that at the sight of the dust of the earth turned into lice, they cryed out, It was the finger of God; but he grew more and more outragious, and caused one to be hanged and quartered, and his head set on London-Bridge, who said at his execution, he came there by acci∣dent, and he must dye. Scotland raising an Army in their own just defence, and by force of Arms
The Arch-Prelate of St Andrewes in Scotland reading the new Service-booke in his pontificalibus assaulted by men & Women, with Crickets stooles Stickes and Stones. The rising of Prentises and Sea-men on South∣wark side to assault the Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury's House at Lambeth. inforcing their own peace. A first pacification being then made by the King, and some of his Nobility, and ratified under Hand & Seal, 'twixt them and the Scots, yet was it shortly after quite broken off by the Arch-Prelate of Canterbury, and the E: of Strafford, and burnt by the Hangman at the Exchange. 4 Parliament. A fourth Parliament was thereupon shortly after called again, by those complotters means, but to a very ill intent,
and another Parliament summoned also at the same time by the Earl of Strafford in Ireland, both of them only to levy and procure mo∣neys to raise another Army, and wage a new War against the Scots. The Ships and Goods of Scotland, were in all parts and Ports of this Land, and of Ireland also, surprized and seized on for the King, their Commissioners denied audience to make their just Defence to the King, and the whole Kingdome of Scotland, and England too, hereup∣on much distracted and distempered with levying of moneys, and imprisoning all amongst us that refused the same. This Parliament also refusing to comply with the King, Canterbury, and Strafford, in this Episcopal War against the Scots, was soon dissolved and broken up by them, and thereupon they returned to their former wayes of wast and confusion, and the very next day after the Dissolution thereof, some eminent Members of both Houses had their Chambers and Studies, yea their Cabinets, and very pockets of their wearing Cloaths (betimes in the morning, before they were out of their Beds) searched for Letters and Writings, and some of them impri∣soned, and a false and most scandalous Declaration was published a∣gainst the House of Commons in the Kings Name. A Forced Loan of money was attempted in the City of London, to be made a president (if it prevailed there) for the whole King∣dome, but some Aldermen refusing, were sorely threatned and im∣prisoned. In which interim, the Clergies Convocation continuing, (notwithstanding the Dissolution of the Parliament) New Con∣science oppressing Canons were forged, and a strange Oath with an &c. in it was framed for the establishing of the Bishops Hierarchy with severe punishments on the refusers to take it. The OATH. That I A. B. doe Sweare that I doe approve the Doctrine and Disci∣pline or Government established in the Church of England, as con∣taining all things necessary to Salvation. And that I will not endeavour by my selfe or any other, directly or indirectly, to bring in any Popish Doctrine, contrary to that which is so established: Nor will I ever give my consent to alter the Government of this Church, by Arch-Bi∣shops, Bishops, Deans, and Arch Deacons, &c. as it stands now esta∣blished, and as by right it ought to stand. Nor yet ever to subject it to the usurpations and superstitions of the Sea of Rome. And all these things I doe plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to the plain and common sense, and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or mentall evasion; or secret reservation whatsoever. And this I doe heartily, willingly, and truly upon the faith of a Christian. So help me God in Jesus Christ. In this Convocation sore Taxations were also imposed upon the whole Clergy; even no lesse then six Subsidies, besides a bountifull
Contribution to forward that intended War against Scotland. For the advancing of which said sums for this War, the Popish were most free and forward; yea, and a solemn Prayer was composed and im∣posed by the Bishops on their Ministers every where, to be used and read in all Churches, against the Scots, as Rebels and Traytors. The Papists also in a high measure enjoyed even almost a total Tole∣ration, and a Popes Nuncio suffered amongst us to act and govern all Romish affairs, yea a kind of private Popish Parliament kept in the Kingdome, and Popish Jurisdictions erected among them. Commis∣sioners were also (secretly) issued out for some great and eminent Papists, for Martial Commands, for levying of Souldiers, & strength∣ning their party with Arms and Ammunition of all sorts, and in great plenty. His Majesties Treasure was by these means so extreamly ex∣hausted, and his Revenues so anticipated, that he was forced to com∣pell (as it were) his owne Servants, Judges, and Officers of all sorts, to lend him great sums of money, and Prisons filled with re∣fusers of these and the other illegall payments; yea many High-Sheriffs summoned in the Star-Chamber, and to the Councel board, and some of them imprisoned for not being quick enough in levying of Ship-money, and such like intolerable Taxations. In sum, the whole Land was now brought into a lamentable and languishing condition, of being most miserably bought and sold to any that could give and contribute most of might and malice against us, and no hope of humane help, but dolour, desperation, and de∣struction to be the portion of all. In which interim, the Scots being entred our Kingdome for their own defence, the King had advan∣ced his Royal-Standard at Yorke, where the cream of the Kingdom, Nobles and Gentry being assembled, and a Treaty betwixt the prime of both Armies had at Rippon, for a fair and peaceable accommoda∣tion, the King was, at last, inforced to take his Nobles Councel, and in the first place a cessation of Arms agreed on, and then a fifth Parl. was necessitously resolved on to begin, Nov: 3. 1640. 5th Parliament. Letters from the King, Queen, Popish Earls, Lords, Knights, and Gentry, post into all parts of the Kingdome, to make a strong party for them. Shortly after, a very formidable Spa∣nish Fleet, or Armado, appeared on our English narrow Seas, in sight of Dover, and was coming in (as was on very strong grounds more then probably conjectured) as a third party, to help to de∣stroy us; the Spaniards hoping that by this time, we and the Scots were together by the ears, but they were by Gods mercy, beaten off from us by our Neighbours of Holland, and we fighting against them, fought against our friends. The Souldiers in their passage to York turn Reformers, pull down Popish Pictures, break down rails, turn Altars into Tables, & those
Popish Commanders, that ware to command them, they forced to eat flesh on Fridays, thrusting it down their throats, and some they slew. In the time of ours and the Scots Armies residing in the North, which was in June, 1641. Malignant Lords endeavoured to bring it out of the North, Southward, and so to London, to compell the Parl. to such limits and rules as they thought fit, whereupon the Parl. en∣tred upon this following Protestation. Die Veneris, 30 July, 1641. WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in Parl. finding to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of the Priests, Jesuites, and other adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more boldly and frequently put in practice then for∣merly, to the undermining and danger of the ruine of the true Re∣formed Protestant Religion, in his Majesties Dominions established: And finding also that they have been and having just cause to sus∣pect that there are still even during this sitting in Parliament, endea∣vours to subvert the fundamentall Lawes of England and Ireland, and to introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannicall Govern∣ment, by most pernicious and wicked counsels, practices, plots, and conspiracies: And that the long intermission, and unhappy breach of Parliam. hath occasioned many illegall Taxations, whereupon the subject hath been prosecuted and grieved: And that divers Innova∣tions and superstitions have been brought into the Church, multi∣tudes driven out of his Majesties Dominions, jealousies raised and somented betwixt the King and his people, a Popish Army levyed in Ireland, and two Armies brought into the bowels of his Kingdom, to the hazzard of his Majesties Royal person, the consumption of the Revenues of the Crown and Treasure of his Kingdome: And lastly, finding great cause of jealousie that endeavours have been, and are used to bring the English Army into a misunderstanding of this Parl. thereby to incline that Army with force to bring to passe those wic∣ked Councels, Have therefore thought good to joyne our selves in a Declaration of our united affections and resolutions, and to make this ensuing Protestation. The Protestation. I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Pro∣test to maintaine and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and state, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against Popery and Popish Innovations, within this Realme, contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, his Majesties Royall Person, Honour, and Estate, as also the power and priviledges of Parliament, the lawfull rights and liberties of the Subject, and every person that maketh this Protestation; in whatsoever he shall doe, in the lawfull
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will oppose, and by all good wayes and means endeavour, to bring to condigne punishment, all such as shall either by force, practice, counsels, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise, doe any thing to the contrary of any thing in this present Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just and honourable wayes endeavour to preserve the union and peace between the three Kingdomes of England, Scotland, and Ire∣land, and neither for hope, fear, nor other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation. At the beginning of the Parliament (Nov. 3. 1640.) there was a diligent inquisition after oppressions and oppressors, and first upon the Petition of Mris Bastwicke, and Mris Burton, two widowed wives, and a Petition exhibited in the behalfe of Mr Pryn, Dr. Laighten, Mr. Smart, Mr. Walker, Mr. Foxley, Mr. Lilburn, and many others, set at liberty, some being banisht, and all close Prisoners, others fast fettered in irons, and their wives debar'd from coming to them. Decemb. 1640. The Earl of Strafford, and Laud Arch-bishop of Canterbury, impeached of High Treason; Wren Bishop of Norwich, of Treason, Windebank and Finch fled. The Scots ships that were taken before the Parl. began, restored, and 4000. l. given to rig them, 300000. l. towards their losses, and all Books, Libels, and Procla∣mations against the Scots called in. February, A Bill signed for Tri∣enniall Parl. ix Subsidies, Poll money, and a personall assesment of the whole Kingdome. May, a Bill signed that the Parl. should not be dissolved without their consent; Lord Strafford beheaded, the High Commission Court, and Star Chamber put down, the Parl. pro∣ceeded against Delinquent Judges about Ship-money. The Earl of Strafford's Speech on the Scaffold, May 12. 1641. MY Lord Primate of Ireland, (and my Lords and the rest of these Gentlemen) it is a very great comfort to me, to have your Lord∣ship by me this day, in regard I have been known to you a long time, I should be glad to obtain so much silence as to be heard a few words, but doubt I shall not; my Lord, I come hither by the good will and pleasure of Almighty God, to pay the last debt I owe to sin, which is death, and by the blessing of that God to rise again through the mercies of Christ Jesus to eternall glory; I wish I had been private, that I might have been heard; my Lord, if I might be so much beholding to you, that I might use a few words, I should take it for a very great courtesie; my Lord, I come hither to sub∣mit to that judgment which hath past against me, I do it with a very quiet and contented mind, I do freely forgive all the world, a for∣givenesse that is not spoken from the teeth outward (as they say) but from my heart, I speak it in the presence of Almighty God, be∣fore whom I stand, that there is not so much as a displeasing thought
in me, arising to any creature; I thank God I may say truly, and my conscience bears me witnesse, that in all my services since I have had the honour to serve his Majesty in any employment, I never had a∣ny thing in my heart, but the joynt and individuall prosperity of King and people, if it hath been my hap to be misconstrued, it is the common portion of us all while we are in this life, the righteous judgment is hereafter, here we are subject to error, and apt to be The Earle of Strafford for treasonable practises beheaded on the Tower-hill. mis-judged one of another. There is one thing I desire to clear my selfe of, and I am confident I speak it with so much clearnesse, that I hope I shall have your Christian Charity in the belief of it, I did alwayes think that the Parl. of England were the happiest constituti∣ons that any Kingdome or any Nation lived under, and under God the means of making King and people happy, so far have I been from being against Parliaments: For my death, I here acquit all the world, and pray God heartily to forgive them; and in particular, my Lord Primate, I am very glad that his Majesty is pleased to con∣ceive me not meriting so severe and heavy a punishment as the ut∣most execution of this sentence; I am very glad, and infinitely re∣joyce in this mercy of his, and beseech God to turn it to him, and that he may find mercy when he hath most need of it; I wish the Kingdome all the prosperity and happinesse in the world, I did it living, and now dying it is my wish. I do now professe is from my heart, and do most humbly recommend it to every man here, and wish every man to lay his hand upon his heart, and consider serious∣ly whether the beginning of the happinesse of a people should be
writ in Letters of blood, I fear you are in a wrong way, and I desire Almighty God, that not one drop of my blood may rise up in judg∣ment against you. My Lord, I professe my selfe a true and obedi∣ent Son to the Church of England▪ to the Church wherein I was born, and wherein I was bred, prosperity and happinesse be ever to it: and whereas it hath been said, that I have inclined to Popery, if it be an objection worth answering, let me say truly, that from the time since I was twenty one years of age, till this hour, now going upon forty nine, I never had thought in my heart, to doubt of the truth of my Religion in England, and never any had the boldnesse to suggest to me contrary to the best of my remembrance; and so being reconciled to the mercies of Christ Jesus my Saviour, into whose bosome I hope shortly to be gathered; to that eternall happinesse that shall never have end, I desire heartily the forgivenesse of every man, both for any rash or unadvised word, or deed, and desire your prayers: And so my Lord farewell, farewell all the things of this word: Lord strengthen my faith: give me confidence and assurance in the merits of Jesus Christ. I desire you that you would be silent, and joyn in prayers with me, and I trust in God that we shall all meet, and live eternally in Heaven, there to receive the accomplishment of all hap∣pinesse, where every tear shall be wiped from our eyes, and every sad thought from our hearts: And so God blesse this Kingdome, and Jesus have mercy upon my Soul, Amen. August, 1641. The King went to Scotland. Octob. The Irish Re∣bellion began, whereby above 100000 Protestants were murdered. Novemb. & Decemb. The King came from Scotland to London, and was entertained with most pompous solemnity, and after went to Hamp∣ton Court, the Earl presented a Remonstrance, wherein was expres∣sed the Kingdomes grievances, they desire a Guard. Sir Wil. Belford was displaced, and Cottington made Constable of the Tower, but he was soon displaced, and Col. Lunsford was made Lieutenant of the Tower, but he also was displaced, and Sir John Byron was made Liev. of the Tower in Lunsfords stead, but he also with much ado removed, and Sir John Conyers was put in his place. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peers now Assembled in Parliament. The Humble Petition and Protestation of all the Bishops and Prelats now called by his Majesties Writs to attend the Parliament, and present about London and Westminster for that Service. THat whereas the Petitioners are called up by several and respective Writs and under great penalties to attend the Parl. and have a clear and indu∣bitable right to Vote in Bils, and other matters whatsoever debatable in Parl.
by the ancient Customes, Lawes, and Statutes of this Realm, and ought to be Protected by your Majesty, quietly to attend and prosecute that great Service. They humbly Remonstrate and Protest before God, your Majesty, and the no∣ble Lords and Peers now assembled in Parl. that as they have an indubitate right to Sit and Vote in the House of Lords, so are they (if they may be protected from force and violence) most ready and willing to performe their duties accordingly. And that they doe abominate all actions or opinions tend∣ing to Popery, and the maintenance thereof; as also all propension and incli∣nation to any Malignant party, or any other side or party whatsoever, to the which their owne reasons and conscience shall not move them to adhere. But, whereas they have been at severall times violently menaced, affronted and as∣saulted by multitudes of people, in their coming to perform their services in that honourable House, and lately chased away, and put in danger of their lives, and can find no redresse or protection, upon sundry complaints made to The High Commission-Court and Starr-Chamber voted down, and pluralities & non residencies damned by Parliament. both Houses in these perticulars. They likewise humbly protest before your Majesty, and the Noble House of Peers, that saving unto themselves all their Rights and Interests of Sitting and Voting in that House at other times, they dare not Sit or Vote in the House of Peers, untill your Majesty shall further secure them from all affronts, indignities, and dangers in the premisses. Last∣ly, whereas their fears are not built upon fantasies and conceits, but upon such grounds and objects as may well terrifie men of good resolutions, and much constancy. They doe in all duty and humility protest before your Majesty, and the Peers of that most Honourable House of Parl. against all Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and Determinations, as in themselves null, and of none effect, which in their absence since the 27th of this instant Month of Decem.
1641. have already passed, as likewise against all such as shall hereafter pass in that most Honourable House, during the time of this their forced and vio∣lent absence from the said most Honourable House; not denying but if their absenting of themselves were willfull and voluntary, that most honourable House might proceed in all their premisses in their absence, and this Protesta∣tion notwithstanding. And humbly beseeching your most Excellent Majesty to command the Clerk of the House of Peers to enter this their Petition and Protestation among their Records. They will ever pray to God to bless, &c. Jo Ebor. Th. Dures. Rob. Co. Lich. Jo. Norw. Jo. Asa. Gul Ba. & Wels. Geo. Heref. Rob. Ox. Ma. Ely. Godf. Glouc. Jo Peterb. Mor. Land. Twelve Bishops were impeached of high Treason, and ten impri∣soned in the Tower, and afterward all disabled from ever sitting in the Parl. they are Voted down root and branch, Nulla contradicente: The same night there were bonefires and ringing of Bels. All Popish Recusants inhabiting in and about the City, all dis-affected persons, and such as being able men, would not lend any money for the de∣fence of the Common-wealth, should forthwith confine themselves to their own Houses, and not to goe forth without speciall license. An Ordinance to apprehend dis-affected persons in the City, where∣of were four Aldermen put in safe custody in Crosby House, and some in Gressam Colledge. A letter sent to Mr. Pym. Mr. Pym. Do not think that a guard of men can protect you if you persist in your trayterous courses and wicked designs: I have sent a Paper-messenger to you, and if this does not touch your heart, a Dagger shal, so soon as I am recovered of my plague∣sore. In the mean time you may be forborn, because no better man may be endangered for you. Repent Traytor. Jan: 1641. The Irish proclaimed Rebels, the King demands five Members, Lunsford assaulteth the Citizens at Westmin: an Act to carry on the War in Ireland till it were reduced. Febr: King signs the Bill for taking away Bishops Votes. March, the Queen went to Holland, one of her ships sprung a leak, and much treasure lost, and when she return'd, there was a great storm, Van Trump's Mast broke, and after eight dayes turmoil driven back again, broke and lost 3 ships. The King went to Theobalds, where a Petition from the Par. was present∣ed, desiring him to let the Militia abide neer Lon: and not carry the Prince away, he being at Newmarket the House presented a Decla∣ration, the King went to York, sends a message to the Parl. that he would raise 2000 Foot and 200 Horse at Hull, and go for Ireland, Sir John Hotbam denies the King entrance, in April & May som Mem∣bers leave their seats, and go to the King at York Binion a Silk-man, the Kentish Malignants, and Sir Edw: Deering frame petitions against
the Parl. but rejected, fined, and imprisoned. The King interdicts the Militia, but the Messenger was hang'd at the Exchange. The Lords and Gentry of Ireland and Scotland, petition the King to return to his Parl. the Gentry of York shire do the like, but rejected. The K. set on foot a Commission of Array. June, The Great Seal carried to the K. The Earle of Warwick Adm. Money and Plate brought in for the Cause; the King besieges Hull, 500 men went from London to it: Proclamations and Declarations against the Parliament read in all Churches and Chappels within the K. power. July, An Army raised, and Essex made General, the Lord Major of London imprison'd for causing the K. Commission of Array to be proclaimed; many Procla∣mat: from the K. and Declar: from the Parl. By water the Ship-ma∣sters and Marriners made ready a great number of Long-boats fur∣nished with Ordnance, Muskers, and other Sea-warlike instruments, their Vessels gallantly adorned with Flags and Streamers, together with martial musick, Drums & Trumpets; when they came to White-hall, and understood that the Parl. were safely arriv'd, the Train'd Bands by Land, and the Sea-men by water, let flye their thundring shot both smal and great, their Trumpets sounding, and their drums beating in a triumphing and congratulory manner, was a singular te∣stimony of their cordial affections. The same day Buckinghumshire men, both Gentlemen, Ministers, and others of that Countrey on Horsback, with their Protestations in their Hats, for Reformation of evils in Church and State, and to assure their best services and assistance to the Parl. on all just occa∣sions; and out of Essex, Hartford, Bark-shire, Surrey, and other Counties of the Kingdome, came one after another. At Edge hill 16 pieces of Canon shot against 80 of the Earl of Essex Life-guard, and not one man hurt, and those 80 brake in upon 1600 of the K. four of the Parl. Regiments ran away, and sixteen Troops of Horse, so we were 6000 and they 18000. yet we took their Standard, and cleft Sir Edw. Varney Standard-bearer in the head, and slew the Lord Lindsey Generall of the Field. Lord Gen: Magazine of powder to have been blown up, and Sir John Hotham killed, by one David Alex∣ander, but prevented. Commis. granted to popish Recusants to levy men and arms against the Parl. The K. received the Irish Rebels petition, and permitted their persons with great favour and allow∣ance about him, calling them good Catholick subjects, but rejecting the petition for peace. Novemb. A Treaty of peace intended by the Parl. but pretended by the K. where was that bloody bickering at Brainford by the K. party. New High-Sheriffs, for the better collec∣ting of the 400000. l. Subsidies, intended to have been confirmed to the K. crost. Jan 1643. Newcastle twice routed, K. party worsted near Henly, Scots come into Engl. March, Lichfield Close taken, the K.
sends the Earl of Glamorgan into Irel. with power to conclude. Dr. Bastwick and Cap. Lilburn to be tryed at Oxford, but preserv'd. A let∣ter to all the Freemen Journeymen, and Apprentices of the City, to assemble at their several Halls, to be perswaded not to yeeld to the Parl. voted scandalous. The 2 of May 1643. ye Crosse in Cheapeside was pulled downe, a Troope of Horse & 2 Companies of foote wayted to garde it & at ye fall of ye tope Crosse dromes beat trū∣pets blew & multitudes of Capes wayre throwne in ye Ayre, & a greate Shoute of People with ioy, ye 2 of May the Almanake sayeth, was ye invention of the Crosse, & 6 day at night was the Leaden Popes burnt, in the place where it stood with ringinge of Bells, & a greate Acclamation & no hurt done in all these actions. Mr. Pryn sent to search Canterburies Chamber and Study, found the Original Scotch Service book with his own hand-writing, the cause of all the Scots wars. London to have been betrayed under a pretence of peace, by Mr. Waller, a Member of Parl. Mr. Tomkins, Mr. Challenor, but Waller fined 10000. l. and perpetuall banishment, Tomkins and Challenor hanged, the one at the Exchange, and the other in Holborn. Sir Io: Hotham attempted the betraying of Hull unto the Queen. Decemb. An Order to demolish Altars, to remove the Com∣munion Table from the East end, and to take away all Tapers, Can∣dlesticks, and Basons, and to demolish all Crucifixes, Crosses, and all Pictures and Images of the Trinity and Virgin Mary, both within and without all Churches and Chappels. A plot for betraying of Lincoln by the two Purfries, but preserved. Gloucester admirably freed by the City Regiments. A Rebellion by the Kentish Malignants about Tunbridge. A ship bound from Denmark to the K. of about 300 Tun richly laden with arms and ammunition; another ship bound from Newcastle to Holland, laden with Sea coals, but in the midst thereof
was found between 3 or 4000 l. hid in the Coals, sent to buy Arms for the K. a third ship of 400 tun, carrying 24 peece of Ordnance, taking by the Parl. Scotland with an Army of at least 2000 Horse and Foot, invited by the Parl. when they marched up to the middle in snow, and brought their Artillery over the Ice of the frozen River of Tyne, and the Citizens of London lent the parl. 100000. l. for the Scots first pay, to encourage their advance to help us against the K. forces. The Queen pawning the Jewels of the Crown in Holland, and there∣with buying Arms to assist the war against the parl. and her own ac∣tuall performances with her popish Army in the North, was High treason, and transmitted to the Lords. Images, Crucifixes, papistical Books in Somerset, and Iameses were burnt, and five Capuchin Fry∣ers sent away. May, an Ordinance for the making of Forts, Trench∣es, about the City. Iuly, the assembly of Divines met, Dr. Twisse prolocutor, 120 the total, The Bishop of Canterburies first Prayer on the Scaffold, Jan. 10. 1044. OEternal God, and merciful Father, look down upon me in mer∣cy, in the riches and fullnesse of all thy mercies look upon me, but not till thou hast nailed my sins to the Crosse of Christ: look upon me, but not till thou hast bathed me in the blood of Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ, that so the punish∣ment that is due to my sins may passe away, and goe over me; and since thou art pleased to try me to the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee, give me now in this great instant, full patience, proportionable comfort, a heart ready to dye for thine honour, and the K. happi∣nesse, and this Churches preservation; and my zeale to these, far from arrogancy be it spoken, is all the sin, humane frailty excepted, and all incidents thereunto, which is yet known of me in this perti∣cular, for which I now come to suffer. I say in this perticular of trea∣son, but otherwise my sins are many and great, Lord pardon them all, and those especially whatsoever they be, which have drawn this present judgment upon me, and when thou hast given me strength to bear it, then doe with me as seems best in thine owne eyes, and car∣ry me through death, that I may look upon it in what vilage soever it shall appear to me; and that there may be a stop of this issue of blood in this more then miserable Kingdome; I shall desire that I may pray for the people too, as well as for my self: O Lord, I be∣seech thee give grace of repentance to all people that have a thirst for blood, but if they will not repent, then scatter their devices so, and such as are or shall be contrary to the glory of thy great name, the truth and sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the K. and his posterity after him, in their just rights and priviledges, the honour and conservation of parl. in their ancient and just power, the preser∣vation of this poor Church in her truth, peace, and patrimony, and
Sr Alexander Caron, Sr. Iohn Hotham, Captin Hotham & the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, beheaded on Tower∣hill for Treason against ye Parliament 1645. the settlement of this distracted and distressed people, under the an∣cient Lawes, and in their native liberties; and when thou hast done all this in mercy for them, O Lord fill their hearts with thankfulnes, and with religious dutifull obedience to thee and thy Commande∣ments all their dayes: So Amen, Lord Jesus, and I beseech thee to receive my soul to mercy. Our Father, &c. His last Prayer on the Scaffold. LOrd I am coming as fast as I can, I know I must pass through the shadow of death before I can come to see thee, but it is but um∣bra mortis, a meer shadow of death, a little darknesse upon nature, but thou by thy merits and passion hast broke through the jaws of death, so, Lord receive my soul and have mercy on me, and blesse this King∣dome with peace and plenty, and with brotherly love and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian blood among them, for Jesus Christ his sake, if it be thy will. And when he said, Lord receive my soul, which was his signe, the Executioner did his Office. A design to starve the City, by breaking into Surrey, Sussex, Kent, but disappointed by Sir Wil: Waller, and the City Regiments. Feb: the King granted a cessition of arms with the bloody Rebels of Ire∣land. March, a Solemn League and Covenant taken by the Lords & Commons, city of London, and all parts within the Parl. power. Not∣tingham Town and Castle to have been betrayed, but prevented by Col. Hutchinson. A ship from Denmark of 300 Tuns laden for the most part with Round-heads, being half pike-slaves, with a knob at the end, full of iron spikes, sent to the King, but that yeare the
Swedes fell into Denmarke, and took half his Countrey from him A plot against the City of London by Sir Basil Brooke, Col. Read, Mr. Rip∣ley, and Mr. Vil, two Citizens of London, and others, but prevented. Our Army in Cornwall preserved with the losse of our Artillery. A peace pretended at Vxbridge, and a petition from Buckinghamshire, wherein Sir Iohn Lawrence was a great stickler, but frustrated. Melcomb Regis to have been betrayed, Col. Goring and Sir Lewis Dives were agents therein, the Town and Forts recovered, and two ships with rich prizes from Rhoan in France were seized on to make amends for their trouble. The Service-Book Voted down. Earles and Lords from Oxford, submitted themselves to the Parl. Iune, 1645. The fa∣mous Victory of Naisby over the Kings Forces, 5000 prisoners taken, a Jewel of 500. l. sent to Gen. Leven by the Parl. all the K. Com∣missioners taken at Shaftsbury. Basing house taken and burnt. August, A plot in the west against the Parl. by the Clubmen. A sudden plot upon Scotland by Montrosse, but as suddenly recovered again by Gen: David Lesley. A Treaty with the Parl. for a well grounded peace, and yet at that time the Earl of Glamorgan had a Commission to the ruine of all the protestants in Ireland, and consequently in England also. The Great Seal broken before the Lords and Commons, on Tuesday, the 11 of August, 1646. The King Escapes out of Oxford in a disguised maner Ordered, That whosoever conceals the Kings person, shal be a Traytor. A Letter concerning the Kings coming to the Scots Army, May 5. 1646. RIght Honourable, the discharging our selves of the duty we owe to the Kingdom of Engl: to you as Commissioners from the same,
moves us to acquaint you with the Kings coming in to our Army this morning, which having overtaken us unexpectedly, hath filled us with amazement, and made us like men that dream; we cannot think that he could have been so unadvised in his resolutions, as to have cast himself upon us, without a real intention to give satisfaction to both Kingdoms, in all their just and reasonable demands, in all those things that concern Religion and righteosnesse; whatsoever be his dispositions or resolutions, you may be assured, that we shall never entertain any thought, or correspondency with any purpose, or coun∣tenance any indeavours that may in any circumstance incroach up∣on our League and Covenant, or weaken the union or confidence be∣twixt the Nations, that union to our Kingdom was the matter of ma∣ny prayers, and as nothing was more joyfull unto us then to have it set on foot, so hitherto have we thought nothing too dear to maintain it, and we trust to walk with such faithfulnesse and truth in this par∣ticular, that as we have the testimony of a good conscience within our selves, so you, and all the world shall see, that we mind your in∣terest with as much integrity and care as our own, being confident you will entertain no other thought of us. Signed, May 5. 1646. LOTHIAN. A Remonstrance exhibited in the name of the Lord Major, Alder∣men, and Common-Councel of the City of London, to the High Court of Parl. 1 That some strict and speedy course may be taken for the suppressing of all private and separate Congregations. 2 That all A∣nabaptists, Brownists, Hereticks, Schismaticks, Blasphemers, and all such Sectaries as conform not to the publick discipline established, or to be established by the Parl. may fully be declared against, and some effectuall course setled for proceeding against such persons. 3 That as we are all Subjects of one Kingdome, so all may be equally requi∣red to yield obedience to the Government either set or to be set forth. 4 That no person disaffected to the Presbyterian Government set or to be set forth by the Parl. may be imployed in any place of publick trust. The King gave speedy Order to severall Officers for the surrender of the Towns, Castles, and Forts, which then were in the hands of the Kings Commanders, viz Oxford, Worcester, Litchfield, and Wallingford. A Petition delivered to his Excellency from the Officers and Souldi∣ers in the Army, touching their faithfullnesse in the Parl. service, do∣ing Summer Service in the Winter season, &c. Further presented se∣verall desires of theirs. 1 That an Ordinance of indempnity with the Royal assent be desired. 2 That satisfaction may be given to the pe∣titioners for their arrears, both in their former service, and in this Army before it is disbanded. 3 That those who have voluntarily ser∣ved the Parl. may not be prest to serve in another Kingdome, &c.
4 That those who have lost their lives, limbs, or estates, may be pro∣vided for, and relieved. The Apology in answer to his Excellencies Letter, relating their sense of a second storm hanging over their heads, by the malice of a secret enemy, worse then the former now vanquished, expressing their sorrow that they cannot desire their own security without haz∣zard to his Excellency, &c. Concerning the abuse to divers well affected to the Army, by im∣prisonment, to the ruine of their estates, and losse of their lives. And for their candid intentions and endeavours, declared no lesse then troublers and enemies to the state and Kingdome, resolving rather to dye like men, then to be enflaved and hanged like dogs, &c. A Letter from his Excellency to the Earl of Manchester, concern∣ing the Votes of both Houses, as also his grief of heart for the distra∣ctions between the Parliam: and the Army, defiring that all things may be determined in love, &c. June, 1647. The King taken from Holmby and carried along with the Army, the House ordered that the King should reside at Rich∣mond, but the next day from the General and Councel of Officers, was brought an Impeachment against eleven Members. A particular Charge against the 11 Members impeached by the Army. 1 THat Mr. Denzil Hollis being one of the special Commission: for the Parl. to present Propositions to the King at Oxford, made private addresses to the Kings party then in Arms against the Parl. and did secretly plot and advise them against the Parl. &c. 2 That the said Mr. Denzil Hollis, and Sir Phillip Stapleton during the late war, when the Earl of Lindsey went from the Tower to Oxford, sent seve∣rall Messages to the Earl of Dorset, &c. 3 That the said Mr. Hollis, Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir Will. Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir Wil: Waller, Sir John Maynard, Maj. Gen. Massie, Mr. Glyn, Mr. Long, Col. Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicholas, in the months of March, April, May, and Iune last, in prosecution of their evill designes, met in divers places with persons disaffected to the State, for holding correspondency wth the Queen of England now in France, and incouraged her party there. 4 And indeavoured to bring in Forraign Forces, and Listed divers Commanders and Souldiers there, to raise and levy a new War. 5 and affronted divers Petitioners that came in a peaceable manner, boy∣sterously assaulting them, &c. 6 Imprisoned some Members of the Army, to dis-oblige them from the Parl. The solemn Engagement of the Citizens, Commanders, Officers, and Souldiers, &c. This was the Treasonable Ingagement. WE do solemnly Engage our selves, and Vow unto Almighty God, That we will to the utmost of our power, cordially endeavour that his Ma∣jesty may speedily come to his Houses of Parliament, with honour, safety, and
freedome, and that without the nearer approach of the Army, there to confirm, such things as he hath granted the twelfth of May last, in answer to the Pro∣positions of both Kingdomes, and that with a personall Treaty with his two Houses of Parl. and the Commissioners of Scotland, such things as are yet in difference may be speedily setled, and a firme and lasting peace established. The Army marching towards the City, Orders were given to the trained Bands to go to the Workes The Auxilaries are raised to defend the City. A Proclamation by beat of drum for all that are able to beare Armes, and are not listed to come to receive them. The House of Commons, and the Lords likewise, met according to the order of adjournment, July 30. but nether of the Speakers At length they proceeded to a new election, and Voted Master Pelham a Counsellour, and Member of the Commons House, Speaker pro tempore. The Lords made choice of the Lord Grey to be Speaker of their House pro tempore. The Sargeant at Arms being absent with the Mace when the Commons chose their Speaker, had the City Mace, and chose Master Norfolk Sergeant at Arms. After which, proceeding to debate the greate affairs touching the City and Kingdom, they voted as followes. 1 That the King come to London. 2 That the Militia of the City shall have full power to raise what Forces they shall think fit to the same. 3 That they may make choyce of a Commander in chief to be approved of by the House, and such Commander to present o∣ther Officers to be approved of by the Militia. The Common coun∣cel made choice of Major Gen. Massey to Command in chief all the City Forces. Ordered by the Militia that all Reformadoes and other Officers should the next day at two of the clock be listed in St. Iame∣ses fields, where was a great appearance. Order given for slaying of Horses in the City, and many listed. Most of the eleven Members sat in the House, and in the afternoon Maj. Gen. Massey, Sir William Waller, and Col. Gen. Poyntz, were at listing the Reformadoes. De∣claration of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Councel. A brief of which that his Majesty was surprized at Holmby, and no place for his Majesties residence allowed by the Army nearer then their Quarters, therefore to settle peace, and establish true Religion, ease the Kingdomes burdens, establish his Majesties just rights, maintain the Parl. priviledges, and relieving Ireland, they professe the main of their enterprise, &c. At which time Col. Gen. Poyntzs and other Officers of the new List, attending for their Orders upon the Militia, came into Guild-hall-yard, and most cruelly hackt and hew'd many of the aforesaid Petitioners, divers whereof were mortally wounded, whereof some
since dyed. Lord Say, Lord Magresie, and others, with many of the House of Commons, came to the Head quarters, desiring the Gene∣rals protection. Six Aldermen and twelve Common-councel men sent with a letter to the Gen: declaring their unwillingnesse to a new War. A letter from Southwarke relating their withstanding the de∣sign of raising a new War, desiring protection. Massey sends Scouts, but neer Brainford thirty chased by ten, and took four of Massies. Col. Rainsborough, Col. Hewson, Col. Pride, and Col Thistlwet; marched into Southwarke, the Fort yielded without opposition. The Memberr forced away returne, the Houses being sat with their old Speakers, Thomas Lord Fairfax made High Constable of the Tower. He marches through the City from 11 untill 8 at night. A Letter from Liev: Gen: Cromwel, that his Majesty had with∣drawn himselfe at 9 the last night. His Majesties last Letter, Hampton-Court; Nov. 11. 1645. LIberty being that which in all times hath been; but especially now is the condition, the aime and desire of all men, common reason shews that Kings lesse then any should endure captivity, yet I call God to witnes with what patience I have endur'd a tedious restraint, which so long as I had any hopes that this sort of my suffering might conduce to the peace of these three Kingdomes, or the hindring of more effusion of blood, I did willingly undergo, but now finding by too certain proofs, that this my continued patience would not only turn to my personall ruine, but likewise be of much more prejudice to the furtherance of the publick good, I thought I was bound as well by naturall as politicall Obligations, to seek my safety, by reti∣ring my selfe for some time from publick view both of my friends and enemies; and I appeal to all indifferent men to judge, if I have not cause to free my selfe from the hands of those who change their principles with their condition, and who are not ashamed openly to intend the destruction of the Nobility, by taking away their Nega∣tive voyce, and with whom the Levellers doctrine is rather counte∣nanced then punished; and as for their intentions to my person, their changing and putting more strict Guards upon me, with the discharging most of all the servants of mine, who formerly they ad∣mitted to wait upon me, do sufficiently declare: nor would I have this my retirement mis-interpreted, for I shall earnestly and unces∣santly endeavour the setling of a safe & well grounded peace, where∣ever I am or shall be, and that (as much as may be) without the effu∣sion of more Christian blood, for which how many times have I prest to be heard, and yet no ear given to me; and can any reasonable man think (according to the ordinary cours of affairs) there can be a setled peace without it, or that God will bles those that refuse to hear their own King? surely no, I must further add that (besides what concerns
my self) unlesse all other chief interests have not only a hearing, but likewise just satisfaction given to them (to wit, the Presbyterians, In∣dependents, Army, those who have adhered to me, and even the Scots) I say there cannot (I speak not of miracles, it being in my opi∣nion a sinful presumption in such cases to expect or trust to them) be a safe and lasting peace: now as I cannot deny but that my personal security is the urgent cause of this my retirement, so I take God to witnesse, the publick peace is no lesse before mine eyes, and I can find no better way to expresse this my profession (I know not what a wiser man may do) then by desiring and urging that al chief interests may be heard, to the end each may have just satisfaction; as for ex∣ample, the Army (for the rest, though necessary, yet I suppose are not difficult to consent) ought (in my judgement) to enjoy the liberty of their conscience, and have an Act of Oblivion or Indempnity (which should extend to the rest of all my subjects) and that all their arrears should be speedily and duly paid, which I will undertake to do, so I may be heard, and that I be not hindred from using such lawfull and honest means as I shall chuse: To conclude, let me be heard with freedome, honor, and safety, and I shall instantly break through this cloud of Retirement, and shall shew my self to be Pater Patriae, C. R. A great tumult, insurrection, and mutiny in London, breaking open divers Houses, and Magazines of Arms and Ammunition, seizing on the Dms, Gates, Chains, and Watches of the Cy, assaulted & shot into the Lord Mayors House, and killed one of his Guard, &c. May 16. 1648. Surrey Petitioners came to Westminster, and made a great shout, and cryed, Hey for King Charls, we will pull the Members out by the Ears, disarmed two Sentinels, knockt them down, one Sen∣tinell refusing to be disarmed, the Petitioners got within his Arms, one of them drew his sword and run him through, and the Petitio∣ners drew their swords, and said, Fall on for King Charls now or never; but a party of 500 Foot did take some: Of the Petitioners were slain four or five, of the Souldiers two. The old Lord Goring proclaimed Generall at the head of the Ken∣tish Army, upon the Hill neer Aluford, consisting of 8000 besides those in Maidstone, there were near 300 slain, and about 2300 priso∣ners, many of them taken in the Woods, Hop-yards, and fields, also Gentlemen of good quality. There were about 500 Horse, 3000 Arms, 9 Foot colours, and 8 pieces of Canon, with store of Ammu∣nition taken; their Word at the Engagement was King and Kent, ours Truth. They being routed marched over Rochester Bridge, towards Black-Heath, with about 3000 Horse and Foot, most Cavaleers, Pren∣tises and Watermen, and fled over the water into Essex, by Woollidge and Greenwich.
The Duke of Buckingham, Lord Francis, Earl of Holland, Lord An∣drew, Lord Cambden, and others, rose in Surrey, and made Proclama∣tion that they expected the Parl. would settle the Kingdome, but because they have not, they would fetch the King, and live and dye with him to settle it. July 11. 1648. Pembroke Castle surrendred. Scots Army of 21000. Invaded England Duke ambletons Standard had Motto Date Cefari, Foot Standard  Covenant, Religion, King and Kingdomes; Riseing in Kent, Revolting of the Navie, Redusing Colchester; And Quelling the insurection in Pembroke Shire all in 1648: The Scots entring the Kingdome, July 11. 1648. Maj. Gen. Lam∣bert sent this Letter to Duke Hamilton. MY LORD, HAving received Information that some Forces of Horse and Foot are marched out of Scotland into this Kingdome under your Excellencies Command, I have sent this Bearer unto you, desiring to know the truth and intent thereof, and whether they are come in opposition to the Forces in these parts raised by the Authority of the Parl. of England, and now in prosecution of their Commands. I desire your Lordships speedy answer, and rest Your Excellencies humble Servant. J. LAMBERT. Duke Hamilton's Answer. Noble Sir, I Received yours of the 11 of this instant, in answer whereunto I shall only say, the information you received is true, for according to the Commands of the Committee of Estates of the Parl. of Scot∣land, there are Forces both of Horse and Foot come into this King∣dome
under my conduct, for prosecution of the ends mentioned in my Letter of the 6th, to which I refer you, intending to oppose any that are or shall be in Arms for the obstructing of those pious, loyall, and just ends, and so remain, HAMBLETON. The Towne of Colchester delivered up, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle shot to death. Liev: Col: Lilburn revolted at Newcastle, declared for the King, Sir Arthur Hasterigge storm'd the Castle, Lilburns head was set upon a pole. June 5. 1648. The Lord of Warwick went to Portsmouth, to bring into obedience the mutinous Sea-men; there was with the Lord of Warwick, the Phoenix, Mary, Rese, Robert, Nonesuch, Lilly, Lyon, Bonad∣venture, Antilope, Swift sure, Hector, and Fellowship. A short Abridgment of the Engagement made by the Com∣mon Councell, Commanders, Souldiers, and Commissi∣on Officers in London. WE declare to engage as much as in us lies, to defend the King and Parl: from all violence, and to the end we may be inabled to perform the same, We humbly offer, that the Forces in the line may be one Militia, and no For∣ces may be raised, but by Authority of the said Militia, by consent of the Com∣mon Councell. We desire no Forces in Arms might come within thirty miles of London, during the Treaty, and for those within, what persons soever shall make any tumult, shall be put to death. Ordered, That the Common Councell men and Commanders shall within their severall Precincts goe from house to house, to receive concurrence to the said Ingagement. Decemb. 1648, The House having notice of the Kings carrying to Hurst Castle, Voted, That the seizing his person was without their advice or consent. Dec. 5. The House Voted, That his Majesties concessions to their Proposals, was ground sufficient to settle the peace of the King∣dome. Dec. 6. Col. Rich, and Col. Prides Regiment guarded the Parl. and seized some Members. Dec. 12. Maj. Gen. Brown Sheriff of London, was apprehended. Dec. 13. The House Voted, That the Lords and Commons de∣clare they will make no further Addresses to the King, nor none, shall be by any person whatsoever, without leave of the Parl. and if any make breach of this Order, they shal incur the penalty of high Treason, and that they will receive no more any Message from the King, to both or either Houses of Parl. An Ordinance sent to the Lords for the Tryall of the King, but
they rejected the Commission, and adjourned eight dayes, after that they never sate more. Serjeant Dendy, Serjeant at Arms to the Commissioners, rode in∣to Westminster-Hall, with the Mace belonging to the House of Com∣mons on his shoulder, and some Officers attending him all bare, and six Trumpeters on Horsback, a guard of Horse and Foot attending in the Pallace yard and Proclamation was made, All that had any thing for matter of Fact against Charls Stuart, King of England, to bring it in to the Commissioners. Jan: 19. 1648. That this present Seale of England should be bro∣ken in pieces, and a new one forthwith made, and ordered that the Arms of England and Ireland should be ingraven on the one side, and on the other side a Map of the Parl. with these words in it, The first yeer of Freedome by Gods blessing restored, 1648. The Charge of the Commons of England, against Charls Stuart King of England. THat the said Charls Stuart being admitted King of England, and therein trusted with a limited power, to Govern by and accord∣ing to the Lawes of the Land, and not otherwise; and by his truth, Oath, and Office, being obliged to use the power committed to him, for the good and benefit of the people, and for the preservation of their Rights and Liberties, yet neverthelesse out of a wicked design to erect and uphold in himselfe an unlimited and tyrannicall power, to rule according to his will, and to overthrow the Rights and Liber∣ties of the people; yea, to take away and make void the foundati∣ons thereof, and of all redresse and remedy of mis government, wch by the fundamentall Constitutions of this Kingdome, were reserved on the peoples behalfe, in the right and power of frequent and suc∣cessive Parl. or Nationall meetings in Councels; He, the said Charls Stuart, for the accomplishment of such his designs, and for the pro∣tecting of himselfe and his adherents, in his and their wicked practi∣ces to the same ends, hath trayterously and maliciously levyed War against the present Parl. and the people therein represented. Parti∣cularly, upon or about the 30 of June, in the year 1642. at Beverley in the County of Yorke, and about the 30 of July in the yeer afore∣said, in the County of the City of York; and upon the 22 of August, at Nottingham, where he set up his Standard of War; and also about the 23 of October, in the same year at Edge-hill, and Keintonfield, in the County of Warwick; and neer the 30 of Nov. in the same yeer, at Brainford in the County of Middlesex; and neer the 30 of Aug. 1643 at Cavesham Bridge neer Redding, in the County of Berks; and neer
the 30 of Octob. in the same yeer, neer the City of Gloucester; and a∣bout the 30 of Nov. the same yeer, at Newbury in the County of Ber. and about July 31. 1644. at Cropredy Bridge in the County of Oxen. and Sept. 30. the same yeer, at Bodmin, and other places in the Coun∣ty of Cornwall; and Nov. 30. the same yeer, at Newbery; and about June 8. 1645. at Leicester; and the 14. at Naseby field. At which se∣verall times and places, or most of them, and at many other places in this land, at severall other times within the years afore-mentioned. And in the year 1646. he the said Charls Stuart hath caused and pro∣cured many thousands of the free people of the Nation to be slain, and by diversions, parties, and insurrections within this land, by in∣vasions from forreign parts, endeavoured and procured by him, and by many other evill wayes and means, he the said Charls Stuart hath not only maintained and carried on the said War, both by Land and Sea, during the yeers before mentioned, but also hath renewed, or caused to be renewed the said War against the Parl. and good peo∣ple of this Nation, in this present yeer, 1648. in the Counties of Kent, Essex, Surrey, Sussex, Middlesex, and many other Counties and places in England and Wales, and also by Sea; and particularly, he the said Charls Stuart hath for that purpose given Commission to his Son the Prince, and others, whereby, besides multitudes of other persons, many such as were by the Parl. intrusted and imployed for the Na∣tion, being by him or his Agents corrupted to the betraying of their trust, and revolting from the Parl. have had entertainment and Com∣mission for the continuing and renewing of War and Hostility against the said Parl. and people as aforesaid. By which cruell and unnaturall Wars by him the said Charls Stuart, continued and renewed as afore∣said, much innocent blood of the free people of this Nation, hath been spilt, many Families have been undone, the publick Treasury wasted and exhausted, Trade obstructed and miserably decayed, vast expence and damage to the Nation incurred, and many parts of the Land spoiled, some of them even to desolation. And for farther prosecution of his said evill Designes, he, the said Charls Stuart doth still continue his Commission to the said Prince, and other Rebels and Revolters, both English and Forreigners, and to the Earl of Ormond, and to the Irish Rebels and Revolters associa∣ted with him, from whom further invasions are threatned, upon the procurement, and on the behalfe of the said Charls Stuart. All which wicked Designs, Wars, and evill practices of him the said Charls Stuart, have been and are carried on, for the advancing and upholding of the personall interest of will and power, and pre∣tended prerogative to himselfe and his Family, against the publick interest, common right, liberty, justice, and peace of the people of this Nation, by and for whom he was entrusted as aforesaid.
By all which it appeareth that he the said Charls Stuart, hath been and is the Occasioner, Author, and Contriver of the said unnaturall, cruell, and bloody wars, and therein guilty of all the Treasons, Mur∣thers, Rapines, Burnings, Desolations, Damage, and mischiefe to this Nation, acted or committed in the said Wars, or occasioned thereby. And the said John Cooke, by Protestation (save on the behalf of the people of England, the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereaf∣ter, any other Charge against the said Charls Stuart, and also of re∣plying to the answers which the said Charls Stuart shall make to the premisses, or any Charge that shall be so exhibited) doth, for the said Treasons and Crimes on the behalfe of the said people of Engl: impeach the said Charls Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traytor, Murtherer, and a publick and implacable enemy to the Common-wealth of England, and pray, That the said Charls Stuart King of England, may be put to answer all and every the premisses, that such Proceedings, Examina∣tions, Tryals, Sentence, and Judgement, may be thereupon had, as shall be agreeable to Justice. The Kings Speech made upon the Scaffold at White-Hall, Jan. 30. 1648. I Shall be very little heard of any body here, I shall therefore speak a word unto you here; indeed I could hold my peace very well, if I did not think that holding my peace would make som men think that I did submit to the guilt as well as to the punishment; but I think it is my duty to God first, and to my Countrey, for to clear my self both as an honest man, and a good Christian. I shall begin first with my innocency, in troth, I think it not very needfull for me to insist long upon this, for all the world knowes I never did begin a War with the two Houses of Parliament, and I call God to witnesse, to whom I must shortly make an account, that I never did intend for to incroach upon their priviledges, they began upon me, it was the Militia they began upon, they confest that the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit for to have it from me; and to be short, if any body will look to the dates of Commissions, both theirs and mine and likewise to the Declarations, will see cleerly that they began these unhappy troubles, not I, so that as for the guilt of these enor∣mous Crimes that are laid against me, I hope in God that God will clear me of it, I will not, I am in charity; God forbid that I should lay it upon the two Houses of Parl. there is no necessity of either, I hope they are free of this guilt; for I doe beleeve that ill instru∣ments between them and me, ha's been the cause of all this blood∣shed;
so that by way of speaking, as I find my selfe clear of this, I hope (and pray God) that they may too: yet for all this, God for∣bid that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say that Gods judge∣ments are just, upon me, many times he does pay justice by an unjust sentence, that is ordinary; I will onely say this. That an unjust Sen∣tence that I suffered to take effect, is punished now by an unjust Sentence up∣on me; that is, so far I have said, to shew you that I am an innocent man. Now for to shew you that I am a good Christian, I hope there is a good man (pointing to Dr Juckson) that will bear me witnesse that I have forgiven all the world, and those in particular that have been the chief causers of my death, who they are God knowes, I doe not desire to know, I pray God forgive them. But this is not all, my cha∣rity must goe further, I wish that they may repent, for indeed they have committed a great sin in that particular, I pray God with Saint Stephen, that this be not laid to their charge; nay, not onely so, but that they may take the right way to the peace of the Kingdome: So (Sirs) I doe wish with all my soule, and I doe hope (there is some here will carry it further) that they may endeavour the peace of the Kingdome. Now (Sirs) I must shew you how you are out of the way, and will put you in a way; first, you are out of the way, for certainly all the way you ever have had yet as I could find by any thing, is in the way of Conquest, certainly this is in an ill way, for Conquest (Sir) in my opinion is never just, except there be a good just Cause, ei∣ther for matter of wrong, or just Title, and then if you goe beyond it, that makes it unjust at the end that was just at first: But if it be onely matter of Conquest, then it is a great Robbery, as a Pirate said to Alexander, That He was the great Robber, he was but a petty Robber; and so, Sirs, I doe think the way you are in, is much out of the way. Now Sir, for to put you in the way, believe it, you will never doe right, nor God will never prosper you, untill you give God his due, the King his due, (that is, my Successors) and the people their due, I am as much for them as any of you: You must give God his due, by regulating rightly his Church (according to his Scriptures) which is now out of order, for to set you in a way particularly now I can∣not, but onely this, a Nationall Synod freely called, freely debating among themselves, must settle this; when that every Opinion is free∣ly and cleerly heard. For the King indeed I will not, the Lawes of the Land will cleer∣ly instruct you for that; therefore, because it concernes my owne particular, I only give you a touch of it. For the people, and truly I desire their liberty and freedome as much as any body whomsoever; but I must tell you, that their Li∣berty
and their Freedome consists in having of Government; those Lawes, by which their life and their goods may be most their owne. It is not for having share in Government (Sir) that is nothing per∣taining to them, a Subject and a Soveraign are clean different things, and therefore until they doe that, I mean, that you doe put the peo∣ple in that Liberty as I say, certainly they will never enjoy them∣selves. Sirs, it was for this that now I am come here: If I would have gi∣ven way to an Arbitrary way, for to have all Lawes changed accor∣ding to the power of the Sword, I needed not to have come here; and therefore I tell you (and I pray God it be not laid to your charge) That I am the Martyr of the people. In troth Sirs, I shall not trouble you much longer; for I will one∣ly say this to you, that in truth, I could have desired some little time longer, because that I would have put this that I have said in a little more order, and a little better digested then I have done, and there∣fore I hope you will excuse Me. I have delivered my conscience, I pray God, that you do take those courses that are best for the good of the kingdom, and your own Salvation. The Biship of London minding him to say somthing concerning his Re∣ligion. King. I thank you very heartily (my Lord) for that, I had al∣most forgotten it. In troth Sirs, my Conscience in Religion, I think, is very well known to all the world, and therefore I declare before you all, That I die a Christian, according to the profession of the Church of England, as I found it left me by my Father, and this honest man I thinke will witnesse it. Then turning to the Officers, said, Sirr, excuse me for this same, I have a good cause, and I have a gracious God, I will say no more. Then turn∣ing to Col. Hacker, he said, Take care that they doe not put me to paine, and Sir, this and it please you. But then a Gentleman coming neer the Ax, the King said, take heed of the Ax, pray take heed of the Ax. Then the King speaking to the Executioner, said, I shall say but very short prayers, and when I thrust out my hands — Then the King called to Dr Iuxon for his night cap, and having put it on, he said to the Executioner, does my haire trouble you, who desired him to put it all under his Cap, which the King did accordingly, by the help of the Executioner and the Bishop, then the King turning to Dr Juxon, said, I have a good Cause, and a gracious God on my side. Dr Jaxon, There is but one stage more, this stage is turbulent and trou∣blesome, it is a short one, but you may consider it will soone carry you a very great way, from Earth to Heaven, and there you shall find a great deale of cordiall joy and comfort.
King. I goe from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown, where no distur∣banc can be Doct. You are exchanged from a temporall to an eternall Crown, a good exchange. Then the King took off his Cloak and his George, giving his George to Dr. Juckson, saying Remember, 'tis thought for the Prince, and some other small Ceremonies past, after which, the King stooping down, laid his neck upon the blocke, after a very little pause, stretched forth his hands, the Executionr at one blow severed his head from his Body, his Body was put in a Coffin co∣vered with black Velvet, and removed to his Lodging Chamber at White-Hall. An Act prohibiting the Proclaiming of any person to be King of England, &c. VVHereas Charls Stuart King of England, being for the notorious Treasons, Tyrannies, and Murthers, committed by him in the late unnaturall and civill Wars con∣demned to death, whereupon, after execution of the same, se∣verall pretences may be made, and Title set on foote unto the Kingly Office, to the apparent hazzard of the Publick Peace. For the prevention thereof, Be it Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That no person or persons whatsoever doe presume to Proclaime, De∣clare, Publish, or any way promote Charls Stuart, Son of the said Charls, commonly called Prince of Wales, or any other person to be King or chief Magistrate of England or of Ireland, or of any the Dominions belonging to them, or any of them, by colour of Inheritance, Succession, Election, or any other claim whatsoever, without the free consent of the people in Parliam: first had, and signified by a particular Act or Ordinance for that purpose, any Law, Statute, Vsage, or Custome to the con∣trary notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted and Ordai∣ned, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained, that whosoever shall contrary to this Act, Proclaim, Declare, Publish, or any way promote the said Charls-Stuart the Son, or any other person to be King, or chief Magistrate of Eng∣land, or of Ireland, or of any the Dominions belong∣ing
to them, or to either of them, without the said consent in Parliament, signified as aforesaid, shall be deemed and adjud∣ged a Traytor to the Common-wealth, and shall suffer the pains of death, and such other punishments as belong to the Crime of High Treason. And all Officers, as well Civill as Military, and all other well-affected persons, are hereby au∣thorized and required forthwith to apprehend all such Offen∣ders, and to bring them in safe custody to the next Justice of the Peace, that they be proceeded against accordingly. H. Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Dk. Hambleton, E: of Cambridg, E: of Holland, and Lord Capell be headed Mar: 9. 1649 And their speeches on the scaffold The Speech of Duke Hamilton Earl of Cambridge, on the Scaffold in the Pallace yard, the ninth of March, 1649. I Think it is truly not very necessary for me to speak much, there are many Gentlemen and Souldiers there that see me, but my voyce truly is so weak, so low, that they cannot hear me, neither truly was I ever at any time so much in love with speaking, or with any thing I had to expresse, that I took delight in it; yet this being the last time that I am to doe so, by a Divine providence of Almighty God, who hath brought me to this end justly for my sins; I shall to you, Sir, Master Sheriff, declare thus much, as to the matter that I am
now to suffer for, which is as being a Traytor to the Kingdome of England: Truly Sir, it was a Countrey that I equally loved with my owne, I made no difference, I never intended either the generality of its prejudice, or any particular mans in it; what I did was by the Command of the Parliament of the Countrey where I was borne, whose Command I could not disobey, without running into the same hazard there, of that condition that I now am in. It pleased God so to dispose that Army under my Command, as it was ruined; and I, as their Generall, cloathed with a Commission, stand here, now ready to dye; I shall not trouble you, with repeat∣ing of my Plea, what I said in my owne Defence at the Court of Ju∣stice, my self being satisfied with the Command that is laid upon me, and they satisfied with the justnesse of their procedure according to the Lawes of this Land. God is just, and howsoever I shall not say any thing as to the matter of the Sentence, but that I doe willingly submit to his Divine providence, and acknowledge that very many wayes I deserve even a worldly punishment, as well as hereafter, for we are all sinfull, Sir, and I a great one; yet for my comfort, I know there is a God in Heaven that is exceeding mercifull, I know my Re∣deemer fits at his right hand, and am confident (clapping his hand on his brest) is mediating for me at this instant, I am hopefull thro his free grace, and all-sufficient merits, to be pardoned of my sins, and to be received into his mercy, upon that I rely, trusting to no∣thing but the free grace of God through Jesus Christ: I have not been tainted in my Religion I thank God for it, since my infancy, it hath been such as hath been profest in the Land, and established, and now it is not this Religion or that Religion, nor this or that fancy of men that is to be built upon, it is but one that's right, one that's sure, and that comes from God, Sir, and in the free grace of our Sa∣viour. Sir, there is truly somewhat that (he then observing the Wri∣ters) had I thought my Speech would have been thus taken, I would have digested it into some better method then now I can, and shall desire these Gentlemen that doe write it, that they will not wrong me in it, and that it may not in this manner be published to my dis∣advantage, for truly I did not intend to have spoken thus when I came here. There are, Sirs, terrible aspersions that have been laid upon my self, truly such, as I thank God, I am very free from; as if my acti∣ons & intentions had not been such as they were pretended for, but that notwithstanding what I pretended it was for the King, there was nothing lesse intended then to serve him in it. I was bred with him for many years; I was his domestick servant, and there was nothing declar'd by the Parl. that was not really intended by me; and tru∣ly, in it I ventured my life one way, and now I lose it another way:
and that was one of the ends, as to the King; I speak only of that, because the rest ha's many particulars; and to clear my self from so horrid an aspersion as is laid upon me: neither was there any other designe known to me by the incoming of that Army, then what is re∣ally in the Declaration published. His person, I doe professe, I had reason to love as he was my King, and as he had been my Master: It hath pleased God now to dispose of him, so as it cannot be thought flttery to have said this, or any end in me for the saying of it, but to free my self from that Calumny which lay upon me: I cannot gain by it, yet Truth is that which we shall gain by for ever. There hath been much spoken, Sir, of an invitation into this King∣dome, it's mentioned in that Declaration, and truly to that I did and doe remit my self: and I have been very much laboured for disco∣veries of these inviters; 'tis no time to dissemble, how willing I was to have served this Nation in any thing that was in my power, is known to very many honest, pious, and religious men, and how rea∣dy I would have been to have done what I could to have served them, if it had pleased them to have preserved my life, in whose whose hands there was a power: They have not thought it fit, and so I am become unusefull in that which willingly I would have done. As I said at first (Sir) so I say now concerning that point, I wish the Kingdome happinesse, I wish it peace, and truly Sir, I wish that this blood of mine may be the last that is drawn: and howsoever I may perhaps have some reluctancy with my self, as to the matter of my suffering, for my Fact, yet I freely forgive all, Sir, I carry no ran∣cour along with me to my Grave, his will be done that ha's created both Heaven and Earth, and me a poor miserable sinfull Creature now speaking before him. For me to speak, Sir, to you of State bu∣sinesse, and the Government of the Kingdom, or my opinion in that, or for any thing in that nature, truly it is to no end, it contributes nothing: My owne inclination hath been to peace, from the begin∣ning, and it is known to many, that I never was an ill instrument be∣twixt the King and his people; I never acted to the prejudice of the Parl. I bore no Arms, I medled not with it, I was not wanting by my prayers to God Almighty for the happinesse of the King; and truly I shall pray still, that God may so direct him, as that may be done wch shall tend to his glory, and the peace and happinesse of the King∣dome For my Religion, that which I said was the established Religion, and that which I have practiced in my own Kingdome where I was born and bred; my Tenets they need not to be exprest, they are known to all and I am not of a rigid opinion; many godly men there are that may have scruples which doe not concerne me at all at no time; they may differ in opinions, and more now then at any time;
differing in opinion does not move me (not any mans) my owne is clear: Sir, the Lord forgive me my sins, and I forgive freely all those that even I might as a worldly man, have the greatest animo∣sity against; We are bidden to forgive, Sir 'tis a Command laid up∣on us (and there mentioned) Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespasse against us. Then the Earl turning to the Executioner, said, Shall I put on a∣nother Cap? Must this haire be turn'd up from my Neck? There are three of my Servants to give satisfaction; he also asked him which way he would have him lye. The Executioner pointing to the front of the Scaffold, the Earl replyed, what, my head this way? After a little discourse in private with some of his Servants, he kneeled downe by the side of the Scaffold and prayed a while to himselfe. Then with a chearfull and smiling countenance (embracing Dr. Sibbalds) he said, truly Sir I doe take you in mine arms, and truly, I blesse God for it, I doe not fear, I have an assurance that is ground∣ed here (laying his hand upon his heart) now that gives me more true joy then ever I had. I passe out of a miserable world, to go in∣to an eternall and glorious Kingdome; and Sir, though I have been a most sinfull creature, yet Gods mercy I know is infinite, and I bless my God for it, I goe with so clear a conscience that I know not the man I have personally injured. Then imbracing those his Servants which were there present, said to each of them, You have been very faithfull to me, and the Lord blesse you. And so turning himselfe to the Executioner, he said, I shall say a very short prayer unto my God, while I lye downe there, and when I stretch out my hand (my right hand) then Sir, doe your duty, and I doe freely forgive you, and so I doe all the world. Then the Earl of Cambridge said to the Executioner, Must I lye all along, he answered, yes, and 't please your Lordship. Then he said, when I stretch out my hands— but I will fit my head, first tell me if I be right, and how you would have me lye, and being told he must lye a little lower, he said, Well, stay then till I give you the signe. And so having laine a short space devoutly praying to himselfe, he stretcht out his right hand, whereupon the Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body, which was received by two of his Servants then knee∣ling by him, into a Crimson Taffety Scarfe, and that with the body immediately put into a Coffin brought upon the Scaffold for that purpose, and from thence conveyed to the House that was Sir John Hamilton's at the Mews.
The Speech of the Earl of Holland upon the Scaffold. IT is to no purpose (I think) to speak any thing here, which way must I speak? and then being directed to the front of the Scaf∣fold, he (leaning over the raile) said, I think it is fit to say some∣thing, since God hath called me to this place. The first thing which I must professe, is, what concerns my Reli∣gion and my breeding, which hath been in a good Family, that hath been ever faithfull to the true Protestant Religion, in the which I have been bred, in the which I have lived, and in the which by Gods grace and mercy I shall dye. I have not lived according to that Education I had in that Fami∣ly where I was borne and bred: I hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive that it is very much his pleasure to bring me to this place for the sins that I have committed. The cause that hath brought me hither, I believe by many hath been much mistaken, They have conceived that I have had ill de∣signs to the State, and to the Kingdome, truly I look upon it as a judgement, and a just judgement of God; not but I have offended so much the State and the Kingdome, and the Parliament, as that I have had an extream vanity in serving them very extraordinarily. For those actions that I have done, I think it is knowne they have been ever faithfull to the publick, and very particularly to Parliam: my affections have been ever exprest truly and cleerly to them. The dispositions of affaires now have put things in another posture then they were when I was ingaged with the Parl. I have never gone off from those principles that ever I have profest, I have lived in them, and by Gods grace will I dye in them. There may be alterations and changes that may carry them fur∣ther then I thought reasonable, and there I left them: But there hath been nothing that I have said or done, or professed either by Covenant or Declaration, which hath not been very constant, and very clear upon the Principles that I ever have gone upon, which was to serve the King, the Parl. Religion (I should have said in the first place) the Common-wealth, and to seeke the peace of the Kingdome. That made me think it no improper time, being prest out by ac∣cidents and circumstances, to seek the peace of the Kingdom, which I thought was proper, since there was something then in agitation, but nothing agreed on for sending Propositions to the King, that was the furthest aime that I had, and truly beyond that I had no
intention, none at all. And God be praised, although my blood comes to be shed here, there was I think scarcely a drop of blood shed in that action that I was ingaged in. For the present affaires, as they are I cannot tell how to judge of them, and truly they are in such a condition, as (I conceive) no body can make a judgment of them: and therefore I must make use of my prayers, rather then of my opinion, which are, that God would blesse this Kingdome, this Nation, this State, that he would settle it in a way agreeable to what this Kingdom hath been happily Gover∣ned under; by a King, by the Lords, by the Commons, a Govern∣ment that (I conceive) it hath flourished much under, and I pray God the change of it bring not rather a prejudice, a disorder, and a confusion, then the contrary. I look upon the Posterity of the King, and truly my conscience di∣rects me to it, to desire, that if God be pleased that these people may look upon them with that affection that they owe, that they may be called in again, and they may be, not through blood, nor through disorder, admitted againe into that power, and to that glory that God hath in their birth intended to them. I shall pray with all my Soul for the happinesse of this State, of this Nation, that the blood which is here spilt, may be even the last which may fall amongst us, and truly I should lay down my life with as much cheerfulnesse as e∣ver person did, if I conceived that there would no more blood fol∣low us; for a State, or affairs that are built upon blood, is a foun∣dation for the most part that doth not prosper. After the blessing that I give to the Nation, to the Kingdome, and truly to the Parliament, I doe wish with all my heart, happinesse, and a blessing to all those that have been authors in this business, and truly that have been authors in this very work that bringeth us hi∣ther: I doe not only forgive them, but I pray heartily and really for them; as God will forgive my sins, so I desire God may forgive them. I have a particular relation, as I am Chancellor of Cambridge and truly I must here, since it is the last of my prayers, pray to God that that University may goe on in that happy way which it is in, that God may make it a Nursery to plant those persons that may be distribu∣ted to the Kingdome, that the Soules of the people may receive a great benefit and a great advantage by them; and (I hope) God will reward them for their kindnesse, and their affections that I have found from them. (Looking towards Mr. Bolton.) I have said what Religion I have been breed in, what Religion I have been born in, what Religion I have practiced, I began with it and I must end with it. I told you that my actions and my life have not been agreeable to
my breeding, I have told you likewise that the Family where I was bred, hath been an exemplary Family (I may say so I hope without vanity) of much affection to Religion, and of much faithfullnesse to this Kingdome, and to this State. I have endeavoured to doe those actions that have become an ho∣nest man, and which became a good English-man, and which became a good Christian. I have been willing to oblige those that have been in trouble, those that have been in persecution, and truly I finde a great reward of it, for I have found their prayers and their kindnesse now in this distresse, and in this condition I am in, and I think it a great reward, and I pray God reward them for it. I am a great sinner, and I hope God will be pleased to hear my prayers, to give me Faith to trust in him, that as he hath called me to death at this place, hee will make it but a passage to an eternall life through Jesus Christ, which I trust to, which I relye upon, and which I expect by the mercy of God. And so I pray God blesse you all, and send that you may see this to be the last execution, and the last blood that is likely to be spilt among you. And then turning to the side raile, he prayed for a good space of time. God hath given me (speaking to Mr. Bolton) long time in this world, he hath carried me through many great accidents of Fortune, he hath at last brought me downe into a condition, where I find my selfe brought to an end, for a dis-affection to this State, to this Parl. that (as I said before) I did believe no body in the world more unlikely to have expected to suffer for that Cause. I look upon it as a great judgement of God for my sins. And truly Sir, since that the death is violent; I am the lesse troubled with it, because of those vi∣olent deaths that I have seen before: Principally my Saviour that hath shewed us the way, how and in what manner he hath done it, and for what cause, I am the more comforted, I am the more rejoy∣ced. It is not long since the King my Master passed in the same man∣ner, and truly I hope that his purposes and intentions were such, as a man may not be ashamed not onely to follow him in the way that was taken with him, but likewise not ashamed of his purposes, if God had given him life. I have often dispued with him concerning many things of this kind, and I conceive his sufferings, and his better know∣ledge and better understanding (if God had spared him life) might have made him a Prince very happy towards himselfe, and very hap∣py towards this Kingdome. I have seen and known, that those bles∣sed souls in Heaven, have passed thither by the gate of sorrow, and many by the gate of violence: And since it is Gods pleasure to dis∣pose me this way, I submit my soule to him, with all comfort, and with all hope, that he hath made this my end, and this my conclusi∣sion, that though I be low in death, yet neverthelesse this, lownesse
shall raise me to the highest glory for ever. Truly, I have not said much in publick to the people concerning the particular actions that I conceive I have done by my Counsels in this Kingdome, I conceive they are well known, it were somthing of vanity (me thinks) to take notice of them here, I'le rather dye with them, with the comfort of them in mine own bosome; and that I never intended in this action, or any action that ever I did in my life, either malice, or bloodshed, or prejudice to any Creature that lives. For that which concerns my Religion, I made my profession be∣fore of it, how I was bred, and in what manner I was bred, in a Fa∣mily that was looked upon to be no little notorious in opposition to some liberties, that they conceived, then to be taken; and truly there was some mark upon me, as if I had some taint of it, even thro∣out the whole wayes that I have taken: every body knows what my affections have been to many that have suffered, to many that have been in troubles in this Kingdome, I endeavoured to oblige them, I thought I was tyed so by my Conscience, I thought it by my chari∣ty, and truly very much my breeding; God hath now brought me to the last instant of my time, all that I can say, and all that I can ad∣here unto is this, That as I am a great sinner, so I have a great Savi∣our, that as he hath given me here a fortune to come publickly in a shew of shame in the way of this suffering, (truly I understand it not to be so) I understand it to be a glory, a glory, when I consider who hath gone before me, and a glory when I consider I had no end in it but what I conceive to be the service of God, the King, and the Kingdom, and therefore my heart is not charged much with any thing in that particular, since I conceive God will accept of the in∣tention, whatsoever the action seem to be. I am going to dye, and the Lord receive my soul, I have no reliance but upon Christ for my self, I do acknowledge that I am the unworthiest of sinners, my life hath been a vanity, and a continued sin, and God may justly bring me to this end, for the sins I have committed against him, and were there nothing else but the iniquities that I have committed in the way of my life, I look upon this as a great justice of God to bring me to this suffering, and those hands that have been most active in it, I pray God forgive them, and that there may not be many such Tro∣phies of their Victory. I might say somthing of our Tryal, which I think hath been extraordinary, but because I would not seem as if I made some complaint, I will not so much as mention it, because no body shall believe I repine at their actions, or my owne fortune; it is the will of God, it is the hand of God under whom I fall, I take it intirely from him, I submit my self to him, I shall desire to roule my selfe into the arms of my blessed Saviour.
And when I come to this place (pointing to the Block) when I bowe downe my selfe there, I hope God will raise me up, and when I bid farewell, as I must now to hope and to Faith, that Love will abide, I know nothing to accompany the Soule out of this World but Love, and I hope that Love will bring me to the Fountaine of glory in Heaven, through the Arms, Mediation, and the Mercy of my Saviour Jesus Christ, in whom I believe, O Lord help my unbelief. I shall make as much hast as I can to come to that glory, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth take my soule: I look upon my selfe intirely in him, and hope to find mercy through him, I expect it, and through that Fountaine that is opened for sin, and for uncleannesse, my soule must receive it, for did I rest in any thing else, I have nothing but sin and corruption in me; I have nothing but that, which instead of being carried up into the Arms of God and Glory, I have nothing but may throw me downe into Hell. And here is the place where I lye downe before him, from whence I hope he will raise me to an eternall Glory through my Saviour, upon whom I rely, from whom only I can expect mercy: into his arms I commend my spirit, into his bleeding arms, that when I leave this bleeding body that must lye upon this place, he will receive that Soule that ariseth out of it, and receive it into his Eternall mercy, through the Merits, through the Worthinesse, through the Mediation of Christ that hath purchased it with his owne most precious Blood. Christ Jesus receive my Soule, my Soule hungers and thirsts after him, clouds are gathering, and ust in God through all my heavinesse: and I hope through all impediments, he will settle my interest in him, and throw off all the claim that Sathan can make unto it, and that he will carry the soul in de∣spight of all the calumnies, and all that the Devill and Satan can invent, will carry it into eternall mercy, there to receive the blessednesse of his presence to all eternity. That Lamb of God, into his hands I commit my soul; and that Lamb of God that sits upon the Throne to judge those 24 that fall down before him, I hope he will be pleased to look downward, and judge me with mercy that fall down before him, and that worship him, and that adore him, that only trusts upon his mercy for his compassion, and that as he hath purchased me, he would lay his claim unto me now, and receive me. Indeed if Christ justifie, no body can condemn, and I trust in God, in his ju∣stification, though there is confusion here without us, and though there are wonders and staring that now disquiet us, yet I trust that I shall be carried into that mercy, that God will receive my soule. Then the Earl of Holland looking over among the people, pointing to a Souldier, said, This honest man took me Prisoner, you little thought I should have been brought to this, when I delivered my self to you upon conditions; and espying Capt. Watson on Horse back putting off his Hat said to him, God be with you Sir, God reward you Sir.
Here must now be my Anchor, a great storm makes me find my Anchor, and but in stormes no body trust to their Anchor, and therefore I must trust upon my Anchor (Upon that God, said Mr Bolton, upon whom your An∣chor trusts) yea, God, I hope, will Anchor my soule fast upon Christ Jesus: and if I dye not with that clearnesse and heartinesse that you speak of, truly, I will trust in God though he kill me, I will relye upon him, and the mercy of my Saviour. Then the Earl of Holland imbraced Liev: Col: Beecher, and tooke his leave of him: After which, he came to Mr Bolton, and having imbraced him, and returned him many thanks for his great paines and affections to his soule, desiring God to reward him, and returne his love into his bosome, Mr Bolton said to him, The Lord God support you, and be seen in this great ex∣tremity, the Lord reveale and discover himselfe to you, and make your death the passage unto eternall life. Then the Earl turning to the Executioner, said, Here my friend, let my Cloaths and my Body alone, there is ten pounds for thee, that is better then try Cloaths, I am sure of it. Execut. Will your Lordship please to give me a signe when I shall strike? And his Lordship said, you have room enough here, have you not? Execut. Yes. Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said, Friend, doe you hear me, if you take up my Head, doe not take off my Cap. Then turning to his Servants, be said to one, Fare you well, thou art an honest fellow, and to another, God be with thee, thou art an honest man, and then said, Stay, I will kneel down and aske God forgivenesse, and then prayed for a pretty space with seeming earnestnesse. Then speaking to the Executioner, he said, Which is the way of lying? (which they shewed him) and then going to the Front of the Scaffold, he said to the people, God blesse you all, and God deliver you from any such act as may bring you to any such death as is violent, either by war or by these accidents, but that there may be peace among you, and you may find that these accidents that have hapned to us, may be the last that may happen in this Kingdome; it is that I desire, it is that I beg of God, next the saving of my soule; I pray God give all happinesse to this Kingdom, to this people, and this Nation: And then turning to the Executioner, said, How must I lye? I know not. Execut. Lye down flat upon your Belly: and then having laid himselfe down, he said, Must I lye closer? Execut. Yes. and backwarder. I will tell you when you shall strike, and then as he lay seemed to pray with much affection for a short space, and then lifting up his head, said, where is the man? and seeing the Executioner by him, he said, Stay while I give the signe, and presently after stretching out his hand, and the Executioner be∣ing not fully ready, he said, Now, now, and just as the words were coming out of his mouth, the Executioner at one blow severed his Head from his Body.
The Speech of the Lord Capel upon the Scaffold. THe Conclusion that I made with those that sent me hither, and are the cause of this violent death of mine, shall be the begin∣ning of what I shall say to you: When I made an Address to them, (which was the last) I told them with much sincerity, That I would pray to the God of all mercies, that they might be partakes of his inestimable and boundlesse mercy in Jesus Christ, and truly I shall pray that prayer, and I beseech the God of Heaven forgive any inju∣ry they have done to me, from my soule I wish it. And truly, this I tell you as a Christian, to let you see I am a Christian: But it is ne∣cessary I should tell you somewhat more, That I am a Protestant, and truly I am a Protestant, and very much in love with the profession of it, after the manner as it wa established in England by the thirty nine Article, a blessed way of profession, and such a one, as truly, I never knew none so good: I am so far from being a Papist, which some bo∣dy have (truly) very unwothily at some time charged me withall, that truly I professe to you, that though I love Good Works, and commend Good Works, yet I hold, they have nothing at all to doe in the matter of Salvation; my Anchor-hold is this, That Christ lo∣ved me, and gave himselfe for me, that is it that I rest upon. And truly something I shall say to you as a Citizen of the whole world, and in that consideration I am here condemned to dye: truly, contrary to the Law that Governs all the world, that is, The Law of the Sword, I had the protection of that for my life, and honour of it; but truly I will not trouble you much with that, because in another place I have spoken very largely and liberall about it, I believe you will hear by other means what arguments I used in that case: But truly, that that is stranger, you that are English men, behold here an English man now before you, and acknowledged a Peer, not condemned to dye by any Law of Engl. not by any Law of England; nay shall I tell you (which is strangest of all) contrary to all the Lawes of Engl: that I know of. And truly I will tell you, in the matter of the civill part of my death, and the Cause I have maintained, I dye (I take it) for maintaining the fifth Commandement, enjoyned by God himselfe, which enjoynes reverence and obedience to Parents: All Divines on all hands, though they contradict one another in many severall opinions, yet all Divines on all hands, doe acknowledge that here is intended Magistracy and Order, and certainly I have obeyed that Magistracy and the Order under which I have lived, which I was bound to obey; and truly, I doe say very confidently that I do dye
here for keeping, for obeying that fifth Commandement given by God himselfe, and written with his own finger. And now Gentlemen, I will take this opportunity to tell you, that I can not imitate a better nor a greater ingenuity then his, that said of himselfe, For suffering an unjust judgement upon another, himselfe was brought to suffer by an unjust judgement. Truly Gentlemen, that God may be glorified, that all men that are concerned in it, may take the oc∣casion of it, of humble repentance to God Almighty for it, I do here professe to you, that truly I did give my Vote to that Bill of the E. of Strafford, I doubt not but God Almighty hath washed that away with a more precious blood, and that is, with the blood of his own Son, and my dear Saviour Jesus Christ, and I hope he will wash it a∣way from all those that are gilty of it: Truly this I may say, I had not the least part nor the least degree of malice in the doing of it: but I must confesse again to Gods glory, and the accusation of mine own frailty, and the trailty of my nature, that truly it was an unwor∣thy Cowardize, not to resist so great a torrent as carried that busi∣nesse at that time. And truly, this I think I am most guilty of, of not courage enough in it, but malice I had none; but whatsoever it was, God I am sure hath pardoned it, hath given me the assurance of it, that Christ Jesus his blood hath washed it away; and truly, I doe from my soule wish, that all men that have any stain by it, may seri∣ously repent, and receive a remission and pardon from God for it. And now Gentlemen, we have had an occasion by this intimation to remember his Majesty, our King that last was, and I cannot speak of him, nor think of it, but truly I must needs say, that in my opinion that have had time to consider all the Images of all the greatest and vertuousest Princes in the world, and truly in my opinion there was not a more vertuous, and more sufficient Prince known in the world, then our gracious King Charls that dyed last; God Almighty preserve our King that now is, his Son, God send him more fortunate, and longer dayes; God almighty so assist him, that he may exceed both the vertues and sufficiencies of his Father: For certainly, I that have been a Councellour to him, and have lived long with him, and in a time when discovery is easily enough made, for he was young (he was about thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen yeers of age) those years I was with him, truly I never saw greater hopes of vertue in a∣ny young person, then in him; great Judgment, great Understand∣ing, great Apprehension, much Honour in his Nature, and truly a very perfect English-man in his Inclination; and I pray God restore him to this Kingdome, and unite the Kingdomes one unto another, and send a happinesse both to you and to him, that he may long live and Reign among you, and that that Family may Reign till thy King∣dome come, that is, while all Temporall Power is consuminated: I
beseech God of his mercy, give much happinesse to this your KING, and to you that in it shall be his Subjects, by the grace of Jesus Christ. Truly, I like my beginning so well, that I will make my conclusi∣on with it, that is, That God Almighty would confer of his infinite and inestimable grace and mercy, to those that are the causers of my coming hither, I pray God give them as much mercy as their owne hearts can wish; and truly for my part I will not accuse any of them of malice, truly I will not, nay, I will not think there was any ma∣lice in them; what other ends there are, I know not, nor I will not examine, but let it be what it will, from my very soule I forgive them every one: And so, the Lord of Heaven blesse you all, God Almighty be infinite in goodnesse and mercy to you, and direct you in those wayes of obedience to his Commands to his Majesty, that this King∣dome may be a happy and glorious Nation again, & that your King may be a happy King in so good and so obedient people. God Al∣mighty keep you all, God Almighty preserve this Kingdome. God Almighty preserve you all. Then turning about, and looking for the Executioner (who was gone off the Scaffold) said, Which is the Gentleman? Which is the man? Answer was made, he is coming, he then said, stay, I must pull off my Doublet first and my Wastcoat: And then the Executioner being come upon the Scaffold, the Lord Capel said, O friend, prethee come hither: Then the Executioner kneeling down, the Lord Ca∣pel said, I forgive thee from my soul, and not only forgive thee, but I shall pray to God to give thee all grace for a better life: There is five pounds for thee, and truly for my Cloaths and those things, if there be any thing due to you for it, you shall be very fully recompenced, but I desire my body may not be stripped here, and no body to take noce of my body but my own Servants: Look you Friend, this I shall desire of you, that when I lye down, you would give me a time for a particular short prayer. Liev. Col. Beecher, Make your owne signe my Lord. Capel. Stay a little, which side doe you stand upon (speaking to the Executioner) stay I think I should lay my hands forward that way (pointing fore right) and answer being made yet, he stood still a little while, and then said, God Almighty blesse all this people; God Almighty stench this blood, God Almighty stench, stench, this issue of blood, this will not doe the businesse, God Almighty find out another way to do it. And then turning to one of his Servants, said, Baldwin, I cannot see any thing that belongs to my wife, but I must desire thee to be∣seech her to rest wholly upon Jesus Christ, and be contented and ful∣ly satisfied: And then speaking to his Servants he said, God keep
you, and Gentlemen, let me now doe a businesse quickly, privately, and pray let me have your Prayers at the moment of death, that God would receive my soul. Capel. Pray at the moment of striking, joyne your prayers, but make no noise (turning to his Servants) that is inconvenient at this time. Servant. My Lord, put on your Cap. Capel. Should I, what will that doe me good? stay a little, is it well as it is now? And then turning to the Executioner, he said, Honest man, I have forgiven thee, therefore strike boldly, from my soule I doe it. Then a Gentleman speaking to him, he said, Nay, prethee be con∣tented, be quiet good Mr— be quiet. Then turning to the Executioner, he said, Well, you are ready when I am ready, are you not? And stretching out his hand, he said, then pray stand off Gentlemen, then going to the front of the Scaf∣fold, he said to the people, Gentlemen, though I doubt not of it, yet I think it convenient to ask it of you, that you would all joyne in prayers with me, that God would mercifully receive my soule, and that for his alone mercies in Christ Jesus. Execut. My Lord, shall I put up your Haire? Capel. I, I, prethee doe; and then as he stood, lifting up his hands and eyes, he said, O God, I doe with a perfect and a willing heart submit to thy will, O God, I doe most willingly humble my selfe: then kneeling down, said, I will try first how I can lye, and laying his head over the block, said, Am I well now? Execut. Yes. And then as he lay with both his hands stretched out, he said to the Executioner, Here lye both my hands out, when I lift up my hand thus, then you may strike. And then after he had said a short prayer, he lifted up his right hand, and the Executioner at one blow severed his head from his bo∣dy, which was taken up by his Servants, and put (with his Body) into a Coffin, as the former. March 19. 1648. An Act for Abolishing the House of Peers. THe Commons of England Assembled in Parl finding by too long experi∣ence that the House of Lords is uselesse and dangerous to the people of England to be continued, have thought fit to Ordain and Enact, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the present Parliam: and by the Authority of the same, That from henceforth the House of Lords in Par. shall be, and is here∣by
wholly abolished and taken away; and that the Lords shall not from henceforth meet or sit in the said House of Lords, nor shall Sit, Vote, Advise, Adjudge or Determine of any matter or thing whatsoever, as a House of Lds in Parl. Neverthelesse it is hereby Declared, That neither such Lords as have demeaned themselves with Honour, Courage, and Fidelity to the Com∣mon-wealth, their Posterities who shall continue so, shall not be excluded from the Publick Councels of the Nation, but shall be admitted thereunto, and have their free Vote in Parl: if they shall be thereunto Elected, as other persons of interest Elected and Qualified thereunto ought to have: And be it further Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Peer of this Land, not being Elected, Qualified, and sitting in Parl. as aforesaid, shall claim, have, or make use of any Priviledge of Parl. either in relation to his Person, Quality, or Estate, any Law, Vsage, or Custome to the con∣trary notwithstanding. Hen: Scobel, Cler: Parl. On Thursday, July 25. 1650. The General and Army Marched from Mordington to Coppersmith, Col. Hackers Regiment being drawn up in the way, his Excellency made a Speech to satisfie them con∣cerning Capt. Ogles Troop being sent back into Northumberland, in regard of his interest in that County, & that Cap. Greenwoods Troop appointed for Berwick should March with the Regiment in the stead thereof, which gave great satisfaction. Col. Bright's Regiment being drawn up; Maj. Gen. Lambert appointed Collonel thereof, coming to the head of the Regiment, was received with great Acclamations. A List of the Regiments of Horse and Foot Ran∣dezvouzed and Marched with the Lord Gen: Cromwell, into Scotland. Eight Regiments of Horse. THe Lord Generals, in number 663 Maj. Gen. in number 663 Col. Fleetwoods in number 663 Col. Whalies in number 663 Col. Twisden in number 663 Col. Lilburn in number 663 Col. Hackers in number 663 Col. Okey in number 744 Consisting with Officers, in all 5450
Ten Regiments of Foot. THe Lord Generals, in number 1307 Col. Pride 1307 Col. Bright 1307 Col. Maliveryr 1307 Col. Ch: Fairfax 1307 Col. Cocks 1307 Col. Dunell 1307 Col. Sir Arthur Hasterigs 5 Companies 550 Col. Fenwicks 5 Companies 555 Consisting with Officers, in all 10249 The Traine 690 The whole thus: The Traine 690 The Horse 5450 The Foot 10249 The Totall 16354 A Letter from Liev: Gen: David Lesley, to the Lord Gen: Cromwell. My Lord; I Am Commanded by the Committee of Estates of this Kingdome, and de∣sired by the Commissioners of the Generall Assembly, to send unto your Ex∣cellency this inclosed Declaration, as that which containeth the State of the Quarrell: wherein we are resolved, by the Lords assistance, to fight your Ar∣my, when the Lord shall please to call us thereunto. And as you have profes∣sed you will not conceal any of our Papers, I doe desire that this Declaration may be made known to all the Officers of your Army; And so I rest, Bruchton, 13 Aug. 1650. Your Excell: most humble Servant, DAVID LESLEY. For his Excellency the Lord Generall Cromwell. The Declaration of the Commissioners of the Generall Assembly of Scotland, as followeth. THe Commission: of the Generall Assembly considering, That there may be just ground of stumbling, from the Kings Majesties refusing to subscribe and emit the Declaration offered unto him by the Committee of Estates, and Com∣missioners
of the Generall Assembly, concerning his former carriage, and re∣solutions for the future, in reference to the Cause of God, and the Enemies and Friends thereof: Doth therefore Declare, That this Kirk and King∣dome doe not owne nor espouse any Malignant Party, or Quarrell, or Interest, but that they fight meerly upon their former Grounds and Principles, and in defence of the Cause of God, and of the Kingdome, as they have done these twelve years past. And therefore as they doe disclaime the sin and guilt of the King and of his House; so they will not owne him, nor his interest, other∣wise then with a subordination to God, and so far as he ownes and prosecutes the Cause of God, and disclaimes his, and his Fathers opposition to the work of God, and to the Coven, and likewise all the Enemies thereof. And that they will with convenient speed take into consideration the Papers lately sent unto then from Oliver Cromwel, and vindicate themselves from all the fashoods contained therein, especially in these things, wherein the Quarrell betwixt us and that party is mis-stated, as if we owned the late Kings proceedings, and were resolved to prosecute and maintaine his present Majesties interest, before and without acknowledgement of the sins of his House and former wayes, and satisfaction to Gods people in both Kingdomes. West Kirk, Aug. 13 1650. A. Ker. August 13. 1650. THe Committee of Estates having seen and considered a Declaration of the Commission: of the Generall Assembly, anent the stating of the Quarrell, whereon the Army is to fight, Doe approve the same, and heartily concur therein. Tho: Henderson. The Lord Generalls Answer to the former, as followeth. I Received yours of the thirteenth instant, with the Paper you men∣tioned therein inclosed, which I caused to be read in the presence of so many Officers as could well be gotten together, to which your Trumpet can witnesse, we returne you this Answer, by which I hope in the Lord it will appear, That we continue the same we have pro∣fest our selves to the honest people of Scotland, wishing to them as to our own souls, it being no part of our business to hinder any of them from worshiping God in that way they are satisfied in their Consci∣ences by the Word of God they ought (though different from us) but shall therein be ready to perform what obligations lye upon us by the Covenant; but that under the pretence of the Covenant, mistaken and wrested from the most native intent and equity there∣of, a King should be taken in by you, to be imposed upon us, and this called The Cause of God and the Kingdome, and this done upon the
satisfaction of Gods people in both Nations, as is alleged, together with a disowning of Malignants, although he who is the head of them in whom all their hope of comfort lies, be received; who at this very instant hath a Popish paty fighting for and under him in Ireland, hath Prince Rupert (a man who hath had his hand deep in the blood of many innocent men of England) now in the head of our Ships stoln from us upon a Malignant accompt; hath the French and Irish ships daily making depradations upon our Coasts: strong com∣binations by the Malignants in England, to raise Arms in our bowels, by vertue of his Commissions, who having of late issued out very many to that purpose, and how the interest you pretend you have received him upon, and the Malignant interest in the ends and con∣sequences entring in this man, can be secured, we cannot discern; and how we should believe, that whilst known and notorious Malig∣nants, fighting and plotting against us on the one hand, and the de∣claring for him on the other, should not be an espousing of a Malig∣nant party, quarrell, or interest, but be a meer fighting upon former Grounds and Principles, and in defence of the Cause of God, and of the Kingdome, as hath been these twelve yeers last past (as ye sy) for the security and satisfaction of Gods people in both Nations, or the opposing of which should render us enemies to the godly with you, we cannot well understand, especially considering, That all these Malignants take their confidence and encouragement from the late Transactions of your Kirk and State with your King; for as we have already said, so we tell you again, it is but satisfying securi∣ty to those that employ us, and are concerned in that we seek, which we conceive will not be by a few formall and feigned submissions from a person who could not tell otherwise how to accomplish his Malignant ends, and therefore Councel'd to this complyance, by them who assisted his Father, and have hitherto acted him in his most evill Designes, and are now again by them set on foot; against wch, how you will be able, in the way you are in, to secure us or your selves, is (forasmuch as concerns our selves) our duty to looke after. If the state of your quarrell be thus, upon which, as you say, you resolve to fight our Army, you will have opportunity to doe that, els what means our abode here? And if our hope be not in the Lord, it will be ill with us. We commit both you and our selves to him, who knowes the heart and tries the Reins, with whom are all our wayes, who is able to doe for us and you, above what we know, which we desire may be in much mercy to this poor people, and to the glory of his owne great Name. And having performed your desire in making your papers so pub∣lick as is before exprest, I desire you to doe the like, by letting the
State, Kirk and Army have the knowledge hereof. To which end I have sent you inclosed two Copies, and rest From the Camp at Pencland Hills, Aug. 14. 1650, Your humble Servant, O: CROMWEL. The Victory at Gladsmore in Scotland, July 30, 31. 1650. M G. Montgomery slaine, 200 Arms taken, 80 Troopers, 500 wounded, 4 Colours, 15 Troops routed, 500 Font routed at Muscleburrough. The Victory at Dunbar, Aug. 30. 1650, 4000 killed, 10000 Prisoners, 2000 Horse, 290 Commission Officers, 15000 Arms, 200 Colours, 32 pieces of Ordnance. Of ours that ingaged 5000 Horse and Foot; their word, The Covenant, ours, The Lord of Hests. Novemb. 1650. Insurrections in Norfolke, for which 24 were con∣demned, and 20 executed. Col. Ker routed and taken, and the Town of Ayre. Decemb. 25. The strong Castle of Edenburgh delive∣red up, 53 pieces of Ordnance, whereof 15 Iron, the  Braste, a∣bout 8000 Arms, with store of Ammunition and Provision. Nov. 22. A Squadron of Ships Commanded by Gen. Blague, sur∣prised a considerable part of the Portugal Brasit Fleet fraighted with Sugar, and sent them to England, and after pursued the revolted ships beyond Alligant, where they took 7 of Prince Ruperts Fieet, and pur∣sued him to Thoulon one of the surthest Havens of France, having but two ships left. Jan. 30. 1650. A day of publick Thanksgiving in England, Wales, and Town of Berwick Jan. 1. 1650. The Scots King was Crowned at Schone, he is Ge∣neral of the Army, D. Hamilton Lieut. Gen. of the Scotch Army, Da∣vid Lesley M. G. Middleton L. G. of the Scotch Horse, and Massey M. G. of the English. Jan. 4. 1650. The King of Spaine sent his Ambassador for the ∣knowledging of this State, whose Authority and Soveraignty reades in this Parl. of the Commonwealth of England, and to stablish a good friendship with it. The Portugal sent his Agent also to the like effect. March 6. 1650. Sir Henry Hide Beheaded at the Exchange for re∣ceiving and acting by vertue of a Commission from Charls Stuart the Second, and King of Great Britaine, France, and Ireland, as his Agent to the Great Turk, with an intent to destroy the Trade of the Tur∣ky Company, and the Parl. interest, not onely in Constantinople, but in Mitylene, Anatolia, & Smyrna, in which Conspiracies he was a Com∣missioner, and likewise to seize upon our Merchants Goods for the use of the King of Scotland, and procured audience of the Grand Visi∣er, and raised great fears and uproars among the Merchants.
A Speech made by K. Charles ye. 2d. at his Coronation: i. January. 1650 I will by gods assistance bestow my life for your defence wishing to live no longer then that I may see this King∣dome flourish in happiness. The Oath, I doe promise & vow in ye presence of ye eternall god yt I will main∣taine ye true Kirk of god religion right preaching & administration of ye Sacra∣ments now received & preached within this Realme in purity; And shall abolish & gain-stand all false Religions & sects contrary to ye same. And shall rule ye peo∣ple comīted to my charge, according to ye will of god, and laudable laws & constituti∣ons of ye Realme; causing justice & equity to be ministred without partiality. Browne Bushelt, Beheaded under the Scaffold on Tower-hill, Mar. 29. 1651. for delivering up Scarborough. June 2. 1651. The surrender of Scilly Islands. June 24. Insurrection in Cardiganshire, 40 slaine, 60 prisoners taken. July 29. Burnt Island surrendred.
The Scotch King invaded England with 16000 Hors and Foot, and a light Tran of Artillery, and, caused himselfe to be proclaimed K. of England, Scotland, and Ireland, in Lancashire. August 23. Charls the First erected his Standard at Nottingham, and Charls the Second erected his Standard at Worcester, Aug. 22. 1651. Sept 3. Old Lesley, Crawford, Linsey, Ogleby, with divers of quality, besides  taken that were making levies to raise the Siege at Dun∣dee Aug. 2, 165. St Johnston surrendred. Aug. 19. The Castle of Ste surrendred  pieces of Ordnance, 27 faire brasse pieces, a great iron G, 11 Leather Guns provision of Meal to serve 500 men about twelve months, 40 or 50 Barrels of Beef, 500 Armes, new Muskets and Pikes, 26 Barrels of powder, 20 or 30 Vessels of Claret Wine, and Strong waters, great store of Match and other Am∣monition, Lantes Guns, a thousand Flats and other instruments of War of that nature, all the Records of Scotland, the Chaire and Cloath of State, the Sword, and other rich furniture of the Kings. Aug. 25. The totall rout and overthrow of the Earl of Darby in Lan∣cashire, by Col. Robert Lilburne. A full Narrative of the late Dangerous De∣signe against the State; written with Master Love's owne hand, and by him sent to the Parliam: declaring the severall Meetings, and secret Actings, with Major Alford, Major Adams, Colonel Barton, Ma∣ster Blackmore, M Case, M Cauton, Dr. Drake, M Drake, Capt. Far, M. Gibbons, M. Haviland, Maj Huntington, M. Jenkins, M. Jaquel, M. Jackson, Liev. Jackson Cap. Massey, M. Nilton, Cap. Potter, M. Robinson, M. Sterks, Col. Sowton, Col. Vaughan, and others. COnsidering how a clear and full Narrative may satisfie the State (alhough it may prejudice my self) I am willing with an inge∣nuous freedome, and opennesse of heart to make known the whole matter, so far as I distinctly know and well remember, humbly ho∣ping that this large acknowledgment of mine (which is more then any in the world can prove against me) shall not be taken as an ag∣gravation of my fault, but as a demonstration of my ingenuity. Be∣fore I mention the matters of Fact, I humbly crave leave to signifie the time when, and manner how I came to be intangled in this un∣happy businesse. As for the time, it was after the breaking off the Treaty between
the King and the Scots at Jersey; for before that time (to the best of my remembrance) I was not privy to, or acquainted with any meetings about the sending of Captain Titus (whose face I never saw) to Jersey, or sending Letters to him, or receiving Letters from him, while he was there; or about sending any Letters to, or receiving a∣ny Letters from the King, Queen, Jermyn, Piercy, or any other per∣sons in forreign parts during the Treaty at Jersey, but after that Trea∣ty was ended, Mr. Wil: Drake came to me, told me he had Newes to impart, and to that end, he desired to know (if he could get friends together) whether I was willing that they should meet at my house (it being conveniently scituate in the midst of the City) that so he might communicate what he heard of affairs abroad. To satisfie my curiosity to hear News, I was content to let him, with those he should bring to meet at my house. Thus for the time when, and manner how I came to be present at any meetings about Intelligence. I now come humbly and truly to relate the matter of Fact, which is as followeth: It appeared to me by the testimony of the Witnes∣ses, that there were freequent meetings by Mr. Drake, Alford, Titus, Adams, and others, soon after the death of the late King, and appli∣cations made to the King of Scots, the Queen his Mother, to Jermyn, and Piercy, both before and during the Treaty at Jersey, of which I know nothing, nor was I present: But the first meeting I was at, was at my House (and as I remember) at the reading of a Letter which came from Captain Titus, after the Treaty was ended at Jersey; the Contents of that Letter were (if I mistake not) to this effect: That the Treaty at Iersey was broken off through the violent and evill Counsels of desperate Malignants; and that he had something of con∣cernment
to communicate, which he durst not doe in person, being not safe for him to come over into England, nor could he well doe it by writing, he judging it not fit or safe to send by the Common Post scaring a miscarriage; wherefore he desired some body to be sent o∣ver to him to Calice, to whom he might give an account of all procee∣dings. Upon the reading of this Letter, Mr. Drake moved that some person should be desired to goe to Calice; for said he, we shall hear the whole relation of the businesse at Iersey; whereupon Major A∣dams or Capt. Farr were moved by Mr. Drake to goe. There was mention of Major Alford to goe, though he was not then present that I know of, nor was he ever within my house, as I remember, untill after he returned from Calice: so that there was none that I know of was gone, Mr. Drake told me, Major Alford was the fittest man to go over to Calice, having businesse of his owne to goe into France, to look after his Prodigall Son, so that it was (said he) a plausible pre∣tence to conceae his going over to meet with Titus. There were pre∣sent at this first meeting, M. Drake, M. Ienkins, Maj. Adams, D. Drake, Cap. Far, Capt. Potter, and my selfe, with some others, but who more I cannot remember. About 2 or 3 dayes after Maj. Alfords return from Calice, M. Drake told me he was come to London, and told me he would goe to seve∣rall Ministers and Citizens, to desire them to meet at my House, that so we might hear what Newes Maj. Alford brought with him from Ca∣lice; accordingly the next day in the evening they met at my house, Mr. Drake brought Maj. Alford with him, who gave an account of his conference with Titus, and his receiving a Copy of the Kings Letter from him, as also a Narrative of the Treaty at Iersey, and said, that he brought not over the Letters himselfe, but delivered them to a Pas∣senger that came in the Ship, least himself should be searched; but after he came into England he received the Letter & Narrative from him (but who he was I know not) and so brought them to Lon∣don, whether the Copy of the Kings Letter was read at my house, in my hearing, I remember not; yet I deny not but it was read there; I am sure I heard the Contents of it were to this effect, That he took in good part the affections and loyalty of those who formerly had Petition'd to him (of which Petition I know nothing) and if ever God restored him, or put him in a condition, he should remember them. The Narrative read in my House, was to this effect, He made a large description of the Scots, commending his prudent carriage, & good inclinations to an agreement with the Scots, but that his bad Councel about him hindred it; also he made a rehearsall of his lus∣terings from the Cavaliers at Jersey, how he was imprisoned in a close Room. There were present at this meeting, Maj. Alford, M. Drake, Mr. Case, Maj. Adams, Mr. Jaquel, Mr. Jackson, Mr. Jenkins, Dr.
Drake, Capt. Potter, Mr. Sterks, Capt. Farr, and my selfe, with o∣thers, but who. I doe not remember. A little before the Treaty at Bieda, there was a meeting at my House, Mr Drake proposed, that wee should thinke of some way to promote the agreement between the King and the Scots; where by the way I desire humbly to give notice, that this was the first and on∣ly meeting of this nature, at my house. Mr Drake took out some pa∣pers out of his pocket written in Characters, which he read in my Study, which went under the name of a Commission and Instructions to be sent to the Lord Willoughby, Alderm: Bunce, Massey, Graves, and Titus, to appoint them to advise with, and use their interests in per∣sons of honour, to provoke the King to agree with the Scots, & take the Covenant; as also to advise with the Scots Commissioners, and perswade them, That in their agreement with their King, they would have speciall respect to the interest of Religion, and terms of the Co∣venant; the Commission ran in this form, as if it were in the names of all the Presbyteriall party in England: after I heard it read, I was against it alledging severall reasons, chiefly, that it was an act of high presumption for private persons to send a Commission with Instructi∣ons; and an act of notorious falshood, to say this was in the name of all the Presbyteriall party of England, when but a few persons knew thereof; many in the company also exprest a dislike thereof: Mr. Drake also read a Letter in this meeting, but to whom it was I know not, neither know I the Contents of it, I was at least a dozen times called out of the Room, whiles the Company were there, so that I am not able to give so ful and particular an accompt of the Contents of the Letter, and of the Commission and Instruction: What Mr. Drake did about the Commission and Instructions after he was gone from my house, I know not, what and by whom he sent I know not, until Maj. Alford declared before the High Court, That he received the Papers from Mr. Drake, carried them to Gravesend, and delivered to one Mason, and he caried them to Holland. There was at this mee∣ting, Maj. Huntington, M. Drake, D. Drake, M. Jackson, M Jenkins, M. Cauton, Maj. Alford, M Gibbons, Maj. Adams, Cap. Farr, and my selfe, with others, whom I cannot remember. There is one thing more I make bold to mention, That there are other persons besides those I have named, who did now and then come to my house, as M. Robinson, M. Nalton, M. Haviland, M. Blackmore, Col. Vaughan, Col. Sowton, were present at one time or another, but at what par∣ticular meeting, I cannot positively say. Thus I have cleerly laid open the whole matter of Fact, so far as I well remember, and distinctly know of passages about these meet∣ings and Transactions at my House. Tower of London, July 22. 1651. I attest the truth of this Narrative under my hand. Christopher Love.
Mr. Love's Speech made on the Scaffold on Tower-Hill. August 22. 1651. BEloved Christians, I am this day made a Spectacle unto God, An∣gels, and men; and among them I am made a grief to the godly, a laughing stock to the wicked, and a gazing stock to all; yet blessed be my God, not a terror to my self; although there be but a little be∣tween me and death, yet this bears up my heart, there is but a little between me and Heaven: It comforted Dr. Taylor, the martyr, when he was going to Execution, That there were but two stiles between him and his fathers house; there is a lesser way between me and my fathers house, but two steps between me and glory, it is but lying down upon the block, and I shall ascend upon a Throne: I am this day saling towards the Ocean of Eternity, through a rough passage, to my Haven of rest, through a red Sea, to the promised Land: me∣thinks I hear God say to me as he did to Moses, Goe up to Mount Ne∣bo and dye there, so goe thou up to Tower-hill, and dye there Isaac said of himself, That he was old and yet he know not the day of his death, but I cannot say thus, I am young, and yet I know the day, the kind, and the place of my death also; it is such a kind of death as two famous Preachers of the Gospel were put to before me, Iohn the Baptist, and Paul the Apostle, we have mention of the one in Scripture story, of the other in Ecclesiastical History: and Rev. 20.4. The Saints were beheaded for the word of God, and for the testimony of Iesus. But herein is the disadvantage which I am in in the thoughts of many, who judge that I suffer not for the Word or Conscience, but for medling with State matters. To this I shall briefly say, That it is an old guise of the Devil, to impute the cause of Gods peoples sufferings to be con∣trivements against the State. The Rulers of Israel would put Ieremiah, to death upon a Civil account, though it was the truth of his Prophe∣sie made them angry, because he fell away to the Chaldeans, so Paul must dye as a mover of sedition. The same thing is laid to my charge, whereas indeed it is because I pursue my Covenant, and will not pro∣stitute my pinciples to the lusts of men. Beloved, I am this day to make a double exchange, I am changing a Pulpit for a Scaffold, and a Scaffold for a Throne; and I might add a third, I am changing this numerous multitude upon Tower-hill, for the innumerable compa∣ny of angels in the holy hill of Zion; and I am changing a guard of Soulders for a guard of angels, which will receive me and carry me into Abrahams bosome. This Scaffold is the best Pulpit I ever Prea∣ched in, for in the Church Pulpit God through his grace made me an instrument to bring others to heaven, but 'in this he will bring me to heaven; and it may be this Speech upon a Scaffold may bring God more glory then many Sermons in a Pulpit.
Before I lay down my neck upon the block, I shall lay open my Case, and that without animosity or revenge; God is my record, whom I serve in the spirit, I speak the truth, and lye not, I doe not bring a revengefull heart unto the Scaffold this day; before I came here, upon my bended knees I have beg'd mercy for them that de∣nied mercy to me, & I have prayed God to forgive them who would not forgive me: I have forgiven from my heart, the worst enemy I have in all the world, and this is the worst that I wish to my Accusers and Prosecuters, who have pursued my blood, that I might meet their souls in Heaven. I have no more to say, but to desire the help of all your prayers, that God would give me the continuance and supply of Divine grace to carry me through this great work I am now to doe; that I, who am to doe a work I never did, I may have a strength that I never had; that I may put off this body with as much quietnesse and comfort of mind, as ever I put off my Cloaths to goe to bed. And now I am to commend my soule to God, and to receive my fatall blow, I am com∣forted in this, though men kill me, they cannot damne me, and tho they thrust me out of the world, yet they cannot shut me out of hea∣ven. I am now going to my long home, to heaven my fathers house, to the heavenly Ierusalem, to the innumerable Company of Angels, to Jesus Christ the Mediator of the new Covenant, to the spirits of just men made perfect, to God the Judge of all, in whose presence there is fulnesse of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Then he kneeled down and made a short Prayer privately. Then after rising up, he said, Blessed be God I am full of joy and peace in believing, I lye down with a world of comfort. And then saying The Lord bless you, he lay down with his head over the block, and when he stretched out his hands, the Executioner did his office. The humble Petition of William Jenkins, Prisoner. Most humbly sheweth; THat your Petitioner is unfeignedly sorrowfull for all his late mis∣carriages, whether testified against him, or acknowledg'd by him, and for the great and sinfull unsutablenesse of them to his Calling and Condition. That upon earnest seeking of God, and diligent enquiry into his will, your Petitioner is convinced, that the alterations of Civill Go∣vernments are ordered by, and founded upon the wise and righteous providences of God, who removeth Kings and setteth up Kings, ruleth in the Kingdomes of men, and giveth them to whomsoever he will. That the providences of this God, have in the judgement of your Petitioner, as evidently appeared in the removing of others from, and the investing your Honours with the Government of this Nation, as
ever they appeared in the taking away, or bestowing of any Govern∣ment in any History of any age of the World. That he apprehends, that a refusall to be subject to this present auhority, under the petence of upholding the Title of any one up∣on earth, is a refusall to acquiesce in the wise and righteous pleasure of God, such an opposing of the Government set up by the Soveraign Lord of Heaven and Earth, as none can have peace, either in acting in, or suffering for, and that your Petitioner looks upon it as his du∣ty, to yeeld to this authority, all active and cheerfull obedience in the Lord, even for Conscience sake, to promise (he being required) truth and fidelity to it, and to hold forth the grounds of his so doing to any as God shall call him thereunto. That though an imprisonment, accompanied with the losse of E∣state, and to be followed (without your gracious prevention) with a speedy Arraignment before a high and eminent Judicatory, are far from being pleasant to flesh and blood, and though the injoy∣ment of your grace and favour, be a blessing most deserving to be reckoned among the best of temporals, yet that neither the feeling, and fearing of the former, nor the expectation of the latter, could have induced your Petitioner against the light of his owne judge∣ment, and the prepondering part of his owne conscience to have made, or presenting this acknowledgment, he sadly fore-casting, that a whole skin is but a contemptible recompence for a wounded con∣science. WIL: JENKIN. Sept. 3. 1651. A Victory obtained over the Scotch Army at Wor∣cester. This day twelve months was glorious at Dunbar, but this day hath been very glorious before Worcester; the Word was, The Lord of Hosts, and so it was now; the same signall we had now as then, wch was to have no white about us, yet the Lord hath cloathed us with white Garments though to the Enemy they have been bloody, onely here lyeth the difference, that at Dunbar our Work was at break of day, but now it began towards the close of the evening, 10000 taken and 3000 slain of the Enemy, about 200 of ours. The General ha∣zarding himselfe, rode up to the Enemies Forts, offering them Quar∣ter, whereto they returned no answer but shot. Sept. 1. Dundee taken by storm, 60 ships in the Harbour, 40 Guns. The Scots King beaten at Worcester, gets into a hollow Tree, remains there a night, next day in a Wood, cuts his haire short, shipt for Havre de Grace, and so to Paris. Sir, The Scottish King came hither on Munday the last of October, N. S. and being demanded by his Mother and the Duke of Orleans, how he escaped the Fight of Worcester, gave them this account. That about six a Clock in the evening, his Army being in all like∣lihood lost, he quitted Wor. Towne, with a party of Horse, and mar∣ched
toward Lancashire, but being fearfull of being pursued, and o the Scottish Officers that might deliver him up, he with the L: Wil∣mot quitted their Horses, and betook themselves next day to a Tree, where they staid till night, and then marched, the third day they lay in a wood, and at night marched toward Lancashire, a Lady receiving them, furnished them with Cloaths for a disguise, and cut off their haire. Having reposed 2 or 3 dayes, she endeavoured to ship them out of England, and she riding behind the King, and Wilmot as ano∣ther Servant by, they went to Bristoll, but finding a narrow inquiry there, resolved to go for London, where they stayed 3 week. The King one day went into Westminster Hall, where he saw the States Arms, and Scots Colours; my Lord Wilmot procured a Merchant to hire a ship of forty Tuns to transport them, which cost them a hundred and twenty pounds, but where they took shipping is not known: but as soon as my Lord was entred the Barque, and the King as his Servant, the Master came to him, and told him that he knew the King, and in case it should be known, he could expect no mercy: which saying troubled them, but at length, what with money and promises, they prevailed, and so set saile for Havre de Grace, where they landed, and from thence to Roven, where they cloathed themselves, and writ to Paris. His arrivall there will put them to new Counsels, since, now they cannot send their Ambassadors, which was concluded on before his coming. The Duke of Orleans fetcht him into Towne, and ex∣pressed much as to serve him. Yesterday, he, with Thurenne, Beaufort, and the D. of Guise came to him to the Louvre, where the King told them, that they should endeavour to reconcile the breach between the Prince and the King of France, for, said he, to my knowledge the English will visit you with an Army in the Spring. Octob. 15. 1651. Earl of Darby Beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire. Octob. 30. The Isle of Jersey taken. Nov. 16. The Isle of Man taken. Resolv: That the time for the continuance of this Parl. beyond which they resolve not to fit, shall be Nov. 3. 1654.
The Parl. of the Common-wealth of England Declare; 1 THat no Power, Jurisdiction, or Authority, otherwise then from the Parl. of Engl: be used, exercised, or enjoyned within Scotl: or the Isles, or any of the Territories thereof. 2 That they doe forbid, annull, and make voyd the use and ex∣ercise of any Power, Jurisdiction, and Authority whatsoever, within Scotl: or the Isles, or any of the Territories thereof, other then such as shall be so derived. An Act of Generall Pardon and Oblivion, Feb. 24. 1651. THe Parl. of England having had good experience of the affections of the people to this present Government, by their ready assist∣ance against Charles Stuart Sonne of the late Tyrant, and the Forces lately invading this Nation under his Command; and being much afflicted with the miserable and sad effects which the late unnaturall War hath produced, and resolved to settle the peace and freedome of this Common wealth; and being desirous that the minds, per∣sons, and Estates of all the people of this Nation might be compo∣sed, setled, and secured, and that all rancour and evill will occasioned by the late differences, may be buried in perpetuall Oblivion, Be it Enacted by this present Parl. and by Authority of the same, That all and every person or persons of or within the Common-wealth of England, the Isles of Iersey and Garnsey, the Towne of Berwick upon Tweed, and the Heirs, Execut: and Admin: of them and every of them, and all and singular bodies in any manner incorporated, Cities, Burroughs, Shires, &c. and every of them are, and shall be acquit∣ted and pardoned, of all Treasons, Fellonies, Offences, &c. done be∣before Sept. 3. 1651. not in this present Act hereafter not excepted nor fore-prized. And the said Keepers of the Liberties of England,
granteth and freely giveth to every of them, all Goods, Debts, Chat∣tels, Fines, which to the said Keepers of the Liberties of England, do belong or appertain, before Sept. 3. and which be not hereafter in this Act foreprized and excepted. And it is further Enacted, That this Pardon shall be taken in Courts of Justice, available to all and singular the said persons. &c. shall be arrested, &c. for any thing acquitted by this Act, every person so offending, shall pay to him of∣fended, his treble damages, and 10. l. to the State. Excepted all High-Treasons (other then for words only) and all levying of war, rebellions, insurrections, and conspiracies committed against the Par. since Ian. 30. 1648. And all concealments of the said offences. And all voluntary Murthers, petty Treasons, poysoning, piracles, bugge∣ries, rapes, ravishments, marrying any one against her will. And also all persons now attained for petty treason, murther, poysoning, con∣jurations, witchcrafts, charms, detainments of Customs, and sums of money due upon Composition, Excise, or New-Imposts; all Condi∣tions, Covenants, and penalties of forfeitures due to the Parl. or the late K. since Ian. 30. 1648. All first fruits, and Tithes, and all of∣fences and misdemeanours, whereof any sentence or judgment hath been given in Parl. since Ian. 30. 1648. And all offences of Bribe∣ry, perjuries, and subordination of Witnesses, counterfeiting Deeds, Debenters, Bills of Publick Faith, Escripts, or writings whatsoever, carrying over Seas any Coyn or Jewels, melting downe of Gold or Bullion, &c. detaining the Goods, &c. of the late King or Queen, all offences committed by any Jesuite, any Outlawries upon any writ of Capion ad satisfaciendum, and all, except such persons as were Ian. 28. 1651. in prison by Order of Parl. and all proceedings concern∣ing common High-wayes, all Free-farm-rents, and arrerages due since Iune 24. 1645. all moneys imprested since Nov. 3. 1638. Provided all Acts of Hostility between the late King and Parl. or between any of the people of this Nation, or falling out by reason of the late troubles, shalt in no time after Iune 18. 1651. be called in question. The DECLARATION of the Lord Generall and his Councel of Officers shewing the Grounds and Reasons for the Dissolving the Parliament, April 20. 1653. AFter it had pleased God not only to reduce Ireland, and give in Scotland but so marvellously to appeare for his people at Worcester, that these Nations were reduced to a great degree of peace, it was matter of grief to many well affected, in the Land, to see the Cause of God so little forward∣ed by the Parl. whereupon they applied to the Army, expecting redresse by them, notwithstanding which, the Army being unwilling to meddle with the Civill Authority, in matters so properly appertaing to it, it was agreed, That his Excellency and Officers of the Army should be desired to move the Parl. to proceed vigorously in reforming what was amisse in Government; which
having done, we hoped that the Parl. would seasonably have answered our ex∣pectations, but finding delayes therein, we renewed our desires in a Petition in August last, and although they signified their good acceptance thereof, and re∣ferred the particulars to a Committee of the House, yet no considerable effect was produced, but there more and more appeared among them an aversion to the things themselves, with much bitternesse and opposition to the people of God; which grew so prevalent, that those persons of honour and integrity who had eminently appeared for God and the publick good, were rendred of no further use in Parl. then by meeting with a corrupt party to give them coun∣tenance to carry on their ends For which purpose, they frequently declared themselves against having a New Representative, and when they were ne∣cessitated to take that Bill into consideration, they resolv'd to make use of it to recruit the House with persons of the same temper, thereby to perpetuate their owne sitting, which intention divers of the most active did manifest, la∣bouring to perswade others to a consent therein; and divers Petitions pre∣paring from severall Counties for the continuance of this Parl. were encou∣raged by them. For obviating these evills, the Officers of the Army obtained severall Meetings with some of the Parl. to consider what fitting meanes might be applyed to prevent the same; but such endeavours proving altogether ineffectuall, it became most evident to the Army, that this Parl. would never answer those ends, which God, his people, and the whole Nation expected from them. But that this Cause must needs languish under their hands, and be wholly lost. All which being sadly considered by the honest people of this Nati∣on, as well as by the Army, and wisdome and direction being sought from the Lord, it seemed to be a duty incumbent upon us to consider of some more effe∣ctuall means to secure the Cause which the good people of this Common wealth have been so long engaged in, and to stablish peace in these Nations. And af∣ter much debate it was judged necessary, that the Supream Authority should be devolved upon known persons, men fearing God, and of approved integrity, and committed unto them for a time, as the most hopefull way to encourage and countenance all Gods people, reform the Law, and administer justice im∣partially,
hoping thereby the people might forget Monarchy, and have the Go∣vernment setled upon a true Basis, without hazard to this glorious Cause, and necessitating to keep up Arms for the defence of the same. And being still re∣solved to use all means possible to prevent extraordinary courses, we prevai'ed with about twenty Members of Parl. to give us a Conference, with whom we freely and plainly debated the necessity and justnesse of our Proposals, and did evidence that these would most probably bring forth something answerable to that work, the foundation whereof God himselfe hath laid. The which found no acceptance, but it was offered, that the way was to continue still this Parl. as being that from which we might reasonably expect all good things; and this being insisted upon, did much confirm us in our apprehensions, That not any love to a Representative, but the making use thereof to perpetuate themselves, was their aim. They being plainly dealt with about this, and told, that neither the Nation, the honest interest, nor we our selves would be delu∣ded by such dealings, did agree to meet again next day in the afternoon, and nothing in the mean time should be done, that might frustrate the Proposals. Notwithstanding the Parl. next morning did make more hast then usuall in carrying on their said Act, being helped therein by some of the persons enga∣ged to us the night before, none of them endeavouring to oppose the same, and being ready to put the main Question for consummating the said Act, whereby our Proposals would have been made void. For preventing whereof, we have been necessitated to put an End to this Parliament. And desire that all men, as they would not provoke the Lord to their owne destruction, should wait for such issue as he shall bring forth, and to follow their businesse with peaceable spirits, wherein we promise them protection by his assistance. FINIS.
