W2119A R26362 9440395 43109
A Choice Drop OF HONEY From The ROCK CHRIST. OR, A Short Word of Advice to all Christians, of what Perswasion soever, in order to a thorough Reformation. By T.W. late Preacher of the Gospel. The Fifth Edition. Deut. 32.31. For their Rock is not as our Rock, even our Enemies themselves being Judges. LONDON, Printed and Sold by B. Harris, at the Golden-Boar's-head against the Cross-Keys Inn in Grace-church-street, and at the corner of Grace-church-street, next Cornhill. 1699
A Short Word of Advice to all Christ∣ians, &c. A Word of Advice to my own Heart and thine; thou professeth Baptism, Church-fellowship; thou dost well, they are glorious Ordinances; But if thou hast not the Blood of Christ at the Root of thy Profession, it will wither and prove but painted Pageantry to go to Hell in. If thou retain Guilt, Self-righteousness under it, those Vipers will eat out all the Vitals of it at length. Try and examine with greatest strictness every day, what bottom thy Profession and Hope of Glory is built upon, whether it was laid by the hand of Christ; if not, it will never be able to endure the storm that must come against it. Satan will throw it all down and great shall be the fall thereof, Mat. 7.27. Glorious Professor, thou shalt be winnow∣ed: Every vein of thy Profession will be tried to purpose: Terrible, to have it all come tum∣bling down, and to find nothing but it to bottom upon. Soaring Professor, see to thy waxen Wings betimes, which will melt with the heat of Temp∣tations. What a misery to Trade much and break at length, and have no Stock, no Foun∣dation laid for Eternity, in thy Soul? Gifted Professor, look there be not a worm at the root that will spoil all thy sine Goard, and make it die about thee in a day of Scorchings. Look over thy Soul daily, and ask, where is the Blood of Christ to be seen upon my Soul?
what Righteousness is it that I stand upon to be saved by? Have I got off all my Self-righte∣ousness? Many eminent Professors, have come at length to cry out, in the sights of the ruin of all their duties, Undone, Undone to all Eternity. The greatest sins may be hid under the great∣est duties, and the greatest terrors: See the wound that sin hath made in thy soul, be perfect∣ly cured by the blood of Christ, not skinned o∣ver with duties, humblings, enlargements, &c. Apply what thou wilt besides the blood of Christ it will poison the sore. Thou wilt find that sin was never mortified truly; that thou hast not seen Christ bearing for thee upon the Cross: Nothing can kill it but the beholdings of Christ's Righteousness. Nature can afford no balsam fir for soul-cure. Healing from duty, and not from Christ is the most desperate disease. Poor ragged nature, with all its highest improvements, can never spin a garment fine enough (without spot) large e∣nough (without patches) to cover the soul's na∣kedness. Nothing can fit the soul for that use but Christ's perfect Righteousness. Whatso∣ever is of nature's spinning must be all unravel∣led before the Righteousness of Christ can be put on. Whatsoever is of nature's putting on, satan will come and plunder every rag away, and leave the soul naked and open to the wrath of God. All that nature can do will never make up the least dram of Grace that can mortify sin, or look Christ n the face one day. Thou art a Professor, art baptized, goes on hearing, and praying, and receiving, yet mise∣rable mayst thou be. Look about thee, didst thou ever yet see Christ to this day in distinction
from all other excellencies and righteousness  the world, and all of them falling before his Ma∣jesty and Grace, Isa. 2.17. If thou hast seen Christ truly, thou hast seen pure Grace, pure Righteousness in him, every way infinite, far exceeding all sin and misery. If thou hast seen Christ thou canst trample upon all the righteousness of men and angels, so as to bring thee into acceptation with God. If thou hast seen Christ, thou wouldst not do a duty without him for ten thousand worlds, 1 Cor. 2.2. If ever thou didst see Christ, thou didst see him a Rock higher than self righteousness, satan, sin, Psal. 61.2. and that Rock doth follow thee, 1 Cor. 10.4. And there will be continual drops of Honey and Grace out of that Rock to satisfy thee, Psal. 81.16. Examine if ever thou be∣held Christ as the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth, Joh. 1.14.16.17. Be sure thou art come thou art come, to Christ, that thou stand upon the Rock of ages, hast answered his call to thy soul, hast closed with him for Justification. Men talk bravely of be lieving, (whilst whole and found) few know it. Christ is the mystery of the scripture; Grace the mystery of Christ. Believing is the most wonderful thing in the world. Put any thing of thine own to it, and thou spoilest it; Christ will not so much as look at it for believing. When thou believest, and comes to Christ, thou must leave behind thee thy own righteousness, and bring nothing but thy sin, O that is hard, leave behind all thy ho∣liness, Sanctifications, duties, humblings, &c. and bring nothing but thy wants and miseries, else Christ is not t for thee, nor thou for Christ. Christ will be a pure Redeemer and Mediator.
and thou must be a pure sinner, or Christ and thou wilt never agree: It's the hardest thing in the world to take Christ alone for righteous∣ness; that is to acknowledge him Christ, Join any thing to him of thy own and thou Un-Christ's him. Whatever comes in when thou goest to God for acceptation, (besides Christ) call it Anti-Christ, bid it be gone; make only Christ's righ∣teousness triumphant; all besides that is Baby∣lon, which must fall, if Christ stand, and thou shalt rejoyce in the day of the fall thereof, Isa. 1.10.11.12. Christ alone did tread the wine∣press, and there was none with him, Isa. 63.3. If thou join to any thing but Christ, Christ will trample upon it in sury and anger, and stain his raiment with the blood thereof. Thou thinkst it easy to believe; was ever thy faith tryed with an hour of temptations, and a thorough sight of sin? was it ever put to grapple with Satan, and the wrath of God lying upon the Conscience: when thou wast in the mouth of hell and the grave, then did God shew thee Christ a ran∣some, a righteousness, &c. Then couldst thou say, O I see grace enough in Christ; thou mayst say that which is the biggest word in the world Thou believest. Untryed faith is uncertain faith. To believing there must be a clear conviction of sin, and of the merits of the blood of Christ, and of Christ's willingness to save upon this consideration meerly, that thou art a sinner; things all harder than to make a world. All the power in nature cannot get up so high in a storm of sin and guilt as really to believe there is any grace, any willingness in Christ to save. When satan chargeth sin upon the conscience, then the soul to charge it upon Christ, that is Gospel-like,
that is to make him Christ, he serves for that use. To accept Christ's righteousness alone his blood alone for Salvation. That is the sum of the Gospel, when the soul in all duties and distresses can say, Nothing but Christ, Christ a∣lone for righteousness, justification, Sanctificati∣on, Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. Not humblings, not duties, not Graces, &c. That Soul hath got above the reach of the billows. For all temptations, satan's advantages, our complainings are laid in self-righteousness, and self-excellency, God pursueth these, by setting satan upon thee, as Laban did Jacob for his I∣mages which Rachel hid, Gen. 31. these must be torn from thee, be as willing as thou wilt, these hinder Christ from coming in, and till Christ come in, guilt will not go out, and where guilt is, there is hardness of heart, and therefore much guilt argues little, if any thing of Christ's blood, that will tend to hardning. Make Christ thy Peace, Eph. 2.14. not thy duties, thy tears, &c. Christ thy righteousness, not thy graces, &c. Thou mayst destroy Christ by du∣ties, as well as by sins. Look at Christ, and do as much as thou wilt. Stand with all thy weight upon Christ's righteousness; take heed of hav∣ing one foot on thy own righteousness, another on Christ's. Till Christ come and fit on high upon a throne of grace, in the conscience, there is nothing but guilt, terrors, secret suspicions, the soul hanging between hope and fear, which is an un-gospel like State. He that fears to see sin's utmost vileness, the utmost hell of his own heart, he suspects the merits of Christ. Be thou never such a great sinner, 1 John, 2.1. try Christ to make him thy advocate, and thou shalt find him Jesus Christ the
Righteous: In all doubtings, fears, storms of conscience, look at Christ continually. Do not argue it with satan, (he desires no better) bid him go to Christ, and he will answer him, it is his office as he is our Advocate, 1 John. 2.1 his office to answer law, as our surety, Heb. 7.22. his office to answer justice, as our Media∣tor, Gal. 3.20. 1 Tim. 2.5. and he sworn to that office, Heb. 7.20.21. Put Christ upon it; if thou wilt do any thing thy self, as to sa∣tisfaction for sin, thou renounceth Christ the righteous, who was made sin for thee, 2 Cor 2.21. Satan may alledge, and corrupt scripture, but he cannot answer scripture. Its Christ's Word of mighty authority, Christ foyled Satan with it, Mat. 4. In all the scripture there is not an ill word against a poor sinner stript of self-righteousness; nay, it plentifully points out this man to be the subject of the grace of the Gospel, and none else. Believe but Christ's willing∣ness, and that will make thee willing. If thou findest thou canst not believe, remember its Christ's work to make thee believe; put him upon it, he works to will and do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Mourn for thy unbelief, which is a setting up guilt in the conscience a∣bove Christ, an undervaluing the merits of Christ, accounting his blood an unholy, a com∣mon, and unsatisfying thing. Thou complainest much of thy self; doth thy sin make thee look more at Christ, less at self? That's right, else complaining is but hypocrisy. To be looking at duties, graces, enlargements, when thou shouldst be looking at Christ; that's pityful: Looking at them will but make thee proud, looking at Christ's grace will make thee humble. By grace you are saved Eph.
2.5. In all thy temptations be not discoura∣ged, Jam. 1.2. those Surges may not be to break thee, but to heave thee off thy self on to the Rock Christ. Thou mayst be brought low, even to the brink of hell, ready to tumble in; thou canst not be brought lower than to the belly of Hell, many Saints have been there, even dowced in hell, yet there mayst thou cry, there mayst thou look to∣wards the holy Temple, Jonah, 24. Into that Temple none might enter but purified ones, and with an offering too, Acts, 21.26. But now Christ is our Temple, Sacrifice, Altar, High-priest, to whom none must come but sinners, and that without any offering, but his own blood once offered, Heb. 7.27. Remember all the patterns of grace that are in heaven. Thou thinkst, O what a monument of grace wouldst thou be: there are many thousands as rich mo∣numents as thou be. The greatest sinner did never oppose the grace of Christ, do not des∣pair: Hope still, when the clouds at blackest, even then look towards Christ, the standing Pil∣lar of the Father's love and grace, set up in heaven, for all finners to gaze upon continually. VVhatsoever satan or conscience says, do not conclude against thy self. Christ shall have the last word, he is the Judge of quick and dead, and must pronounce the final sentence, his blood speaks reconciliation, Col. 1.20. clean∣sing, 1 John, 1.7. purchase, Acts, 20.28. redemp∣tion, 1 Pet. 1.19. purging, Heb. 9.13.14. re∣mission, v. 20. liberty, Heb. 10.10. justifica∣tion, Rom. 5.9. nighness to God, Eph. 2.13. Not a drop of this blood shall be lost. Stand and hearken what God will say; for he will speak peace to his people, that they return no
more to folly, Psal. 85.8. He speak; grace, mercy and peace, 2 Tim. 1.2. That's the lan∣guage of the father and of Christ. Wait for Christ's appearing, as the morning star, Rev. 22.19. He shall come as certainly as the mor∣ning, as refreshingly as the rain, Hos. 6.3. The sun may as well be hindered from rising as Christ the sun of righteousness, Mal. 4.2. Look not a moment off Christ. Look not up∣on sin; but look upon Christ first: When thou mournest for sin, if thou dost not see Christ, a∣way with it, Zach. 12.10 In every duty, look at Christ before duty, to pardon. In duty, to assist. After duty, to accept; without this it is but carnal, careless duty. Do not legalize the gospel, as if part did remain to thee to do and suffer, and Christ were but an half Mediator; and thou must bear part of thy own sin; make part satisfaction. Let sin break thy heart, but not hope in the Gospel. Look more at justification than sanctification. In the highest commands consider Christ, not as an exactor to require, but a debtor, an under∣taker, to work. If thou hast looked at work∣ings, duties, qualifications, and such like, more than at the merits of Christ, it will cost the dear; no wonder thou goest complaining. Gra∣ces may be evidences, the merits of Christ, (on∣ly without them) must be the foundation of thy hope to bottom on. Christ only can be the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. When we come to God, we must bring no∣thing but Christ with us. Any ingredients of our own qualifications, will poison and corrupt faith; he that builds upon duties, graces, and the like, knows not the merits of Christ. This makes believing so hard, so far above nature;
if thou believest thou must renounce (as dung and dross, Phil. 3.7.8.) thy priviledges, thy obedience, thy Baptism, thy Sanctification, thy Duties, thy Graces, thy Tears, Meltings, thy Humblings, and nothing but Christ must be held p: Every day thy workings, thy self sufficien∣cy, must be destroyed. Thou must take all out of God's hand, Christ he is the gift of God, Joh. .10 Faith the gift of God, Ephes. 3.8 Pardon  free gift, Rom. 5.16. Ah how Nature storms, ret's rageth at this, that all is of gift and it can urchase nothing with its actings and Tears, and ears, and duties, that all its workings are ex∣cluded, and of no value in Heaven. If nature had been to contrive the way of Sal∣vation, it would rather have put it into the ands of saints or Angels to sell it, than of Christ (who gives freely) whom therefore it suspects; t would have set up a way to purchase by do∣ing; therefore it obminates the merits of Christ as the most destructive thing to it, would do any thing to be saved, rather than go to Christ, or close with Christ. Christ will have nothing, the soul will force some what of his own upon Christ. here is the great controverse. Consi∣der, didst thou ever see the merrits of Christ, and the infinite satisfaction made by his death? did thou see this in a time when the burthen of sin, and the wrath of God lay heavy upon thy Conscience. That is grace. The greatness of Christ's Merits is not known, but to a poor soul at the greatest loss. Slight convictions, will but have slight low prizings of Christ's Blood and merits. Despairing sinner; Thou art looking n thy right hand, and thy left, saying, Who will shew us any good? Thou art tumbling over all thy duties and professions, to patch up a righteous∣ness
to save thee. Miserable comforters are all those to thee. Look at Christ now. Look to him, and be saved, all the ends of the earth, Isa. 45.22. There is none else. He is a Saviour, and their is none besides him, ver. 21. look any where else, and thou art undone; God will look at nothing but Christ, and thou must look at nothing else. Christ is lifted up on high (as the brasen serpent in the wilderness (that the ends of the earth, sinners at the greatest distance, may see him and look to wards him. The least sight of him will be saving, the least touch healing to thee, and God intends thou shouldst look on him for he hath set him upon a high throne of Glory, in the open view of all poor Sinners. Thou hast infinite reason to look on him, no reason at all to look off him. For he is meek and lowly of heart, Mat. 11.29. He will do that himself Which he requires of his creature, bear with infirmities, Rom. 15.1. not pleasing himself, not standing upon points of Law, ver. 2. He will restore with the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. And bare thy burdens, ver. 22. He Will forgive, not only until seven times, but se∣venty times seven, Mat. 18.21.22. It put the Faith of the apostles to it, to believe this, Luz. 17.4.5. Because we are hard to forgive, we think Christ is hard. We see sin great, we think Christ doth so too, and measure infinite love with our line, infinite merits, with our sins, which is the greatest Pride and Blasphemy Psa. 103.11.12. Isa 40.15. Hear what he saith, I have found a ransom, Job. 33 24. In him I am well pleased, Mat. 3.17. God will have nothing else; nothing else will do thee good or satisfy conscience, but Christ who satisfied the Father, God doth all upon the account of
Christ thy deserts are hell, Wrath, rejections. Christs deserts, are life pardon, and acception. e will only shew thee the one, but he will give ee the other. Its Christ's own glory and hap∣pness to pardon. Consider, whilest Christ was pon the earth, he was more among Publicans d sinners than Scribes and pharisees, his pro∣fessed adversaries; for they were righteous es. It is not so as thou imaginest, that his ate in glory, makes him neglectful, scornful  poor sinners; no he hath the same heart now  Heaven, he is God, and changeth not, He is e Lamb of God that taketh a way the sins of the orld, John 1.29. He hath gon through all thy emptations, dejections, sorrows, desertions. jections, Mat. 4.3 to 12. Mark. 15.14. uke 22.44. Mat. 26.38. And hath drunk e bitterest of the cup, and left thee the sweet; e condemnation is out, Christ drunk up all the thers wrath at one draught, and nothing but lvation is left for the; thou say'st, thou canst ot believe, thou canst not repent, fitter to re∣ent, fitter for Christ if thou hast nothing but n and misery, go to Christ with all thy impe∣itency, and unbelief, to get faith and repen∣tance with, from him; that is glorious. Tell Christ, Lord, I have brought no righteousness, no race to be accepted in, justified by; I am come  thine, and must have it. We would be bring∣g to Christ, and that must not be; not a penny  nature's highest improvement will pass in hea∣ven. Grace will not stand with works. Tit, 3. Rom. 11.6. That is a terrible point to na∣re; which cannot think of being stript of all  having a rag of duty, or righteousness lest  look at. Self-righteousness, self-sufficiency, e the darlings of nature, which she preserves
as her life: That makes Christ such an ugly thing to nature, nature cannot desire him; he is just directly opposite to all nature's glorious interests. Let nature but make a gospel, and it would make it contrary to Christ. It would be to the just, the innocent, the holy, the righ∣teous, &c. Christ hath made the gospel for thee, that is, to needy sinners, the ungodly, the un∣righteous, the unjust, the accursed. Nature cannot endure to think the gospel is only for sinners, it will rather chuse to despair, than to go to Christ upon such terrible terms. When nature is but put to it by guilt or wrath, it will to its old haunts of self-righteousness, self-good∣ness, &c. And infinite power must cast down those strong holds. None but the self Justici∣ary stands excluded out of the gospel; Christ will look at the most abominable sinner, before him, because to such an one Christ cannot be made justification: He is no sinner To say in complement, I am a sinner; is easy; bt to pray with the Publican indeed, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, is the hardest prayer in the world. It is easy to say, I believe in Christ; but to see Christ full of grace and truth, Of whose fulness thou may'st receive grace for grace. That is saving. Its easy to profess Christ with the mouth; but to confess him with the heart, as Peter, (to be the Christ, the Son of the living God, the alone Mediator) that's above flesh and blood. Many call Christ Saviour, few know him so. To see grace and salvation in Christ, is the greatest sight in the world; none can do that, but at the same time they shall see that grace to be theirs. Sights will cause applicati∣ons. I may be ashamed to think, that in the midst of so much profession, yet I have known
little of the blood of Christ, which is the main thing of the Gospel. A Christless, formal pro∣fession will be the blackest sight next to hell that can be. Thou mayst have many good things, and yet one thing be wanting, that may make thee go away sorrowful from Christ. Thou hast ne∣ver sold all thou hast, never parted with all thine own righteousness, &c. Thou mayst be high in duty, yet a perfect enemy and adversary to Christ in every prayer, in every ordinance. Labour after sanctification to thy utmost, but make not a Christ of it to save thee; if so, it must come down one way or other. Christ's infinite sa∣tisfaction not thy sanctification, must be thy jus∣tification before God. When the Lord shall ap∣pear terrible out of his holy places, Fire shall consume all that as Hay and Stubble. This will be found Religion only, To bottom all upon the everlasting mountains of Gods love and grace in Christ, to live continually in the fight of Christs infinite righteousness, and merits (they are sanctifying, without them the heart is carnal) and in those sights to see the full vile∣ness, yet littleness of Sin, and to see all pardon∣ed; In those sights, to pray, hear, be baptized, &c. Seeing thy polluted self, and all thy weak performances continually; in those sights to trample upon allthy self-glories, righteousnesses priviledges as abominable, and be sound conti∣nually in the righteousness of Christ only, re∣joycing in the ruins of all thy own righteousness the spoiling of all thy own excellencies, that Christ alone, as Mediator, may be exalted in his throne, mourning over all thy duties how (glo∣rious soever) that thou hast not performed in the sight and fense of Christ's love. Without the blood of Christ on the Consciences all are d services, Heb. 9.14.
opinion of Free will so cry'd up, will be easily confuted as it is by the Scripture in thy heart who hath had any spiritual dealings with Christ, as to the application of his merits, and subjecti∣on to his righteousness. Christ is every way too magnificent a Person for poor nature to close withal, or apprehend. Christ is so infinite ho∣ly, nature durst never look at him; so infinite∣ly good, nature can never believe him to be such, when it lies under full sights of Sin. Christ is too high and glorious for nature so much as to touch. There must be a divine love first put into the soul to make it lay hold on him, he lays so infi∣nitely beyond the sight or reach of nature. That Christ that natural Free-will can appre∣hend, is but a natural Christ of man's own mak∣ing, not the fathers Christ, not Jesus the Son of the living God, to whom none can come with∣out the Father's drawing, John, 6.44.46. Fi∣nally; Search the Scriptures daily, as mines of Gold, wherein the heart of Christ is laid. Watch against constitution sins, see them in their vile∣ness, and they will never break out into act. Keep always an humble, empty, broken frame of heart; sensible of any spiritual miscarriage, observant of all inward workings, fit for the highest communications. Keep not guilt in the conscience, but apply the blood of Christ imme∣diately. God chargeth sin and guilt upon thee to make thee look to Christ the brasen Serpent. Judge not Christ's love by evidences, but by promises. Bless God for shaking off false foun∣dations, for any way whereby he keeps the soul awakened, and looking after Christ: better sickness, temptations, than security and slightness. A slighty spirit will turn a prophane spirit, and will sin and pray too. Slightiness is the bane of Profession, if it be not Rooted out of
Heart, by constant and serious dealings with and beholding of Christ in Duties, it will grow more strong and more deadly, by being under Church Ordinances. Measure not thy Graces by others attainments, but by Scripture-trials. Be serious, exact in Duty, having the weight of it upon the Heart; but be as much afraid of taking comfort from duties, as from Sins-Com∣fort from any hand but Christ is deadly. Be∣much in Prayer, or you will never keep up much Communion with God. As you are in Closet-Prayer, so you will be in all other Ordi∣nances. Reckon not duties by high Expression, but by low frames, and the beholdings of Christ. Tremble at duties and gifts. It was the saying of a Saint, He was more afraid of his duties, than his sins; the one often made him proud, the other always made him humble. Treasure up manifestations, they make the heart low for Christ, too high for sn. Slight not the lowest, meanest evidences of Grace. God may put thee to make use of the lowest, as thou think'st; even that 1 Job. 3.14. That may be wrath a thousand worlds to thee. Be true to truth, but not turbulent and scornful. Restore such as are sallen. Help them up a gain with all the bowels of Christ. Set the broken dis-jointed bones with the grace of the Gospel. High pro∣fessors, despise not weak Saints. Thou mayst come to wish to be in the condition of the meanest of them. Be faithful to others infirmi∣ties, but sensible of thy one. Visit sick beds, and deserted Souls much; they're excellent schools of experiences. Abide in your calling, be duti∣ful to all relations, as to the Lord, Be content with little of the world: little willserve. Think
every little of earth much, because unworthy of the least. Think much of Heaven too little, because Christ is so rich and free. Think every one better than thy self, and carry ever self-loathing about thee, as one fit to be trampled upon by all the saints. See the vanity of the world, and the consumption that is upon all things, and love nothing but Christ. Mourn to see so little of Christ in the world, so sew needing him. Trifles pleaseth them better. To a secure soul, Christ is but a Fable, the scriptures but a story. Mourn to think, how many under baptism, church-order, that are not under Grace looking much after duty, obedience, little after Christ, little versed in Grace. Prepare for the Cross, welcome it, bear it triumphantly like Christ's cross, whether scoffs, mockings, jeers, contempts, imprisonments, &c: But see it be Christ's cross, not thine own. Sin will hinder from glorying in the cross of Christ. Omiting little truths against light may breed hell in the conscience, as well as omitting the greatest Sin against light. If thou hast been taken out of the belly of hell, into Christ's bosome, and made to sit among Princes in the houshold of God: O how shouldst thou live as a pattern of Mercy redeemed, restored soul, what infinite sums, dost thou owe Christ? With what singular frames must thou walk in, and do every duty? Sabbaths, what praising days, singing of halelujahs should they be to thee? church-fellow-ship, what a heaven, a being with Christ, and Angels, and Saints? Baptism, what a drowning the soul in e∣ternal love, as a burial with Christ, dying to al things besides him: Every time thou thinkest on Christ be astonished, and wonder; and whe thou seest sin, look at Christ's Grace, that d pardon it; and when thou art Proud, look
Christ's Grace, that shall humble and strike the down in the dust. Remember Christ's time of love when thou wast naked, Ezek. 16.8.9. and then he chosethee. Canst thou ever have aproud thought; remember whose arms supported thee from sinking, and delivered thee from the low∣est hell, (Psal. 86.13.) and shout in the ears of Angels and Men, Psal. 148. sing for ever praise Grace. Daily Repent, and Believe and Pray; and walk in the sight of grace as one that hath the anointings of grace upon thee. Remember thy Sins, Christ's pardonings; thy deserts, his Merits; thy weakness, Christ's strength, thy pride, Christ's humility; thy many infirmities Christ's restorings: thy guilt, Christ's newap∣plications of his Blood; thy failings, Christ's raisings up; thy slightiness, Christ's sufferings thy want, Christ's fulness; thy Temptations, Christ's Tenderness; thy vileness, Christ's righteousness. Blessed Soul! whom God shall find not ha∣ving on his own righteousness, Phil. 3.6. but having his robes washt and made white in the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7.14. Woful, mise∣rable Professor! that hath not the gospel with∣in, rest not in Church-tryal, thou may'st pass that, and be a cast away in Christ's day of try∣al. Thou mayst come to Baptism, and never come to Jesus, and the Blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. Whatever workings or attain∣ments come not up to clear distinct apprehen∣sions of Christ's blood, merits, righteousness, (the main object of the Gospel) falls short of the Gospel, and leaves the Soul in a condition of Doubtings and Questionings, and Doubt∣ings (if not lookt unto betimes) will turn to
rightiness of Spirit, one of the most danger∣ous Frames. Trifle not with ordinances. Be much in Meditation and Prayer. Wait dili∣gently on all hearing opportunities. We had need of Doctrin, Reproof, Exhortation, Con∣solation, as the tender Herbs and the Grass hath of the Rain, the Dew, the small Rain, and the Showers, Deut. 32.3. Do all thou dost as Soul work, as unto Christ, Zach. 7.5, 6. As immediately dealing with Christ Jesus, as if he were looking on thee, and thou on him, and setch all thy Strength from him. Observe what holy Motions you find in your Soul to Duties. Prize the least motion that is from a sight of Christ the least good thought thou hast of Christ, the least good word thou speakest of them, sincerely from the Heart, is rich Mercy, O bless God from it. Observe of every day you have the Day spring from on high (with his Morning Dews of mourning for Sin) constantly visiting, Luk. 1.17. the bright Morning-Star (with fresh influences of Grace and Peace) constantly arising, Rev. 22.16. And Christ sweetly greeting the Soul in all Duties. What Duty makes not more spi∣ritual, will make more carnal, what doth not quicken and humble, will deaden and harden. Judas may have the Sop, the outward privi∣ledge of Baptism, Supper, Church-Fellowship, &c. But John leaned on Christ's Bosome, John 15.23. That's the Gospel-ordinance posture, in which we should pray, and hear, and perform all Duties. Nothing but lying in that Bosome, will dissolve hardness of heart, and make thee to mourn kindly for sin and cure Slightiness and Ordinariness of Spirit, (that Gangrene in Profession) that will hum∣ble
indeed, and make the Soul Cordial to Christ, and Sin Vile to the Soul, yea, trans∣form the ugliest piece of Hell, into the Glory f Christ. Never think thou art right as thou shouldst be, a Christian of any glorious attain∣ment, until thou come to this, always to see nd feel thy self lying in the Bosome of Christ, who is in the Bosome of the Father, Job. 1. 8. Come and move the Father for Sights of Christ, and you shall be sure to speed: You an come with no Request that pleaseth him etter. He gave him out of his own Bosome or that very end, to be held up before the yes of all Sinners, as the Everlasting Monu∣ment of his Father's Love. Looking at the natural Sun, weakeneth the Eye. The more you look at Christ the Sun of Righteousness, the Stronger and clearer will the Eye of Faith be. Look but at Christ, you will Love him, and Live on him. Think on him continually, keep the Eye constantly upon Christ's Blood, or every Blast of Tem∣ptation will shake you. If you will see Sin's Sinfulness, to hate it and Mourn, do not stand looking upon Sin, but look upon Christ first, as Suffering and Satisfying. If you would see your Graces, your Sanctifications, do not stand gazing upon them, but look at Christs Righte∣ousness in the first place (see the Sun and you see all) then look at your Graces in the second. When you act Faith, what you first look at, that you expect Settlement from, and make it the bottom of your Hope. Go to Christ in sights of thy sin and misery, not of thy grace and holiness. Have nothing to do with thy graces and Sanctification, they will but vail
Christ, till thou hast seen Christ first. He that looks upon Christ thro his Graces, is like one that see the Sun in Water, which wavereth and moves as the Water doth. Look upon Christ only as shining in the Firmament of the Fathers Love and Grace, you will not see him but in his own glory which is unspeakable. Pride and unbelief will put you upon seeing somewhat in your self first; but Faith will have to do with none but Christ, who is un∣expressibly glorious, and must swallow up thy Sanctification, as well as thy sin; for God made him both for us, and we must make him both, 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21. He that sets up his Sanctification to look at, to com∣fort him, he sets up the greatest Idol which will strengthen his doubts and sears. Do but look off Christ, and presently (like Peter) you sin. A Christian never wants comfort, but by break∣ing the order and method of the Gospel, look∣ing his own, and looking off Christ's perfect righ∣teousness, which is to chuse to live rather by candle-light, than by the light of the sun. The honey that you suck from your own righte∣ousness, will turn into perfect gall, and the light that you take from that to walk in, will turn into black night upon the Soul. Satan is tempting thee by putting thee to plod about thy own graces, to get comfort from them, then the Father comes, and points thee to Christ's Grace, as rich and glorious, infinite∣ly pleasing him, and bid thou Study Christ's Righteousness (and his biddings are enabl∣ings) that's a blessed Motion, a sweet whisper∣ing, checking thy unbelief, follow the least hint, close with much Prayer, prize it as an
unvaluable Jewel: Its an earnest of more  come. Again, if you would Pray and cannot, and so are discouraged. See Christ Praying for you, using his interest with the Father for you. What can you Want? John, 14. and chap. 17. If you be troubled, see Christ your Peace, Eph 2.14. leaving you Peace, when he went up to Heaven, again and again, charging you not to be troubled, no not in the least sin∣fully troubled, so as to obstruct thy comfort, or thy believing, John, 14.1.27. He is now upon the throne, having spoiled upon his cross, in the lowest state of his Humiliation, all what∣soever can hurt or annoy thee. He hath born all thy Sins, sorrows, sears, disgraces, sicknesses, troubles, temptations, and is gone to prepare mansions for thee. Thou who hast seen Christ all, and thy self nothing, who makes Christ thy life, and art dead to all righteousness besides, thou art the Christian who hath sound savour with God. Favorite of Heaven, do Christ this Favour for all his Love, love his saints and churches, the meanest, the weakest, notwith∣standing difference in Judgment, they are en∣graven on his Heart, as the Names of the chil∣dren of Israe, on Aaron's Brest-plate. Exod. 24.21. Let them be so on thine. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love Her, Psam. 122.6. FINIS.
