W2326 12560866 63163
THE DECLARATION OF His Higness the Prince of Orange, CONCERNING PAPISTS not departing from the Cities of London and Westminster, and Ten Miles adjacent. WHEREAS the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, by their Order of the Two and twentieth of December last past; For the better preservation of the Peace and common Safety, did Require, That all Papists (except as in the said Order is Excepted) should within Five Days after the Date of the said Order, depart from the said Cities to their respective Habitations, from which not to remove above Five Miles distant, as in and by the said Order Printed and Published more at large appears. And, whereas, notwithstanding the said Order, and the Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, great Numbers of the said Papists (not Excepted in the said Order) are still remaining in the said Cities of London and Westminster, and places within Ten Miles Adjacent, raising and fomenting Jealousies and Discontents, by false rumours and suggestions, deluding and seducing the unwary, and conspiring Civil Dissentions and Insurrections to destroy the Peace and Quiet of this Kingdom. IN pursuance of the good intents in the said Order mentioned, We do hereby Declare and Require, all Papists, and reputed Papists, not Excepted in the said Order, within Three Days after the Date hereof, to depart from the said Cities, and Ten Miles compass of the same; or otherwise, to be taken and proceeded against, and expect the utmost severity that the Law, for their Offences, can inflict upon them. AND for the better making this Our DECLARATION effectual, We do hereby Require the Lord Mayor of London, and the Aldermen of the said City, and all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Constables, and other Officers within their respective Counties, Cities, Parishes, and Places, to cause diligent search to be made, and such as they find abiding or lurking, contrary to the said Order, to Apprehend, and as Papists, and persons suspected to be Conspiring and Plotting against the Peace and Good of the Kingdom, to Commit and Imprison, to detain till discharged by due course of Law. AND for the better finding out, and discovering all such Papists, and reputed Papists, We hereby Require the Constables and Beadles of every Parish, within the said Cities and Limits, to go through their respective Parishes and Precincts, and to take Accounts in Writing, from the respective House-keepers, of the Names, Qualities and Additions of all Lodgers within their respective Houses, and whether they are Protestants or reputed Papists; and their Accounts so taken, under their hands, to deliver to the next respective Justice or Justices of the Peace, by them to be returned and certified to Us, under their Hands and Seals: And that the said respective Justices of the Peace, cause also the Names of the said Constables of the respective Parishes to be certified to Us, that thereby We may see how this Our DECLARATION is observed. AND, whereas We have granted Passes to several persons to Transport themselves beyond the Seas; We do hereby farther Declare, That if they do not depart from the said Cities of London and Westminster, according to the Tenor of this our Declaration, then all such Passes shall be void, and of no effect. Given at St. James's the Fourteenth Day of January, 1688. W. H. Prince of Orange. LONDON, Printed by J. Starkey, and A. and W. Churchill, MDCLXXXIX.
