w2812 8250633 41178
MNEMONICA; OR, THE Art of Memory, Drained out of the pure FOUNTAINS OF ART & NATƲRE. Digested into Three Books. ALSO, A Physical TREATISE of cherish∣ing Natural Memory; diligently col∣lected out of divers Learned Mens WRITINGS. By John Willis Batchelour in Divinity. Omne bonum Dei donum. Ut unaquaeque ars nobilissima ac divinissima fuit; ita ad mortalium cognitionem tardissimè per∣venit. Cardanus. LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Leonard Sowersby, at the Turn-stile, near New-market, in Lincolns-Inn fields, 1661.
To the Honorable William Pierrepont, Esq Honored Sir, IF Lines were capable of Hu∣mane affections, these would blush, they are so mean a pre∣sent to so Illustrious and person; at least conscious of their Masters presumption, they would condole his unhappiness, that had not great∣er ability to accommodate some more worthy Fabrick to so fair a Frontispiece. The Original compi∣led by a learned hand, among some vulgar things and trifles, containeth very excellent and profitable mat∣ter; I hope it hath not lost its utili∣ty
(though Grace) in English. Honored Sir, I fear, good intenti∣ons are no sufficient Plea for teme∣rous Enterprises, especially the Un∣dertaker being privie to his own im∣perfections; Therefore like a Cri∣minal acknowledging my vanity in ambitiously affecting things above my Sphere, I humbly re-implore your Honors pardon and admit∣tance to be what I was before, Your Honors most humble Servant Leonard Sowersby.
THE PREFACE. THough I hope Courteous Rea∣der, this my Art of Memory is so perfect and complete in all parts, that it will out-live the envy of Detractors; yet seeing like a new-born Infant, it doth now first present it self to the world, let me in a word or two demonstrate how agreeable this Art is, both to Reason, and the principles of Nature, that so I may recall, what the pre∣judice of many hath long proscribed. I do ve∣ry well understand the whole Controversie a∣bout this Art, is principally referred to that part which is called Local: Therefore wholly omitting the other helps of Memory, descri∣bed in the first and second parts of this Book, I will onely insist upon defence of this which is handled in the third Book, and will prove by most evident reasons, it doth not so much vary from Art and natural use of Memory, as ignorant persons prate. First I acknowledge and willingly confess, that Writing is the surest Guardian of me∣morable things, far excelling all other Art of Memory; but a man cannot always commit
to writing every thing he desireth to remem∣ber, and must therefore necessarily sometimes make use of other helps: As writing Me∣morandums is worthily esteemed the best way of Remembring; so that may rightly chal∣lenge the next place, which beareth greatest affinity thereto. Now if men deal impartial∣ly, they will easily find, that the Art of Me∣mory by Places and Idea's or Images, doth very nearly resemble Writing. The Places in artificial Memory, are as it were Leavs; the Idea's, Letters; the distribution of them in Places representeth Writing; lastly, the repetition of them, Reading: which thing Cicero in his Partitions, but more copious∣ly in his second Book De Oratore, doth ele∣gantly declare. Secondly, experience teacheth, that Places and Idea's do much conduce to faithful re∣membrance of things; particularly as to Pla∣ces, their usefulness doth hence appear, that if a Traveller observe any remarkable thing in a cross-way, or some noted place of his journey, returning the same way, he doth not onely remember the place, but calleth to mind what soever he had seen there, though at pre∣sent removed. The same thing often happen∣eth in Repetition of Idea's; for the mind as it were walking through the same Places, in
which formerly it had disposed Idea's, and carefully marshalled them in order, with pur∣pose of perusal, by occasion of the Places, is much assisted in recalling Idea's to mind there placed: So Printers by Distrribution of their Letters into several Boxes, do without any hesitation fetch them thence upon occasion, extending hands to the right Box. The hi∣story of Simonides of Chios is very pertinent to this purpose, who being at Supper among many other Guests, at a wealthy mans house named Scope, was acquainted two young men attended at the door to speak with him; Simo∣nides arising from the Table went to them; whiles he was at the door, the Guests were e∣very one slain by a sudden fall of the chamber, whereby their bodies were so bruised and de∣faced that they could not be distinguished one from another when their friends came to bury them; but Simonides bearing well in mind in what place each of them was seated, point∣ed out the bodies of them all, and was hereby first admonished, that Places and order might be very advantagious to quicken Memory. He also left to posterity some Precepts of the Art of Memory, which are all since drown∣ed in the deep gulph of Antiquity. Another singular example correspondent in some sort to this, is the Election of Darius to the Per∣sian
Monarchy; Cambyses being dead (as saith Herodotus) it was concluded among the seven Persian Princes, next morning to take horse together, and to ride forth of the City, unanimously agreeing the chief sove∣raignty, without any further contest, should reside in him whose Horse first neighed. Da∣rius one of the seven, through the craft of his Groom Oebares, obteined the Supremacy. Oebares was a subtil wilie fellow, to whom Darius discovered the whole business, and warned him to use all diligence to prevent his Competitors: Oebares desired him to take no care, for he would effectuate his so much desired design: Before night Oebares led forth a Mare, chiefly affected by Darius his Horse, and tied her in the high-way, through which the Princes were to ride next morning; afterward he brought forth Dari∣us his Horse, and leaving him at liberty, suf∣fered him to cover the mare. At Sun-ri∣sing the seven Princes of Persia mounted to∣gether, and rode forth of the City; when they came to the place where Oebares had tied the Mare the night before; immediately Darius his horse began to neigh, and presently the o∣ther Princes, as hearing some divine Oracle, alighted, and saluted him King. This exam∣ple, if I am not deceived, doth sufficiently e∣vince
the utility of Places to rouse up Me∣mory, seeing even bruit beasts remember things placed by the place. Further, that Memory is quickned by I∣dea's is thus manifest: No man is ignorant, that Memory is stronger conversant about sensible things then about insensible; and of sensible things, those which are visible make deepest impression; therefore things heard are more firmly retained in Memory, then those which are barely conceived in mind, & things seen better then those which are heard, accor∣ding to the Poet: Segnius irritant animos dimissa per aures, Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, Et quae ipse sibi tradit spectator. Things heard in mind no such impression make, As those whereof our faithful eyes partake, And whereof we our selves spectators are. For this cause Physicians perswade Stu∣dents of Physick, not only to read over the works of Hippocrtes, Galen and other most skil∣ful Physicians, Philosophers, Anatomists Herbarists, & to frequent publick Lectures, but also to be present at Dissections, and to gather Herbs with their own hands, that they may never after forget, what their eyes have
once seen. I perswade the same thing in this Book; form a lively Idea of that thing which you desire to remember with an imagination so strong, as if you did see it indeed: For even as an ember almost dead, is resuscitated by application of a Match, and breaketh forth in∣to a flame; So a Notion languishing of it self, by mental conspection of its Idea, is vi∣vified, and reassumeth strength. Seeing all understanding is deduced from external sence, it doth consequently follow, that intelligible things reduced to sensible, will sooner inform the understanding. Hence the Holy Ghost sub∣mitting himself to humane capacity, doth oftentimes in Scripture attribute cor∣poreal members and external sences to God himselfe, and to invisible Spirits; Because we do better understand the nature of such things veiled in that manner with sensible things. I omit the Imaginative faculty is so called of framing Idea's or Images in the Brain; As also that Intellect is said to be derived ab interna lectione Idearum, from internal election of Idea's retained in Memory. Memo∣ry, so far as it is strictly taken for the com∣mon receptacle of Memorandums, is meerly passive, and doth retain and conserve imagi∣nary Notions, transmitted thereunto by the understanding, in the same manner as Paper
preserveth words written therein. As it is the of∣fice of a Scribe, not of Paper, to write, and read things written; so to dispose Idea's in Memory, and aptlp to use them, is the work of Understand∣ing, not of Memory. Why are there any memo∣rable monuments extant, as it were truly visible Idea's, by which the memory of things past are committed to posterity? Thus the Funeral Pile of Semiramis, and the Columns of Hercules have preserved the memory of them both in succeeding ages. Thus in sacred story we read that twelve Stones were reared in the River Jordan for a last∣ing monument of the Israelites passage, Josh. 4.9. Also that a great stone was placed under an Oak, in memory of the peoples Covenant with God, Josh. 24.27. Why else were Sacraments or∣dained by God, but as visible Idea's of invisible things, whereby he admonisheth us, too forgetful of his benesits? Lastly it is a common thing, even amongst illiterate and ignorant men, to remember things by Idea's. One being to keep in mind the name of a certain man called, Fisher, to imprint this name deeper in memory, thinketh of a Fisher∣man placing his Nets. Another having some bu∣siness committed to his care, which he feareth to forget, bindeth a Ribbon or Thred about his little finger, by sight of which visible Idea he is admoni∣shed of his charge. Whence it is apparent, that the excogitation of Idea's to fix things in memory, is
in some sort natural, seing Nature it self hath taught men, destitute of Learning, to use the same. Now there onely remaineth Answers to Obje∣ctions, by which the Adversaries of this Art in∣deavour to obumbrate the lustre, and diminish the credit thereof. First they object, that the faculty of Natural Memory and Ingenuity, by use of this Art, is unmeasurably impaired; for such Authors as have treated of this Art, do usually prescribe pro∣vision of a multitude of Places, wherein occur∣ring Idea's of Memorandums may be distributed to remain alwaies, with a weekly, or at least month∣ly perusal, or over-looking of them all, least at any time they should be forgotten, which is certainly a transcendent labour, and must needs dull the edge of humane understanding. To which I answer, I am of the same opinion; to wit, that if any man indeavour to retain all things he desireth to re∣member by Places and Idea's, to be reviewed once a month, he undertaketh a work that would weary the dullest witted men, much more ingenious per∣sons, who loath nothing more then frequent medi∣tation of things formerly learned; It is also un∣necessary, because writing of things worthy, memo∣ry in books, is much easier, more certain and rea∣dier for use. The way of Memory I prescribe,  onely to preserve things lately heard, read, or in∣vented,
until they may be transcribed, that the mind sinking under this burthen, may be relieved as speedily as may be. Moreaver it is certain, that the virtue of natural Memory is very much corroborated by this way of Remembring proposed in this book: For the mind being daily accusto∣med to Revocation of sentences slipped out of Me∣mory, and that of thy a word or two, is more enabled in discharge of its office, then is credible to one un∣experienced, whereby also wit is more and more exacuated. Neither have I used any principles in this Art prejudicial to the faculty of Memory; but do rather admonish you not to use them, least they procure great damage to your natural Memory. Secondly, they say it is a great trouble, in the Roposition of one Idea, to enter upon two or three considerations. I answer, that they which speak Latine, observe a manifold construction of words, yet do readily pronounce each word in its case, gen∣der, number, person, and tense, without study; nor is the Memory thereby any way confounded, because they are frequently conversant in practice of Grammar rules; In like manner, when all the rules of the Art of Memory are exactly known, it will not be difficult to attire all Idea's with their proper circumstances. If any man blame or accuse me as dissenting from Logicians, who affirm that any thing may
be kept in memory by help of Logical method, he is much mistaken; for it is evident they speak onely of long speeches; But no sober man did ever ascer∣tain that method was sufficient to remember com∣mon businesses, words, phrases, numbers, and par∣ticular sentences, all which things are faithfully kept in memory by Idea's aptly disposed. The dig∣nity of method reserved (which I acknowledged to be very great) it cannot be denied, but the very method of a long Oration partly forgotten, may be recalled to mind, by the order of disposed I∣dea's. But some may say, it is a fantastical business to be imploied in excogitating and composing toyes, and therefore this is not worthy to be called an Art, which is occupied in such trifles. How, I pray, is the Art of Memory wholly fantastical, when it is onely busied in framing phancies, where∣by phantasie is aided to serve the memory more faithfully? That this is an Art, I prove thus; Reason and Memory are distinct faculties of the mind, though not divided asunder; Therefore if there be any Art to inform Reason, as such is Lo∣gick, why not also an Art to inform Memory as this is? Lastly if any man ask, what cause moved me to divulge this Art, my answer is, that having di∣ligently read over all the books, I could procure of this Art, and bestowed much labour, with great
loss of time, besides great defatigation of mind, in practising other mens precepts, when I perceived some things impious, obscure, and superfluous ad∣mitted in this Art; also many things very neces∣sary quite omitted, with so much confusion and disorder, that scarcely any certainty could be found wherein to insist, I did heartily desire to raise this excellent Art out of the thick fogge wherein it was inveloped, and eliminate all its superfluities wherewith it was defiled. Accordingly I under∣took it at leisure hours, and by dismissing super∣abundancies, and supplying defects, have reduced it into a new and (if I be not deceived) much bet∣ter form, which experience having proved very be∣neficial to my self, I conceived might also profit o∣thers, and therefore have boldly published the same. These are the things I had to say in approbation of artificial memory, whence I think doth sufficiently appear, that the principles hereof are derived from the most internal Fountains of Art and Nature. Such as have good natural memories, may well want the use of this Art, like as healthy people need no physick; but it will be of singular ad∣vantage to such as have dull, remiss momories, e∣specially if they be quickned and sharpned by dili∣gent practice of this Art from theit younger years. No man is indued with so happy a Memory, but he may improve it by this Art; for as all liberal sci∣ences
help nature to perfection, by demonstrating some more accomplished method then Nature it self hath taught, so also this; Men compose Ar∣guments naturally, but learn to argue better by Logick; so though Nature teach us to remem∣ber, yet we learn to commit things to Memory more surely, by benefit of this Art. How mean soever these things are, exposed in the ensuing Books, they have been divulged with a desire of your Utility; It is your part therefore, to take my indeavours and labours in good part, as I acknow∣ledge it mine, to give glory to God in all things, and to look upon him as the Author of all good Arts, and the Fountain of Wisdome: Farewell: J. W.
The Art of Memory. The first Book. CHAP. I. Of remembring common affairs. MNemonica, or artificial Memorie, so far as it falleth under our present considerati∣on, is two-fold: in Writing, or without Writing. The Written way of Remembring, de∣pendeth on naked hand-writing, which is more certain and facil then the o∣ther; and therefore alwaies to be used when oportunity doth permit. In treating hereof, it were superfluous to speak of writing notes superfluous to speak of writing notes in Table-books, or to pursue every trivial mat∣ter, but onely deliver such things as seem more usefull: First I will handle Notation of common business, after∣wards such things as pertain to learn∣ing
Concerning the former of these two I will onely adde one precept, omit∣ting such as are in frequent use, Pro∣vide an Almanack with blank pages, in which every evening, against the proper day of the moneth, set down your chiefest business of that day, and also the names of such persons as you have conversed with about any serious affair, either at home or abroad. Though the utility hereof be not pre∣sently conspicuous, yet many times afterward, it is of great consequence to resolve difficulties of very great im∣portance. Suppose that after some re∣volution of time, three months, a year or more, question arise about the very day whereon such or such a thing hap∣ned, an exact knowledg whereof will be very profitable; the certain day you have forgotten, but well remember it was on the same day your sheep were shorn, or the day after such friends di∣ned with you; this being considered, your Almanack will exhibit the parti∣cular day. Moreover by the mens names with whom you spake that day, haply you may learn many things most neces∣sary to be known in the present cause.
This briefly shal suffice concerning re∣membring ordinary business. CHAP. II. Of remembring Words. THere are four kinds of Memoran∣dums belonging to Discipline, or Learning: Words, Phrases, Sentences, and Set-Speeches. A Word may be remembred by De∣rivation or Connexion. Derivation is pro∣per, or Improper; Proper Derivation is an apt interpretation of Words; as Pel∣lex an Harlot, of , and  of  a word compounded of  and  the division of man and wife; or if you please of  and  be∣cause an Harlot is a Divided Wife.  blessed, as it were of  im∣mortal: Filii and filiae, Sons and Daugh∣ters, , from the love they procure between Parents▪ vir a Man, à viribus; Mulier a Woman, quasi mol∣lior, from the Sexes tenderness; Puer a Boy, à puritate corporis; Panis Bread, of Pan, who (as Olaus Magnus saith) first in∣vented
the Bakers Art; Popa a Glutton or Victualler, from Popina a Cooks-shop; Lucus a Grove, à lucendo, for it proper∣ly signifieth a place planted with trees, enlightned with Torches, and hallow∣ed to some Idol: Babble of Babel; a Sol∣dier of Soldurius, who served under Ce∣sar, Lib. 3. Ces. Com. or if you had ra∣ther, quasi sole duratus; Church, antient∣ly called Kirk, of  sup. , the Lord's-house; Neighbour, as it were nigh thy bower, a word formerly used for a dwelling house; Gospel, of good spel, antiently used for speech or tidings; Par∣tridge, of parting a ridge, for they are u∣sually found in ridges of Land. Improper Derivation, is a strained in∣terpretation of a word; as  drunk∣enness, , because after sacrifice they feasted their pallates;  smoke, as it were , the steam of something burning; : Lachrimae à lace∣rando, so Tears in English, of tearing the heart: Monumentum quasi monens mentem; Domus ex do & mus; Cottage as it were a coat for age: Beer as it were Bee-here; Gos∣sip of go-sip; Simony as it were See-mony; and Derivation howsoever absurd or
wrested, printeth words in Memory; yea the further it is fetched, the deeper impression it maketh. A Word is retained by Connexion, when it is aptly composed in a sentence a∣mongst other words: Homer said well, Words have wings, both because being spoken, they cannot be recalled; and that if they be neglected in the scope of sentences, they are forgotten: for example, let these words Oestrum a Gad-bee, and Cynomya an Horse-flie, be pro∣pounded to be remembred, they may be comprehended in a sentence thus; Viminia tibi lotione macerantur, quae cynomya adeoque etiam oestro vehement ius pungent; Rods steeped in piss, sting worse then a Horse-flye or Gad-bee: So these words, Vitricus a Father-in-law, Acupedius a Footman, illunis moonless, are thus com∣prised in a sentence; Illunis licet, sublu∣stris tamen nox erat, quâ Acupedius ad Vi∣trici aedes deflecteret; It was a light night, though the moondid not shine, in which the Footman called at my Father in law his house. Again, suppose these words to be kept in mind; Alyptes a Surgeon, succenturiatus substituted, tympanotriba a Drummer, strigosus bare bone: they may
be thus framed into a Sentence; Aly∣ptes strigosus in locum tympanotribae caesi suc∣centuriatus est; A bare-boned Chyrur∣geon was substituted in place of the slain Drummer. This is a profitable kind of exercise for unknown, out-worn, for∣reign or seldom used words, which oc∣cur sometimes in reading, and are to be observed, that they may be better known. Learners, who study the pri∣mitive words of any Language; as La∣tine, Greek, or Hebrew, may reap no smal benefit by Derivation and Connexion of words, if they imitate the following method Having provided a Paper-book to contain the Primitive words, divide every page into three Columns, of which let the third be broadest: In the first columne write down the Primitive words, in the second their significati∣ons, in the third their Etymologies, or Derivations. But if you meet with any word that doth not presently admit Derivation either Proper, or Improper, leave the space in the third columne void, and pass on to the next word, that you may not lose time by a perplexed indagation of the Etymology: Then col∣lect all the words you find in the page,
which decline Derivation, into one sen∣tence, so by Connexion you may im∣print those words in Memory, which you cannot by Derivation. Every such sentence must be written at the bottom of the page; I will give you an Exam∣ple in the first twelve primitive words of the Greek tongue, as they are exhi∣bited in the Catalogue of John Surcinus, in this order. , to exhale, from the feigned sound wee make in breathing. Scap. , to hurt, of , the first Passive Ao∣rist, of the verb , to hurt, according to the Ionick dia∣lect. , kind, of  the privative particle, and , envious. , to meet, of , signifying the same. , a Maidser∣vant, delicate. These words have a manifest Relation one to the other. ,   These words have a manifest Relation one to the other. , foolish.   , a heap.  
, good: As it were , Divine; or of , to be admired; hence cometh our English word Agast. , Overmuch: Hence cometh our English word, Again, and Again. , to love.   , Posts: From Angeri, to afflict, for so they do their Horses with their Spurs; and hence may come our English word Angry. ; What should a fool do with heaps of goods? Here you may see two words admitting no derivation, comprehended in one Sen∣tence; but the Verb , to love, is so frequent, it needeth no connexion. The manner of exercise to learn these, is thus: First, lay a flat Ruler, or your finger, over the middle Column, in such sort, that the words of the first and third Column (which contain the primitives & their de∣rivations) may appear on both sides; by mutual comparison of which, you must try to investigate the significations latent under the Ruler: Afterward conceal the first Column in like manner, that by
comparing the significations and deriva∣tions lying in sight, you may study the primitive words latent under the Ruler or your finger. If you dispatch but one page a day after this order, (which is scarcely an hours work in few dayes you may fix all the primitive words of the whole tongue in your mind without any labor, nay rather with delight. If you can pro∣cure some companions in scrutinie, of the derivations, equally lovers of the same study, your labour will be rendered much more delectable and facile. CHAP. III. Of remembring Phrases. A Phrase may be committed to memo∣ry, by accommodating it to some fit subject; as if this phrase were to be re∣membred, Very much estranged from filthy affections; I apply it to a Christian Soul∣dier, as to a meet subject in this manner, A Christian Souldier ought to be very much estranged from all filthy and sordid affections of mind.
Or this example, To forgoe manhood through effeminate delicacy, may be fitly accommodated to Sardanapalus King of Assyria; thus Sardanapalus by effeminate delicacy and luxury, lost all manhood, and led a Womanish life. Again, this example, A man furnished with abundant store of Learning, may be thus applyed; Usher the renowned Bishop of Armagh, was furnished with abundant store of good Literature, and manifold Learning; so that he did justly bear the prize from most relates of the World. This manner of applying Phrases, is principally necessary in learning the Ele∣gancies of any Tongue, and is very well worthy to be more frequently used in publike Schools: I confess Masters do u∣sually command their Schollars to collect phrases and elegant sentences out of their Lectures, and to write their gleanings in Books, not in loose Papers, which is som∣what; but if they did, also urge them to refer every phrase by them collected, to some friend or acquaintance, they would by this means reap a far greater Harvest of Learning: For phrases thus accom∣modated, sink deeper, and continue lon∣ger in memory.
CHAP. IV. Of remembring Sentences. SEntences worthy of Memory, are ei∣ther frequently or seldom used: Sen∣tences of common use (I mean such as we desire to preserve not onely in paper, but in our hearts, because of their singular Elegancy, serious Gravity, concise brevi∣ty, or witty ingenuity) are to be stored in a Manual every kind in a peculiar place: Epigrams by themselves, Anagrams by themselves, so Proverbs, Epitaphs, Jests, Riddles, Observations, &c. by themselves: This Enchiridion wherein you write such remarkable sentences, ought always to be carryed about you, (and may therefore be called, Vade mecum) that you may peruse the same at leisure-hours when you are a∣broad, not having other employment; by which means, Time, most precious of all things, will not be unprofitably spent: And hereby you will keep in mind things worthy remembrance, better, safer, soon∣er, more certainly, profitably, and de∣lightfully, then by that monstrous repeti∣tion,
prescribed by some Authors in this Art of Memory, which nevertheless can∣not be effected without long study, very great defatigation of the understanding & pernicious damage of the memorative fa∣culty; besides, a perpetual Oblivion of some Idea's, occasioned by so long space of time interposed. A sentence seldom used, is either an in∣terpretation of some Classick Author, or a common Observation; by Classick Books or Authors, I mean those which are accounted Authentick by common consent of professors in every Science; such are the Scriptures among Divines, Decrees and Statutes among Lawyers, the works of Hypocrates, Galen, or Paracelsus, among Physicians: Euclids Elements a∣mong Mathematicians, &c. If you meet with any memorable in∣terpretation of a Classick Book, note it down in short hand in the Margent, near the Text to which it properly relateth; or if you had rather, cause clean paper to be bound between every leaf, to receive such Comments: Or, (which is better) have plenty of white Paper bound at the end of the Book, in which write your In∣terpretation, and relate them to the text
by like numbers or letters prefixed before the Notes and Text. CHAP. V: Of remembring long Speeches. NOw lastly, I will treat of Speeches; A speech, according to my acceptati∣on, is any large Treatise composed of many sentences of one kind; such are Ser∣mons, Orations, Declarations, Heads, or Se∣ctions of Books; or finally, any long Trea∣tise, or memorable Speeches, are either such as are framed by our selves, or by others: Again, Speeches of other men are either extant in Books, or are deliver∣ed by word of mouth. If the Speeches to be remembred, are already extant in print, it is sufficient to set down their Titles in your Common∣place-Book, under their proper Heads, to advertise you in what Chapter or part of a Book, this, or that Argument is more largely handled: As for example, In the first Book of Calvin's Institutions, and thirteenth Chapter, the three persons of the Godhead in one Essence, is proved by
divers reasons; to transcribe which Trea∣tise, though in Epitome, would be very laborious: Therefore it is better under the title of Trinity, among other com∣mon observations pertaining to the same purpose, to write down these words, That three Persons are contained in one onely Es∣sence of God, Cal. Institut. Lib. 1. Cap. 13. By which Citation you are directed to that place of Calvin whensoever you please. If the Speech you desire to preserve be verbally pronounced, you must take it in short-hand, if you have skill; otherwise in long hand, with as much celerity as you can: If you be at any time left behind through nimble volubility of the Speak∣ers tongue, it will be sufficient to write onely the essential words of every Sen∣tence (as for the most part are Substan∣tives and Verbs) leaving vacant spaces, in which either words of less weight may be interposed, which must be supplyed im∣mediately after the Speech is ended. Four things must be observed, that spee∣ches contrived by our selves, may be deeply fastened in memory; Method, Wri∣ting, Marginal Notation, and Meditation; the Method ought to be so disposed, that e∣very
part of an entire Speech, and every sentence of those parts, precede accor∣ding to their dignity in nature; that is, that every thing be so placed, that it may give light to understand what followeth: Such a method is very effectual to ease the memory both of Speaker and Hearer; for in a speech methodically digested, each sentence attracteth the next, like as one link draweth another in a Golden Chain, therefore Method is called the Chain of Memory: For this cause let every former sentence so depend on the latter, that it may seem necessarily related thereunto. In writing a Speech, let your first care be, that your Lines extend not too far, but that space enough be left in the Mar∣gent: In the next place, that your whole speech be distinguished into heads; for a distinct mind apprehendeth better then one confused. After you have compiled a Speech you are shortly to deliver, do not transcribe it, though it be both blotted and interlined, lest you lose as much time in new Writing, as would suffice to learn it: Besides the blots and interlining do more firmly fasten in mind the sentences so blotted and interlined, then if they were otherwise. This is also to be noted,
that although it be necessary to write o∣ver the intire Speech, or at least, brief notes thereof, before it be publikely pro∣nounced; yet ought that Transcription by no means to be seen publikely, unless Memory languish, and be weak: For the mind doth better recollect it self in the absence of Notes, and by united force is better prepared to speak. Marginal Notation is when one or two chief words of every sentence is placed in the Margent, which so soon as seen, (which is with the least cast of an eye) revoketh the whole sentence to mind: As if this ensuing small Treatise of the Re∣surrection were to be learned by heart; I distinguish the sentences thereof by words placed in the Margent, by which means they are speedily remembred. That there shall be a Resurrection of the dead at the last day, is confirmed by these reasons. Because it is im∣perfect.First, that which is imperfect, is unca∣pable of perfect felicity in its kind; but the soul separate from the body is imper∣fect, and therefore not capable of perfect felicity. Thence followeth a necessity of the Bodies Resurrection, that by the con∣junction thereof with the Soul, the Elect
may enjoy perfect felicity: How are they happy,Tertullian. (saith Tertullian) if they shall perish in part? Seals of Salvation.Secondly, If the Body by Christs com∣mand, ought to be as well partaker of the seals of salvation, as the Soul; then it shall as well participate of Eternal Salvation; but the Body, according to Christs insti∣tution, ought to partake of the seals of salvation: For the Body is washed with water of Baptism, and nourished by Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper: Ergo, &c. As Seeds.Thirdly, Like as Seeds cast into the Earth dye, and revive again; so humane bodies buried in the ground, dissolved and corrupted, shall rise again at the last day, by the quickening virtue of Christ: Paul brandeth him with folly, 1 Cor. 13.35. who cannot conclude the resurrection of the dead out of the vivification of Seeds bu∣ried in the ground;1 Cor. 13.35. whence Augustine,Augustine. He which vivisieth dead and putrified Seeds by which men live in this world, more facilely will raise you up to live eternally. Revolu∣tion of things.Fourthly, The Revolution of all things is an argument of the Resurrection; as Day followeth night, Waking Sleep, Rest Labor, and Winter Summer; so Life fol∣loweth
death, and Resurrection Sepulture. That which Tertullian speaketh in his Book Of the Resurrection of the flesh,Tertullian. is pertinent hereto; Day (saith he) dyeth into night, yet is enlivened again with glorie all over the world. Fiftly, It is evidently proved by the Resurrection of Christ; seeing Christ, which is our head, is already risen, it is a testimony that we also, who are his members, shall live after death. Where the head is, thither will the members be gathered;Christ our head. 1 Cor. 15.20. in this respect Christ is termed the first fruits of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.20. Resurre∣ction of o∣thers.Sixthly, The particular Resurrection of some, to a temporal life in this world, was a sign of the general Resurrection to eternal life to be at the end of the world. These were raised again after death. 1. The son of the widow of Sarepta, 1 King 18.22. 2. The son of the Shunamite, 2 King. 4.33. 3. A certain man by the touch of Elias bones, 2 King 13.21. 4. The son of the widow of Naim, Luke 7.15.
5. The daughter of Jairus, Luke 8.48. 6. Lazarus, John 11 43. 7. Tabitha, Acts 9.40. 8. Eutichus, Acts 20.10. Who though.All which, though they dyed a∣gain, after their Resurrection, yet may we not think those Saints dyed any more, of whom mention is made, Matt.Saints cut of their Tombs. 27.52. who rose out of their Tombs after Christs Resurrection, that they might passe to eternall life with him, by ver∣tue of whose Resurrection they were rai∣sed. Finally, there are almost innumera∣ble places of Scripture,Places of Scripture, which may be produced to evince to the certainty of this Article, of which I will onely cite a few at present. Job 19.25, 26, 27. For I am sure that my Redeemer liveth,Job 19.25. and he shall stand the last on the earth; and though worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me. Isaiah, 26.19. Thy dead men shall live,Isai. 26.19 even with my body shall they rise: awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust, for thy dew is as
the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. Ezek.Ezek. 37.5. 37.5, 6. Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones, behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live. And I will lay sinews upon you, and make flesh grow upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, that ye may live, and ye shall know that I am the Lord. These quota∣tions were indeed spoken to the Pro∣phets, Isaiah and Exekiel, of the Restau∣ration of the people out of Captivity, neverthelesse thereby the Resurrection is evidently confirmed;Tertullian. as Tertullian saith, that must be necessarily first, which illu∣strateth another; a Similitude, Comparison, Metaphor, or Allegory, cannot be dedu∣ced out of nothing. Dan. 12.2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth,Dan. 12.2. shall awake, some to e∣verlasting life, and some to shame and perpe∣tual contempt. John 5 28▪John. 5.28 For the hour shall come in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, but they that have done evil, unto the resurrecti∣on of condemnation.
1 Cor. 15. Paul in that whole Chap∣ter,1 Cor. 15. treateth of the Resurrection of the body, and establisheth the same by many reasons, which I will not presse further, but onely reply to a common argument of Atheists, wherewith they do stubbornly seal up their hearts a∣gainst this truth. They Object,Object. Resoluti∣on of bo∣dies. that oft times the bo∣dies of many are buried in one and the same monument, whose carcasses must inevitably be commixed by cor∣ruption; that the bodies of some are burned to ashes, that others are drow∣ned in the sea, and devoured of fishes, those fishes perchance of men, and those men of beasts and ravens; lastly, that there are men in some Regions who eat humane flesh, by which means the substance of one must be necessa∣rily converted into the substance of the other; How then say they, is it possible, that every mans proper body should be restored in fire? I answer,Ans. Above our capacity. that the Resurrection is a work above mans capacity, whereof we are no more able to assign a certain rea∣son, than of the worlds creation; wherefore though the above recited
things seem impossible to us to be done, yet all things are possible to God. You may ask, saith Tertullian upon the Apo∣calyps, how matter when it is dissolved, may be restored?Tertullian I reply, you who once were not, are made, and so when you cease to be, shall be made a∣gain. Furthermore, we see that a skil∣full Alchymist,Alchymist by his Chymical art, can seperate and extract Gold, Silver, Tinne, &c. each severally apart out of the same masse; cannot God then produce out of the Elements humane bodies, how many alterations soever they undergo? seeing the bodies of the dead are onely changed, never reduced to nothing. God created light out of darknesse, ill things out of nothing,Light out of darknes power out of weaknesse, grace out of sinne, and pro∣cured us a blessed life out of our Savi∣ours cursed death. Shall not any thing be possible to him? It is impossi∣ble. Conclusi∣on a secret part.I conclude, At the final Resurrection, every person shall have a secret portion of his body, out of which by operati∣on of Divine Omnipotencie, it may
be formed a new intire,Of the Rib. so that a man may be perfect. He which created the woman of the mans rib, and cause a grain of Mustard-seed to become a stately plant, can also compose an intire body of the least part of one. Like as in the seed of plants, there is some hidden thing by which they dayly gain vigour and grow;As in the seeds of Plants. so there is some hid∣den thing in every humane body, out of which the body (dissolved) will be again new made.Aquinas. Thomas Aquinas think∣eth it is the primary being of each per∣son, which being restored to every one in the Resurrection, will be dilated in an instant, as Adams rib in the womans creation, and the loaves of Elizeus and Christ,Loaves. with which so many were sa∣tisfied. What nature produceth by long intervals of time, God can effect in an instant. Thus having dispatched Marginal notes, I descend to Meditation, concern∣ing which, take these following Ca∣nons. Can. 1. After you have copied over your whole Speech or Sermon, aptly divided into heads, and marked the principall words of each sentence in
the Margent, go diligently to meditati∣on, trying whether you can repeat all the Sentences in their order by bare sight of the Marginall notes. You need not be sollicitous of every word, so that you do accurately remember the sense or scope, because the minde esteemeth it an unworthy thraledom to be obli∣ged to every conceived word; Horace hath most truly said, Rem bene praevisam verba haud invita se∣quentur. The scope foreseen, words readily occur. But if you stick at any place, read o∣ver the sentence (which the Marginall note doth not suggest) with no lesse di∣ligence and attention of minde, than if you had never seen the same. I dare promise such manner of proceeding in Meditation will produce more happy success, then Opinion can readily con∣ceive: If you do not benefit your self by Marginal notes either in Learning a Speech or Sermon, you will make slow progress, and be sensible of very great
trouble in Meditation; whereas by their help, you may fix sentences in Memory with great celerity (not to say, with plea∣sure) as you may make an experiment, if you please, in the foregoing Tractate. Can. 2. The manner of Meditating, is to learn by parts; That is, First to com∣mit the first Section to Memory, then the Second, afterward the Third, and so forth; the rest in their order: When you have dispatched all the heads severally, apply your self to repeat the whole, observing Quintilians method, to learn with low voice and soft murmure, whereby Memory is be∣nefitted with the double motion of spea∣king and hearing. This counsel seems e∣specially appropriated to such whose minds are slippery, and subject to wan∣der, starting presently aside, if they be not thus restrained; on the contrary, fixed stable minds will experience silent Medi∣tation the more speedy and efficacious way to imprint Notions in Memory. Can. 3. Furthermore seeing a vehe∣ment and earnest application of mind is required in Meditation, whereby the spi∣rits are much exhausted, you must be care∣ful to avoid longer study then agreeth with your health, least your spirits fail
through too great intention of mind: And beware you do not lose a moment of that little time you assign unto Meditation; when you must meditate, let it not be with weariness, but do that willingly, which you must do necessarily. Can. 4. The first and last hours of the day are most apt for Meditation; that is, immediately before and atfer sleep: Let your first Essay in Learning your task be at Evening, about an hour after Supper, reading over twice or thrice what you in∣tend to commit to Memory against the next day, your study being finished, be∣take your self to your rest, that your mind (no other ways diverted) may re∣pose upon your Evening Meditation. In the morning so soon as you have shook off drowziness, and prepared your self, repeat those things diligently you medi∣tated the night before. It is to no pur∣pose to study before sleep, unless in like man∣ner you ruminate after sleep. Can. 5. All that speak publickly, espe∣cially Dispensers of the Word, ought to make it their great care, not to utter things disorderly, but throughly digested by Meditation; lest they be be like such Cooks as buy good meat in the Shambles,
but marr it in the Dressing, sending it raw, or half-boiled to the Table. Be∣sies, if any man appear publickly, either in Pulpit, or otherwise, before he is pro∣vided what to say, he becometh timorous, and the vital spirits (the eies of reason) have recourse tot he heart through fear, whereby he is rendred much more unapt to speak then before. Can. 6. Lastly, which is peculiar in de∣livering Sermons, let Speakers apply more general Doctrines to themselves jointly with the rest, in Confession, Petition, De∣precation, imprecation, intercession, thanks∣giving or praising God, as occasion is given by the Doctrines themselvs; so they shall not onely remember all things bet∣ter, but also edifie their own consciences; Nay further, frequent use of this ioint-application, proveth finally a Manudu∣ction to speak with sense of Divine grace and evidence of Spirit, which is the most excellent ornament of a Preacher. The end of the First Book.
The Art of Memory. The Second Book. CHAP. I. Of remembring without writing. HAving dispatched vulgar ways of Memory, I descend to helps con∣ducing to the same purpose without Hand-writing, which is then most plea∣sant, when we are destitute of the aid of Paper, Ink, or Table-Books, or when by some obstacle we are debarred the free use of them. This consisteth of two o∣perations, Reposition and Deposition. Reposition is the manner of charging Memory with Note-worthy things; here∣in it is not to be expected that each par∣ticular word of every sentence be retai∣ned; but onely, that the general sence be fastened in mind. At all times when a man is about to commit any thing in custody to his Memory, first let him stu∣dy to drown all unnecessary thoughts in
oblivion, that he may perfectly intend the things he is to learn; Oblivion being such a principle of Memory, as Privati∣on is of Generation; and a ready remem∣brance most commonly proceedeth from right understanding the thing in hand; therefore a man must prepare himself diligently, and so unite the force of his imagination, that he may as it were engrave and imprint occur∣rent things in his Memory. Lead doth facily receive impression, because it is tenacious, which Quick-silver cannot admit, by reason of its Fluxibility: In like manner fleeting inconstant minds continually hurried into new & strange cogitations, is far from gathering fruit by any thing heard. The method of a speech is chefly to be observed, regard∣ing seriously what is the general subject thereof; Secondly, the greater parts, and with what Logical Arguments each part is handled; the perfect Method of a speech doth much conduce to remem∣ber the whole; or if the Contexture thereof be inartificial, imperfect, and unsatisfactory, comprehending many things forcibly applied, rejecting things of a like kind, yet a strong Memory will
retain the same by observation of the absurdities and rude Artifice of the whole. Deposition is when we recollect things committed to memory; and having transcribed or transacted them, dis∣charge our memories of them, which is alwayes to be practised at the first opportunity: Things charged in Me∣mory by day, are to be deposited at least before sleep, if not sooner; things charged by night, are to be deposited immediately after sleep, that the mind be no longer burthened then is conve∣nient, and that things negligently laid up in mind, be not forgotten, Writing being the faithfullest Guardian of Me∣morandums. If in dis-burthening your Memory, something charged happen to be forgotten, shut your eyes, that no no external obiect may divert your mind, and try to recall it by importu∣nate scrutiny; which operation may be called Revocation, and is an Art that by help of certain Rules teacheth the in∣vestigation of things lapsed out of me∣mory. To conclude, Deposition, or dischar∣ging things committed to mind, is not
unlike expunging writing out of Table-Books: If therefore there be any Art of Oblivion (as some affirm) it may be properly referred hither. So much in general; now to explicate the particu∣lar species thereof. CHAP. II. Of remembring by certain Verses purpose∣ly born in mind. THe method of charging Memory without writing, is twofold, Poe∣tical and Ideal. The Poetical way of remembring, is accomplished by virtue of Poetry, ei∣ther by Verses purposely afore-compo∣sed, or ex tempore. The manner of re∣membering by Verses already compo∣sed, is when a man doth excogitate or retain remarkable things by repetition of Verses provided to that purpose. Sup∣pose an Attorney be to wait upon Jud∣ges riding the Circuits from one County to another, it may be worth his labour to repeat these verses at leaving his lodging, least he forget some necessary
thing, which we may imagine formerly framed by him to this end. Scalpellum, calami, cornugraphium{que} libelli, Charta, pugillares, capitalia, cera, sigillum, Sic crepide, gladius, cultellus, pugio, burssa, Muccinium, indusium{que} monilia, penula, pecten Fascia cruralis, cruralia, dactylothece. Pen-knife. Quills, Ink-horn, Books, Paper, Table-Books, Caps; Take Wax, Seal and Slippers, Sword, Knife and Dagger, safe make Purse, Handkerchiefs, Shirts, Rings, Coat, and for your own sake, Comb, Garters, Stockins, Gloves. Thus a Carpenter oft employed to work abroad, may ingenuously make the Tools and Instruments belonging to his Art, in Verse; by repetition of which on occasion, he may be admo∣nished what Tools to take along with him: In like sort all ordinary business frequently incumbent upon any man, may be conveniently committed to memory in Verses, which may adver∣tise him to omit nothing. Here I have thought expedient to propose certain Verses lately composed by my self, that they may be benefici∣al
to others (if they please) as they have sometimes been to me, which are these. An? Quis quid? cujus? cui? quo? quibus? auxilijs? cur? Quomodo? circa quid? qualis? quantum? ex, in & a quo? Quamdiu? ubi? quando? quoties? quotu∣plex? quot & unde? If? who? what? whose? to what? whe∣ther? why? about what? How? what fashion? how much? by, of, in, and from what? How long? how often? how manifold? whence came that? Where? when? how many? These Verses (craving the Readers pardon for the ruggedness) contain twen∣ty two Questions of excellent use to in∣vent, retain, as also to recall to minde things of great concernment and worthy memory in urgent affairs; which being prudently applyed by way of interroga∣tion, do necessarily extort the answer of all Logical places, which (though I sup∣pose no man will deny) may be thus illu∣strated.
1. If there be any such thing?If? This question is referred to an indefinite argu∣ment. 2 Who was Author of the Motion,Who? Work, Fact, Saying, Writing, Counsel. This question respecteth the efficient Cause. Definition. 3. What it is? Effects. doth it contain? Effects. doth depend on it? Effects. is moved? Effects. is done?What? Effects. is spoken? Effects. is written? Effects. is consulted? Effects. 4: Whose it is?Whose? 5. To what it is compared,To what? either in quantity equal, greater. lesser. quality like, unlike.
6. Whither it tendeth?Whether? 7. Why the final Cause?Why? 8. About what subject or objectAbout What? in procreating? conserving? abolishing? destroying? 9. How was it done, naturally?How? purposely? necessarily? accidentally? carelesly? 10. VVhat fashion form, connexion,What Fashion? description? 11. How much quantity? 12. By what? whether alone? as principal equal,How Much? By what? inferior with others? as principal equal, inferior with instru∣ments? as principal equal, inferior 13. Of what matter?Of what? 14. In what it is contained?In what? is exercised?
15. From what it is is distinguished, as diverse, unlike, related, contrary, contradictory, privative. 16. How long? 17. How often? 18. How manifold? distribution of causes, of whole into parts of effects, of genus in species of subjects, of accidents. 19. Whence came it? is it derived? is it proved? 20. VVhere? 21. VVhen? 22. How many? induction of causes, parts, effects, species, subjects, accidents.
Hereby it doth accidentally appear, these Verses are both useful to recollect things slipt out of memory, and also to invent new; in handling any subject, ma∣ny things may escape our scrutiny, which a careful repetition of these Verses, and prudent application, may prompt the mind: As for example, suppose a learn∣ed Counsellor were to be consulted about some difficult nice Case, in which a man would not willingly omit any material business, lest his labor be frustrated; let the Interrogations included in these ver∣ses, be severally applied to the cause in controversie, viz. asking, 1. If such a suit be triable in such a Court▪ 2. Who are the adversaries Counsel∣lors? Who his Witnesses? Who enjoined to him in a strict tye of friendship? Who did, spake, writ this or that? Who is Te∣nant of the controverted form? 3. What is exhibited in the Adversa∣ries Declaration? What he thinketh they do now deliberate? 4. To what Mannour, the Farm in question appertaineth? 5. To what case this is like?
6. How far he hath proceeded in the business, and how far he is like, till the suit be determined? 7. Why he said, or did such a thing? 8. About what the controversie chief∣ly dependeth? 9. How he must proceed in the cause? 10. What is the condition of the Jud∣ges? 11. How much cost the drawing of the Reply or Declaration? 12. By what means the possession was regained? The most material passages in any de∣pending cause, may be investigated by propounding such like questions: I hope no man will repent his labour in commit∣ting these lines to Memory, whereby he may reap so much benefit in his studies and common affairs. Whereas I first made mention of an in∣definite Argument, I shall entreat the Readers patience, whilest I declare the cause thereof, not finding any sufficient Reason to banish or expel an Indefinite Argument out of the Logical Common∣wealth, and admire that Ramus hath pre∣termitted it: I think (reserving place for better Judgment) an argument absolute∣ly
consentaneous, is branched more arti∣ficially in this manner. An argument absolutely consentane∣ous, is indefinite, or definite; indefinite is that which argueth a thing indefinitely, as, God is. There is a fift Essence; Definite is that which argueth a thing definitely: Defi∣nite is the cause and effect. Now in this axiome (God is) we do not affirm that God is this or that, but sim∣ply, that he is: And when we say (there is a fift Essence in rerum natura) we do not shew what causes it hath, or what effects, subjects or adjuncts, onely indefinitely pronounce, there is such a thing. To con∣clude, it is manifest, that an indefinite ar∣gument is sufficiently distinguished from all other arguments, because it doth pro∣perly answer this peculiar question (If it be?) which yeildeth very profitable use in Discourse: This by the way. Lastly, In this way of remembring by Verses formerly excogitated, both the parts, Reposition and Deposition, are dispat∣ched in like manner as before; for like as by one repetition of the Verses we charge the memory; so by another we discharge it: Whence there is no need here of any Rules of Revocation, seeing that if the
Verses be once firmly fixed in memory, no part of them will be to seek. This may suffice for the first Poetical way of remembring, that is by Verses provided before-hand: Now I will pass to the next way of Remembring by extem∣porary Verses. CHAP. III: Of remembring by ex tempore Verses. THis order of remembring by extem∣porary Verses, is when the occur∣ring subjects to be remembred, are dispo∣sed in Verse, in the same order as they present themselves; by repetition of which they are again recalled to mind: First, I will handle how to charge the memory ex tempore, afterward I will propound the Deposition or discharging of things so committed to mind. Extemporary Reposition is, when many sentences are delivered in custody to the mind, by certain essential words interwo∣ven in Meeter, and often repeated; in which case great care must be used to im∣print the first Letter of each portion
perfectly in memory. For example, suppose in a Sermon preached in your hearing, you do principally observe these Senten∣ces, which you would preserve in mind, Viz. 1. Earth digged out of a Well, how deep soever, exposed to the air upon a high Tower, although it seemeth to re∣tain no Seed of Herbs, neither is sown by man, yet of its own accord produceth green Herbs; Whence is proved, That there is an innate faculty in every part of the Earth to germinate, infused by God thereinto in the Creation, by his Word, Let the earth bud, &c.Gen. 1.11. 2. It is better to doubt of secret things, then to strive about such as are uncertain, Augustine. 3. The birth of God is to be silently adored, not busily pried into. Nazian∣zene. 4 Not to sin is God's Righteousness; man's Righteousness is God's Indulgence. Bernard. 5. Magistracy cannot compel to Faith and Religion; but may and ought to con∣strain to the means of Faith and Reli∣gion.
6. The folly of School-men is ridicu∣lous, not unlike Mahomets Dreams, con∣tending that the place of Terrestrial Pa∣radise was elevated many degrees above the Earth level, when as Paradise was cer∣tainly defaced by the Deluge, if not be∣fore. 7. He who moderateth himself in un∣lawful things, never falleth into unlaw∣ful. 8. In natural and civil actions, man doth yet retain free-will; but in spiritual and super-natural he lyeth in a dead-sleep til he be vivified by infusion of Christ's Grace. 9. In sacred Baptism, the administrati∣on is of great efficacy; but the Admini∣strator of small. 10. Missa, whence cometh the English Word Masse, of the same signification, denoted no more primarily, then Missio, like as Remissa is the same as Remissio, and Offensa as Offensio: It is certain, the original thereof was derived from a custom among the Fathers living in the primive times, of celebrating the Eucharist alwayes after publike prayers, and reading and expoun∣ding the Scriptures; at which Novices in the faith, persons unbaptized and excom∣municate
might not be present, though they had all permission to attend at Prayers and Sermons. Therefore a Decree was made, that they which did not communicate of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, should be dismissed before the Celebration. Coun. Carthage, 4. Can. 8. Whence Augustine in his Sermon of Time, 237. saith, Behold after Sermon, dismission is pronounced to such as are not sufficiently instructed in Christian Religion; the faithful stays. Hence it is manifest, the Papistical Mass is far different from that of the Fa∣thers; for neither do the Priests dismiss those who do not communicate, but do not somtimes admit any to the Sacrament. 11. Eph. 5.14. Wherefore he saith, Rise up thou which sleepest, stand up from the dead, and Christ will give thee light. By the first clause of this verse (wherefore he saith) seems to be implied, that Paul did not pronounce this sentence of his own Au∣thority, but cited it from some other place; yet seeing this sentence is no where read in Scripture, it is probable that Paul doth here introduce Christ, speaking by his Apostles in their ordinary Gospel-Mi∣nistry, saying, Rise up thou which sleepest, &c. These words are daily pronounced
Reg. 1. If any portion of a Sentence negligently committed to memory, be lost in deposition, you must try if it may be recovered out of oblivion, by the number of syllables of which such por∣tion did consist; for the number of the syllables will either bring it to light, or instruct yee to conjecture probably what it was. For example, in the pra∣ctise of Poetical Reposition, delivered in the former Chapter, suppose that the second portion of the second Verse be forgotten, the first and third portions being these: Not to sin—Paradise on Earth. By numbering the syllables of these two known portions, the middle-porti∣on is found to consist of four syllables; which consideration alone may happi∣ly recall the latent portion. Reg. 2. If this way fail, bend your stu∣dy to finde out the first Letter of the same, repeating the Letters of the Al∣phabet in order, taking good heed which your mind doth suggest to have been the first Letter, wherein your me∣mory will certainly prompt you, unless you were very remiss and negligent in charging the same: The first Letter be∣ing
found, the rest unknown, you must apply that severally to every Letter of the Alphabet, because your mind will likewise acquiesce, when you come to that which was the second. Thus having reco∣vered the two first Letters of the elapsed portion, though the rest be unknown, they may be easily enquired out by help of a Dictionary: As in the former ex∣ample, running speedily over the words beginning with Un, you will soon meet with unconstrained, which was the first word of the lost portion. Reg. 3. If you cannot attain to the same this way, you must compare the parts placed on either side (if the latent sentence were any part of a continued Sermon composed methodically) to in∣form your self how the Speaker passed from the precedent to the subsequent; be∣cause if a man remember the fourth and sixth observations of a late-heard Ser∣mon, disposed in good method, he may regain the fifth, lying as it were in the way, with little or no trouble, by consi∣deration of the method, how he descen∣ded from the fifth to the sixth. Reg. 4. If still you remain unresolved, take in hand the indagation of the mat∣ter
and form thereof; By matter, I mean the subject of the sentence in quest; by form, I understand the structure thereof (Conscience is a natural faculty of the mind, placed in the supremest part thereof, assenting to good, disallowing evil, and therefore of it self never sinneth) the matter of this Sen∣tence is Conscience, the form, the descrip∣tion of the same. If the Matter of a sentence be swal∣lowed up in Oblivion, then the more ge∣neral Classes of common places are to be leisurely perused, possibly when you come at the right head, the mind demurring there, may produce the whole Sentence, or at least, the matter thereof will disco∣ver it self. The more general Heads or Classes (in my Opinion) are these. Of God in general. Of the Trinity. Of the Holy Ghost. Of Christ. Of the Counsel of God. Of the Creation. Of God's Providence. Of the World. Of Time. Of Angels.
Of Devils. Of man in general. Of godly men. Of wicked men. Of brutish Creatures. Of insensible Creatures. Of the blessings of this life. Of the affliction of this life Of Duties. Of sin. Of indifferent things. Of Houshold Government. Of Policy. Of the Church in general. Of the typical Church. Of the Evangelical Church. Of the Word of God. Of Sacraments. Of Heresies. Of the end of the World. Of eternal Life. Of eternal Death. In like manner to find out the latent form, the formal words included in this Hemistick, are to be rehearsed, which do naturally shew the form of any Sen∣tence.
Not, Some, Or, Though, Therefore, Like as, If, None, And, All. That these words, or their Synony∣maes, do shew the formal manner of all sentences, may thus appear. Negative, The Note whereof is, Not, Particular, The Note whereof is, Some, Disjunctive, The Note whereof is, Or, Discretive, The Note whereof is, Though, Illative, The Note whereof is, Therefore, Relative, The Note whereof is, Like as, Conditional, The Note whereof is, If, General Negative The Note whereof is, None, Copulative, The Note whereof is, And, General Affirmative, The Note whereof is, All. If, the Matter being found, the form be still wanting, then apply the Matter of the Sentence leisurely to all Logical pla∣ces, enquiring first if it be? in the next place, What are the efficient causes, matter, form, end, subjects, adjuncts thereof, &c. So may you extort it, though it were dor∣mant in the Brains remotest Cell, or drowned in the River Lethe. Finally, If the Sentence sought for, cannot be discovered by any of these ways, let it pass, and despair not of find∣ing
it; for though now it be concealed, when you seek it; yet if that portion of the sentence comprehended in your verse, be read or heard any where, that same, or the next day, it is a hundred to one but the whole sentence will present it self to mind. Here we will conclude the manner of Remembring by extemporary Verses, which seemeth principally referred to them, who imploy their study much in Poetry, and are indued with a good me∣morative faculty. Thus much may also suffice for the Poetical Art of Remem∣bring: Now let us pass to the method of remembring by Idea's, which quickeneth even the dullest memories. The end of the Second Book.
The Art of Memory. The third Book. CHAP. I. Of Repositories. THe Art of Memory, which we now treat of consisteth of Ideas, and pla∣ces, wherein we will first handle the Reposition of Idea's, and afterward their Deposition. Reposition of Idea's is, when things to be remembred, are charged upon Me∣mory by Idea's, disposed in certain pla∣ces of a Repository; but before I dis∣cend to the manner of Reposition, it is necessary for better explanation, to speak of Repositories, Places, and Idea's in distinct chapters. A Repository is an imaginary fabrick, fancied Artificially, built of hewen stone, in form of a Theater, the form whereof followeth; suppose the Edi∣fice to be twelve yards in length within the walls, in breadth six yards,
and in height seven yards, the roof thereof flat, leaded above, and parget∣ted underneath, lying wholly open to view, without any wall on that side supposed next us: Let there be imagi∣gined a Stage of smooth gray Marble, e∣ven and variegated with a party co∣loured border, which Stage is to be extended over the whole length and breadth of the building, and raised a yard high above the Level of the ground on which the said Edifice is e∣rected: Let all the walls, that is, the opposite wall, & two ends be wain∣scotted with Cypresse beards, so artifici∣ally plained and glewed, that the joynts be indiscernable; suppose also a Groove or Gutter cut in the middle of the Marble Stage, three inches broad, extended from the opposite wall to the hither side of the Stage, whereby it is exactly divided into two equall parts, and that upon the further end of the said Groove, there is erreared a Column, a foot and half thick, arising up to the Roof of the building, almost touching the opposite wall, and deviding it into two equal parts, as the Groove divideth the Stage; so that by the Groove, and
the Pillar, the whole Repository is parted in twain, and consisteth of two Rooms, siding each other, each of them being six yards long, six yards broad, and six yards high. For the better under∣standing this invention, I have caused a Type of the Repository to be here deli∣neated, the explanation whereof im∣mediately followeth.
The Letters, a, b, c, d, shew the length of the Edifice, a, c, b, d, the height, a, e, b, f, the height of the Stage, g, i, k, h, are boundaries of the opposite wall, e, c, i, g, the side wall upon the left hand, h, k, d, f, the side wall of the right hand, c, l, m, d, de∣sign the Roof, g, i, n, p, the opposite wall of the first Room, e, g, o, p, the Stage of the first Room, r, q, k, h, the opposite wall of the second Room, s, r, h, f, the Stage of the second Room, n, o, the Pillar dividing the opposite wall, o▪ p, the Groove wrought into the Stage. A Repository according to this fa∣shion, is to be represented before the eyes of our minde, wheresoever we are, as oft as we intend to practise this Art; supposing our selves to stand about two yards distant, against the midst thereof.
CHAP. II. Of Places. A Place (as to our consideration) is an apt space in a Repository, de∣signed for reception of Idea's. There are onely two Places in every Repository of equal form and magni∣tude, that is the two rooms of each Re∣pository determinated as a foresaid by the Pillar and Groove. That place is said to be the former, which is on the right hand of the Re∣pository, that which is on the left hand, the latter; That part of the Reposi∣tory is said to be on the right hand, which is opposite to the left hand of a man standing against the middle of the Repository, that on the left hand which is opposite to the right. Thus in the Scheme exhibited in the former Chapter, the letters, g, i, n, o, demonstrate the opposite wall of the right hand part, or first place or room of the Repository, and the letters, e, g, o, p, the Stage thereof; so r, q, k, h, are Indices of the opposite wall of the left hand part, or second Place or
room of the Repository, and s, r, h, f, the Stage of the same. CHAP. III. Of Idea's in General. AN Idea is a visible representation of things to be remembred, fra∣med by a strong imagination, by help whereof the minde by reflexion cal∣eth to memory, together with the Idea, the thing represented. Idea's are to be vested with their proper circum∣stances, according as their natures require, for like as Writings, the fair∣er they are, are more facilly read; so Idea's, the more aptly they are conceived, according to the exigency of their nature, are more speedily re∣called to minde; and also consequent∣ly the things by them signified. Mo∣tion is to be attributed to Idea's of move∣able things; quiet to Idea's of quiet things, and good or evil savours, to Ideas representing things so qualified. Examples of moveable Idea's, are Ar∣tificers at work in their shops, women
dauncing, Trees shaken by the wind, Water running from Cocks, and such like. Idea's of quiet things, are Henns laying in their nests, Thieves lurking under bushes, &c. Idea's to which sound is ascribed, are a Lion roaring, a Bell ringing, whistling, murmure of Trees, a Quirister singing, a Huntsman hol∣lowing, &c. Moreover, if Perfume, burning in a Chafing-dish, be used for an Idea, a sweet and pleasant odour must be attributed thereto, on the contrary to vaults under ground, a filthy, unwholsome stink, is to be as∣signed; so Idea's of merry men, require cheerfulness of countenance, of sick∣men, pale-nesse and sadnesse. After this manner Idea's sot Edifices, Machines, and all Artificial things whatsoever, ought to be signalised; proportion of form, and splendour of colours, must be attributed to Pictures, grace and livelinesse of Letters, to Writings, glory and excellency of Wormanship, to En∣gravings,; Finally, every Idea must have such illustration as may render it most notable and conspicuous, and seem principally coherent to its na∣ture.
But before I proceed further, it is expedient to take into consideration, the common Affection of Ideas, their Species, shall succeed after, in a more proper place. The common Affections of Idea's are three: Quantity, Position, and Co∣lour. CHAP. IV. Of the Quantitie of Idea's. AN Idea in respect of Quantity, is ei∣ther equal, greater, or lesser then the thing represented. An equal Idea is, when the thing re∣presented, is bestowed in a Place of the Repository, in its proper and due magnitude, as being neither too great to be contained therein, nor so small it cannot be discerned by one standing before the Repository; such are Chairs, Pictures, Tables, Beds, Heaps of Stone, Piles of Wood, two Combatants in a single Duel, and the like. An-augmented, or greater Idea, is when the thing to be remembred, is in∣creased
to a multitude, that it may be bet∣ter viewed at a distance, which else being small, would not fall under cognizance; as if the thing to be deposited in the Re∣pository, were a Penny, a Pearl, a Grain of Mustard-Seed, or a Spider, which are so small, that disposed in a Room of the Re∣pository, they escape the sight of a man standing before the Repository: In such ca∣ses, instead of one Penny, imagine a heap of Pence new coined; Instead of one Pearl, a multitude of Pearls; Instead of one Grain of Mustard-seed, fancy certain Bushels scattered about the Stage; And for one Spider, suppose a multitude creep∣ing about the opposite Wall. A contracted or lesser Idea is, when the thing to be remembred is so great, that it cannot be comprehended in its proper natural quantity, within such narrow li∣mits as a room of a Repository, & is there∣fore imagined to be pourtrayed with ele∣gant lively colours, in a Picture fixed to the opposite Wall. Thus space of places how far soever distant, & all great things, may be facilely represented in a Picture: As if the thing to be remembred were a Battel, a triumphant spectacle, hunting or hawking through Woods and Groves,
a Naval conflict, large Territories, Ca∣stles, a Mountain, or Church, &c. whose Idea's cannot be contained in the me∣morial places, unless contracted, and aptly and artificially comprized in a Picture, conceited by imagination hanging against the opposite Wall, that so it may be fully comprehended. CHAP. V. Of the Position of Idea's. LEt the Position of every Idea be such as in vulgar use doth most commonly appertain to the thing sig∣nified; Let the Idea's of things usually hanged against a Wall, be so disposed in the Repository, as Musical Instruments, Arms, Looking-Glasses, Pictures, Brush∣es, written Tables, &c. Such things as are customarily fastened to, or in a Wall, imagine them accommodated in the Repository in like manner, as Ti∣tle-pages of Books pasted against the Pillar, Proclamations, or printed pa∣ges nailed to the Wall, Funeral-Strea∣mers, or Pendants, in the higher part
of the opposite Wall, as you see in Churches: Such things as are com∣monly set upon shelves, fancy them so placed in the Repository, as Vessels of Gold, Silver, Glasses, Books, Mercery Wares, &c. Such things as are usually placed on a Table, conceive them so marshalled in the Repository, as Victu∣als, Sums of Money, Table-Boards, &c. such things as lye, or are any ways sci∣tuate on ground, must be so placed in the Reyository, as heaps of Wheat, a Cra∣dle, Chest, Table, living Creatures, whether standing, fitting, or lying, &c. Such things as are frequently under ground, are to be supposed under the Marble-Stage; for though they escape the eye of a man standing before the Repository, yet they cannot be concea∣led from the eyes of his mind, which are onely exercised in this matter; of this sort are Graves, Wells, Wine-Cel∣lars, Mettaline-Mines, Subterranean passages, through which streams have their course, as Blood in the Veins, &c. Like method is to be observed in site and position of all other things.
CHAP. VI. Of the Colours of Repositories and Idea's. HEre you are to be admonished, that though every Repository is suppo∣sed to be uniform in Building; yet they are distinguished from one another by the pillar in the middle of every Repo∣sitory, which must be imagined of seve∣ral colours; as if you use ten, that which you design for the first, must be concei∣ved to have a Golden Pillar; the second a Pillar of Silver: the third of black stone; the fourth of blew stone; the fift of red stone; the sixth of yellow stone; the sevench of green stone; the eighth of purple stone, the ninth of white stone, the tenth of Cinamon colour. Now for distinction sake, Gold is called the colour of the first Repository; Silver the colour of the second Repository; black of the third Repository; and so successive∣ly as before. If you use more than ten Repositories, you must repeat the same colours over again, as before; so that
the eleventh is imagined to have a gol∣den pillar, the twelfth a silver pillar, the thirteenth a black pillar, the four∣teenth a blew pillar, and so the rest in order. After the same manner every I∣dea must be conceived cloathed, adorn∣ed, or some way illustrated with the proper colour of the Repository, where∣in it is imagined to be placed. Take an example or two for better explanati∣on: Suppose a Saylor in a Canvase Suit be retained for an Idea in the first Repo∣sitory, I represent him standing there with a Golden Chain over his shoulder like a Belt; if in the second, imagine he weareth a silver Chain a∣bout his neck, with a Whittle fastened thereto: If in the third, that he hath black Boots on his legs: If in the fourth, that he hath a blew Skarf on his Arm, tyed in a rose-knot: If in the fifth, that he wears a Red Monmouth Cap on his head: If in the sixth, that he swagger∣eth with a yellow Feather in his Cap: If in the seventh, that he hath a Green Silk Garter on his right leg: If in the eighth, that his Canvase Coat is imbel∣lished with a border of Purple Velvet: If in the ninth, that his neck is beauti∣fied
with a very white Orient Pearl; If in the tenth, that he hath a pair of Cinnamon coloured Breeches. Howbeit, if the Idea of its own na∣ture be any ways related to the colour of its Repository, whereby it may be pre∣sently understood to have the colour thereof, it will need no other attribu∣tion: For example, if a Mayor of a City, (who in regard of his Office is dignified with a purple Gown, and Gold Chain) be placed as an Idea in the first or fift Repository, there will be no need of Attribution of colour, because the Golden Chain doth manifestly re∣present the colour of the first Repository, the purple Gown the colour of the fift. In like sort, if a black Bull be placed as an Idea in either room of the first Repo∣sitory, his horns must be conceived gild∣ed with Gold; if in the second, with sil∣ver; if in the third, black, being the pro∣per colour of that Repository, excludeth any other addition: If in the fourth, let him be decked with a Chaplet of blew Flowers; if in the fift, with a Garland of red Roses, &c. So a Picture imagined to be painted on the opposite Wall of the first Repository, must be illustrated with
Gold in some convenient place: If in the opposite Wall of the second Repository, with silver; of the third, with black, &c. This attribution of a Repositories co∣lour, is of marvellous use, both to keep in mind the Idea's themselves, as also their order; hereby the mind re-peru∣sing Idea's formerly bestowed, hath al∣wayes some certainty to guide it self, and recollect any Idea at present latent; because it's unquestionable, that the missing Idea is either wholly, or at least in part, illustrated with the proper co∣lour of its Repository. Moreover, in attributing a Repositories colour to an Idea, (of it self not parta∣king thereof) you must be careful that the colour of the Repository be accom∣modated to the most eminent part of the Idea, or as near as may be: If the History of the Prophet Jonah thrown into the Sea by Mariners, be used as an Idea, it must be represented in a picture according to the third Chapter prece∣ding; in which, though the Whale, Sea, Ship & Land are to be pourtrayed, yet the Effigies of Jonah himself is the most remarkable part of the picture, because Jonah is of the History there painted: If
therefore this Story be to be deposited in the first Repository, let the border of his Gown be supposed of Gold; if in the second, of Silver; if in the third, let the Gown be fancyed black; if in the fourth, blew, &c. so the top of a heap of Wheat is the most conspicuous part; therefore if a heap of Wheat be placed in the first Repository, imagine a Golden Streamer two foot long fixed in the top of the Heap; if in the second Repository, let the Streamer be Silver; if in the third, black; if in the fourth, blew, &c. Thus much may suffice for common Affections of Idea's, in quantity, positi∣on and colour; their species follow. CHAP. VII. Of Direct Idea's. AN Idea is simple or compound: A simple Idea is uniform, and is fourfold, direct, relative, fictitious and written. A Direct Idea is when a visible thing, or conceived under a visible form, is be∣stowed in the Repository, according to
the same form, under which it is natu∣rally apprehended: So a Goat is the di∣rect Idea of a Goat; a Rhinocerot of a Rhi∣nocerot; a Peacock of a Peacock; a Dove of a Dove. Thus a Majestical man a∣dorned with a Scepter, Imperial Dia∣dem and Robe, is the Idea of a King: A person arrayed in Academical habit, of a Schollar; An ancient woman in mour∣ning weeds, weeping and wiping her face with an Handkerchief, of a widow: A Virgin apparelled like a Nun, of a Nun: A Satyr, as the Poets describe them, of a Satyr: So a Temple is the direct Idea of a Temple, a Book of a Booke, a Bed of a Bed, a Sheath of a Sheath, an Image of an Image▪ a picture of a picture, an Epistle of an Epistle, a Bond sealed, of a Bond: So good An∣gels and Spirits, though they be incor∣poreal and invisible, (seeing they are commonly conceived under visible forms) may be reposited as the other. To conclude, the minde of man doth naturally & immediately present direct Idea's of all visible things, or such as are conceived under a visible form, that it is in vain to excogitate any, but ra∣ther life those that offer themselves. If
a man hears the relation of a Naval Battel, doth not he presently seem to behold the Sea, Ships, smoke of great, Ordnance, and other things obvious in such matters. If speech be made of muttering an Army, doth not the Hea∣rer form in his minde the Effigies of a Field, replenished with Souldiers mar∣ching in Military postures. No precept in this kind is delivered, which Nature it self hath not dictated; but onely to imprint these Idea's more deeply in me∣mory, we bestow them methodically in some place, left otherwise they be for∣gotten through light apprehension. To explain this more evidently, I will use an example. An Example of remembering a History. Diogenes the Cynick entering Plato's Hall, when he saw the Table covered with a rich Carpet, the Shelves glitter∣ing with Silver, Gilt Cups, Vessels, and other sumptuous furniture, laid hold of the Carpet with all his might, threw it to the ground, and trod thereon with his feet, saying, I tread upon Plato's pride: To whom Plato replied, But with greater pride:
The Idea of this Story is not so great, but that it may admit Reposition in its equal quantity: Therefore I suppose in the place of the Repository where it is to be bestowed, that there is a table cover∣ed with a rich Carpet, which a sordid fellow in beggarly Raiment, throws on the ground, a grave man clothed in honest sober apparel looking on. The attribution of the colour of the Repo∣sitory is not to be forgotten: If there∣fore it be the first Repository in which this Idea is to be placed, I imagine the Carpet to be imbellished with a fringe or border of God: If in the second, of Silver: If in the third, of black: If in the fourth, of blew, and so forth in the rest. Another Example. When Caius Julius Cesar first invaded Britain, the inhabitants taking arms set upon him, and in set-battel drave him and his old Souldiers to flight: Whence that of Lu∣can concerning Caesars repulse. Territa quaesitis oftendit terga Britanis. Unto the Britains found, afrighted backs he shew'd.
The Idea of this history must be contract∣ed, because it cannot be contained in the memorial place in its due magnitude, C. 4. Therefore I imagine the representation of a sharp Battel, fairly interwoven in the hangings, doth cover the half portion of the opposite Wall, either on the right or left hand, not omitting the fit attribution of the Repositories colour; wherein one part of the Combatants personating the Romans, are armed and clad more ci∣villy, their General and Standard-Bear∣er, with their whole Squadron, giving ground, whereby their fellows take an occasion of flight; the other part, de∣signing the Britains, in more rude and Savage attire, press their flying Enemies, and prosecute their victory. An example of a Sentence to be remembred, the Subject being visible. An Ant is a small Insect, the coldest and dryest of all Creatures, and there∣fore the wisest; for cold and dry do chief∣ly contribute to Wisdom. The Idea of this sentence ought to be augmented; for the magnitude of an Ant is so inconsider∣able, that being bestowed in a memorial
place, it escapeth sight: Therefore I sup∣pose an Ant-heap in the middle stage of the memorial place, seeming almost black with Ants, swarming hither and thither; As for assignation of colour if this Idea be placed in the third Repository, the co∣lour of the Repository, is sufficiently no∣ted by the blackness of the Ants; if in the seventh, by the greenness of the Ant-hill; so that there needeth no addition of colour, if placed in the third or seventh Repository: But if it be designed to the first Repository, let a Triangular Golden Streamer be supposed fixed in the Ant-hill, a foot high; if in the second, a Silver Streamer; if in the fourth, a Streamer of blew Silk; if in the fifth, of red; if in the sixt, of yellow; if in the eighth, of purple; if in the ninth, of white; if in the tenth, of Cinnamon colour. Another Example. . Or as Ovid hath it in his first Book De Amore: Qnid magis est durum saxo? quid molli∣us unda? Dura tamen molli saxa cavantur aqua.
What is harder then a stone? then water soft? Yet Stones are worn by Water dropping oft. Either sentence signifying the same thing, are disposed after a like manner, by supposing a Leaden Spout, sustained by an Iron Prop, fastened in the upper part of the opposite Wall of the Repo∣tory, doth discharge plenty of water up∣on the Marble Stage, which is worn be∣neath with the continual drip: In this case the prop of the Spout may exhibit the colour of the Repository. All Histories, Actions, Fables, com∣mon Affairs; all visible things, or concei∣ved under a visible form; finally. All sen∣tences whose subject is visible , may be disposed in Repositories by Direct Ideas, in equal, augmented or contracted quan∣tity. CHAP. VIII. Of Relative Ideas. A Simple relative Idea is, when some∣thing to be rememembred is ex∣pressed by his Correlative.
First, when the Cause is signified by the effect, as Melancholy by a sad man, with his hat pulled over his eyes, his arms folded a cross, his eies looking on the ground, standing immoveable: The Spring by Green Meadows and Flow∣ring trees: Winter by houses, Plants, earth, and all other things covered with Snow, and rigid with Frost: Glut∣tony by a Fat man, vomitting half di∣gested morsels. Secondly, when the effect is signifi∣ed by the Cause, as you did note the oppression of the poor, by some eminent Oppressour, generally spoken against for his unjust accumulation of riches: bla∣sphemy by some notorious blasphemer, whose discourse is frequently forced with impious oaths. Thirdly, when the Subject is noted by an Adjunct, as Regal dignity, by a Scepter and Crown; a Tavern, by a Bush; Exorcisme, by a Figure or charm; the Planets and twelve houses, by their proper characters appropriated unto them. Fourthly, when an Adjunct is signi∣fied by the Subject; as Cold, by Ice; heat, by fire; light, by a candle; love, by a
heart, the seat of affection; pride by a Peacok spreading his tail; Gluttony, by an Estrich; Drunkennesse, by a noted drunkard; Impudence, by a norious whore; Avarice by a rich man count∣ing money, &c. Fifthly, when one like thing, is put for another, as Parallel Circles, for the world; a clean writing book▪ for a soule; a Serpent with a tail in his mouth, for a year,; a woman embracing a broken pillar, for Fortitude; a Virgine veiled, holding a drawn sword in her right hand, & a pair of ballances in her left, for Justice; a Winged old man, having long hair in the forepart of his head, bald behind, and holding a Sythe in his hand, for Time: A man lading wa∣ter out of a pond with a Sive, for a fool undertaking an imposible thing, &c. Sixthly, When a sentence is denoted by some particular example, by which the truth thereof is notably demon∣strated▪ as, No Element is qualified with gravity in its proper place: This Philoso∣phical axiome may be fitly illustrated by a man diving under water, who so long as he is in the Water, is not sen∣sible that is ponderous, but out of the
water findeth exprimentally a pail full of water heavy: The quantity of such Ideas is equal; for I imagine all the Stage of the Memorial place, where this Idea is to be represented, convert∣ed into a Bath, with a capacious Mar∣ble Cistern, a foot thick round about, filled to the brim with fair water, in the middle whereof a naked man stan∣deth upright, lifting a Tankard of wa∣ter with both his hands, as if he were shewing it: If this Idea be placed in the first Repository, the Tankard must be supposed of Gold; if in the second, of Silver; in the third, of Potters earth, black, in the fourth, blew, &c. that the Idea may be some way related to the co∣lour of its place. Another Example. The body heated with wine, boileth over with lust. This Sentence may be expres∣ed by an Idea of Lot, sporting wanton∣ly with his two Daughters in the Grot, is a notable illustration thereof. To this purpose I imagine the Stage of the memorial place, wherein this Idea is to be conserved, transformed into a Cave,
as it were framed out of a natural Rock, and seem to behold Lot revel∣ling with his two Daughters: Here Lot's outer Garment must be deemed to bear the Repositories colour. Another Example. Judicial Astrology is a busie vanity. Basil in Hexaemer. Hom. 1, This may be relatively fancied by the History of Thales the Philosopher, about to take a Stars height with an Astrolobe in a clear night, who being somewhat heedless of his station, fel into a Ditch, for which he was worthily derided of a Woman standing by; because he did so curious∣ly mind things over his head, he did neglect those under his feet. In brief, if any thing may be readily understood by its Correlative, the same maybe used for a Relative Idea; by which kind of Idea, all kind of Hyeroglyphicks and innumerable sentences ingenuous∣ly exemplified, may be repofited in Re¦positories.
CHAP. IX. Of Fictitious Ideas. A simple Fictitious Idea, is when any thing is bestowed by way of a substitute, wherewith it is faigned to have some supposed conveniency; as when a word of Homonymous significa∣tion, denoting some visible thing in one sense (either in our our own lan∣guage, or another) is substituted for something invisible or unknown. Af∣ter this manner proper names are of∣ten reserved in Memory: as in Latine, Ramus, a mans name, may be signi∣fied per ramum viridem, a green branch; Remus, per remum, an Oare; So in En∣glish, Smith a mans name, may be re∣posed by a Smith blowing up fire in his Forge. Pinke, by the Flower so called: Carpenter, by one of that trade plaining boards: Penelope, by the Picture of Pe∣nelope and her web: Lucrece, by the Pi∣cture of the Roman Lady so called, pro∣curing her own death. Thus stran∣gers names may be conserved by
friends or acquaintance of the same name; as John a strangers name, by a brother or friend, so cal∣led; so Grace, signifying favour, may be retained by Grace, a womans name. Thus words or names (which at large signifie no visible thing) which divided into parts, signifie one or ma∣ny things, may be laid up in Reposito∣ries on the Stage, wall, or hangings in decent order; as these Barbarous words in Latine,er, s, sis, sus. Aperglissus, by a Clay banke, on the right hand whereof (which is towards our left hand) a Bear wallow∣eth, and on the left (toward our right hand) a Sow. Tedaspis, by a Torch and an Asp,a, aspis. . Bosarnos, by an Oxe and a Lamb. Araphos, by an Altar and a Light.. Sustineamus, by a Sow, a Moth, and a Mouse, according to that noted rse, rfur edit▪ pannum, panem quoque sus∣tineamus. Sow eats Bran, a Moth Cloth, a a Mouse Bread.
So Coxcomb in English, may be repre∣sented by two Cocks fighting, & pulling each other by the Comb. Birdlington, by a Bird, Ling fish so called, and a Tunne. Harbottle, by a Hare and a Bot∣tle, &c. Some men to fix single words and letters more firmly in memory, use the images of men and women for substi∣stuted Ideas of Letters, and for ani∣mation (to use their own phrase) attri∣bute actions to them, whereby the minde may be provoked to the affecti∣ons, Mercy, Mirth, Lust, Feare, Ava∣rice, Wrath, &c. But such Ideas are by no means to be approved, First, be∣cause it is impious, and dangerons to cherish lustfull or scurrulous images in the mind, which infect the soul, and render it more dull in performing its Office. Secondly, it wholly pervert∣eth the natural manner of Remembring; for Nature teacheth men from their infancy, by the images of men, to ap∣prehend men, not letters, which or∣der to infringe, is all one as to unteach Nature, which is both dangerous and difficult. Thirdly, too much time is lost in animation of such Ideas, which,
is therefore done, that being revol∣ved in Memory, they may be more deeply engraven. Lastly, it is vain and altogether unprofitable, to frame an Alphabet of living Creatures, and learn them by heart, seeing they serve onely to apprehend naked Letters or single words, whose use is not fre∣quent. CHAP. X. Of Written Idea's A Single written Idea, is when the thing to be Remembred, is imagi∣ned to be written with black letters in a plain white Table, four foot square, hanging against the opposite wall of the Repository. Written Idea's will per∣haps at first seem too weak and infirm to prompt the Memory with any thing to be remembred; but if all our Rules which are required in disposing writ∣ten Idea's, be strictly observed, you will think otherwise.
In every such Idea, six things are re∣quired. First, that the Characters (such as are Letters and Arithmetical figures) be supposed of such magnitude, that they may be plainly read by one stand∣ing somewhat remote; for so they are most easily attracted by the visual fa∣culty, and transferred to Memory, such like writings and inscriptions are fre∣quently seen in walls of Churches and houses. Secondly, That every Idea be con∣ceived written in the same form as are commonly exposed in Books or Paper. In remembring Proofs, you must fancy the names of the Books abbrevi∣ated, as Gen. 20.6. Rom. 8.13. Cata∣logues of names are distinguished by their descent downward in order, as in the Alphabetical Catalogue of the He∣retiques. Aetians. Agnoites. Albanenses. Anthropomorphists, Apollinaries.
Apellites. Arrians. Artemonites. Athelites, &c. Distribution of parts distinctly pla∣ced, being referred to the whole, are thus explicated. Jewish feasts have been more solemn, 3. Passover. Penticost. Feast of Tab. less so∣lemn, 3. New Moons, or of blow∣ing the Trumpet. Feast of Expiation. Feast of Dedication, in∣stituted by Herod the Great. A Syllogisme consisting of a Proposi∣tion, Assumption, and Conclusion, is placed in divers distinct sections, after this manner. He which devoureth things consecrated to God, procureth destruction to his own family, Prov. 20.25. But he which appropriated a portion of Glebe (pertaining to the Priest) to himself
and his heirs, devoureth that which is conse∣crate to God, Ezek. 45.4. Therefore he which appropriateth a Por∣tion of Glebe, &c. A Comparison distributed into its two parts, hath Protasis and Apodosis collate∣rally disposed thus. As there is great difference between the faculty of seeing, and the act of seeing; for the faculty is alwayes present, the act is often intermitted. So there is great difference between the faculty of faith, and the act of believing: re∣generate persons after conversion, do alwayes possess the former, but the latter is often in∣terrupted. So Poetical fragments are expressed in single Verses and Lines, long Sentences in prose are described in Lines of equal length, summarily fancy all kind of wri∣tings in their usual mode. Thirdly, it is required, That you sup∣pose the Writing to begin at the upper end of the Table. Fourthly, One word at least in every written Idea, must be very carefully ap∣prehended
and supposed to be expressed in Text-Letters, with all the Vowels in Gold, especially let the first Letter be ve∣ry great, and the other transcendent Let∣ters, if there be any, drawn somewhat longer then customarily. Here you may observe, that of the small Letters some are interlineary, some transcendents: In∣terlineary letters in all kind of Writing, are such as lye equally between two pa∣rallel lines, as a, c, e, m, n, o, r, u, w. Transcendent letters are such as ex∣ceed the Interlineary space, some of which do onely penetrate the upper line, as b, d, i, k, l, t, h, some the lower, as f, s, j. Fifthly, It is necessary, according to the Doctrine delivered in the sixt Chap∣ter, that every Idea be rendered some way partaker of the colour of his Repo∣sitory) that the frame or border of every Table be imagined of the same colour as his Repository. Lastly, you must so long contemplate your supposed written Idea, till you have made at least some small impression there∣of in your memory, diligently observing in your mental meditation, the length of the whole; Writing the first letter of the
principal word, as in the fourth Rule the Golden Vowels, transcendency and or∣der of the letters, with such like conside∣rations as chiefly conduce to imprint the written Idea firmly in your imagination: For seeing Writings make less impression in the mind, then things, they must be more carefully and longer revolved in mind, that they may accomplish by assi∣duity, what they cannot perform through imbecillity. These generally required in every writ∣ten Idea, may suffice: Now I will descend to particular Rules; but considering that to treat of every particular kind of writ∣ten Idea, would be both laborious and unnecessary, I will onely insist upon the more usual, which are four, a Word, a Proof, a Phrase, a Sentence. A single Word, and a Proof, cannot be supposed to have any principal Word, because they be singular, which never the∣less must be carefully taken notice of as in the fourth Rule. Let this Word (Spagyrus) be the Ex∣ample of a Word to he imaginarily writ∣ten, signifying according to Paracelsus, one which can dexterously discern good
from evil, truth from falshood: Fancy the same thus written. SPAGYRUS. In the Inscription I diligently weigh the length of the Word▪ the first letter, the figure and order of the other letters, their colour and transcendency: Three are of Gold, a, y, u. three descend be∣neath the lower line, p, y, g. In the inscription of a Proof, besides the Name of the Book, the quantity of the Numbers is to be carefully observed: Number being the measure of quantity, and therefore meerly related to visible things, is facilely kept in mind; the only observation of the quantity of Numbers, fixeth them perfectly in Memory. Take an Example of a Proof. Exod. 10.16 The letters e, and o, are fancied of Gold, x, and d, are transcendents, the former ascending above the line, the latter descending beneath. In writing a Phrase and Sentence, the first Word is to be heedfully observed;
and therefore the first letter must be ima∣gined very large, all the Vowels written with Gold, and the transcendents very largely extended, as is aforesaid, Rul. 4. Moreover in writing of Phrases, all the Words except the first, must be sup∣posed written with small letters, after this manner. To entice with flattering words. Conceited with vain glorious bubbles. A Sentence consisteth of one or more clauses. A Sentence of one Clause may be sup∣posed wholly written with Capital let∣ters, as, NO CALAMITY IS ALONE. THE LAW OF GOD IS THE LIGHT OF MAN. . FRIENDS HAVE ALL THINGS IN COMMON. In Sentences of many Clauses, you may suppose all the words of the first Clause marked with capital letters, the rest with small letters: As SOLA SALUS SERVIRE Deo; sunt coetera fraudes.
GODS SERVICE IS CHIEFEST BLESSEDNESS; other things are de∣ceits. QUANQUAM BONUM NON EST MALUM; est tamen bonum ut sit malum. Augustine. ALTHOUGH EVIL IS NOT GOOD; yet it is good that there should be evil. WHATSOEVER IS TO BE BE∣LIEVED BY EVERY MAN IS TRUE. But every wicked man is to believe that he shall be saved: Therefore it is true, that every wick∣ed man shall be saved. Here you must note, that every wick∣ed man is not to believe absolutely, that he shall be saved, but conditionally, viz. If he repent, and believe in Christ. Another Example. AUREAM QUISQUIS MEDIOCRI∣TATEM DILIGIT; tutus careat absoleti Sordibus tecti, careat invidenda Sobrius aula. Horat.
THE GOLDEN MEANE WHO IS CONTENT WITHALL, Wants no spacious Pallace, nor envied Hall. By written Idea's you may conserve all Characters, single Letters, naked Num∣bers, calculations of Nativities, Cosmo∣graphical Descriptions and Proofs, as al∣so all Words, Phrases and Sentences, not to be aptly expressed otherwise. Now having dispatched all written I∣deas, and such as are single, we will pro∣ceed to the compound. CHAP. XI. Of Compound Idea's. THis kind is compounded of single I∣dea's, representing either a naked word or sentence: A compound Idea signifying a single word, consisteth of a Fictitious and written Idea; As for exam∣ple: If you were to remember (Edline) a friends Name, imagine (Ed) written on the opposite Wall on the right hand, and a line extended thence all along to the left aside.
So Lambert may be retained by a Lamb placed in one of the Repositories, and [ert] written on the opposite Wall on the left hand. Many words may be conveniently re∣posited by Idea's compounded of fictiti∣ous and written Idea's. A compound Idea representing an in∣tire sentence, is twofold, consisting either of a Direct and Written Idea, or of a Rela∣tive and Written Idea; the nature of both will appear perspicuous by exam∣ples. Example of an Idea, compounded of a Di∣rect and written Idea. In the third Book of Ovid's Elegies, the Fable of Jupiter and Danaes, is thus morally applyed. Jupiter admonitus nihil esse potentius auro, Corruptae pretium Virginis ipse fuit. Dum merces aberat durus pater, ipsa severa, Aerati postes, ferrea turris erat. Sed postquam sapiens in munere venit adulter Prebuit ipsa sinus, & dare jussa dedit.
Jove having heard Gold was of greatest power, Would for a Maiden-head himself have sold: Without a Bribe, Father and Maid look't sowre, Brass gates and Iron Walls did him with∣hold; Till in a shower of Gold wise Jove de∣scending, The Daughter lov'd, the Father did be∣friend him. To remember this Moral, imagine the story of Jupiter and Danaes, drawn to the life in the upper part of a large frame hanging against the opposite Wall, and these Verses of Ovid writ according to the usual manner, in the lower part, which is vacant. Another Example. The seven Electoral Princes first insti∣tuted Otho, third Emperor of that Name, and Pope Gregory the fift, are in∣cluded by Manlius, in these Verses.
Moguntinensis, Trevirensis, Colonensis, Atque Palatinus Dapifer, Dux portitur ensis. Marchio Prepositus camere, Pincerna Bo∣hemus. The Prelates of Mentz, Trevers and Colen. The Palsgrave Carver,Of Bran∣denburg. Marquiss Cham∣berlain, TheOf Au∣stria. Duke Sword-bearer, Cup-bearer theOf Bohe∣mia. King. Suppose an Emperor sitting on a throne in one of the Repositories, seven Princes standing about him, and these Verses writ on a table, hanging against the opposite Wall. Another Example. An Epigram of Sir Hugh, a vain-glo∣rious Knight, taken out of Nicholas Bor∣bon. Sepelapis motus non fit muscosus, ut aiunt, At barbam é bello retulit Hugo domum. Moss (as they say) grows on no rowling stone; Yet Sir Hugh from the Wars brought a Beard home.
Imagine an armed Knight, of a fierce Martial aspect, with a long Beard, walk∣ing in a memorial place, bearing a white Shield on his left arm, wherein this Epi∣gram is inscribed. Another. An Epitaph upon the Empress Matil∣da, Daughter of Henry the First, King of England; Wife of Henry the Fourth, Em∣peror; and Mother of Henry the second, King of England. Magna ortu, majorque viro, sed maxima prole; Hic jacet Henrici filia, sponsa parens. By Birth Great, Wedlock greater, great∣est in Progeny, Here lies the Daughter, Spouse, and Mo∣ther of Henry. Fancy this Epitaph graven on the hi∣ther side of an Alablaster tomb, standing in a memorial place. All Histories, Acts, Fables, Apologies, Morals described in Verse, or other Wri∣ting; also Epigrams, Epitaphs, Anagrams and Mottoes may be retained in Memo∣ry,
by an Idea compounded of a Direct and Written. Example of an Idea compounded of a Rela∣lative and Written. Theodore Beza writeth thus, under the Emblem of a man spitting towards Hea∣ven. Cernis, ut hic foedo coelum qui conspuit ore, Non coelum, imo suos conspuit ore sinus: Et tu coelorum Dominum contemptor, in illum Non quot verba jacis, tot tibi probra vomis? This Drivil who doth spit at Heaven high; Not Heaven, but his bosom doth defile; So contemners of Divine Majesty Do hurt themselves, not God, by spee∣ches vile. In the upper part of a table hanging against the opposite Wall, imagine the picture of a man with his hands on his sides, his legs stradling, and his head ben∣ded backward towards Heaven, spitting thereat; this Tetrastichon written under∣neath, according to the usual manner in Emblems.
Another. The same Theodore Beza hath another Embleme of a Circumference, equally di∣stant on every side from its Center, with these Verses. Cernis ut haec medium cingat teres undique punctum Linea, & hinc spacio distet & inde pari. Scilicet illa refert, quod nos tegit undique coe∣lum, Tellurem hoc punctum quod tenet ima no∣tat, Cur igitur doleas? quorsum (dic quaeso) la∣bores Tu, patria pepulit quem pietatis amor? Coelum si versus tendis, quocunque recedes, Hinc spacio coelum cernis & inde pari. See how this Circumference doth in∣close The middle point, like distant every where: The Circle, Heaven round about us shows, The Center noteth Earth which doth us bear.
Why then (I pray) thy labour blam'st thou so, Who art expel'd thy countrey for Gods love? If thou to Heaven tend, where e're thou go, Thou seest all places like near Heaven a∣bove. In the upper part of a fair large table, fancy a center and circumference to be described, with these Verses writ under∣neath. Another. Magnus Aristoteles trutinando cacumina re∣rum, In duo divisit quicquid in orbe fuit. Great Aristotle weighing all things here, Concluded, in the World but two there were. Suppose two Parallel circles drawn in the upper part of a table, in the center of which, let the figure 2. be written, and underneath this Distich, whereby is sig∣nified Subjects and Accidents.
Another. ,Hesiod. The Lord hath pleased openly to place The sweat of Virtue before each man's face. Suppose the versicle of Hesiod elegant∣ly painted at the foot of Cebes table. All Emblems, Hyeroglyphical Sentences or illustrated with similyes, may be depo∣sited in Repositories by a Relative and written Idea; of which the Picture occu∣pying the upper part of the Table, is a a Relative Idea, and that written under∣neath, a Scriptile. So much for com∣pound Idea's, and all the other kinds. CHAP. XII. Of chusing Ideas. IT is sufficiently manifest out of the five precedent chapters, what Idea, and how qualified, every thing to be re∣membred doth appropriate to it self; but to render all more perspicuous in this chapter, I will briefly ennumerate the Rules dispersed in several places, for
choice of Idea's; though such Recapitu∣lation may be accounted tautology; yet it is very profitable; the Rules follow. Rule 1. All Histories, Actions, Fables, Apologies, common businesses, visible things, or conceived under a visible form, all sentences whose subject or matter is visible, and without any dependent writ∣ten illustration, ought to be laid up in the Repositories by a Direct Idea, in quanti∣ty equal, augmented or contracted. Cap. 1. Rule 2. All Histories, Actions, Fables, Apologies, Morals and Similyes, remark∣able for some coherent Verses or Wri∣ting, as all Epigrams, Epitaphs, Ana∣grams and Impresses are generally to be expressed by a compound Idea, consisting of a Direct and Scriptile. Cap 2. Rule 3. All Emblems and Sentences il∣lustrated by some notable Example, or ex∣pressed Hyeroglyphically, are to be be∣stowed in Repositories by a compound Idea, consisting of a Relative and Scrip∣tile, Cap. 2. Rule 4. All Characters, single Letters, nakes Numbers, Calculations of Nati∣vities, Cosmographical descriptions and citations, are to be always disposed in Repositories by a Scriptile Idea.
Rule 5. All single words signifying no visible thing, whose Idea either relative, fictitious, or compound of fictitious and scriptile, doth presently occur, is to be so placed in the Repository, either relative∣ly, fictitiously, or compoundly: If no such Idea occurr, then it is to be repre∣sented by a Scriptile Idea. Rule 6. All Phrases and Sentences in∣expressible by a Direct Idea, may be con∣served by a Relative Idea, or compound∣ed of a Relative and Scriptile, if any present it self commodiously, or if no such offer it self quickly, by a Scriptile Idea. Cap. 8.10. & 11. So much shall suffice for choice of I∣deas. CHAP. XIII. The manner of Reposing Ideas. NOw there remains to speak of the manner of laying up Idea's in their places, to which purpose take these en∣suing Rules. Rule 1. Every Idea is to be placed in its order, viz. that which first occurreth
in the first place; the second in the se∣cond place of the first Repository; the the third in the first, the fourth in the second place of the second Repository; fift in the first, the sixt in the second place of the third Repository; the like method is to be used in all the Reposi∣tories, till all the Idea's be placed. Rule 2. Due quantity, convenient site, colour of the Repository, and pe∣culiar attributes, are to be imposed on each Idea, and very carefully minded. Rule 3. After you have rightly dis∣posed the first Idea of any Repository, note it very diligently with the eye of your mind, as if it really stood there, observing its kind, subject, quantity, site, attribution of the Repositories co∣lour, and other such like peculiar attri∣butes, if it have any. For example, whether the Idea deposited in the first place of any Repository (as to the kind) be direct; as to the subject, concerning a man; in respect of quantity, equal; in regard of sight, placed on the ground; and as to peculiar attributes, whether moving or yeilding a sound; go over all these things in your mind, saying, The Idea which I have here bestowed, is Di∣rect,
of a man, equal, placed on the ground, moving and yeilding a sound: For by such considerations an Idea is more firmly graven in memory. Rule 4. After you have fitly disposed the second Idea of any Repository, you must excogitate fome apt relation thereof to the former, in respect of like∣ness or unlikeness of site, likeness or unlikeness of subject; or else in regard of the action of the latter Idea refer∣red to the former; you can pitch upon no Idea which may not be related to the former by one of these five wayes, which shall plainly appear by example: if both Idea's of one Repository, pre∣cedent and subsequent, be fixed to the wall, placed on a table, the ground, or under ground, &c. they agree in site: But if one be fastened to the Wall, the other placed on a Table, on the ground or under ground, they are unlike in site: When the subject of both Idea's is Justice, Sin, a Man, War or Sleep, &c. they agree in subject; but when the sub∣ject of one Idea is Justice, of the other Drunkenness, the one of a man, the other of a stone, or any other opposite thing, they disagree in subject. Taken an
example of transferring the action of a latter Idea to a former: Suppose that a man in a Gown, sitting at a Table, and over-looking some Books of Ac∣counts, with Counters lying ready to compute the total sum, be an Idea dis∣posed in the first place of a Repository; and the Idea to be placed in the second room of the Repository, be a Farryer giving a Horse a Drench with a Horn: In this case, that the action of the lat∣ter may have some dependance on the former, imagine that the Horse (as soon as the drench is poured into his mouth) leaps back and disturbeth the man in his reckoning, who sits at the Table in the first place of the Repository. This mutual Relation of Idea's placed in the same Repository, is as it were a linking of them together, and doth admirably conduce to the remembrance of both. Rule 5. If two or more distinct Idea's concur, whose relation to one another is found so near, as if they were com∣bined together; bestow them in one same Memorial Place: As if the Idea immediately preceding be a Silver Ba∣son full of fragrant Water, set upon a joyned Stool, and the subsequent Idea
be an idle man doing nothing; you may conjoin these two Idea's in one, imagining that this man washeth his hands in that odoriferous Water; so if the former Idea be two Virgins talking together, the latter a Skein of Green Silk, to join these two Ideas by a pro∣per connexion, you may fancy that one of the Virgins holdeth the Skein upon her wrists, whilest the other windeth it off her hands into a bottom. In like manner if the Antecedent Idea be Scriptile, and the Consequent likewise Scriptile, if so be you allow space e∣nough in the Table, the latter may be subscribed under the former in a con∣venient distance from one another. Thus three Scriptile Ideas concurring together, if they be not too large for one Table, may be supposed written therein; the first in the highest place, the second in the middle, the third in the lowest, allowing nevertheless a fit distance. But alwayes when you com∣prize two or three Ideas in one place, you must remember carefully, that so many Ideas were constituted in such a place.
Rule 6. When you have laid up a∣ny Idea in its Place, (whether it be in the first or second Room of the Repository) peruse all the foregoing Idea's in their order, if you have time, that they may reside more deeply in Memory, and make the stronger impression in minde. For as a School-boy by often reading over his lesson, learneth it by heart, so the more frequently you peruse Idea's, the more firmly you will retain them. Rule 7. Lastly, have a care not to load your Memory with a more nume∣rous multitude of Idea's then is fit, for as it is unwholsome to burthen the sto∣mach above its strength, so also to o∣verwhelm the Memory with multiplici∣ty of Idea's, doth lead into great con∣fufusion. Temperate men admit only so much meat as they think they can well concoct; so do you only commit such worthy things to Memory, as you trust faithfully to remember; for it is better firmly to retain a few remarka∣ble things, then many of mean base nature.
CHAP. XIV. Of the practise of the Art of Memory. I Think now convenient to illustrate the premised precepts by examples, whereby the practise of this Art, may be rendred more facile. First, I will propose examples of common affairs, afterward of observations; Lastly, I will briefly exhibit the Art of Dictating, and discharging of Memory. Examples of ordinary business. I. Suppose (as taking it for grant∣ed you were to go to some great Mar∣ket Town, it concerns not our purpose whether the place be known, or un∣known, and intend in the first place to enquire the price of Seed Barlie: i∣magine then in the first Place of the first Repositorie (that is the part on the right hand) you see a man measuring Barlie out of a Sack into a Bushel, with a company of men standing about him,
as is the usual manner in Markets, not forgetting to fancy the Bushell handles to be Gold, that so the Idea in some part may be related to the Repository in co∣lour, as is required in the sixth Chap∣ter: II. Moreover, That in the same Town liveth a Labourer whom you know, and must enquire out to work in your Hay-harvest; fancy him to stand in the second place (on the left hand) of the first Repository, sharpen∣ing his Golden Sythe on a whetstone, as it were preparing for such Rustical im∣ployment: I say Golden Sythe, that it may participate of the colour of the Reposi∣tory; this Idea agreeth with the for∣mer in sight and subject, for both Ide∣a's of this Repository are of men, and pla∣ced on the ground. III. Furthermore, That in your Journey, our minde full of Cogitati∣on, is transferred from ordinary af∣fairs, to Philosophical Contemplation, and in such Meditation you pitch up∣on something worthy further discussi∣on; place the Idea thereof in the first
Room of the second Repository; for ex∣ample, if this were your Meditation; Even as Terrestrial exhalations condensed are the materiall cause of the Thunder-stone, though engendered in the aire, which is no Matrix of ponderous bodies: So of the rayes (which are as it were exhalations) of cele∣stial bodies, there is generated a certain substance, called Quintessence, which by commixion with the four Elements, through their tenacity, groweth into one with them, whereby they are altered, and indewed with new forms, according to the disposition of the matter into which those celestial rayes are conveyed, the hand of the Almighty di∣recting them. This Idea must be aug∣mented, Chapter 3. Imagine therefore a multitude of Thunder-stones, heaped up in the midst of the first Memorial place, of the second Repository, some of the uppermost guilded with Silver, to represent the colour of the Reposito∣rie. IV. A while after you call to minde some Aromatical Spices you are to buy: To remember which, fancy the second place of the second Repositorie convert∣ed into a Grocers shop, the opposite
wall garnished with Nests of Boxes full of several Spices, with Titles writ up∣on the Boxes, after the usual mode; two foot on this side the wall, let there stand a Counter, the Wares exposed thereon you are to buy: as if the first thing you nominate to buy be Pepper, let a Silver Box full of Pepper stand up∣on the further end of the Counter; if the second thing designed be Nutmegs, place a loose bagge of Silver gilt Nut∣megs in the middle of the Counter; if the third be Sugar, set a Sugar loafe on the hither end of the Counter, with a Silver string tyed about the top, that it may in some part bear the colour of the Repositarie. In this case you must remember that three Idea's were be∣stowed in one Place, whose coherence with the Idea in the other Repository, is taken from their unlikenesse of sight; for that Idea was heaped on the ground, these three are placed upon a Counter. V. Your next incident businesse is to remember to speak with a Counsel∣lour of the same town (a man of a very great repute and credit for knowledge
in the Law) about a friends sute de∣pending in Chancery: Imagine that Counsellour in a Lawyers Gown, sitting in a Chair, overlooking some writings, in the first Place of the third Repository; seeing his Gown is black, you need no other attribution of colour of the Re∣pository. VI. If another new occasion present it self to minde, as that you are to buy a piece of Black Velvit of a Mercer in that town; the second Place of the third Repository must be transform'd into a Mercers shop, a piece of Black Velvet neatly laid in folds of equal length, ly∣ing on the Counter, which doth in like manner as well denote the Repositories colour, as the Gown of the Counsellour sitting in the former Place; whence al∣so is deduced a manifest relation to the precedent Idea, the Lawyers Gown supposed to be lined with Velvet. Examples of remarkable Observations. If you dined the same day among many learned men at an Ordinary, and in their discourse did observe some
things worthy of further considerati∣on; the Idea's of such Observations, are to be reposited in their following Repositories, in the same order as they occur. I. The first Remarkable sentence may be this, Desire of things not attaina∣ble, procureth wretched madnesse. I would signifie this Sentence relatively, in the first Place of the fourth Repository, by some young man aparelled in Blew silk, deeply enamoured of a Virgine nobly descended, whose enjoyment he could not expect, weeping and lying on the ground, till surprised with Melancholy, he became mad: the truth of the Sen∣tence is evidently demonstrated by this Example. II. The second Sentence may be that of the Poet Lucretius. Praeterea si nulla fuit generalis origo Terrarum & Coeli, semperque aeterna fu∣ere. Cur supra bellum Thebanum, & funera Trojae, Non alias alii quoque res cecinere Poetae?
Besides if God did not Heaven create, And Earth, they are Eternal, and each thing: Beyond the Theban War, and Troys sad fate, Why do not Poets then, elder deeds sing. The Idea of this Sentence is to be com∣pounded of a Direct and Scriptile, you must imagine the Wars of Thebes and Troy severally depainted in the upper part of a large spacious Table, and be∣neath these Verses of Lucretia's fairly written; because it is put in the fourth Repository, suppose a Blew Line three in∣ches broad, drawn between the Pi∣ctures of Thebes and Troy besieged: The Line is more remarkable in this Idea, shewing the Pictures to be devided into two equal parts, Chapter 6. The frame must hang against rhe opposite wall of the second place of the fourth Reposito∣ry; this Idea may be referred to the Idea in the former Room from their diverse situations, the precedent placed on the ground, this hanging against the oppo∣site wall.
III. Let this be the third Sentence, Every thing that is just, is not agreeable to equity, Manlius Torquatus, did justly, but not equally, when he commanded his son, a couragious young man (who had deserved well of the Republick) to be beheaded, be∣cause that contrary to his order, provoked by the enemy, he brought forth the Roman Legi∣ons and joyned battel in his father the Gene∣rals absence, though he was Victor. The Idea of this Sentence is Direct, to be pla∣ced in the first Place of the fifth Reposito∣ry; imagine a Martial man standing there in compleat armour; a plume of Feathers in his Crest, of a severe frown∣ing aspect, a great Golden chain (the Index of his name) girt round about his body, holding a Red Trunchion in his right hand, applyed to his sides; and seeming imperiously to command one clothed like an Executioner, hold∣ing an Ax sprinkled with blood, to put his Sonne, arrayed in Red silk, to death. IV. A man may wittingly do his neigh∣bour a prejudice, without committing an in∣jury; for if there be two Innes in one Town, the one Inkeeper must needs endamage the o∣ther,
by endeavouring to draw Guests to his own Inne, yet is such damage without injury, nor condemned by any Law. This Idea is Direct, but in quantity contracted. I∣magine therefore in the second Place of the fifth Repository, a Town elegant∣ly described on a Table, hanging a∣gainst the opposite Wall, containing two Innes, the signs of both sustained by Posts of a Red colour; it hath reference to the former Idea in respect of subect, for Justice is the basis of both I∣dea's. V. No excellent wit it free from some mad∣ness, may be expressed Relatively by a learned man who through too great in∣tention of minde in study, is become frantick, wearing a yellow Plume of Feathers in his hat (yellow being the colour of the sixth Repository) and car∣rying some childish Geugaws in his hands, at which he laughs so heartily, that the Reponant heareth him; he is to be set in the first Place of the sixth Re∣pository, near the opposite wall. Ilia a vestal Virgine, great with childe by Mars, brought forth two twinns, Ro∣mus and Remus at one birth , which shee put forth to be nursed by a notable harlot, na∣med
Lupa, of whom all Bawdy-Houses after in Latine were called Lupanaria: Hence certainly arose the Fable, that they were nourished by a She-Wolf: Romus in process of time being created King, imposed his own Name upon Rome, by the Citizens whereof in flattery, he was called Romulus. This is a Direct Idea; imagine in the second place of the sixth Repository, a She-Wolf suckling two Twins with her dandling Dugs, as if they were her own Whelps, her neck inviron∣ned with a yellow Collar, which with howling doth divert the mad man in the precedent place from his mirth. This Re∣lation is in regard of action, passing from the latter Idea to the former, accor∣ding to the fifth Rule of the 13. Chap. Moreover both Idea's of this Repository agree in clamorous sound, and in their site on the ground. Milo of Croton, a famous Wrestler, first crowned in the Olympick Games, when through age he had left off his youthful ex∣ercise, and travelled through some Woodlands of Italy, espyed an Oak near the way rifted in the middle, and willing (as is supposed) to try whether any of his ancient vigour remai∣ned, thrust his hands into the Clefts of the
Tree) to rend down the middle part; but the Oak thus forcibly writhed (so soon as his violence ceased) returned to its pristine E∣state, and closing fast upon his hands, detein∣ed him a prey for wild Beasts, Aul. Gell. At∣tic. Noc. 15 16. The Idea of this Histo∣ry is Direct, of equal magnitude to be placed in the first place of the seventh Repository, in the midst whereof I fan∣cy a cleft Oak full of Green Leaves and Acorns, in that cleft of which a strong great limbed man, crowned with Lau∣rel, is fast held by the hands, who ben∣ding back his head and body, cryeth with a horrible vociferation, that you really seem not onely to see his wretch∣ed body, and the Beasts preying about him; but also hear his outcries and la∣mentations. VIII. To drive forward the night with old Wives fables. This phrase is expressed by a Direct Idea, supposing the oppo∣site Wall of the second place in the se∣venth Repository, converted into the form of a Chimney, containing a great Fire, about which some women sit gos∣sipping, among them an old woman in a Green Gown (like an Ape in Purple) laughing and holding up her hands,
her countenance, gesture and action conformable, tells a Tale to the rest, which affecteth the whole Conventicle of Women with mirth. The relation of this Idea to the former, ariseth from the great noise in both, onely the former is a lamentable doleful sound, this a merry jocund noise. IX. Men are certainly more ancient then the Heathenish Gods, because these are the o∣thers invention. The Idea of this sen∣tence is direct, viz. a Statuary in a Pur∣ple Wastcoat, fashioning an image, which is to be disposed in the first place of the eighth Repository. X. Every particle of Snow, if it be not somewhat melted, is of a six angu∣lar figure, proclaiming the admirable Artifice of the Creator, to such as curi∣ously contemplate the same. The Idea of this Sentence is Direct, in quantity augmented; for seeing one flake of Snow is so small, that bestowed in a me∣morial place, it cannot be seen afar off; a heap of Snow is to be substituted in the middle of the stage of the second place of the eighth Repository; and because this Idea hath nothing of Pur∣ple in it (the proper colour of this Re∣pository)
fancy a Purple Streamer two foot high, placed in the midst of the heap of Snow, Cap. 6. The Relation may be deduced from the subject, there being Artifice in both Ideas, though of much greater excellency and admira∣tion in the latter, then the former, Snow being a Divine Artifice, a Statue but humane. XI. There are three most beautiful Mo∣thers, of three very deformed Daughters; Fa∣miliarity breedeth Contempt, Truth pro∣cureth Hatred, and Peace engendereth idle∣ness. This Idea is Direct, imagining in the first place of the ninth Repository, three most amiable women in very rich Apparel, having Garlands on their heads, sitting upon three-legged Stools, and giving suck to three crying misha∣pen Children, lapped up in pure white swadling Clothes: The cry of the chil∣dren gives this Idea a loud sound. XII. A Priviledge is that which is granted in favour of certain persons contra∣ry to common right, and is called Privilege quasi privata lege, that is, by a private law. This may be expressed relatively, by some well known person deeply in debt, who procured a Priviledge for
himself fairly written in white Parch∣ment, authorized with the Great Seal, to protect himself from molestation of Creditors: The Parchment of the same colour with the Repository, ex∣cludeth all other assignation of colour as useless. Lastly, A dependency upon the former Idea, may be deduced from a transient action, supposing that this man in the second place, looking on the Women in the first place, doth salute them very curteously and civilly after the gentile posture, by whom he is mu∣tually saluted again. XIII. He doth not live, who takes no care but to live. The Idea of this Sen∣tence is Scriptile, and must be supposed written in a large white Table, noting such observations as you had formerly delivered to this purpose, which may be supposed committed to the man standing in the second place of the last Repository to hold, as having no other employment, whereby he is somewhat diverted from conference with the wo∣men; by this means both these latter I∣dea's are as it were one, Cap. 13. Rul. 5. and being deposited in the ninth Re∣pository, needeth no attribution of co∣lour,
as is shewn before, Cap. 10. Rul. 4▪ XIV. The ancient Gauls and Britains used English Mastives in Military ser∣vice, instead of Souldiers. Strabo. This Idea is direct, but contracted by reason of the great space, to be assigned for a field Battel: Let therefore this skirmish of men and dogs be imagined inter∣woven artificially in colours to the life. in the hangings of the opposite Wall of the first place of the tenth Repository, the Collars of the Mastives of Cinna∣mon colour (the proper colour of the tenth Repository, full of iron spikes. XV Good works justifie faith, faith ju∣stifieth the person, is a Scriptile Idea; there∣fore I suppose this sentence fairly writ∣ten (according to the Rules in the tenth Chapter) in a large square table, the frame of Cinnamon colour, hang∣ing against the opposite Wall of the se∣cond place. The relation of one Idea to the other, is taken from their like site both hanging against the Wall. XVI. Dic ubi tunc esset, cum praeter, cum nihil esset? Tunc ubi nunc, in se, quoniam sibi sufficit ipse.
Say where was God, when him beside Not any thing had been? Then there where now, in himself, for Himself sufficeth him. This is likewise a Scriptile Idea, and may be fitly comprehended in the ta∣ble of the preceding Idea, observing such Rules as are delivered concerning repositing a Scriptile Idea, and noting that two Idea's are comprized in this place, Cap. 13. Rule 5. 17. In the year 1530. in the time of Charles the fift, Emperor, the Germane Princes exhibited their Confession of Faith at Augspurgh, with a solemn pro∣testation because of that perillous time, whence afterward they, and all such as embraced the same confession, were called Protestants. This Idea is Direct; but all the ten Repositories being al∣ready occupied, you must imagine ten other Repositories of the same colour as the former, to be used in the same order as was proposed in the 16. Chap∣ter: So the colour of the eleventh Re∣pository will be gold. I suppose in the first place thereof an Emperial Throne,
adorned with badges of the Empire, glittering with Gold and Gems, upon which the Emperor crowned with a Golden Diadem sitteth, to whom his Nobles bare-headed, present their Con∣fession fairly engrossed in paper. XVIII. Philip King of Macedon, sent a Prolix Epistle to the Laconians, wherein he did require some things which did not please them: They returned him an answer containing but one syllable (that is) Not, which the Writer did describe in so great a Character, that it equalized a large Epistle. Another time the same Philip menaced the same people, That if he did once invade their Countrey, he would cause an utter extirpati∣on of them; the Laconians on the contrary sent no other reply but this particle, ei, that is, if; insinuating thereby, that the word if was well inserted by Philip, who could never hope to penetrate their Region: Hence was derived the Proverb, Laconical brevity, This is a Direct Idea, these two words fancied to be drawn in two sheets of paper, with a Golden Margent round about, an inch broad, and pasted a∣gainst an opposite Wall. Coherence with the former Idea offereth it selfe from similitude of subject, supposing
that these two words [not, if] contain an answer to the aforesaid Confession presented to the Emperor. XIX. Passionate anger is temporary mad∣ness. This sentence may be relatively exemplified in Saul, who transported with anger, endeavoured to smite Jona∣than his most beloved Son and Heir, with a Javelin; imagining the point of the Javelin to be silver, that it may in something represent the colour of the twelfth Repository. It will be unnecessary now to pro∣ceed further, because I think the prece∣dent examples will sufficiently declare by what kind of Idea's all memorable things are to be expressed, and in what place to be deposited. If you please to essay the rehearsal of all the Idea's of this Chapter in their order, without looking in the Book, provided you have first read them over with good intenti∣on, I doubt not but you will ingenu∣ously confess the great utility and cer∣tainty of this act. Any man may easily apprehend, though he were never admonished, that observable notes of Sermons are to be laid up after the same manner, as these
observations, which I have set down for better observation, as taken at a Banquet. CHAP. XV. Of Dictation and Reposition. MOreover, the practical part of this Art is perspicuously seen in the Exercises of Dictating and Repetition. The use of Dictating is, when a per∣son is to dictate to several Scribes or Secretaries, what every one must write, so as to direct and exercise them all at once, which is frequently incumbent upon Princes and Generals of Armies in perillous times: In such cases there must be assigned a peculiar Repository to every Scribe, wherein the affairs and sentences by him to be dispatched must be reported in order; that is, the first Repository to the first Scribe, the second Repository to the second, the third to the third, the fourth to the fourth, and so forth if there be more: All Idea's of things to be dispatched by the first Secretary, must have some
attribution of Gold appertaing to them; all Idea's of the second Reposi∣tory, something of Silver; of the third, something of black, of the fourth, blew, &c. In this case also it is permit∣ted to place two, three, or more Idea's if it be necessary, in one place of a Re∣pository: All businesses and sentences being thus reposited in order, & faith∣fully digested before in mind, it is no difficult matter by the first Idea of the first Repository, to dictate to the first Scribe what he must write first; by the first Idea of the second Repository, to tell the second Scribe what he shall write; by the first Idea of the third Re∣pository, to inform the third; and in like manner all the rest in their order. Again, by the second Idea of each Re∣pository, the second sentence is facile∣ly delivered to each Scribe: By the third, every Scribes third business; by the fourth Idea their fourth, and so for∣ward in the residue. This is the Exer∣cise, which by some is called the Art of Dictating. Repetition is when a man repeateth sen∣tences spoken by several persons, so as to return each persons sentence in order as
it was delivered; as if six, seven, or more friends sitting together (to experience your happy memory) do every one in or∣der speak some sentence, to have them repeated again, after the same or a retro∣grade manner, which way they please; dispose the Idea's of your first friends sentences in the first Repository; of your second friend in the second Repository; of your third friend in the third, and so forward in the rest. All which being rightly disposed, you may with little trou∣ble restore to every friend his saying, ei∣ther in the same order as they were spo∣ken, or in a retrograde or inverted or∣der. I have not thought expedient to illu∣strate these with Examples, because I think them sufficiently explained by what hath been already said; as also, that this Exercise of Dictating and Repeating have little or no use, but vain ostentati∣on; though I have inserted them here, it was not done as necessary, but because the knowledge of them did not seem su∣perfluous for such as are learned of this Art.
CHAP. XVI. Of irregular Reposition. I Have thought good to annex a few words of irregular Reposition, which is onely one Rule, that is, a real Reposi∣tory may be sometimes substituted instead of a feigned, which irregularity is admit∣ted upon a double occasion: First, A thing it self being at hand, may be fitly used instead of its proper I∣dea: As if a man sitting in his Study, light on some Book whose sheets are transplaced, which he intendeth when he goes forth of his Study, to send to a Book∣binder to be amended: That Book is to be cast at the threshold of the Study, that the sight thereof may admonish him de∣parting, to get it bound: So also if Ink be wanting, an Ink-Glass or Bottle may be set by the Book. Secondly, When a man must exone∣rate one or more Idea's, as soon as he hath reposited them; as when something offers it self to a mans mind, talking to a powerful or rich man, which he judg∣eth
convenient to be communicated to him with the first opportunity, let him speedily reposite the Idea of that thing in the same house, field, plain, or where∣soever he then is, in some certain place conversant before his eyes, that he may be always put in mind to propound the same when occasion serves: As if he think to do some friendly office for a person ab∣sent, by preferring some business of his to the rich man; let him imagine that Friend always obvious in some determi∣nate place in sight, not suffering the ob∣ject to slip out of view, till he have cur∣teously performed his officious enterprise. Or if there intervene some thought of buying fewel, whereof the rich man hath great plenty, let him suppose a great quantity of Wood piled up in some place not distant out of sight: This is all I have to say of irregular Reposition.
CHAP. XVII. Of depositing Idea's. HAving spoken copiously of reposit∣ing Idea's, now I will conclude with Depositing them. Deposition of Idea's is, when things charged upon Memory by Idea's, are re∣called, and the mind exonerated of them, the Memorial Places after such Depositi∣on, being left empty, and prepared to re∣cive new Idea's. Now in this case, if it happen at any time that an Idea negli∣gently reposited, is lost or forgotten, when it should be deposited, the recovery thereof must be endeavoured by these en∣suing considerations. First, This is always assuredly known, every lost Idea did bear the colour of his Repository, either in whole or part; therefore the first thing to be inquired is, in what respect the colour of the Repo∣sitory did agree with the Idea sought; by this sole consideration, forgotten Idea's are oft discovered.
The Idea being not discovered thus, make diligent indagation for its relation to the Idea placed in the same Reposito∣ry, in regard of site, subject or action, Cap. 14. Rul. 4. One Idea of a Reposito∣ry being known, doth easily call the o∣ther to mind, by mutual dependence whereby they were connexed together, unless there did precede very negligent Reposition. If still you are disappointed, happily you may find it out by repetition of such things as are especially remarkable in laying up Idea's, of which I have spoken in the 13. Chapter. That is by enquiring whether the latent Idea's was In respect of kind Direct, Relative, Fictitious, Scriptile, Compound, Double, treble, &c.
In respect of subject, Of God, Of Christ, Of the Holy Ghost, Of Angels, Of Men, Of Animals. In respect of quantity, Equal, Augmented, Contracted, In respect of site, Under ground, Upon ground, Upon a Table, Upon a Shelf, Against a wall. In respect of attribu∣tion, Moving, Quiet, Giving a sound. Yeilding a smel. An Idea is oft recovered by discussing these few questions in a mans thoughts. If it be certain the forgot Idea was Scriptile, but the inscription is in oblivi∣on, the first inquiry must be, whether it were a single word, proof, phrase, or
sentence or one or more clauses; a single word, proof, or principal word of a sentence, may be regained by ap∣plying each Letter of the Alphabet in the same manner as is prescribed in the second Rule of Poetical Revocation, in the second Book, Cap. 3. till you have obtained the first Letter; the other Let∣ters may be found by transcendencies and gilded Vowels; the chief Word be∣ing obtained, the rest come easily to mind. If you cannot yet discover the Idea, have recourse to the third and fourth Rules of Poetical Revocation, 2. Book. 3 Chap, an Idea being revocable in the same manner. Finally, if it continue irreparable by all these ways, let it pass, and be no long∣er sollicitous in search thereof: For as a Book carelesly laid up in a Study, is not many times to be found when it is sought, though you remove several Volumes; yet afterward comes to hand beyond expe∣ctation, when another Book is reached that stands by it: So it doth oft happen in this business, though an Idea negli∣gently reposited, cannot be found when it is sought, yet at another time when a Notion reposited in the cell of Memory
near it, is excited, that also of its own ac∣cord discovereth it self. If a man do prudently follow these Rules of recovering latent Ideas, as with Ariadnes thred, he will doubtless wind himself out of the Labyrinth of blind Oblivion, and with admirable facility recall to mind forgotten sentences, and vanished Idea's. FINIS.
A TREATISE Of cherishing Natural Memory. CHAP. I. Of such as debilitate Memory. NAtural Memory is a faculty which every man hath naturally to ap∣prehend and retain note-worthy things; if Memory be diligent in its Function, endeavour must be used to conserve it un∣prejudiced; if it be impaired, care must be taken to have it restored and erected: I will therefore first treat of the conser∣vation
of Natural Memory indamnified, afterward of the restauration thereof impaired. Three things conduce to preserve Na∣tural Memory in good Estate, viz. De∣clination of such things as debilitate Me∣mory; use of such things as corroborate the same, and a well instituted method of living, whereby the Memorative fa∣culty may be most preserved in vigor. Things that debilitate Memory are these. 1. Unwholsome air that is infected with vapour of standing-waters, Marsh∣es, Woods, Prisons, Dunghils, Common Sewers, &c. 2. Aire shut up from penetration of Wind and Sun; for air not purified by Wind or Sun, engendereth a malign ve∣nomous quality, like standing water in Ponds and Lakes; therefore when you walk abroad, leave the Windows of your Chamber and Study open. 3. Windie aire, that is, agitated with violent winds. 4. Aire that procureth rain.
5. Moist aire, such as discendeth a little before Sun set, and hovereth a∣bout the earth all night, and some part of the morning, especially in Mari∣time places. Go not forth before the rising Sun hath purified the aire by his Rayes, nor after Sun setting, when cloudy darkensse of night invadeth the aire. 6. Aire infected with smoke of strong sented combustible things, as Sea coales, Weeds, Turfe, Dung and Char-coales, un∣lesse they be well kindled. II. Drinks, Broths, and Decoctions made of unwholsome waters, offend the Memory, of which kinde is the wa∣ter of Ponds, Marshes, of Ice and Snow dissolved, as also of Muddie, Salt, Bitter, and ill smelling water. Rain water, especially falling in time of Thunder, or Lightning (because it is lightest) is chiefly commended for Domestical uses; but serveth only for present occasion, by reason of its spee∣dy corruption: Fountain or Spring Water challengeth the next place, which devolveth from Mountains, through stony craggy clifts; to this succeedeth River water, when the chan∣nel
of the River is deep and gravelly; Well-water is ranked last, if it smell of Mudd; the Well must be cleansed and purged by casting in Lyme, and the bottome afterward covered with great store of Chalk, through which the wa∣ter bubling, is defecated and rendred more Salubrious. To conclude, the clearer, lighter, further distant from any taste or smell, colder in Summer, hotter in Winter water is, the more wholesome it is. III. Food hurteth the Memory. 1. If it be crude, as raw flesh, un∣boiled water, immature fruits, green hearbs, chiefly if they beef cold quail∣ty, &c. 2. If it be Vaporous, that is, reple∣nish the head with grosse Vapors, as thick drinks, strong wine, Beans, Pease, Gar∣lick, Onyon, &c. but Onyons are more noxious then the rest, because they lose not their Malignity by Decoction, even then procuring the head-ach, offend∣ing the eyes by causing obstructions in the Optick nerves, dulling the Senses, and raising troublesome dreams. 3. If it be very moist, and engender phlegme, as Milk, Chickens before they
are feathered, young Piggs &c. especi∣ally any food that hath a slimie tast. 4. If it digest slowly, as Cheese, marrow, fat, principally of Fish, flesh of Cranes and Herons, fruit included in shells, as Wall-nuts, Small-nuts, Chest-nuts, Al∣monds, &c. 5. Variety of dishes, diversity even of wholesome meats is evil, of Sauces worst of all, distracting the stomack by concocting food of several qualities. Neverthelesse healthfull persons may eat any meats, though they be esteem∣ed somwhat hurtfull, when the appetite doth as it were long; For such victuals as the appetite doth greedily covet, the stomack doth earnestly embrace, quick∣ly Concoct and Transmit to the lower parts, whence they offend lesse; how∣ever it is safer to eat such meats at Din∣ner, then at supper. IV. All Repletion of Drink, or food is hurtfull, chiefly of Bread; too much Repletion dulleth wit, and is a great ene∣my to the Memorative faculty. Plato saith, The soul is diseased in a full fed bo∣dy. It is often seen by experience, that if a learned or wise man, accustomed to live sparingly through poverty, be
exalted to some eminent degree of dig∣nity or honour, and doth afterward indulge his appetite by eating and drinking immoderately, he becomes lesse learned and wise: The reason is by accesse of gross humours to the brain, the Notional Figures imprinted therein before, by degrees wear out and vanish, and new figures take no such deep impression, but are quickly erased through overmuch humidity of the brain. Fly therefore Drunkennesse and Gluttony, as the mortallest enemies of a good Memory. V. Sleep offendeth Memory. If it be First, overmuch. Secondly, if taken in a windy place, or under Lunar raies. Thirdly, in the day, most of all with shoes on, or being miry. Fourthly, u∣pon the back, for it preventeth expul∣sion of Excrements, at mouth and no∣strils, their proper conveyances, and causeth their Conflux to the back, whence ariseth Obstructions. Fifthly, upon the belly, because it endama∣geth the eyes, being dangerously preju∣dicial to such as are molested with Rhumes in their eyes. VI. Venus, 1. if it be immoderate.
2. upon a full stomack. 3. when the body is lesse moist, as at New Moon, in time of hunger, &c. 4. when sleep doth not follow, for it is requisite that the loosned members of the body, be refreshed by ensuing sleep. Persons very young or very ancient, of a frigid constitution, and all such as finde in∣convenience after the act, must wholly abstain therefrom. VII. Coldnesse of the hinder part of the head, of the neck, stomack, belly and feet. VIII. Labour or exercise of body. 1. Exceeding moderation, which ex∣hausteth strength. 2. In windy or moist places. 3. On a full stomack, which replenisheth the head with crude Vapors, & augmenteth Choller. IX. Idleness. X. Perturbation of mind; as anxious care, fear, grief, too much bashfulness, covetous hope, Jealousie, &c. XI. Filthy desires, as avarice, envy, thirst of revenge, lust, love of harlots, and the ardent Passion, Love. XII. Rash answers. XIII. Disorderly reading of Books, imitating Children in trivial Schools.
XIV. Night study. XV. Wearing head-hair over long. XVI. Dipping or washing the head in cold water. XVII. Distraction of mind about se∣verl studies at one time, as if a School∣master be intent at his private study, when his Schollers attend and repeat their lessons. CHAP. II. Of things corroborating Memory. OF this kind are these that follow. 1. Wholsome Air, that is clear, light, sweet, open, milde, speedily growing warm with the rising sun, and cold with his setting. 2. Sweet sents, for they comfort the heart, brain and mind, in some sort nourish the Spirits, and indue the brain with a tenacious quality, where∣by it is more apt to retain Idea's, This is experimentally proved in hony composed of the breath of flowers, mingled with morning dew, the sub∣stance of hony being gummy.
3. Of meats. First, All such as ingender good nu∣triment, that is, which procreat pure bloud, full of Spirits; such are Ca∣pons, Partridges, Pheasants, Weather, mutton, Goats flesh, and like meats as administer pure aliment to the Bo∣die. Secondly, Brains of Partridges, Sparrows, Hares, Conies and Hens, which being dryer then the brains of other creatures, are thought to profit Memory very much; if Wekerus may be credited, brains of Hens frequent∣ly eaten, hath recovered diverse per∣sons of the Phrensie. Thirdly, These herbs used in sauces, Bawm, Bugloss, Watercresses, in commenda∣tion of which there is extant a Proverb, Ede nasturtium, Savorie, Beets, Penni∣royall, Hysope, Tyme, Nigella, Rose∣mary flowers, Cardnus Benedictus, these are not onely beneficial to exacu∣ate the Memory, but do also exhilarate the minde, and eaten last at supper, procure pleasant dreams. 4. Washing the feet once a moneth in water moderately heated, wherein Bawm, Cammomill, Bay leaves, and other
odoriferous hearbs have been boyl∣ed. V. Exercise. 1. If If it be moderate, thereby un∣proficable excrements are expelled, na∣tural heat augmented, the motions of the Spirits rendred free, the body re∣covers vigour, and the soul made more apt to perform its functions. 2. If it recreate the Spirits and all parts of the body exercised, also the Breast and Lungs by vociferation, such are shooting, bowling, hunting, haw∣king, but stool-ball playing, is by Gal∣len preferred before them all. 3. Such as is done upon an empty sto∣stomack. 4. In delightfull places, not subject to wind. Exercise must be moderate at first, more vehement in the middle, more remiss at lattet end: Moreover let pre∣paration precede exercise, by evacuati∣on of the belly, bladder, & nostrils, &c. and extension of the members; in like manner after exercise, there is requi∣red stretching of the members, mode∣derate friction of the body with warm linnen, and cohibition of the Spirits.
Finally, your apparel close fitted, walk leisurely abroad, if the winde breath a gentle gale, otherwise within doors. Such persons as are of exceed∣ing hot and dry Complexions, must abstain from laborious excercises, using such as are moderate and provoke sweat less. CHAP. III. Of a prescript order of life. NOw in the next place I will deli∣ver some precepts or Rules of well ordered living, (chiefly regarding Students, for whose sakes this work was undertaken) in such sort that the Memorative faculty may be benefitted. The Rules are these. Rule 1. Divine assistance is to be di∣ligently and frequently implored in Prayer, to sanctifie our souls with Ce∣lestial grace; for as the milde influen∣ces of Celestial bodys immediatly transfused into our corporeal, contri∣bute much to the good estate thereof: so Divine influences of grace, infused
by God into our souls, recreate and re∣store them much more: And seeing divine irradiations are alwaies volunta∣ry, there is doubtless no Rule more powerful or efficacious to procure the Lords good will towards us, then pious supplications-made to God in Christ, as James testifieth in his Epistle, 5. Chap. ver. 16, 17. nor is it imprudently said, Cedunt astra Deo, precibus Deus ipse suo∣rum. The Stars give place to God, he to his peoples prayers. Rule 2. Comb your head every day backward, to loosen excrements from the hair roots, let it be done fasting, so soon as you are ready in a morning. Combing the head (the stomack ex∣tended with meat) is very dammage a∣ble by alluring humors into the vains. Rule 3. Excrements of the mouth are to be vacuated by spitting, of the lungs by hauking, of the nostrils by wiping as oft as there is a motion. It is more healthy to eject such super∣fluities by the mouth and nostrils, than
than to lade the stomack with excre∣ments of Gormandising: the brain al∣so is much impaired by impure exha∣lations ascending from unclean sto∣macks. Rule 4. Urine, Ordure, and Winde, must be exonerated at the first motion; many by retaining Urine, and other excrements, have been seized by dan∣gerous and mortal diseases. Rule 5. Wholly abstain from all E∣vacuations by virtue of Phisick, as Pur∣ges, Vomits, Blood-letting, unless very urgent necessity compel you. Phleboto∣my and Purges, as well as they do ex∣pel evil humours, exhaust the good and profitable, yea the Vital Spirits, where∣by naturall virtue doth decay. There∣fore Plato in Timeo, forbad the use of Purgations, when the cure of the body might be otherwise accomplish∣ed. Rule 6. To eat twelve Raisons of the Sunne stoned, every morning, without drink, instead of breakfast, conserveth Memory, comforteth the stomack and Liver, diminisheth Phlegme, augment∣eth blood, and preserveth youth,
Rule 7. Let your Supper be larger then Dinner, because the subsequent distance of time is longer; but such as are incum∣bred with nocturnal distillations, (as old men, and cold constitutions) must eat more plentifully at Dinner then Supper. At meals hot things are to precede before cold; things of easie digestion be∣fore things of hard; and liquid things be∣fore solid, for their better concoction in the stomack. All solid meat requireth long chewing: Drink must be swallowed leisurely by degrees: Beware of consu∣ming much time in eating and drinking. Eating too slowly is as noxious as eating overfast. Conclude your meat with a piece of Bread, Coriander Confects, Mar∣melade of Quinces, dryed Pears, or the like. Lastly, let the quantity of Food be proportionable to the takers strength, not his appetite; for as Varro saith, It is one thing to suffice a man, another thing to suffice humanity. Rule 8. Observe constant accustomed hours of eating: Nature coveteth to perform her office of concoction at cer∣tain limited hours, as is manifestly seen in sits of intermitting Feavers: Moreover after Supper drink not at all (ensuing
sleep will moisten sufficiently) nor be∣tween Dinner and Supper, unless you be very thirsty, or so accustomed by long use; yet such vicious customs are to be o∣mitted by degrees. Rule 9. Refrain from labor both of bo∣dy and mind after meats, spend about an hour in delectable discourses with compa∣ny sitting, standing or walking gently. Sit∣ting near the fire after meat, doth much impede digestion, by revocation of the internal heat to the external parts: Like∣wise after Supper abstain as long from sleep, it being very obstructive to the brain to sleep upon a full stomack. Rule 10. At bed-time shut all the Win∣dows of your lodging, that no Winde may enter; and also the Window-shuts, least Lunaries penetrating the Window, molest you sleeping. Sleep under the Moon-beams causeth head-ach, though it doth not hurt such as are awake. Let your head and ears be covered; yet too much covering offendeth the head. When you go to bed, first lye down on your right side, your head onely so much ele∣vated, as in height may equallize your left shoulder, your arms and thighs some∣what contracted; by such position of
body, stomachical heat is encreased: when you are about to sleep, turn on your left side: Again, when you awake, turn on the right side, and extend your legs at full length: Let your sleep be equal to your waking, not in time, but proporti∣on, left the brain be too much exsiccated by watching, or moistned by sleeping. Rule 11. Elect learned men well edu∣cated for Companions and Consorts, such as near as may be, whose conversation may render you better and more learn∣ed, not such as your society may improve. It is a notable argument we may be infe∣cted by the manners of those with whom we converse, seeing Education among Countrey Clowns, makes men rustical; among godly people, makes men pious; those who live with learned men, grow more learned; and they which are educa∣ted in Families of noble men, ill govern∣ed, are most commonly scoffers & drunk∣ards. So powerful is the custom of those among whom we live, that it is of great∣er efficacy to form mens manners, then natural inclination it self; you cannot therefore be too curious in choice of your company.
Rule 12. The mind must be constant∣ly exercised in learning some sentences by heart (yea though there be no need) that the faculty of remembring may be quickned by use and practice; for as cor∣poral vigor is continually augmented by labour and exercise, and diminished by sloth and neglect of labour, so the mind accustomed to diligent study of learning, gains strength, by ease and idleness is im∣paired: As frequent disputation render∣eth Students skilful Logicians, and custo∣mary Preaching makes a man an elo∣quent Orator: So frequent practice of learning by heart, maketh Memory more prompt in operation. There is nothing saith Ludovicus Vives, doth more delight in pains and labour, then Memory, nor doth sooner corrupt and perish by idle∣ness; therefore something must be learn∣ed every day (though there be no necessi∣ty) if it be onely but to prevent stupidi∣ty of Memory, which of all Diseases is most pernicious to it. Hence these two Versicles aptly represent a Rule. Sepe recordari medicamine fortius omni Solus & artificem qui facit, usus erit.
Practice of Memory doth more conduce Then Medicine, Skill doth arise from use. Rule 13. The aptest time for Study, is when the Stomach is empty, then purest spirits ascend from the heart to the brain. Hence Aurora is esteemed most grateful to the Muses; it is also convenient to re∣peat every night briefly what you have studied by day, which is reported to have been Pythagoras his custom. It is a won∣derful thing, and the reason not easily percep∣tible (saith Quintillian) how much firmness one nights interposition doth contribute to la∣bour, whether quiet, mature, or concocted; so soon as sleep is shaken off, the same things are to be rehearsed again, which were meditated before sleep the evening last past, otherwise nocturnal lucubration doth yeild little benefit. Rule 14 Let no man devote himself to a Study or Profession for which he is unapt by Nature; whatsoever Science you advisedly make choice of, delight therein, employ all diligence in studying the same, accounting it greater glory to excel therein, then to be able trivially to dispute of many other Arts.
Rule 15. Addict your self to the skil∣fullest Master in that Profession you have chosen; give attention to him with deep admiration, as to one delivering Oracles; forsake him not till you participate of the profoundest mysteries of the professi∣on. Many would have proved singular, had they not esteemed it a shame to be Schollars too long. Rule 16. Read the choicest Authors, such as do not force their Books with trifles: Seeing we cannot be ignorant, that study exhausteth the Spirits, we must have a care of consuming them in reading un∣learned Commentaries of illiterate men. Rule 17. Covet not to read many Books, but to understand perfectly what you read. It doth not so much concern Bodily health, how much we eat, as how well we digest what we eat: So deliber∣ate Reading is more advantagious then confused. Rule 18. Follow the concisest method in study; for as in going a journey, he which taketh the shortest and plainest way is less defatigated at Evening, then he that diverteth to rough or by-wayes; so it is in this case; the more succinct me∣thod
we observe in learning any Science, the more and speedily we attain the same. Rule 19. Apply not your self to solita∣ry Study, if you can procure any Com∣panions in the same, at least use frequent conference with others, of things per∣taining to Discipline. Mutual Discourse about profitable questions, will not onely promote your Studies much, but also bring promptness of tongue, rendering you more capable to speak publikely. Rule 20. To conclude, if your mind be at any time disturbed with study, use a little relaxation. It is better study be intermitted, then the understanding over∣whelmed. Arcus enim si nunquam cesses tendere, len∣tus erit, as sung the Poet; A bow that is always bent, will stubborn grow. Re∣creations of the mind onely, are musick, disputes with merry facetious persons; beholding solemn spectacles, &c. Some scantling of time must be also allowed for daily exercise of body, but not in the morning, to be set a part for more solid Studies; rather in the afternoon, or a lit∣tle before Supper, that the heat extract∣ed
externally, may have recourse before you take refection. CHAP. IV. Of restoring a debilitated Memory. HAving premised Rules for conserva∣tion of Natural Memory in good estate, I will next prescribe some helps for the same debilitated. Imbecillity of Natural Memory pro∣ceedeth from too much heat, coldness; moisture, or dryness of the brain. Over∣much heat wasteth and consumeth ani∣mal spirits; too much coldness obstruct∣eth motion of the Spirits lodged in the Cells of the Brain; superfluous dryness causeth such callocity, that the species cannot be imprinted: Redundant moi∣sture doth erase and obliterate forms of things, as soon as they are imprinted. If there happen excess in two qualityes (as if the Brain be hot and moist, cold and moist, hot and dry, or cold and dry) the Brain, and consequently memory is more infested. Therefore the whole business of curing debilitated memory, consisteth in
augmentation or diminution of callidity and humidity of brain. Weakness of memory ariseth from some small indisposition or Disease; if it be onely indisposed through bad dyet or disordered course of life, those pre∣cepts are to be observed which are assigned particularly to every man, according to his constitution in the sixt Chapter, not neglecting the general dyet before prescribed, and common rules of living delivered in the former Chapter, so far as is found agreeable to each mans Temperament. That a man may better judge of his brains temperament, I have thought neces∣sary briefly to enumerate the signs of the brains temperament, collected out of the works of learned Physicians. Although the temperaments of the brain as to de∣grees of quality, are almost innumera∣ble, yet they are reduced to nine more general, the signs of which I will demon∣strate in few words.
CHAP. V. How to discern the temperament of the BRAIN. IN the first place take the signes of a temperate Brain, which are these: The possessors thereof are not offended with heat, cold, moisture, or driness, pro∣cured from external causes; they also en∣joy intire sences, most apt to learn all Discipline and good Arts, nor are they hastily precipitated into passions and per∣turbations of mind; their dreams are few and pleasant, sometimes they dream of flying, because their bodies, incumbred with no excrements, seem indued with very great levity and agility; sometimes they dream of Stars, and such like splen∣did things, the colour of such persons hair (if they live in temperate Regions) whiles they are children, is yellowish; when they are men, a deep yellow; then also the hair of their heads becomes curl∣ed, in age they wax hoary slowly, and are seldom bald. To conclude, they are moderate in all things, both in animal fa∣culties, (as pulse, respiration, sleep, &c.)
and in redundancies, as Excrements of the Ears, Nose, Mouth, and superfluities of other parts, all which in quantity and quality are found to be in mediocrity. II. Signs of a hot Brain. When heat predominates, the Head is hot in feeling, the parts about the head are hot and rud∣dy, the eyes are red and quick in motion, the veins conspicuous, hair begins togrow upon the head presently after Nativity, and encrease apace; such as far exceed temperate persons in heat, have black curled hair on their heads, which in age doth shed, and cause baldness: Superflui∣ties of their pallats, nostrils, eyes and ears are few, their sleep is short, and not deep; their heads are offended with hot meats, potions and odours, so much the more if these things be naturally hot: Pulse and Respiration is quicker then in persons possessed of a temperate Brain; they excel in memory, are agile in their actions, prone to wrath and venery, and enjoy perfect sences. III. Signs of a cold Brain. If coldness predominate, the Head is cold in touch, scarcely any red doth appear in the face, and that in cold seasons converted to a bleak blewish hue, their eyes are weak,
their veins inconspicuous, their Pulse and Respiration more slow then in temperate persons, their hair grows not till some space after birth, thin, smooth, not shed∣ding and turning hoary, without bald∣ness; their head is seldom hurt by hot, but facilely offended by cold causes, whence proceeds frequent distillations, rheums, stoppings, stuffings and pozes of the Nostrils; they are sleepy, timorous, slow to anger, less desirous of Venery; their memory is treacherous, mind stu∣pid, and sences weak, especially their hearing; subject also to swimmings of the Head, called Vertigo. IV. Signs of a moist brain. In such in whom moisture doth abound, the head-hair is plain and copious, plenty of hair proceeding from moisture, as colour doth from heat, for which cause moist brains never wax bald; their hair also seemeth bedewed with an airy oily fat humour, if it arise from natural humidity of the brain, or else with a waterish thin hu∣mor, if procured by preternatural hu∣midity of Brain: Moreover such peo∣ple have dull wits, are slow in motion, retain faithfully in memory things late∣ly past, but forget things acted long since;
their sence of smelling is weak, their o∣ther sences imperfect; they abound with Excrements expelled by the nose, mouth, eyes, &c. their sleep is long and deep; they dream sometimes they are in jeopar∣dy, and unable to move themselves from the place, because bodies laden with su∣perfluities are made sluggish. V. Signs of a dry Brain. Dry Brains learn slowly, and do not easily forget; superfluities of Nostrils, Eyes and Palate are few, but Ear-was much; their Eyes are hollow, the hair of their heads hard and curled, growing speedily bald. VI. Signs of a hot and moist Brain. Such as partake of hot and moist brains, have hot heads, humours also find pas∣sage through the sutures of the Scull, they have a good colour in their faces, their eye-veins are conspicuous, head∣hair copious, streight and yellowish; their sences somewhat dull, soon grow bald, prone to Venery, quicker in motion then temperate people, propense to anger, yet not cruel; cannot watch much, yet are they vigilant, oft see obscure Visions in Dreams, their Excrements arc copi∣ous.
VII. Signs of a hot dry Brain. They which are possessed of a hot dry Brain, are slender of Body▪ yet their joynts and muscles firmly knit together; they have great Veins, perfect Sences, compleat nimble motion, a strong loud sounding Voice, hard brown Skins, their Head∣hair grows speedily, being black and curl∣ed, but sheds speedily; their bodies are very hairy, they excel in wit and memo∣ry, are inconstant in their Opinions; their sleep is light and short, dreaming most commonly of fiery things; they are lit∣tle eaters, have few excrements, and are audacious, proud, liberal, temeracious, and prone to Venery. VIII. Signs of a cold moist brain. Such as are indued with cold humid brains, have dull sences, weak pulse, slow motion, heads replenished with superfluities, ren∣dering them obnoxious to Rhumes and Poses; their sleep is much, great and pro∣found; they dream of water and watery meteors, as snow, rain, hail, &c. seldom become bald, are not long angry; finally, they abound with superfluous humours. XIX. Signs of a cold dry Brain. Such as partake of a cold dry brain, enjoy sound intire sences in youth, which pre∣sently
begin to decline, they soon grow old and hoary; the Veins of their Eyes are inconspicuous, little annoyed with excrements, but easily prejudiced by cold causes; they often dream of smoake, mysts and great darkness: If cold pre∣dominate over dryness, they grow bald more slowly; if dryness exceed cold, more speedily; Respiration and Pulse is more slow and rare, they participate of small quantity of Blood; have somewhat hard bodies; to conclude, they are not quickly pacified being angry. CHAP. VI. Of Dyet properly convenient to every temperament. HAving exposed to your view the signs of the Brain's temperament, Order requires I should in the next place specifie a particular Dyet for every tem∣perament, onely omitting the first kind, compounded of an equal Commixtion of the four qualities for whosoever is pos∣sessed of such a temperament of Brain, or nearly related thereto, enjoyeth a good memory, and therefore needeth no
Physical Precepts; the chief business in∣cumbent on such a blessed Estate, is to preserve it, by shunning all things perni∣cious to the memorative faculty, and u∣sing those profitable things before pre∣scribed. II. If the Brain suffer through exces∣sive heat, endeavour must be used to qua∣lifie the same; persons so infested must abstain from all things augmenting or ex∣citing heat; such are most Aromatical Spices, as, Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, &c. All sorts of Wine and strong Drink; Gar∣lick, &c. violent exercises must be eschu∣ed, and hot Solar beams, especially at noon and after meat, as also study after Supper, let such persons eat cold sowr fruits after meals, smell often to things of a cold scent, as are Violets, Roses, Saun∣ders, natural Camphire, Rose-water, Wood-bine Flowers, Mullein, &c. re∣create their Spirits sometimes in Gar∣dens, where Flowers and odoriferous Herbs breath a fragrant smell, walking in the shade: So soon as they are ready in a morning, let them wash their faces in cold water, dipping their eyes open therein, that the water may soak and re∣frigate their eyes; in like manner at E∣vening
towards Bed-time, let them a∣noint their temples, and two uppermost Spondyle, with Oyle of Roses, which doth diminish the heat of the Brain, and also procure Ileep, which hot brains want not a little. III. If the Brain be over-cold, it must be tempered by abstinence from things of a refrigerative nature, and use of hot things; persons afflicted with a cold Brain, must desist from using all things which cool the Brain, as Lettice, Musk-Melons, Brown-bread, Brains of living Creatures that are humide, as of Calves, Pigs, &c. unripe fruits, green herbs, un∣boiled water, &c. Let them decline the Moon and Northerly Winds, eat hot vi∣ctuals, use these Aromatical Spices, being very profitable, Pepper, Cloves, Cinna∣mon, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger, Juniper-Berries, Ivory-shavings, &c. Hot Odours comfort the Brain, exhaled from Balm, Mint, Galangal, Rosemary, Lignum Aloes, Oranges, Amber, Musk, &c. Moreover Green Ginger eaten fasting twice or thrice a Week, in quan∣tity of a small Nut, doth much commo∣date a cold Brain. Likewise Wine of good colour, taste, and Odour taken
moderately. It is expedient once a month to wash the hinder part of the head and neck toward bed time, with hot water, wherein Balme, Cammomile, Sage, Bay-leaves, Hyssope, Fennel, Sweet-Marjerome, &c. have been decocted; Lastly, Unction of the nape of the neck, and two uppermost spondyles with tepid oyl of Dill or Rue, admini∣streth great benefit to a cold Memo∣rie. 4. If the brain abound with superflu∣ous humors, care must be taken to con∣sume them, and reduce the brain to its due temper. Let moist brains therefore abstain from all humid and Phlegma∣tick things, as Broths, Pottage, Milk, Swines flesh, especially Pigge, young Lanbs, Chickens before they are plumed, Musk-Melons, &c. Let them refrain from use of Garlick, Onions, Strong Drinks, and all other things which re∣plenish the brain with gross Vapors; and be carefull their food be free from all viscosity, lest through augmentation of Phlegmatical matter in the brain by fly mie meat, they render themselves obnoxious to Apoplexies, Lethargies, or Palsies. Let their meat be well season∣ed
with salt, for that doth very much exiccate and cut Phlegmatick hu∣mors, and rarifies the Spirits, being best of all sauces for moist brains. Let them shun Southern winds, and all things replenishing the head with hu∣mors. Chewing of Mastick with Gin∣ger and Pellitory of Spain, doth migh∣tily purge the head of Phlegmatick su∣perfluities; the same effect is procured by Sage held some space in the mouth: it is also salutiferous to swallow a grain of the purest white Frankincense. To∣bacco (so called from the Isle Tobacque) temperately taken, is beneficial▪ for moist brains, chiefly when the head is repleat with more then usual superflu∣ities, but too frequent use thereof de∣cayes Radical moisture, augmenting Rhumes and distillations by accident; for as a Well (the more it is exhaust∣ed with buckets) doth more abound with water, so the head frequently e∣vacuated by smoke of Tobacco, is dayly replenished with greater abun∣dance of humors. Juyce of Citrons ta∣ken fasting is much more excellent to digest Phlegmatick matter, then To∣bacco, which I think, no man that
makes experience will deny. 5. If the brain be too dry, it must be lenified with moistners, such people must abstain from salt meats, and all drying things, and avoid the east wind, Let them eat moist and succulent things, as Rear Eggs, Capons, Phea∣sants, Mountain Birds, Kidds flesh, new Cheese unsalted, fresh water fish caught in gravelly places, Milk, Broth, Che∣ries, Prunes, Pomegranats, Figgs, Me∣lons, Succory, Endive, Lettice, and like things, small drink, if they drink wine at any time, let it be allayed with water, and eschew all violent motion; if their bodies be costive, let them ra∣ther use cooling moistening Clysters, than Purgations. So much for the four simple quali∣ties annoying the Brain, which things well observed, I may be more brief in the other four temperaments, as con∣sisting of these compounded; for if the Brain be infested with two peccant qualities, as too hot and moist, or two hot and dry, in such compound tem∣peraments, such things as we have ex∣hibited to mittigate either quality, are to be used, so far as one doth not im∣pede
the alteration of another. If of two qualities, one is more predomi∣nant than the other, and more affect the Brain, we must proportionally more oppose the stronger; but to re∣turn to our purpose, and say some∣thing of compound temperaments, as well as of simple. 6. He which hath a Brain too hot and moist, must fly all moistening and heating things, refreshing himself with cold and dry things; for such the North wind is good, the South wind hurtfull: cold dry odours are most fit for them, as Saunders, Rosewood, Eg∣lantine, &c. Lotions made of cooling drying herbs decocted; unctions with cooling drying oyls, as oyl of Myrtle∣berries, of Cammomil flowers, oyl of Hony, oyl of Roses. 7. Brains hot and dry in excess, must decline hot and dry things, and recover themselves with cooling moist∣ners, avoiding the East wind: Let them be most commonly bare headed, and choose their habitations (if they may) in a cold moist Region, near some river; let their lodging-Cham∣ber be a low room, paved with Tyles.
Towards sleep let them anoynt their heads with oyl of Violets, or of Water-Lillies,; cold moist scents are most ad∣vantagious for them, as of Mullein, Nightshade, Roses, Violets, Water-Lillies, Willow leaves, &c. 8. Persons afflicted with brains too cold and moist, (to which distemper most Students are incident) have a ve∣ry weak Memorative faculty, for of the four primary qualities, Humidity and Frigidity, are most noxious to Memory, but Frigidity most of all; yet the Brain is more facilely and speedily cured of these distempers, than of the others, because the Brain (of the seven prin∣cipall Members) is naturally moist, cold, and humid, so that hot and dry things applyed to qualifie its intem∣perateness, are less dangerous. To those things which are severally delivered before for help of cold moist Brains, these things may be added, all hot and dry things, as Aromatical spices, Nutmegs Ginger, Cynnamon Powder of Euphorbium, Zedoarie, &c. Of Herbs, Balme, Marjerome, Water∣cresses, Hysope, Tyme, Piony, Ele∣campane, &c. In Conserves. Of
Food, Sparrows, Partridges, Turtles, Larkes, Pheasants, Capons, Weather-Mutton, and Goats-flesh, &c. Sack drunk temperately. Also Conval Lil∣lies distilled with strong wine, the quantity of a spoonfull drunk, is sin∣gular against all infirmities of head or Brain, proceeding from a Frigid or humid cause, doth Vivifie the Memory and Sences, and exhilerate the heart: Conserve of Rosemary flowers is of like virtue. After meat it is good to eat Conserve of Quinces, Anniseeds, or Cynnamon in Confects, or Corian∣der seeds boyled in vinegar, and after∣ward Confected. Heating drying O∣dours yield much comfort, such as is exhaled from Lignum Aloes, Styrax, Muske, Civet, Ladanum, Bettony, Nigella, Rosemary, Lavander, &c. It is also very profitable to anoynt the Temples once a moneth with Partridges Gall, till it penetrate. Frication of the head in a morning fasting with course clothes perfumed with Frankincense, as also much and frequent Exercise, is very beneficial. Moist humours may be sometimes expelled from the head by sneesing powders, amongst which Nut∣megs
challenge the first place; Bettony rubbed to powder, and snuffed up into the Nostrils, provoketh sneesing with∣out any offence, but is onely to be used the stomake being empty. Oyl of Tyles, or Oleum Philosophorum (as some call it) tepified, and anoynted on the hinder part of the head, and uppermost rack∣bones, doth wonderfully restore Me∣mory, decayed by a cold or humid cause. To conclude, all cold moist food and sauces, are hurtfull, no lesse noxious is moist air, and cold morn∣ing, evening, or Nocturnul seasons, e∣specially to lie out all night in the open air. 9. Such as are oppressed with too much coldnesse and dryness of Brain (to which qualities most aged men are subjected) must eat frequently a little at a time, nourishing themselves with humective dyet, such as heateth mode∣rately, as Rear Eggs, New butter, sweet Almonds, Filbirds, Pine-apple-kernels, Chesnuts, Pistachioes. All nourishing meats, and sweet things, as Lyquorice, Hony, Sugar, Raisins, Conserves of Borage and Buglosse, Cytron peel Preserved. Strong sweet wine, as Muskadine, Ipo∣cras,
drunk temporately is most resto∣rative for old folks, and cold and sick∣ly persons, more efficaciously Gold (made almost red hot in the fire) quenched therein, doth marvellously restore and exhilerace the heart. Con∣cerning this matter, Roger Bacon, a fa∣mous Philosopher, in his Treatise of old age, hath this story; An ancient husbandman (saith he) wearyed with plow∣ing, and thirsty with his hot labour, drank water of a Cytron colour, and after he had greedily swallowed the same, was changed both in complection and strength like one of thirty years of age, possessing more excellent discretion, memory and understanding, than ever he enjoyed before, from which time he lived eighty years in the Kings Court, Ba∣con who reciteth this thought, that wa∣ter or liquor received its yellow Tin∣cture from Gold, as he there testifieth. Moreover to anoynt the hinde part of the head, neck, stomake, belly, feet, (and other parts of the body, if you please) with Oyl of Lillies or Cammomil, is very beneficial. The answer of Pol∣lio doth notably instruct us how profi∣table Wine and Oyl are to conserve
health, who having attained to the age of an hundred years, and asked by the Emperour Augustus (as Pliny relateth) by what means he had preserved vigour both of minde and body to that age? replyed, By wine within, and oyl without. Baths made of Decoctions of hot and moist hearbs are most usefull, as also hot Odours, but all things moist and cold are to be avoided. The conveni∣entest time of Studie for old men, is when their brain is moderately warm∣ed with wine, or meats of good nu∣triment; then the Idea's of Notions do as it were bubble and erect themselves, whereby Invention is exacuated; for Phantasie pertaking of corporeal quali∣ty, is excited by meat and Drink. It is usually seen at first fitting down of Guests to a banquet, deep silence oc∣cupieth them all, but after their brains are tepified with Spirits of Wine and good meat, their Fancies are elevated, and all the company begins to prate. This may suffice for recovery of de∣bilitated Memories, when no disease is contracted.
CHAP. VII. Of Diseases of the Brain. IF Memory be so far impaired, some disease ensueth, recourse must be had to Physick as to the last refuge, wherein nothing is to be undertaken without a Physitians advice; for though there be many medicines found in ap∣proved Authors, whereby a very much decayed and languishing Memory may be restored, yet it is unsafe to rely wholly upon such written directions: so long as Memory doth prosperously discharge its Office, according to the innate temperament of the Brain; yea though declining somewhat from tem∣peratenesse, there must be a totall ab∣stinence from Physick, because Na∣ture often accustomed to Physicall re∣medies, will alwaies expect them, when interrupted, and so become remisse in undergoing its charge so true is that common Proverb,
Natura sonos frustra medicina fatigat. In health, they do abuse Nature, who Physick use. But now it is high time to contract sails, and put this work into a Harbor, concluding with Horace, Vive, vale si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti; si non, his utere me∣cum. FINIS.
