W2788 R220009 99831447 35910
HEAVEN The End of Man OR, FINAL CAUSE OF THE SOUL's SPIRIT. By WILLIAM WILLIAMS, Teutonico-Philosopho-Theologus. Juvenal. Satyr. VIII. Summum crede nefas animam praeferre pudori, (viz. Virginis Pudicitiae.) Et propter vitam vivendi perdere CAƲSAS. Viz. Deum, Efficientem; Virginem, Formalem; & Coelum Finalem Causam. He that loveth his Life above the end of Life, shall lose it. LONDON: Printed for Eliz. Whitlock, in Amen-Corner, near Stationers-Hall, 1696.
READER. THou art here presented with a small Tract, written in an Uncommon Stile: The Au∣thor hath been much conversant in, and a Stu∣dier of the Teutonick Philosophy: His Notions, which he hath here delivered, (though somewhat uncouth) yet are they not to be rejected: He hath express'd himself for the most part in a Metaphorical manner, in which the Cu∣rious Readers are desired to receive them: With this Re∣quest, Not to permit the Non, or Misunderstanding of the Rational Reader, if not a little Elevated, and more Divine∣ly Enlightned, then the unthinking World generally is, be imputed as a fault to the Unintelligibleness of the Book it self: It is not denied but that somewhat may be Object∣ed against it; but what then? I know of no Systems, of Divinity nor Philosophy, exposed to Humane View, but there may be Objections raised, that cannot (by the best Wits) be easily, if at all, Answered. It will like∣wise be expected from him that is so Captious and envi∣ously Critical, to set forth something in which will be no Contradiction nor Disconsonancy; and then he may more reasonably find fault: But as it is improbable, nay utterly impossible to please all, so the Author expects not to be disliked by all; and if what he hath here publish'd please but the best, or be profitable to any, he hath his end, who de∣sires nothing more than the Manifestation of the Truths of God in Nature and Scripture; whose aim and end is to be his Servant, and every Mans Brother, Dum Spiritus hos regit Artus. Reader, Thou mayst here perceive, 1. What Mans Condition was. 2. What it is. 3. What it ought to be. 4. What it ought not to be. 5. What it may be, if he accept. 6. Or if he refuse. 7. What it must be, if persevere. 8. Or if he fall from Grace. 9. What it will be in the Bliss. 10. Or in the Curse.
CHap.I. The Souls Antiquity. S. 1. Lucifer's Noble Birth. 2. Lucifer's Fall. 3. His Captivity. 4. The Souls Eternity. 5. Man now a Subject of Time. 6. The Souls Circle. 7. Fatal Necessity of the Souls being. 8. Gods Repentance. 9. His Ballance allows the same event, &c. 10. All alike relieved by a poor wise Man. Chap. II. The Souls Longing. 1. Crying, Give, give. 2. Seven-fold Craving. 3. The Souls Importunity. 4. He desires some real thing. 5. It is no Whimsey. 6. Atheists Objections Answered. 7. By Humane Laws. 8. By Religion and Dreams. 9. By Loves Passion. 10. By the Seven Properties. Chap. III. The Souls Allegiance. 1. There is a Divine Law. 2. It altereth not. 3. Yet it is inverted by Man. 4. But it must be observed. 5. To indulge the good Genius, &c. 6. It is no indifferent thing. 7. Mans Portion from God. 8. The Fool neglecteth it. 9. And hateth his own flesh. 10. No middle state. Chap. IV. The Souls Rebellion. 1. The Fools Appetite. 2. Trust not in Ʋncertainties. 3. The Lawivers Example. 4. His Wisdom. 5. Travall appointed to Man. 6. Christs Sorrows. 7. Mans Ignorance. 8. And Mortality. 9. Thantasie inverted. 10. Soul and Body most sympathize. Chap. V. The virgins Suit. 1. Mans Meet Hlp. 2. Virgin Vertue. 3. The Beginnings of Grace. 4. The Excellency of Vertue. 5. The Gospel of Peace. 6. The Pleasantness of Vertue. 7. Divine Contemplation. 8. The Contentment of Vertue. 9. The Acceptable Sacrifice. 10. The Authority of Vertue. Chap. VI. The Whores Suit. 1. The Soul's Backsliding. 2. The Baits of Sin. 3. Seven-fold Vice. 4. The blind fall headlong. 5. The Destruction of the Individuum. 6. For spoiling the Souls sport. 7. Not propagating the Species. 8. Degrading the Soul. 9. The Divine Reprover in the Conscience 10. Misery the end of Vice. Chap. VII. The Virgins Espousal. 1. Reconcilement. 2. Consecration of the Soul. 3. Full Assurance. 4. Perfect Liberty. 5. Religious Vows. 6. Pious Resolution. 7. Seven-fold Vertue. 8. Seven-fold Reward. 9. Grace turned into Wantonness. 10. By Double-Heartedness. Chap. VIII. The Virgins Farewel. 1. Beware of falling from Grace. 2. For there is no third Recovery. 3. Vertue very Rare. 4. Christs profered Service slighted. 5. A seared Conscience, 6. The Tallent given to another. 7. The Souls Anguish. and, 8. Despair. 9. Late Repentance. 10. Hellish Blasphemy. Chap. IX. The Souls Rest. 1. Where is this Rest? 2. Not Gods fault, if missed. 3. God alloweth Time. 4. And Tallents. 5. The eed sown at Death. 6. The Heavenly Feast stays for Man. 7. Mans self-enjoyment Gods glory. 8. Spoil not the End for the Means. 9. Seven fold state in Eternity. 10. Heaven Describ'd. Chap. X. The Souls Transmigration. 1. Christ is the Lawful King. 2. His Right to reign in Man. 3. False Judgment. 4. Retaliation. 5. The Souls Metamorphosis. 6. Work in time. 7. Before the Evil Days come. 8. Before a second Apostacy. 9. No Redemption out of Hell. 10. The Conclusion.
HEAVEN The End of Man OR, FINAL CAUSE OF The SOULS Spirit. CHAP. I. The Souls Antiquity. The PREFACE. THe Words of the Eternal Preacher, Son of God, King of Heaven, Vanity of Vanities (saith the Great Prophet) Vanity of Vanities. All the Labour of Lucifer is Vanity: And it is in vain to act against God, it shall never prosper. What profit hath Lucifer now of all the Labour in oppo∣sition to God, which he hath taken under the Sun of his Eternity? One Generation of Angels hath passed away, and another humane off spring comes in their stead: But the Kingdom and the Prize which is to be contended for, abideth still.
§. 1. Lucifer's Noble Birth. WHen Almighty God was pleased to multiply himself in Generating the holy Angels, even the three Throne-Angels, from whom again sprung many thousand Millions, Lucifer's Dominion stood in the middle betwixt Michael and Ʋriel: And he receiving and partaking of the brightness and beauty of the other two, as by reflexive Rays, was invested with a most transcndent Glory and Fairness. But when he gazed and looked upon the most excellent Clarity and Beauty of the Son of God, and also of his Pure and Blessd Virgin, making her self ready as a Bride for the reception of her Husband; and when he perceived that this Virgin of God was the most beautiful of the Virgins, he took a distaste a∣gainst his own Virgin, whom God had appointed for him as his chaste Consort, and fell deeply in love with Gods Queen Virgin, desiring to be like her, or indeed brighter and fairer than she: And was ex∣ceelily importunate to unite with and defile her in the Bed of Incest, not being content to enjoy her pleasant Aspect and Serenity, to partake of her de∣lightful Society and Communication, as his dear Si∣ster. But, Oh (said she) dost thou know who I am? Look upon my Clarity and Excellency, and the Ma∣jesty of my Glory: Go home to thy study, and think of something else: Aim not too high: This Attempt is too difficult for thee: Thou art not worthy of me, for I am the chaste Spouse of the Son of the Deity: I never ill defile my self: I will never consent to thy oolish desire. Thereup Lucifer being highly af∣ented, endeavoured to ce her to his unlawful re, and would needs commi a Rape upon her: But  as rescued by the Angels, and carried into the
Wilderness, where she had a place prepared of God for Her. Then Lucifer cast out the Flood of his Wrath, and disgorged the Vomit of his Malice after her, to devour her. But the Earth helped the Virgin, and swal∣lowed up the Flood of his Envy, and the escaped late Gods Pallace, which God appointed for  ∣ctuary of Refuge. §. 2. Luciser's Fall. NOw Lucifer increasing the Infection of his Eyes, by gazing upon her Beauty, and letting out his Mind after her for a hellish end, he importun'd her to look out at the Window of her Pallace, and would needs perwade her by all manner of smooth and flat∣tering speeches, to take a walk with him in the ad∣jacent Groves of Paradise: She still disswaded him from such a foolish Attempt of false Lust, saying, Be but content, and I will cloath thee with my Jewels, and the Ornaments of my excelling Beauty; But be assured I will never consent to be Desled with false Imagination, or to be infected with Lust. Then he opened the Door in the Center of his Do∣minion, which was Eternally forbidden: And would needs search into the Ground or Abyss of the Deity, to know the Root of the false Tree in the Center or midst of the Creation, seeking to know whence the Cause of Gods Beauty and his proceeded. And then said, O fair Virgin, if thou consent to cohabit with me, I will honour thee with the Joynture of my Black Kingdom: I will make thee Queen of the Infernal Regions: She still scorned his Rashness, and pitied his Folly. Art thou, said he, become so disdainful and haughty? I will force thee to my Lst, whether thou consentest or no. But she was caught up to Heaven. At that Lucifer raved, roaed, raged
and spat poyson, like an horrible Dragon, as if he would tear the three Worlds, and the Deity it self in pieces, if it had been possible. And there was a kind of War: Michael and his Angels expelled Lucifer and his Dragon-Angels out of Heaven: And yet it was no real War, for Heaven spewed him out of its own accord, and he was cast out, as Dung, into the cursed part of the Earth; and his Souldiers, his Vas∣sals, were ast out with him. Then for Malice being mad with Fury, he endea∣voured to blow his poyson, and belch forth his ma∣lignity into all the Seeds and Idea's of the Creatures of this Creation which we now see. Thus also Lucifer for Madness sought to slay his own innate proper Virgin, after he had failed in deflowering of her, which was contrary to the Law of Eternity: And therefore he opened the Matrice of the wrathful Nature, and was united with, and gene∣rated a Dragon-like Essence, & to his own everlasting Torment, so that now he burns in the Hellish Fire of his Consumption, never to be consumed: And hath great Wrath and Envy against the Son of Man, who is to dethrone him, because he knows he has but a short time. Wo to the Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea, for the Devil is come down unto you. So that to this day we plainly see the cause of Luciser's Envy against the Son of Man, even, Because He expels Lucifer out of his Throne, and is but an Usurper, as Lucifer lays to his Charge. And so Lucifer spat his Malice upon every thing that was capable of Re∣ceiving it, as a Serpent out of a hole or prison to which he is consin'd: And before the Creation he would envenom the Seeds of the External Essences: For every thing had its own Formative Seed in its self, before it was created. So the Earth was with∣out
Form, and Void, like a Chaos, and Darkness was upon the face of the great Deep in Lucifer's Dominion. § 3. Lucifer Captivated. YEt the Spirit of God would not suffer this once fair middle World to stand in Eternal Igno∣miny, and to become the Devils Murthering Den: But he moved the Waters to quench Lucifer's Dark Lightning and Thunder, and his Jugling Tricks, and said, Let there be Light to adorn this fair World, as it had done from Eternity, and there was Light. Then the Creation groaned and travailed in great Labour to be freed from the Vanity of the Curse, this Vanity of Va∣nities, that was a Vexation to the Spirit of God. For Lucifer, if he had his will, would suffer neither Grass, Flower, nor Fruit to grow, nor Animals to live, for the Use and Recreation of Man, for he en∣vied his Happiness. And he himself could not en∣joy their Society, for every thing feared him, and shunned him, as a Revolted Prince and Tyrant. But when on the fifth Day he saw that Life and Sense sprung up through his dark Death, he intended as he sat in Council, to torture or to kill the Beasts, Birds and Fishes, for a Mock-Sacrifice to atone the wrath of the incensed Gods: For he understood there was no Lord or Arch-Shepherd set over them, to protect them: Therefore also the Creator consulted to put a stop to his Trayterous Rage, and malicious designs of his fellow-Plotters, and to generate a Lord to supply his place upon his Throne, and to divest him of his Robes and his Crown. Here ariseth a great Objection, Why did not God annihilate the Devil, when he was aware of the danger of his Fall?
Answ. Lucifer being created out of the Essence of God, and being made a free Agent, had the Power of his own Will, and was in a Capacity of giving Glo∣ry  God, as well as the other two Hierarchies: So that according to the Order and Creation of Ange∣lical Nature, the Essence of Lucifer could not be turned into Nothing. God as a most skilful Mu∣sician melodized with himself on his own Harp in Heavenly Joy before the World was. God gave Lucifer (once a most fair and bright Angel, but now corrupted and spoiled by Imagination and Pride) such another Harp. But Lucifer broke the Strings, and instead thereof, (because he was not willing to play together with God and the holy Angels, in one Symphony) puts something invented by his vain Fancy, which makes an horrible noise. [And here is now God against God.] But you will say, Lucifer is Unalmighty. So he is; but ask the Devil, and he will tell you, He is the Almighty God, and Omnipotent Mountebank in the Dark World, and also Prince of the wrathful part of this World, and is absolute Monarch in his own Black Region. Therefore O Man, beware to come thither: For to return again to God's Jurisdiction, Hac Labor, Hoc Opus est. But you will say, Why did God create or gene∣rate Man, seeing he knew it would increase the De∣vils Kingdom? Answ. The Devil could not be captivated other∣wise: And there was no necessity that Man should ll, except he would himself: For if our Noble  ast d stood, in the great Trial in Paradise,  Lucifer had infected the Macrocosm, as to one part, yet the infected part was hidden in the black Principle, and the Earth had been a meer Paradise in this  World.
§ 4. The Souls Eternity. NOw, O Man, behold thy self: Thou art Lu∣cifer's Rival: Consider the Eternity, Anti∣quity, and Beginningless Noble Birth of thy Soul: Thou art but a little or small Incarnation, and yet God was pleased therein to multiply himself: O Man, consider thy self here: Thou hast the Image of the Great Creator upon thy Soul; tho' de∣faced, yet capable to be restamped upon thy Spirit. Vanity of Vanities: All is Vanity, whatever it be that offendeth or vexeth the pure Spirit of God and his Divine Image: Therefore whatever hurteth or hindereth the well-being of the Soul, or Separates it from God its Creator, must be removed. What profit hath he that worketh in all wherein he labour∣eth for the Wind? God hath made every thing beautiful in his time: also he hath set the World in Mans Heart; Yea the three Worlds are in the little World; so that no Man can find out the Work that God maketh from the Not-beginning of Eternity to the infinite End: For the Work of Eternity is the World not yet made, and yet ever made by Eternity. And Good and Evil do manifest themselves one by the other; so Pain and Pleasure remain in one another hidden, yet both remain in the wonder of God, to his own Manifestation and Glory. And so, when I applied my Heart to know Wisdom, and to see the business that is done upon the Humane Earth in this lower World: (for there is that neither day nor night enjoyeth a sweet rest of sleep with his Eyes, in the Darkness of the Hellish Shadows:) Then I be∣held all the Work of God, that a Man cannot find out the Work that is done under the Eternal Sun: Because tho' a
Man labour to seek it out, yet he shall not find it: Yea, though a Wise Man by the Serpents Craft think to know it, yet he shall not be able to search it out. The thing that hath been before the Creation is that which shall be; and that which is done at present, is that which shall be done in the succeeding World, and there is no new thing under the Temporal or Eternal Sun: Is there any Soul whereof it may be said, See this Essence is New? It hath been already of old time (in the Nonage of Mans Generation) which was before us. There is no remembrance of former things that were done in Lu∣cifer's Apostacy: The New Man forgets all old things: Neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are o come in Man's Apostacy, by the succeeding Generations that shall come after us. For to every purpose under the unmixed Heaven there is a season, and a time for every Action: A time to dye to the World, and a time to be New-born: A time to plant good Herbs, and a time to pluck up evil Weeds that are planted in the Heart: A time to kill evil Beasts, and a time to heal the wounds of the Soul: A time to break down Lucifer's Bulwarks, and a time to build up the holy Tabernacle for God in Man. A time to weep for sins past, and a time to laugh in Heaven: A time to murn, when the holy Bride is with-drawn; And a time to dance with her when she is found: A time to cast away Stones out of the Soulish Field, and a time to gather Stones together for Gods Building: A time to embrace the Virgin, and a time to refrain: A time to get Heavenly Treasures, and a time to lose all for the sake of the Beloved: A time to keep the Di∣vine Talent, and a time to cast away Lucifer's Jewels: A time to rent the Heart, and a time to sew new Gar∣ments with new Cloth: A time to keep silence from uttering vain words, and a time to speak to Gods
praise: A time to love God and his fair Daughters, and a time to hate what is contrary to him: A time to War with Lucifer, and a time of Peace, when the End of our Journey is found. § 5. Man a Subject of Time. SO that tho' Time be mutable, yet there is an un∣interrupted coherence between its Links or Chains; and if the Cause go before, the Effect must follow: For if there be a departure out of the Or∣der, there must be a time to put that which departs therefrom in its due place again, or turn it out. And so if there be a time of a false Birth, there must be a time to die Eternally, if not new born. If there be a time to plant evil Weeds, there must be a time to pluck them up, and throw them without the Garden, and the Planter together. If Man affords time to kill the Son of God in his Conscience, God will find a time to raise him again to judge the Mur∣derer. If Man sin is time to build up a Babel of Confusion, God will break it down in his time. If there be a time to langh in vanity, there must be a time to weep in repentance, or to weep in Eternity. If a time to dance to Satan's Musick, there must be a time to mourn in Sackcloth and Ashes. If there be a time to gather stones together to Babel, there must be a time to cast them away. If there be a time to embrace Jeza∣bel, there will be a time to refrain from that embra∣cing. If there be a time to get Riches by false deal∣ings, there will be a time to lose them by Thieves and Rust, or other means. If there be a time to keep Gods Talent in a Napkin, and hide it, there will be a time to take it away, and give it to another. If there be a time to sew Fig-leaves, there must be a time to rent
them, and discover the Nakedness of those that sew them. If there be a time that the dumb Conscience (who betrays his Author) keeps silence, there must be a time that it will speak to Condemnation. If there be a time to love the Whore, there will be a come to hate and curse her, that ever she was a occasion of Allurement. If there be a time of false peace, and taking up a false Rest, short of the  end, there must be a tim that the Conscience will pro∣claim an implacable War against him tha doth so, and cause him to wander as a Fugitive and Vaabond to Eternity, and yet never obtain his Desire upon  Enemies. And thus, because to every Action there  appointed a true time, therefore the misery of Man  upon him. Now here lies the Great Mstery, because of Ig∣norance in the Souls Original and Nobility, many a Man becomes a wretched Mscreant. Nay (may some say) It is by Gods predestinate purpose that Man is to know and seel pain. Yes, this is the pre∣destinate purpose of God, and the Antient Law of Eternity, That whoever would be greater than God, and oppose his own Lumour and self-will to Gods will, must feel Eternal Pain, that proceeds from this chiefly; He will gnash his Teeth, and eat his own Flesh; yea, from his own Center shall stream Flashes of burning Brimstone, because he will think how he hath fooled himself away by his own Folly, when he might have been a Royal Prince: So that Ignorance is the cause of Mans Wretchedness: Man shuts his Eyes, and seeth not how God the Root of Man, can∣not by any Skill or Device be plucked up: And so Man comes to be subject to an evil time and ill chance, by breaking himself off from his true Eternal Root.
§ 6. The Soul's Circle. THe words of the Preacher, the Prophetical Sound, the Son of God, King of Heaven. Prince of Order, and Ruler of the seven Worlds: One Hu∣mane or Angelical Spirit passeth away into its own Place and Lot, and another brood cometh into this World in his stead: But the Mansion of the Spirit abi∣deth unmoved for ever. The Humane Sun ariseth and seems to set out of sight, and so Immortal Man seems to be Mortal, but he hasteth to the place of Eternity where he arose, and wheeleth from one Tropick to another by an unces∣sant Labor, and Eternal Motion. The Wind of the Soul goeth towards the South, and turneth to the opposite side; it whirleth about continually, as upon seven Wheels, whether moved backward with Lucifer, and so re∣maining still: Or returning again according to its Cir∣cuits, as moved forward by the Divine Motion and Breath. All Humane Rivers run into the Ocean of Eter∣nity, yet Eternity is never fill'd: Ʋnto the place from whence the Rivers of Generation came, thither they re∣turn again. Some flowing hiddenly to the springing Fountain, and some abiding in the restless and tossed State in the Abyss. The Son of Man before his External Birth, was as it were taking his Rest, or a sweet Nap of Repose up∣on the Brests of the Virgin his dear Mother, the ho∣ly Bride of God, who cometh down from God out of Heaven; And there the Eternal Soul was at Rest, until his Natural Parents waked him, and disturbed his Beatifical Visions: His Natural Parents sent for him into this outward Region, to see the Beauty of this fair World, and to receive the Salutation of a
Joyful Welcome thereinto: Who (as a Birth of Time out of the Matrice of Eternity) came very mean, simple and helpless into this lower Country, even as a most vile sprwling Worm, not bearing the least malice to the Creator, or any other Crea∣ture of the Creation: And lived a year, ten years, (or more; or perhaps a hundred years,) and then leaves all in great longing after some New Friends or Beloveds, which he had chosen to his So∣lace in this strange Land. § 7. Fatal Necessity of the Soul's Being. BY reason hereof, he goes back with an ill will towards his Antient home, and parts in great anguish and pain, and perhaps in that anguish and despair he Eternally abides; and that for follow∣ing some Lusts, and pursuing some Pleasures, which he would fain solace his Mind with for a few years in this World, and never so much as consi∣dered that he must endure a thousand millions of painful years, in lieu of that little short pleasure, till the hour of Death, or rather the time of taking his leave of his Friends, being too late: And tho' truly the Light of the World be sweet, and tho' it be a pleasant thing for the Eyes to behold the Sun of Time, yet if a Man live many years, and rejoyce in them all, let him remember the Days of Darkness, for they shall be many: All that cometh is Vanity. Now then where lies the fault here? Here ariseth a great Question: Is it any promo∣ting of Gods Honour, Joy, or Profit, that Man must know Pain opposed to Pleasure, or be sensible of, and really feel in the Practick what Anguish and Torment is? I say, Doth this increase Gods Joy
or Beatitude, and as it were perfect the Perfection of the perfect God? Some may answer, No. But it was God's Will that it should be so: Well! Then there must be some Cause wherefore God willed this Evil: The Objector may reply, He doth all for his Glory: If so, He confesseth God torments his own Child for his own Glory. § 8. Gods Repentance. BUt this is a Belying of the Deity, and of his Love to the Children of his own Loyns; and making of God an unnatural, cruel, fierce, wrath∣ful Judge, or Executioner; yea, crueler than the Sa∣vages of the Desert, which love their own Issue; nay, than the very Devils of Hell. For, alas! It is no Glory nor' Pleasure at all to God, to hear that his own dear Children are imprisoned in an Eternal Wilderness, where they can never find the way to their Journey's End, their Creator: But he counts it a great Loss, and Dishonour and cause of Rpen∣tance (if we may use that Metaphor, that God re∣penteth) that when he views his Brides Room, and finds that his Children (each one with his Mate) are not returned to the Great and Solemn Wedding of his Son: He will say, Where are all my Children but these? It will be answered, They have listed them∣selves Soldiers under another Power, and would not come. Here again we must be forced to frame another Metaphor, to speak or utter these high Mysteries with a humane Tongue: For no Grief can ever en∣ter into God, nor the loss whereof may vex him, (if we speak properly) God perceiving that his Chil∣dren
took not his Sons Counsel; will, as it were, mourn for them a few days, and when the mourning Days shall be ended, He will consider that there is no Redemption out of the Jaws of Eternal Death, and and so he will for ever forget them. And so I considered in mine Heart even to declare all this, that tho' Mankind go forth from one Root, or Fountain Ocean, yet the greatest part comes not back to the same Door or Gate of Enterance into their Antient Resting Place; but enter in at a false Door by a gross mistake: And being once entred there, there is no Recovery, because they would not hearken to the Voice of Divine Wisdom and Skill. Therefore (in a humane sense) it is an Addition to God's Glory to see his dear Children returning to Heaven: (Oh! what hearty and kind Embracing and Welcoming is here!) Their Ships laden with Di∣vine Treasures, and carved with the Story of the Afflictions which happened to them in a strange Land. § 9. The same Event to all by allowance of God's Ballance. THe Righteous, and the Wise, and their Works, are in the hand of God, and weighed in the Ballance of Equity: No Man knoweth either Love or Hatred, Joy or Sorrow, and how it will be in the other World, by all that is before him in this World: All things come alike to all: There is one Event to the Righ∣teous and to the Wicked: God maketh the Sun and Rain to come upon the Just and Unjust: His Divine Sun enlightens every one that comes into this World; both the Clean and the Ʋnclean: Him that sacrificeth his Lusts, and him that sacrificeth not: Him that swear∣eth to Gods Covenant, and him that fears the Oath of
Divine Allegiance, and him that forswears it This seems an evil among all things that are done under the Sun, that there is one Event unto all: Yea also the Heart of the Sons of Men is full of Evil; and Madness is in their Heart while they live, and after that they go to the Dead: For to him that is joyned to all the Living: in the holy World, there is hope in this Life-time for a living Dog, which may be cultivated by degrees, is better than a dead Lion. And the Living know that they shall dye the Eternal Death, if they cut themselves off from the Root; But the Dead, who die the second death, know not anything at all, but only pain; neither have they any more a reward from God, for the memory of them, when the Days of Mourning shall be past, is for ever forgotten. Also their Love, and their Hatred, and their Envy is so perished, that it can never hurt any of the Celestial Incolists: Neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun of their Eternity, in the dark Center of their Abyss. §. 10. All alike Relieved by a Poor Wise Man. SO I returned and saw under the clear Sun of Divine Light, that the Race is not always to the Swift, nor the Battel to the Strong, nor yet Bread to the Skilful Til∣ler of the harsh Earth; nor yet Favour to Men of Skill: But Time and Chance happeneth to them all; and a wise Man discerneth both Time and Judgment. But a wise Man also knows not his time: As the Fishes that are taken in an evil Net and as the Birds that are caught in the Snare, so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil time, or Unlucky Hour of the Enemies temptation, when it falleth suddenly upon them, and that for want of Divine Skill and Wisdom, with which whoever is endued, he cannot be cheated. This wisdom also have
I seen under the Sun, and it seemed great unto me. There was a little Microcosmick City, and few skilful Soldiers within it: And there came a great King against it, and by Authority from Luciscer besieged it, and built great Bulwarks against it: Now there was found in it a poor contemptible wise Man, and he by his Wisdom delivered the City, by giving his Life for the Inhabitants Yet no Man remembred that same poor servile Man. Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength: neverthe∣less the poor Mans Wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard. The Words of the Wise are heard in quiet, as a still pure Voice, more than the cry of a King that ruleth among Fools, and his losty loud words in the streets of Confusion: Wisdom is better than Weapons of War: But one sin ful Affection destroyeth much Good, and by its jarring spoils the still Harmony in the Humane Harp, even as one scabbed Sheep infects the whole Flock. CHAP. II. The Souls Longing. § 1. Crying, Give, Give. VAnity of Vanities (faith the Soul's Spirit) All extern Objects are a vexation of my Spirit. Now O Man (saith the Eternal Preacher of the holy Gospel) Knowest thou what thy Soul, and what the Spirit of thy Soul is? The Soul is a dry Hunger; It is a longing Anguish: It is a Fire without Fewel: Lay thy hand upon thy Brest, and feel thy own Root the Heart, and then tell me, dost thou feel no panting there? No Breathing or
Longing there? No Hungring nor Thirsting there? Art thou sensible of no Labour and Travail there? No restless and incessant Crying there? Crying, Give, give; O give me that which I labour for: O give me that which I seek after; Even as every thing would fain live, so would I: Thou wilt say, That's the throboing and motion of the Heart and Pulses, proceeding from the Vital Spirit. Tho' that be true, yet Life and Sense in Man, are rooted in the Abyss of the Source of Eternal Joy and Delightful Affecti∣on of a thing Loved: And that is the Soul, who cries in the Gate of Mans Pallace, Give me some Food, true Food for me. § 2. Seven-fold Craving. O Saith the Spirit of the Soul, Pity me, my dear Soul: O pity a poor Prisoner: Bring me out of this Dungeon of Confinement, enlarge my Habi∣tation, that I may find my late home again, and so∣lace my hankering eager Mind with my own dear Family and Relations. Oh have pity upon a poor Beggar; Give me a lit∣tle Food to satisfie a hungry craving Soul: O give me a little Water out of the Living Fountain, to quench the great thirst and furious fire of my Passion. O have compassion upon a poor Pilgrim; shew me the way to a quiet lodge of Repose: I want the sha∣dow of a great Rock in this weary Land: I cannot take a Nap of sweet sleep and refreshment in this parched Heath: Here is no spreading Elm, nor Beech, nor Fountain of Chrystal Streams, no warbling River, beside which I may take my rest, to recreate my lan∣guishing and tired Spirits. O come, dear Shepherd, to seek thy roving Sheep: Call me again with thy
Melodious Shepherds Pipe: I listen at times to hear it, but cannot: I dare not bleat my self, lest the Wolves hear me: O come, blessed Shepherd, and stand upon a high place, where thy Voice may be audible: Come skipping upon these Mountains, and leaping upon the Hills of my wandring Mind: For I am quite ed in this tedious Wilderness, O give Rest to my travailing weary Spirit: O this is not my Rest. O somebody have mercy upon a distracted Innocent, condemned by false Witnesses, to be confined as in Bedlam: I cannot set my heart at rest, because of a pannick Fear that seizeth upon me: Oppression makes a wise Man mad, and besides himself. O some Skil∣ful Musician, come and refresh my Senses, and self∣afflicting Conscience, with the Har mony of the holy Gospel, and the Melody of the blessed Tidings of Everlasting Serenity. O who will pity a poor wounded and sick Person? Give me some heavenly Balm or Cordial, to heal my heavy heart, and to slop the raging of my Sore, and the swelling of my furious Agony: Break the sence that separates me from my desired Object. O shew mercy to a poor naked Person: O I have been stripped naked in a Wilderness by Thieves and Murderers; they have whipped me, and smote me with sore Boils all over: As Lions they have broken and crushed my Boes: O somebody cloath me with the Robes of Panity, and white innen of Sanctity; to cover the Nakedness of my Lustful Affections and Longing Mind. O Pity a poor Slave, a Servant of Servants, a con∣demned Person: Redeem me from under the Cap∣tivity of Luciser, and raise my drooping Life into the Heaven of Everlasting Safety, and Undisturbed Quietness: O give some Fewel to feed the Coals of
my aspiring Love, that it may blaze in a holy Flame of Divine Light. §. 3. The Soul's Importunity. TO these Demands the Soul Answers, Trouble me not: Get thee gone, and come another time; when I shall have convenient opportunity, I will take thy condition into Consideration. I will not be gone, saith the Spirit: Now is my time; I will not be put off so: Be gone, saith the Serpentine Soul, I have nothing for thee: Go work and earn it where thou canst get it: Whence comest thou? O saith the Divine Spirit of the Soul, I have been wan∣dering and travailing upon the Mountains on thy Errand; I have not been idle: Think not that I am come to put a Trick upon thee, as to beg of thee an Alms for the maintaining of my self in Idleness. Go, saith the Soul to thy vagabond Companions: Thou art a Spy, coming to see the Nakedness of the Land. I am no Spy, saith the Soul's Spirit; I am in great necessity, and that not for my own sake, but for the sake of others. Who is there in the House, saith the Soul? One of the Handmaids answers and saith, What wilt thou have me to do, to this Disturber of our Peace and Enjoyments? Go, saith the Soul, and give him some of these Orts, the Refuse of vain Pleasures. When these are proffered to the Spirit, he saith, (ut∣terly refusing them) Take them your selves, I will not meddle with it: I must have some true Food, or none at all. Nay, saith the Soul, if thou art so saw∣cy a Beggar, and so wanton, want thou shalt for me. Sayest thou so? saith the Divine Spirit; Is it come
to that? Must I now be a Gleaner? And yet would fain tasle and eat the best ripe Grapes. O give me some of your Superfluities. A little pittance of what you throw away to the Infernal Dogs, would be greatly pized by me, and rellish as a sweet Morsel: O give me some. No, no, saith the Soul, go and get where thou canst. Is it thus you requite me, saith the Spirit? It is by my Labour and Procurement that you enjoy all your Pleasures. And I defire a part: Either procure some for me, or suffer me to go to fetch some, my self; or I will never leave complain∣ing in thy Streets. Lay therefore thy hand on thy heart, and give some to this Beggar, and I will be gone: And I will never trouble, vex, nor worry thee any more: I will be quiet, and gone to my Place and Lot: Thou shalt have quiet for me: Give me my desire and I have done: Thou shalt hear no more of my murmurs, my tormenting and pricking of thy Conscience. Get thee gone quickly, saith the Ser∣pent, thou art a sturdy bold brazen-fac'd Beggar, let me alone. Nay, saith the Soul's Spirit. I will never stir, I will not be gone: I will never let thee alone, until I have the Alms I seek: I am so sturdy I will not be deny'd: I am fully resolved, I never will cease vexing of thee, till I have my Desire: Therefore I pray consider of it. Take this Fellow, faith the Soul to one of his Servants, Bind him hand and foot; strike the Conscience dumb, we will not be controuled by it. The Oppressed Spirit still Cries and Moans in the Gates of Mans City: Cease, saith the Soul; What is all this Clamour for? Let us have no more Noise: Be packing, thou impudent Bawler, and disturb not our sweet sleep and quiet Rest, our present Joys and Recreations. I will not give over, saith he, if I bring my Blood upon thee,
I will never cease, though you slay me: I am so im∣portunate and impudent, that I will never stir a foot from this place, till I have my Errand: My words shall break thy Rest: My Words shall be as Goads and Nails in thy side, Clenched by the chief Architects and Masters of the Assemblies: I will prick and vex thee in thy Conscience everlastingly, until I have my de∣Desire: But if thou grant me my Divine Object, I will deal so fair, that in token of gratuity I will give thee a Vantage of Temporal Joys added unto thee. If first thou allowest me my desire, do what thou wilt: Enjoy Temporal Pleasures freely, It shall not be im∣puted a Violation of Gods Law, and the Righteous∣ness thereof. § 4. He Desireth some Real Thing. BUt to what shall I compare this Cry in the Soul? The Soul is like a Child that cannot speak, even as a Lamb dumb before the Butcher, his Voice is not heard in the Street of Mans City; He is afflicted and grieved, and yet opens not his Mouth: I say, The Soul's Spirit is like a poor afflicted sickly Child, that can no∣thing but jabber a little: The poor Child repines, murmurs, whines and grumbles; and is still discon∣tented: Give him what you will, yet still he hath the same tone: Then the Mother or Nurse asks, What dost thou lack, my dear Child? O that I knew thy want! Come, my sweet Child, my poor sick Child, we will make thee a well-relish'd Dish: No, no, saith the Child, in effect, making Signs by the Aversion of his head. Wilt thou have this sine Rat∣tle to play with? No. I will sing thee a sweet Lul∣laby: No. Will nothing in this World we can procure or do for thee, please thee? My sweet Babe
art very hard to please, and humoursome: All we can do for this Child, is to no purpose: O that some skilful Body would come and direct us: For we are at our Wits end, because of this Child, it is past our Skill to humour it. Am I so hard to please (saith the Child, if he could speak) Yes, saith the Nnrse, thou knowest not thy own Mind. Do I not, saith the Child, in his Mind: I want none of those fine things you would put me off with: I want no Lullaby, I want Ease and Quietness: I would fast some small time from those false Delights which was the cause of my Malady: I want Ease: O ease me of this pain, and then I will be quiet, and not before. Therefore hereby All know very well what it is the Soul would have, and what it seeks after, that is, Food, Fewel, and Satisfaction for its fiery longing Hunger: Which if it hath, it will be satisfied, and not till then. The fire longs for the Light: If it burns in secret, it is in pain and in anguish. All things are full of Labour: Man especially cannot utter his own Labour, and travail of his Soul: The Eye of the Mind is not satisfied with seeing Vanity: Nor the Ear of the Spirit filled with hearing Childish Rattles: Therefore Vanity of Vanities, (saith the first and last Preacher) Vanities of Vanities, all is Vanity, whatever it is, tho' seemingly pleasant, which refresheth not the Spirit of the Soul. §. 5. It is no Whimsey. AGain, The Soul is like the Horse-Leech: It hath two Daughters, crying, Give, Give: There are three things that are never satisfied, yea Four, that never say, It is enough: The Grave of Devouring
Hell, in which every Soul that entreth is Eternally Lost, and then gapeth for more Souls: And the bar∣ren unsatisfied Womb of a false Virgin, which recei∣veth without Conception: And the Fire of false Lust, which never saith, No more, it is enough: And lastly, The Soul which is not filled with Vanity. But O Man, if thou findest in thy self that thou longest for no∣thing, that thou hast all things according to thy wish, as thou wouldst have it to be; and that thou art fortunate in every accident that happens to thee, and that nothing crosseth thy Mind; that thou art content in whatsoever state thou art; that thou ne∣ver vexest nor tormentest thy self in Prosperity or Adversity; and that thy Soul takes all Accidents for Good, having framed it self to receive all things in good part, then it hath attained its desire, and the Longing ceaseth. Thou wilt say, My Soul is not in that Frame: My Soul within me is always wanting and craving, and very hard to please: It knows not what it would have: It wills, and it wills not. Am I so humour∣some? saith the Soul: Well might I deserve the blame, if I were like one mad or frantick, (as if one longed for the Kings Crown, to which one can claim no Title, seeming to be possessed with a strange fury) or if I were like a Childing Woman, longing for things unprocurable for money: Even as a who∣rish Deceiver, being pregnant of a false Essence, longeth for strange Properties, which endangers the Soul: But I desire that which desires me, and cries, O my dear Companion, come and receive me: for I stand here very lonesome in a solitary condition, except some Soul pity me, and entertain me: If I longed for far-fetched Treasures, and dear-bought bought Sawces and Jewels procured by the Blood of
others, which all hazard the Eternal Life, there would be some colour for blaming me: But that which I long for, is easily procured, and (if not too much slighted and neglected at first) obtained with∣out wracking Labour and Care. Now perhaps you will mock me, and impute this my Longing to a foolish Fancy; and say to me in scorn: Ah ha! But I defie your Reproaches: Give me my Desire, or I will vex and worry you for ever∣more: Now I am come as a Sojurner to view this outward World: But I will not partake of your false Joys, and count them a satisfaction of my mind: For all is a Vexation of my Spirit. If you will not give me Food for my Hunger, (mark well) I will be glutted like an Horse-Leech with the Blood of hu∣mane Souls, to Eternity; and then I will vomit up all again, as previous to a fresh thirst after Blood. I was born crying when I came first into this World, and that makes it manifest that I longed to go back again to lean upon my Virgin-Mothers sweet Brests: I cried, Give, give; O give me some of my Virgin-Milk. Here may seem an Objection to lie in the wny: Whimsie of Whimsies, (saith the vain Atheist) Va∣nity of Vanities, All is a Whim, whatever checketh the Soul, and is a Vexation to his lustful Spirit. What is the Voice in the Conscience which opposeth the Hamane Lust, but a Vain Whimsie, which the Beasts are not sensible of? Therefore Man by his Sensibili∣ty, and being immoderately affected with a vain Fan∣cy, degradeth himself below a Beast, and sensual Animal: And see now what his witty and wise con∣ceit bath hath brought him to: So that he cannot enjoy all sorts of pleasure at his Liberty, without being controuled by a Consciential Whimsey: Let him thank himself for his Folly.
§. 6. Atheists Objections Answered. NOw, Who is the Wise Man? And who knows the Interpretation of the Souls Enigmatical Myste∣ry? And who can search out that which is far off, and exceeding deep? Who can discover the Devices and Intrigues of the Harlot, the Souls Enemy? Wisdom makes the Face to shine. And the boldness of the Countenance shall be changed, by which means the Divine Virgin, the Souls Friend, will be enamoured with him, and invited to love him: But he that is wilfully blind in a foolish Passion of false Love, hates the Light of the blessed Sun, in the Virgins Beauti∣ful Face: And why doth Darkness hate the Light? Why cannot Obscurity endure the splendid Rays of Beauty? Perhaps it fears, lest the Light should in∣spire it, and so it should become Fantastical, or pos∣fessed with an Enthusiastick Fury. Object. Here the Atheist encounters with me, say∣ing, What is this whole World but a Stage? The Actors are Mankind: When the Play's ended, the Stage down they fling, And then there is no difference in this thing, Between a Beggar and a King. (As saith the Poet) Answ. Then if it be a Stage, it represents some Actions that are really done, or that were and will be acted in a real Substance, in one of the two Eter∣nal Worlds. But still he will object, saying, Death is Nothing, and after Death there will be Nothing: And who but a Fool, will be asraid of Nothing? What is
Heaven but a sublime Fancy? What is Hell but a Child-frighting Bugbear? A Whim-Chimera, built by the Phantasie in the Air of Darkness, and hudled up in the Chaos or Hoil of Nihility. Ye that be∣lieve Immortality, rid away the Hag of your Fancy, which Night-Mareth your Souls: Send her packing to the Hell of Silence, and the Grave of Non-entity. Answ. There was a Man asked what Life was? The other returned an Answer Answerless; for prefently he turned his back and went away: As much as if he had said, If thou knowest not expe∣rimentally thy own Death and Life, it is not a mat∣ter of Discourse; therefore he by his removing from his place, did actually define what Life was: The Fool saith in his heart, and wisheth, There were no God: But he believeth not so in his Heart: For tho' he tells you so in the day time, yet by night he doubteth. § 7. By Humane Laws. But the Atheist affirms, Cum prorepserunt primis Animalia terris, &c. There was a time when Humane Animals, as a mute and filthy Cattle, crept upon the Earth, and wandred like Beasts, the stron∣ger driving the weaker out of his Cave: Fighting with their Claws and Fists, until afterwards Use and Art invented the framing of Weapons. After wandring they came into Society: And then invented Articulate Sounds, to discover the meaning of their Minds to one another; and so Reason taught them to abstain from sighting about their Food, and from snatching, as Bulls or Dogs, an uncertain Concubine one from the other. Then they invented the Marking out their Minds by Images upon Tables, and made Law to distin∣guish
every Mans Propriety from another. But those Laws being not able to Bridle them, they at last invented, there was a Just Eye in secret that ob∣served every Unjust Action: That so they might be afraid to steal, or commit Fornication. Answ. That God made Man upright. and that Man found out many Inventions; part of which was the Languages now extant we acknowledge: But with∣al we affirm, That the first Language was a Natural Mental Speech. Let such an Atheist read History: For he shall find there is no History that shews the Manners of any People, but it shews also, or gives a hint of their Religion. The Voice of every Ani∣mal likewise, calling to the Lord of Nature, when any sudden fear seizeth upon them, proves a Supe∣riour Power. There was one told his Friend, That when he was young he thought there was no Hell in the Con∣science; but now being old, he began to doubt, what if there be one? Now seeing the Atheist pleads, That as the Flame of an Extinguished Candle dissolves and loseth it self in the Circumambient Air, even so the Taper of Life vanisheth into pure AEther, and is no more, when the Law of Union of Body and Soul is viola∣ted and broken. Second Spira. Answ. Here some Atheist may perhaps acknow∣ledge (as Reason will force any one that hath com∣mon Sense) that there is a First Mover: Which is demonstrated in all things: So many Fountains from one Trunk or Bole, which is the Ocean: So many Branches from one Root: So many Members recei∣ving a Radical Life from one Heart; so many Stars receiving Light from one Fountain of Light, the Sun.
But seeing he will not acknowledge that God will be so cruel to be the Cause of an Everlasting Hell to the Soul of Man, I acknowledge the same thing: Yet there is a Hell, and that Eternally. For if it were not so, Man would have destroyed the whole Creation ere this time, (in which there is such an an excellent Order, and sympathetical Harmony between Superiours and Inferiours, between Bodies and their Spirits) and rifled the Closet of him that sits Eternally upon the Fire, the Root of every Be∣ing. As God made all Visibies of Nothing, or rather out of his own invisible Essence: So thou, O Chymi∣cal Atheist, makest of the whole nothing. § 8. By Religion and Dreams. AGain, The Atheist asserteth, That Pride and Humility are but one thing, only they differ a little in Circumstances: For Pride looks upon all its desired Accomplishments to be behind i: Humi∣lity expects its Perfections as being before it, not yet attained: And so Humility is a kind of Pride; saying to it self, Thou shalt be advanced to Honour some time or other. Answ. But let him know that right Honour is an Advancement of Love: For in Heaven there is not the least defire of Revenge: As may be seen in the Son of God himself, than whom none is more Ho∣nourable, yet He is that which helpeth and saveth Nature, which is gone out of its Order, and becomes a Servant of Servants, stooping to Death for the sake of Mankind. The Babe is greatest in Heaven. But Honour that rigorously ruleth by Force is no Honour: He is not long feared, that is not always loved. It is true, God alone by his Power must keep up the Wall and Fence of the Gulf between
the two Natures, to keep them in Harmony, which Harmony he himself is in the Abstract: Or else the Fire of Hell would break in, and destroy the being of the first Essence in the Love-World, which was without beginning. But the Atheist yet imagines that because he dreams of frightful things, and the Idea's that he hath of them impress afflicting Resentments upon his Spirits, as if they were real; but when he awakes he saith all vanishes. Second Spira. Answ. We will suppose a Man in a terrible Me∣lancholick Dream, and that the said man should Eternally remain in that Condition, wherein the Soul is as really disturbed, frighted, and put out of Harmony, as if he had been awake. That is, The Fright that he is assaulted with, is real to the Imagination of the Soul, as may be perceived that it many times trembles, and continues in a trem∣bling posture after waking a long time. Now you will say all vanishes, and passeth into Silence, when the Soul recovers it self by the outward Senses. Answ. But suppose it had no such recourse, as to seiz upon the Body and wake it when it is so exceed∣ingly affrighted, to rid it self out of the supposed imminent Danger. Suppose it were then in the Sleep of Death, and the Body will not be waked; where shall the Body seek shelter then? The temporal Sleep being a true figure of Death, even the first Death, or sleep of the Body in the Grave. And as the Soul is sensible of a real Joy or Sorrow in Dreams and Visions: So also in Death why may not it feel the same? Seeing the Soul by its creative Imagination frames either an Heaven or Hell to it self, and is really sensible thereof, without the use
of the material Organs, while the Body is incapa∣ble of Sense in sleep; or, which is all one, dead to the Natural Functions of the External Sensoriums. So that it is very clear and plain against all Athe∣istical Deniers of the Souls Immortality, even an Eternal Testimony for Gods being, and the Souls everlasting abode either in Life, or in feeling Deaths Property, called Pain or Hell; that there is no ma∣terial thing that can hurt or afflict the Soul, either in Sleep or Death, but only its own Imagination or Turba, which the Worm of the Soul causeth. Thus in Dreams, the Passion wherewith the Soul is affected, seems a Shadow of a Fancy after wa∣king: So the matter of this outward World seems (and is indeed nothing more than) a Shadow, in re∣spect of the two Real, Substantial, Eternal Worlds. For when this World was made, or rather New∣modelled or formed, yet there was no new matter un∣der the Eternal Sun. §. 9. By Love's Passion. AGain, The Atheist objecteth, The Irrational Animals dream as well as Man: And there∣fore the Phantacy that fancieth Images in sleep, is Temporary. Answ. In the Creation of the World, there was no new thing done, but what was done in the Eternal Mystery before, in the Nonage of Time: And all Created Beings will eternally abide in the Figure and Shadow: Yet in the Stilness: For when we say Beasts have no immortal Souls, it must be meant they enter back again, or downwards, into the Root of their First Constitution. That is, Though they are now out of their first
Order, yet the Breach thereof shall not be imputed to them, because it was not their Fault but Mans, and they sprung forth each according to his kind, or Eter∣nal Property in the Seed of their Souls of Life, so they shall be manifest Eternally in the same. But the Atheist objecteth still, That the Conceit of the Soul is very deceitful, and as unconstant as Proteus. For if the Mind strongly conceits a Hea∣ven to it self, the Mystery of the same conceit un∣known, makes an intension of its Heaven: We of∣ten see that Love after Marriage grows Languid: Whereas the same Love before the Enjoyment of its wished Object, was so elevated and wrapt up in the said Object, that it counted the same a seeming Hea∣ven. But many times two Lovers (who have at∣tained to the Blossom of the Tincture of Venus.) in∣sect one another by their burning Lust, so that they become Deadly Enemies, even these very same Per∣sons, who were ready to impart the Heart within them one to the other, if it could be done without Deah. And tho' sometimes the Complexion of others are more Noble, and still some Love remains, yet it is not always so pure and faithful as the first. As may be seen by Experience, that many in Wedlock hunt after Whoredom and wandring Beds, more than they did when in a single state. Answ. The Original of Love and Propagation proceedeth from the hiddennefs of the Virgin: All things grasp after the Virgin; and that made the Spirit of this World grasp and reach after Man, because he found the Virgin in Man before the Fall. And when a young Man loves a Maid, he thinks to find the Virgin in the said Maid; but when he Unites with her, and toucheth the Tincture of Venus, but
cannot get the Virgin in his Possession, then follow∣eth a less Esteem of the Felicity which he thought to find in her. §. 10. By the Seven Properties. SAy what you will (saith the Atheist) He that hath Skill to rule his own Spirit, may draw his Affe∣ctions and Fancy to what Object he pleaseth. Answ. Ask thy own Mind, why will not it give over Imagination, and lie in Silence? Ask a Mad∣man why he will not stop the Wheel of his Mind, that rolleth about too violently? Ask a Man why he will not in sleep dream of Comedies? And enquire whether any of these have power over this Spirit of Phantacy, to retain the Spirit by his own Power. It is true both in the Light and in the Wrath-World, which soever of the Seven Properties are predominant in the seven fold Wheel of the Eter∣nal Mind, that will by and by be lowermost: But in the Love Kingdom one Property desireth not to ex∣pel the rest out of the Harmony, or to move and turn the Wheels backward. This is demonstrated in all things, especially in Musick: For tho' there be insinite Varieties of Notes and Tunes, according to the Altering and Transpo∣sings of the seven Sounds, yet (tho' the Saturnine or Martial String may be predominant) while an In∣strument is dexterously handled, the rest by a secret sympathy will bind them in a Melodious Harmony. And this is also observable, That the end of a Tune hath some Resemblance to the beginning there∣thereof; to shew that when the Harmony of the Sphears or Stars of Time shall find its beginning a∣gain, then will it be swallowed up in an Eternal Consort of the Properties: Excepting those Essences
who have spoiled their Materials, or rather changed the form of their Breasts, according to the Pattern of which the Instrument is to be tuned. It may also be seen in the Variety of other Sen∣sibles: For in taste there are many thousand Varie∣ties, yet if the seven Properties be rightly and arti∣ficially mixed, tho' the Saturnine property be pre∣dominant, yet the other Properties will bind it in an equal Accord: The like is understood of other qualities, too tedions to enumerate. Thus by what hath been said, it is clear that a terrible Dream comes from the multitude of vain Busi∣ness; and a Fool in his Eternal Melancholly Fit of Angnith, snores in a deep sleep of Despair, and sees horrid Spectiums that imposeth real Punishment up∣on his Soul, according to his Lot and Degree. And to answer the aforesaid Objection, it is con∣sest that when a Man is in love with a Maid: (the Object engaged to his Noblest Passion, her Idea be∣ing as it were stamped upon his Spirit with the Character of Sympathy) Tho' you proser him ano∣ther Maid far more worthy in Beauty and Nobility than the former, yet none will content his Fancy, or stop the current of his Passion, but the Enjoy∣ment of her, (to whose Service he was made Votary before) or Death. Even so the Soul being in love, and enamoured with his fair Virgin, though you proffer him all the External Joys and Pleasures that the World can af∣ford, yet the Soul doth slight all, and contemn them in comparison of the Virgins Love. Answ. Tho' this External Love hath some Analo∣gy (if it be pure and Faithful) to the love between the Soul and Gods pure Virgin; yet there is a difference between the Phantacy and Imagination, in
its pursuit after divers Objects: The Object makes the Difference: For if the Soul takes a Shadow for a Substance, there's the Deceit, and the great Er∣ror. And so as one said, (Ow. Epigr.) If chaste true Love be accounted the greatest Terrestrial Happiness, what may we suppose Calestial Love to be! CHAP. III. The Souls Allegiance. §. 1. There is a Divine Law. NOw the Question is, Whether the Soul be left loose or dissolute, to do that which is right in the sight of his own Eyes, not subject to a Law, not enjoyned to obey his King by an Oath of Allegiance, and so left open to hostile Powers, who may allure him and draw him to the Traps of headlong Ruine and Destruction: And by this means Religion may degenerate into Sceptism. Answ. It must be confessed, There is a Perfect Law of Liberty; but it is in subjection to Gods Spi∣rit in Love, not by a slavish Fear. For instance, A little Child before he can go, must be under Guar∣dians, and not permitted to creep where he will: But when he is so educated that he knows how to comply to the beck of his Guardian or Tutor, he is let loose to go where he will; and yet he will not do what his Tuto hath forbidden him, if he be of
a pliable Disposition; efpecially having had expe∣rience of the Crosness of another Tutor or Master: Tho' our Ancestor went beyond his Bounds in a like Case. Again, Here ariseth agreat Question, Where lieth the great Mistake, that many a Soul must wander at a Fugitive, and never find a Lodge of quiet Repose? Is there a Counter-Law in Eternity, that forbids him to find Ease? O no: The Antient Law of Eternity doth strict∣ly command the Soul to give the Souls Spirit the thing that he longs after; the Object that he earnest∣ly desireth. There never was any other Law in Eternity, nor ever will any be repugnant to this: Feed on the Tree of Eternal Joy, and pure pleasant Life: Thou mayest eat of all the fair and pleasant Trees in the Garden of Eternal Delight: Yea, thou must eat of them: But touch not the Tree of Pain, opposed to Pleasure, upon penalty of feeling Pain without end, or of entering into the Property of Death; that is, Thou shalt not have thy Liberty to choose an altering of that pain∣ful property by reason of thy own false Tincture, which had tinctured the Souls Spirit, and fermented it by a false Leaven, into that Nature which is contra∣ry to its first Creation. §. 2. It altereth not. Observe therefore, O Man, what I say: I the Truth, the Eternal Preacher, By searching have found out and know that whatsoever God doth, it shall be for ever: The same Commandment still remains unalterable: Nothing can be put to it, nor any thing ta∣ken from it: And God doth it, that Men, his Off-spring,
should fear before him, and love him. That Law which hath been in the Angelical Republick, is now in the umane Commonwealth: And that which is to be af∣ter the End of the humane Judgment, hath already been, before Mans Creation: And God requireth, and wi at the great Assizes require an account of that which is past, if done contrary to the old Law, for he requires that it for ever continue the same. And God deth this, that all his Generation, An∣gels and Men may by an awful Obedience take an Eternal Oath of Allegiance and Submission to his Law, that altereth not, and make an Everlasting Co∣venant with him, and love him. Therefore I counsel thee, O Man, my Brother, to keep the King's Commandment, even my Law, and that in regard of the Eternal Oath of God: Be not hasty to fly away. and sneak as a Fugitive out of my sight; and stand not in an evil thing. For a King doth whatsoever pleaseth him: Therefore bring thy Deeds to the Light, that they may be discerned: Where the Word and Law of a Lawfully succeeding King is, there is Power: And who may say unto him, What doest thou? Or why hast thou appointed me to be a Vessel of Wrath? Nay, None hath power to call him to que∣stion, tho he hath been the occasion of his Subjects Rebellion, and then torment them for Rblling: Which is an unjust thing: Yet it is not to be suppo∣sed that the right King of Kings, (who is Justice it self) can or will do such injustice: Whoso keepeth the Kings Commandment shall fee no evil thing. And a wise Mans Heart by Wisdom and Divine Skill, dis∣cerneth both Time and Judgment: Both when and how he must act, according to the Unalterable Law. And because to every purpose there is Time and Judg∣ment, therefore the misery of many a Man is great upon
him; for he knoweth not that which shall be; and who can tell him when it shall be, if he himself hath not Skill? § 3. Yet it is inverted by Man. MOreover, I saw under the Sun of Time and Va∣nity, the Place of Judgment, that Wickedness was there: That there is a time wherein one ruleth over another, even his lawful King, to his own hurt: I saw also the place of Righteousness, which ought to be Righteous, that Iniquity was there; that Servants were put upon Horses, and Princes of the Noble Royal Blood, even of the pure Seed in the Conscience, walking in the form of Servan's upon the humane Earth: And so Folly (I have seen) was set in great dignity, and the Rich, Free, and Right Honourable, sit waiting upon them in a low place, as a Gleaner or Beggar: Which is an evil that I have seen, as an Er∣ror that proceedeth from the Ruler of an humane City, who succeeded not as a lawful Heir to the King∣dom. O my Soul, come not thou into the secret Plots of such as these; unto their Assembly and Cabal, O mine Honour, be not thou united: Neither do thou, O Noble Soul of Man, be privy to their Treachery and Treason. For in their anger they slew the right Seed, and Gods Image, and in their self-will, like Lucifer, they would dig down the Wall of Heaven: Cursed be their Anger, for it is suce, and unfit for the Holy Heaven; and their Wrath, let it be for ever separated from the Divine Order and Harmony, for it is Cruel and wild: I will divide them in Eden, and scatter them in Paradise.
§ 4. But it must be Observed. I Said in my heart (when I saw this breaking of the Antient Law in the place of Judgment) God by Christ shall judge the Righteous and the Wicked, and put each one in their due place and station: For there is allowed a time for every purpose, and for every work, to prevent the Sentence of Condemnation. Therefore, O Man, keep thy foot (When thou goest to the Temple of God) from stumbling: And be more ready to hear his Law from the Mouth of his Messenger, than to give the sacrifice of fools, who sacrifice the Lord of Glory the Holy seed to their false Lusts: For they consider not that they do evil. Be not rash with they mouth to add any thing; and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any new Commentary upon the Ancient Law of God: For God is still the same in the unchangeable Heaven, and thou upon the corrupted Earth; therefore let thy Commentaries and words be few. For a Dream comes through the multitude of Business in Vanity: And a fools Voice is known by multitude of words: When thou vowest a Vow to God defer not to pay that which thou hast vowed: Better it is that thou hadst never been born an humane Being, to vow the Vow of necessary Obedience to God, than that thou shouldst become such an Essence, and not pay thy Vow. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, not performing the Oath of thy Covenant: Neither say thou before thy Angel. Guardian, the Witness of all that thou doest, that it was a foolish Error, and I am sorry that ever I was born, to make a Vow to be broken by de∣liberation. Wherefore should God be angry at thy Voice, and de∣stroy. the Work of thy plotting Hands? For in the mul∣titude
of Whimsies, Images of Fancies, and many Vain Words, there are also divers Vanities: But be thou wise and fear God. §. 5. To indulge the Good Genius: The Injunction. MOreover, O Man, consider by all this, that there is a strict Obligation laid upon thee (if thou be'st born a Man, the Son of God's Loins) and a meer Necessity put upon the Soul, that he must do what in him lies, to promote the Joy and Plea∣sure of his Mind: For an Heavenly Feast is purpose∣ly made for his Eternal Solace; Coelestial Nectar and Fruit of the pure Vine is appointed to make thy heart everlastingly merry. Gods Virgin hath told thee so in the Prophecy which she taught thee, as soon as thou wast born, saying, What my Son? And what the Son of my Womb? And what the Son of my Vows? Give not thy Strength and Purity to Whorish Women: Nor thy Ways to that which destroyeth the Royal Off spring: It is not for Kings, O Man-King, it is not for Kings to drink the Gall and Poyson of Wine, which intoxicates the Senses: Nor for Princes of the Divine Monarchy to drink that which inebriates the Brain, and causeth Pain in the Bowels: Lest they drink and forget the Ancient Unalterable Law, and pervert the Judgment of the Afflicted, who bears the Form of a Servant in the humane Gate. Give this intoxicating Drink to him that is ready to perish in Eternal Misery: And the Wine of Spewing and Ebriety to them that have heavy Hearts in the hel∣lish Chambers: Let them drink and forget their Poverty, and want of the means of Refreshment, and let them try whether by Guzling and Tipling they may re∣member their Misery no more.
But swim thou, O Man, (this is the Injunction) in Rivers of Pleasures, and Christaline streams of Ne∣ctar: Yet thou art forbidden upon pain of Eternal Deth, (or an Imprisonment in Deaths Bonds du∣ring the Life of thy Eternity) to drink of the sowr harsh property of Pain opposed to Pleasure, or of the Poyson of the Creation, which will cause a Com∣motion in thy griping Bowels, and a Rebellion of one Property against another in thy disturbed Con∣science, that thou shalt never feel Ease and Refresh∣ment. Rejoyce, O Man, therefore, and continue young Eternally: And let thy Heart chear thee in the Endless days of thy renovated Youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes, affording to thy Soul his Will and Desire, all that which he longs after: But know thou that for all these things God will bring thee to Judgment, to clear or condemn thee; yea, and if thou neglectest this, to banish thee for ever to thy own desired Country, where Pain is known. § 6. It is no indifferent thing. THerefore remove sorrow from thy Heart, and put away evil and pain from thy flesh: for the Child∣hood of Folly and fading Youth are Vanity, and the source of Death. Be not Righteous over-much, and wise in thy own Conceit, thinking thou canst find a place of Superi∣ty above this Heavenly Joy: Why shouldst thou destroy and cast thy self into an Abyss of never attaining thy aim? Be rot over-much wicked, having treache∣rous thoughts in thee that thou mayest Dethrone God: Neither be t cu foo ish, in not apprehending the way and means of satisfying the Soul: Why
shouldst thou dye before the appointed time? For thou wast never appointed to die, except thou drawest Death upon thee, and swallow up thy self by thy bab∣ling, and foolish self-accusation in thy accusing Con∣science. It is good thou shouldst take hold of this Counsel: Yea, also from this Obedience withdraw not thy Hand: For he that feareth and loveth God's Law, shall come forth out of all the foresaid dangers. Now observe, It is no indifferent thing, this Law must be fully obeyed, that is, thou must afford all the delight and Pleasure to thy Soul, that he is ca∣pable of. There is nothing better for thee, than that thou shouldst eat of the Tree of Life, and drink the Wine of Plea∣sure, and play in the Coelestial Dance, and fill thy Soul, and make him enjoy good in thy Labour: This is the Ancient Unalterable Law, which will continue to all Eternity: This also I saw, that it was from the Hand of God to do thus: For who can eat and drink, and sport in this Angelical Scene, And who else can hasten here∣unto more than I, who am nearest to God? For God giveth a Man that is good in his sight, Wisdom and Know∣ledge, and Joy: But to the Sinner against this old Law, he giveth Travel, to gather, and heap up, that he may provide for, and give to him that is good before God; but he shall never reap the Fruit of his Labour, be∣cause he had not the Fear of God before his Eyes, when he plotted to undermine him. § 7. Mans Portion from God. BElieve it, O Man, I know there is no good in all thy Labour, except thou doest rejoyce, and do good in thy Life, and enjoy the Fruits of thy Travail: This
is the Gift of God: And this is thy Portion which God hath appointed thee, and every man: If thou dost not so, who will deliver thee out of the Jaws of Death to see what Pleasures shall be after thee in the next World? This is a sore Evil which I have seen under the Sun of Time and Vanity, namely Treasures and Riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt: But those Riches perish by evil Travel: And he begetteth a Son or Fool like himself (in his own Metamorphosed Form, whereinto his Soul by Transmigration doth enter:) And he carrieth nothing in his Hand to the Infernal Shades: As he came forth out of his In∣fernal Mothers Womb, or the Original Matrix and cause of every Property, Naked shall he return or go as he came, and shall take nothing of his foolish Labour, and hunting after Vanity, which he may carry away in his Hand: And this also is a sore Evil that it must be thus: God cannot be blamed: That in all Points as he came, having nothing of his own but what God gave him, so shall he go again with his empty Vessel: And what Profit hath he that hath laboured for the Wind? And will Eternally Labour, and yet find nought but a Shadow of Vanity. All his Days also be eateth in Darkness, and he shall have much Sorrow, and Wrath, with never-ceasing Pain and Sickness. Behold that which I have seen: It is good and come∣ly for one to Eat and Drink in true Pleasure, and to enjoy the Delights of Humane Life, and the good of his Labour that he taketh under the Sun of his Lot, all the days of his Eternity which God gives him for his Right and Propriety: For it is his Portion: For he shall not lay to Heart the Days of his Affliction: Be∣cause God answereth him in the Joy of his Heart.
There is an Evil which I have seen below the Sun of Purity, and is common among Men: A Man to whom God hath given Riches and Honour, so that he want∣eth nothing for his Soul of all that he desireth, Yet (because of his evil Mind) God gives him not Power to eat thereof, and enjoy the Fruit of his La∣bour, but a Stranger eateth of it: This is a sore Va∣nity and an evil Disease. § 8. The Fool neglecteth. IF a Man beget an hundred Images of his evil Mind, and live many Years, so that the days of his Years be many, and yet his Soul be not filled with good, and also that he have no Burial, but that he be left as a Carkass for the Daemons of the Power of the Air, I say that an untimely Birth is better than he, as being cut off in the Bud. For this Embryo cometh in with Vanity, and de∣parteth in Darkness, and his Name shall be covered with Darkness, and never known in the light of Life: Moreover He hath not seen the Sun of Vanity, nor known any Opposition of the Properties: This hath more rest than the other. Yea though this other live a thousand Years twice told: Yet hath he seen no Good: So as to find Satisfaction: Do not all such as these go to the same Place at last? All the Labour of Man as for his Mouth, for the Preservation of the Individuum, and the Propagation of the Species, and yet the Appetite of the Fool is never filled. For what hath the Wise Conceited more than the Fool? What hath the Poor and Vagabond Beggar, that faith, he knoweth how to walk before the Living? Btter is the sight of the Eyes, and real Enjoyment of the thing longed for, then the Vagabond-wandring of
the Desire: This is Vanity and a grievous Vexation of the Spirit of the Soul. That which hath been, is named already: And it is known, that it is Man, who is the second Angel: Neither may be contend, as Lu∣cifer did, with the Deity who is mightier than he, and Cross the natural Inclination of his Soul, by for∣cing it to change it into the contrary Property, and so to desire on Opposition of both. Seeing that there be many things that increase Vanity, which is no real Felicity to the Soul, what is Man the better, if he try the false Tree and Poyson himself as Lucifer? For what Fool knoweth what is good for Mans Per∣fection in this Life, all the Day of his vain Life, which he spendeth as a Shadow or a Fancy? For who shall tell him what shall be after him under the Sun of Vani∣ty? Nay, though he should know that out of his Ashes should arise a vertuous holy Property, yet that will not bring him back to the Living, and immortal Nature. §. 9. And hateth his own Flesh. AGain, I considered all Travel, and every right Work, that for this, a Man is envied of his Neighbour Lucifer: This Envy is also Vanity, for it will not prosper: And it increaseth the Vexation of his proud Spirit. The Fool foldeth his Hands together, and rather then stir to find that which his Soul desireth, he Eats his own Flesh: There is one alone, and there is not a second: Yea he hath neither Successor nor Compani∣on: Yet there is no End of all his Labour after some∣thing that the Soul wanteth not: Neither is the Eye of his Mind satisfied (no more then the Grave or Horse-Lech) with vain Riches: Neither saith he,
for whom do I labour, and bereave my Soul of that which it longs after? This is a great Vanity, and a sore fruitless Labour. Then after all, I commended Mirth, and true Pleasure, because a Man hath no better thing under the Temporal or Eternal Sun, then to Eat the pure Manna, and Drink the Nectar that God hath ap∣pointed him and chear up his Heart, and be Merry for that shall abide with him of his Labour, all the days of his Eternal Life, which God hath appointed and given him under the Sun of Immortality. Though I said before that there was an unaltera∣ble Law, or Rule of Eternity, by which all Eter∣nal Creatures, Angels and Men must be governed, yet it is not meant, that this Law was any other than a Law of natural Love: It was no Impositi∣on contrary to the Inclination of the said Eternal Essences: (For to speak properly, a Law is given to shew Transgression:) But it was a Law of Love and Sympathy, which they by natural Instinct ob∣served, as naturally as every Creature loves Life and shuns Death: It was the straight Rule of Eter∣nal Life and Joy. From which if any Eternal Es∣sence swerve and change his Form and become Crooked, it cannot be ever made straight again: And that which is wanting to the composing of an Har∣mony cannot be numbred in the Election of God: It was the Law of pure Philautia: Love thy self and God: whose Image thou thy self art: Indulge thy Fortunate Genius, defraud him not: This Law was not indifferent but necessary, and therefore may well be termed an Eternal Law.
§. 10. No Middle State. BUt perhaps some may say, I desire no such sensibility or Knowledge of extraordinary Joy and Pleasure, in the enjoyment of my Life: If I could but avoid Pain and Death, I desire no more: Or if I could be annihillated again, I would be content: I labour not after the Promotion of Pleasure in the highest intenseness, or degree, that my Soul is capable to partake of, which this Law enjoyns me to: I desire but a little Corporal Plea∣sure, and that but for a time in this Life. I Answer, thou shalt not be left to thy Choice herein: For thou art strictly bound to avoid Death and love thy Life, Aut Coesar aut nullus: Either give me my Desire or nothing: Saith the Soul, and for this end thou wast Created and Begotten, to in∣crease the Joy of thy Mind to its highest Pitch, as a Play-fellow in the Scene of Heaven: And yet not so much for the sake of others (as if the Divine Joy were not perfect without Thee) but chiefly for thy own sake, and for the sake of the Divine Prisoner within Thee, who longs to be released out of Cap∣tivity: For it is but just and fit, that if any will not Dance with the Celestial Incolist's in the Divine Sport of Love (but murmureth and is disconten∣ted) He shall be excommunicated and turned out of the Society, as a Disturber of the harmless Peace and Love-sport.
CHAP. IV. The Souls Rebellion. §. 1. The Fools Appetite. NOW then, O Man, I will ask Thee a Que∣stion: Dost thou think thou camest to be a Creature into the World, purposely to Eat and Drink and to take thy Pleasure? Thou wilt say, No, perhaps: But I say Yes: That was the Cause thou camest into this World, and only so thou glorisiest thy Creator, who sent for Thee out of the Abyss and Womb of Eternity: This was his beginningless Law to Angels and Man∣preceding Essences, and this same Law will stand for Man-succeeding Creatures in the endless Eter∣nity, if any shall ever be Created by the Creator hereafter, when the Humane World shall be con∣summated: For (as we said before) All the Labour of Man is for his Mouth, and his holy digesting Throat, if he knows how to feed on the Tree of Eternal Life and Pleasure in eating and drinking and sporting in the Angelical Pastime, and gather∣ing of Flowers in Paradise: And yet the Appetite of the Fool who misused this Pleasure, and contracted upon himself the Disease of the Greedies is not fil∣led: His Canine Appetite or Orexis is never satis∣fied. Again, another Fool longs after strange Hetero∣geneous
Objects, which tend not to the satisfaction of the Appetite, and are not proper Food for him: And gives his Money for that which is not Bread, and his Labour for that which profiteth not his Soul, and the well-being of himself, What is Man the better for them? What would this Fool have? He knows not himself: He wills this: He refuses that: He wracks himself and his own Spirit: And what is this but much Pains to little purpose? And though it be true, that it is a piece of Wisdom to reserve the best till last, And he is not wise that suffers himself to be condemned by the poor silly Ant, who knows (by an instinct of Nature or Law of Creation) his time, and laies up or provides in the Summer against Winter: And he is a Fool that will fare above his Purse to day and want to mor∣row, and eats and drinks beyond the Power of Na∣ture, and thereby gets a Surfeit or Disease; yet there is no need for Man to gather up more then needs, seeing there be many things that increase Vani∣ty and Emptiness, and meer husks not proper Food for the Soul. §. 2. Trust not in Ʋncertainties. SOme may say: Wisdom is good with an Inheri∣tance, and by it there is profit to them that shall see the Sun after him, his Successors: For Wisdom is a Desence: And Money or Treasures (being Price of necessary things) is a defence against the Win∣ter, and Forreign-Invaders from Lucifers Domini∣on. Answer, The Covetous Man nourisheth an old grudge against God belike: For he cannot trust God for Maintenance: Though the right Frugal
Man be a wise Man, yet it is a folly for such a Man (when he hath gathered sufficiency for himself, to live in the right and natural order of Health and true Pleasure) to torment himself too much in heap∣ing up, and gathering into a Bag with Holes for his supposed Successors: Except he knew that his Succes∣sor, who should enjoy the Fruit of his Labour, would be a Wise Man: That is, One that will know how to manage those Treasures that are provided for him, and fulfil the Proverb, One Soweth and another Reap∣eth; that both he that Soweth and he that Reapeth may rejoyce together in an holy Sport of Eternal Love, in the Lord. But how can he tell that, whether his Successor be a Wise Man or a Fool, to whom he shall leave all his La∣bour? What tho' Money or Treasures be a Defence, yet the Excellency of Knowledge is, that true Wisdom, which knows how to use them, giveth Eternal Life to them that have it, that they may Eternally enjoy the Fruit of their Labour. §. 3. The Law-givers Example. I Was in Paradise chief Regent over the Essences and Animals in Eden, when I dressed the fair Flower-producing Garden, in the pure springing Odours and delightfulness of the Spiritual Sences: When I made me pleasant Gardens, I said in my heart, Come on, I'll prove thee with Mirth: Therefore enjoy Pleasure: And behold, if not managed with true Wisdom, it is also Vanity. I said of temporary laugh∣ter, It is mad: And of mutable mirth, What doth it but presage a following fit of Sorrow? I sought in mine heart to give my self unto the mirth of Coelestial Wine, yet acquainting mine Heart with
Wisdom; and to lay hold on Folly, if Folly were there∣in, that I might see what was that Good, for the Sons of Men, my Brethren, which they should do under their own Heaven, all the Days of their Immortal Life: I made me great Works in Eden: I builded me Houses, and many pleasant Masions in the Forest of Para∣dise: I erected fair Bowers, and recreative Walks and Galleries: I planted me Vineyards, where pure Grapes might be produced: I made me fair Gardens and Orchards, and I planted Trees in them of all kinds of Fruit, pleasant to behold, and good for the Ever∣lasting Food of Man. I made me Pools of Water, to water therewith, as with Coelestial Dew, the Wood that bringeth forth Trees for my fair Building, and for Food: I gat me Servants, Angel-Guardians, and Maiden-Virgins: And had Maidens born in my Coelestial House: Also I had great possessions of all sorts of Animals, which were brought to me to receive their Natural Names, according to their genuine Nature, and to be in Subjection to my Authority, above all the Monarchs, (yea Lucifer him∣self,) that were in Eden before me: I gathered me also Silver and Gold, the Coelestial precious Metals, and the peculiar Treasures of Kings, and of Angelical Pro∣vinces and Hirarchies: I got me Singers, Virgin-Sigers, with their ravishing Voices, he Delights of  Sns of Men, as Musical Instruments, and that of all sot: For the workmanship of my Tabrets, of my Pipes, in Hrps and Viols, were prepared in me, in the Day that I first appeared in Eden: All precious Stones were my Covering and Ornament wherewith I walked up and down in Puriy in the midst of the Siones of Fire.
§. 4. His Wisdom. I Was the Anointed Cherub, and God had set me so: And so I was great, and my Grandeur encreased more than all the Princes that were in Pardise in the Throne of the third World before me: Also my true Wisdom remained with me: And whatsoever my Eyes de∣sired, I kept not from them, I with held not my Heart from any Joy: For my Heart rejoyced in all my Labour: And this was my Portion of all my Labour and Sport: Then I looked on all the Works that my Hands had wrought, and on the Labour that I had laboured to do: And behold all seemed Vanity and Vexation of my Spi∣rit, and a wracking of the Spirit of my Successor Adam: And there was like to be no profit to him under the Sun of his Third Principle. And so I turned my self to behold Wisdom and Mad∣ness, being a deprivation of the Heavenly Senses, and Folly: For what can the Man do that cometh after the Royal King of Eden? Even that which hath already been; That which was done by the holy Angels, if he continue in my Wisdom. Then I saw that Wisdom excelleth Folly, as much as the Light of Heaven excelleth the dark and painful Fire of Hell. The Wise Mans Eyes are in his Head, and walketh by my Light, but the Fool walketh in Dark∣ness, and will not bring his Deeds to my Light. And yet I my self perceived also that one Event hap∣peneth to them all.
§. 5. Travail appointed to Man. THen said I in my Heart, As it happeneth to the Fool, so it happeneth even to me: Then why was I more wise? Then said I in my Heart, That this is also Vanity: Yea, it is a miserable Lot, that both the Fool and the Wise should become so subject to Va∣nity, that they must both dye the Corporal Death: And while they groan to be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, they must either beget a Child that will (when this Corporal Death, as pangs of a travailing Femae seizes upon them) either comfort them concern∣ing their Work, Labour and Travail, and the Toil of their Hands, which God hath given to all the Sons of Men to be exercised therewith, and concerning the Ground which the Lord hath Cursd: Or else they will Eter∣nally remain in this Labour and Pangs, and dye the Eternal Death, with the imperfect Embryo in their Bellies, and shall never be disburthened, or cast out their Sorrows. In the External World there is no remembrance of the Wise more than the Fool for ever: Seeing that which is now in respect, in the Days to come shall all be for∣gotten in the other World: And all things are muta∣be: And how dieth the wise Man? As the Fool: There∣fore I hted the outward Life, and the Life of the salse Birth: Because the Work that is wrought under the Sun of Vanity is grievous unto me: For all is Vanity and Vexation of the pure Spirit of the Soul: Yea, I hated all my Labour, which I had taken under the Tem∣poal Sun, because I should leave it unto the External Man, who shall supply my Place in Eden. And who knows whether he shall be a Wise Man, or a Fool? t shall he have Rule over all my Labour where∣in
I have laboured, and wherein I have shewed my self wise under both Suns: This is also the Vanity of muta∣ble and fading things. §. 6. Christs Sorrows. THerefore I went about to despair of all the Labour which I took under the Sun of Muability: For there is a Divine Man whose Labour is in Wisdom, and in Knowledge, and in Equity: Yet to an Earthly Man, that hath not laboured therein, shall he leave it for his Portion: This is also Vanity, and a great Evil: Yea, it is a great piece of Injustice and Abuse of the Kind∣ness of the Divine Man, who undertok all this Travail for the sake of the Earthly. For what hath the Divine Mn of all hit Labour, and of the Vexation of his Hear, wherein he hath laboured under the Sun? For all his Days are Sorrows, and his Travel Grief: And he is a Man of Afflictins, and ac∣quainted with Vexaions, yea his Heart taketh not Rest in the Night of his Anguish, which he feeleth in his continual waiting upon his Companion for his Com∣panions sake: And what Thanks hath he? What return of an Acknowledgment of his Love hath he from many a Man, but to add Affliction to his Sor∣row? This is also Vanity, or rather a great Cruelty, which will be imputed to such ingrateful Men. The time will come, that all the Days of their Eternity shall be Sorow, and their Travail endless Grief, weep∣ing and gnashing of Teeth: Their Hearts shall never take a sweet Repose and Rest in the Night of their Wo; because of their Worm, which will Everla∣stingly gnaw them like a Fury in the Conscience.
§. 7. Mans Ignorance. NAy, Let such cruel Men use all the Skill they can in this World, yet they shall not prosper: The Race is not to them, be they never so Swift: The Battel is not to them, be they never so Strong: But they will be taken at last by more subtile Powers, in an evil time, as Animals in a Snare: And so become sub∣ject to Fate or Fortune, as passing by and slighting the good Fortune which God hath appointed for them: And Fortune being now their Goddess, Ru∣leth and Governeth them, making Sport with them, just as rude Boys make sport with any thing that they can master, when they go about to kill it, and put it to as much pain as they can. Thus we see a good or bad Fortune happens to all: Good Fortune is called the Mind or Astrum of the Deity: And according as Mans Manners be here, such a God he will have to sport with him, either in anger or in Love, in the other World: O Man heware here. Thus for want of Divine Skill in the super-coel∣stial Astrology of discerning the true Time and good Fortune, which God hath appointed for every Man that comes into this World, the Misery of many a Man is great upon him, and he becomes most wretch∣ed, and cast into an Eternal Hell: Hell! What's that? An inward ie and I orment in the Bowels, puing him to an unspeakable Pain, because a good Fote o Conciion of Serenity and Satisfaction once proferd unto Man, was neglected or slighted: Fr if the  Lit or Candle had not come to direct them ito te ay, out of Blindness and Ig∣norace thee could e no Hell: And if a good Fotune had not been appointed for every Man, there
could be no Vexation of Spirit, or Torment for the loss of that which was impossible to be obtained: But now because his place in Heaven stands empty, there's his Hell, and there's his Wo. Man also by his wilful Blindness stands in his own Light, and becometh more ignorant still, while he will not use his Wit and Skill with all his Might, to do whatever the hand of his Power sinds to do, by Divine Assistance, and the helping hand of God reached forth in mercy to him, in order to his future well∣being, and everlasting happy Estate. For also he loseth his Senses and Reason, and knows not so much as how to distinguish the true Form, of Proprties, from the false, by the Skill of Divine Logick, which is infused into every Man, if he be a Man. Nay, he knows not the FORM of his own Soul, viz. God: He understands not what God in the Abstract is, viz The Pure Nature shining in the Soul: But he seeks to find him in the Concrete, and cannot reach him. As the Philosopher said, Whoever seeth God, seeth nothing diverse or heterogeneous from him∣self. Further, Ignorant Man knows not how to give a Species its right Genus; He makes Fleshly Pleasure to depend on the pure Nature: And therein the grosly Mistakes, as in many other things, too tedious here to enumerate. §. 8. And Mortaliy. ANother Folly is to do that first, which should be done last: To do that to Excess, which should be confined to a Mean: For in Musick the Mean is the sweetest Note. To take care for a temporal before an Eternal Inheritance is a like
folly: For Pleasure (I mean temporal Joy) is not Sin, but the manner of using it in a wrong way and manner makes it a sin, and a breach of the Antient Order. Then let us not rank the Excess of Vertue in the Predicament of Vice Thus Man, because he will not give to his Soul the thing that he craves after, makes his Soul an Eternal Beggar or Craver, and yet shall never pro∣cure the thing craved. Here's the Wo: Here is the Misery: Here's the Hell. Wo to thee, O Humane Land, when thy King is a Beggar; and an ignorant Child: And thy Princes eating in the Morning of their Eternity, devour all, and are in want when the time of Hunger comes. But blessed art thou, O Micro∣csmical City, when thy King is the Son of the Noble Deity, and thy Princes eat of the Tree of Life in due Season, for their Eternal Health, and Joy of their Everlasting Lives. Blessed art thou, O Immortal Man, that Livest for ever in this pure Life: But cur∣sed for ever art thou, O Immortal Man, that choos∣est to de, or to be for ever feeling Death's Pro∣perty, which is Eternal Pain. This therefore in short is the sum of this Eternal Law: Eat not of Poyson, where Two Properties strive for Mastery: Lut feed on the Tree of the Joyous Life: O Man-King live for ever: Eat, drink, and make thy self morry in the Divine Sport: And satisfie thy Mind  Eternal Delights, for there is no Pleasure after the  Death, which is a Living Death, and an Eternally Dying-Life; No Wisdom nor Skill to sind this Life, in the Crave of Anguish whither thou goest.
§. 9. Phantasie inverted. WHY, saith my Objector. This is a wonder∣ful thing: If this be the only Law and Right of Eternity. And if God never eacted any Coun∣ter-Law, but only as a Penalty upon the breaking of this Law which cannot be altered? What would the Soul have? Or what would Mortal Man have to give himself rest? For the End of all Motion is Rest: And the End of all Travail is Refreshment, the End of Longing is the Enjoyment of a thing Loved. Answer, Phantafie sorceth the Soul out of its na∣tural Posture to work against the Hair: And as the Ancient Proverb saith, Love is Blind, and that which is deformed seems fair in the Souls Eye. And because God hath forbidden the Tree of Con∣trariety to be touched, therefore Man hath a strong Fancy that there is some great Mystery in it: And so like a Fool he comes to be governed by Fancy, not considering there is no Smoak without Fire: which not prevented, his House may be burned. But to clear the Mystery of this Subject still plainer to the Understanding: It is well known, where Fancy is strong, the Author chooseth a La∣borious Life, while he enjoyeth a thing loved or fancied, and feels not the Pain: And prefers it be∣fore a Life of Pleasure without the Society of the Object his Love: For he cannot enjoy Pleasure in Pleasure, while the one thing fancied is withheld and kept back from him: And the best thing being out of sight is out of Mind. Now (saith my Objector,)  apprehend the Matter: God who is a true Rest to the Soul offers
a bitter Cup to the Soul; saying, Drink this first, and thou shalt enjoy Eternal Pleasure. And Lucifer presents Dishes pleasant to the Pa∣late, though bitter to the Belly: God saith, Come to me; O all ye that labour and are heavy laden with Vanity, and I will give you rest, for my Yoke is easie, and my Burden is Light: But here is a Yoak of Bur∣den of Affliction mentioned. §. 10. Soul and Body must Sympathize. ANswer, I deny the Objection: God commands the Soul to enjoy the Pleasure of Temporal as well as Eternal Life: For the temperate Man hath a thousand times more Pleasure in Eating and Drinking then the Spewing Sick intoxicated Drunk∣ard: And as for the Yoak and Burden mentioned before: the upright Soul counteth it no yoak of un∣easiness: For indeed it is not uneafie to any part but only the corrupted Fancy, and the crooked Nature, which judgeth the delightful way of Vertue to be irksome because unaccustomed thereunto. For the Spirit of the Soul desires only his Right Object, which if he obtains, he lts the Soul enjoy Temporal Pleasure as he will, out of what hath been said, it is clear, that it is not God fault that Man attains not the Fruition of his longing Desire, and the Rest of his labouring Mind. For like a Leech he chooseth to glut himself with the Blood of false Pleasure, and then to spue up all again, rather than to enjoy the true rest of his Mind in Contentment. So Mans Ruine is of himself. And the Soul sacrificing the Spirit (as being the true Child in the Regeneration) there are Drums and loud Musicks sounding to stop his Cries, that
the Voice of this Divine Complainer cannot be au∣dible. As thou knomest not the way of the Spirit, or how the Bones do grow in the Womb of the Holy Pregna∣tress, So thou knowest not the Work of God that makes all, except thou be born of this Holy Seed. And here also ariseth another Question, how shall the Soul attain to satisfie his Longing and vehement Desire? This is the Lesson which the whole World of Mankind are yet seeking to learn, and for the most part learned as well as unlearned, are stupid and dull in the comprehending of it, because they would learn it the wrong way. And God hath set the World in Mans Heart, so that Man cannot find out the Work that God maketh from the beginning to the end of his Life, without the Assi∣stance and Revelation of the Spirit of the same God. For first Man must by the Assistance of this spi∣ritual Physitian cure the Distemper of his Soul, and then he will love the thing enjoyned: For what is the most pleasant Dainties in the World to an ill∣prepared Stomack. And also, here also ariseth another great Que∣stion: Is it possible for every Man born of a Wo∣man to reach and attain to this Food or Fewel which he earnestly longs after? Answer, Though it hath been concluded by some pretended famous Divines that it is not possible for some who have been ex∣cluded by Gods predestinate Purpose, who accord∣ing to the Poet, Inscripsere Deos sceleri; numenque supernum, Coede laboriferi credunt gaudere juvenci: And though this Doctrine be horrid Blasphemy or Reproaching of God: Yet I must be forced now to remit the Answer to another place.
CHAP. V. The Virgins Suit. §. 1. Mans meet Help. I The Preacher was Prince over the three Worlds in Eden: I Preached the ancient Law in the Throne of Paradice: And I gave my  to seek and to search out by Wisdom, concerning all things that are done under the Holy Heaven: This sore Travel hath God given to the Sons of Men to be exercised there∣with: This sealed Book hath he given to Mankind to unclasp and to Read: I have seen all the Labour and Travel, and Work, that are done under the low∣er Firmament. And behold all is Vanity, and Vexation of the pure Spirit of the Soul. I communed with my own Heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great Estate, and have gotten more Wisdom then all the ancient Revolted Princes and ord Lu∣cifer wh hath been Prince in Eden before me. Yea my Heart had great Experience of Wisdom and Knowledge; and I gave my Heart to know Wisdom, and to know Madness, and Folly, by Reason whereof Lucifer lost his Throne. I perceived also that this is a Vexation of the Holy Spirit: For in mach Serpentine Wisdom and Subtilty is much grief: And he that increaseth the Knowledge
of good and evil in Opposition, increaseth Sorrow, as not practising what he knows. And so all is Vanity, whatever is a Vexation to the fair Virgins Spirit: And promoteth not the mutu∣al Joy of the Spirit of the Soul, and the Divine Virgin or Humane Goddess. And here lieth the great mistake of Mankind: Folly is the grand Cause or rather a foolish Fancy of setting the Affection upon an Object Loved, which cannot easily be withdrawn: How is that? Man will not love the fair Virgin whom God hath appointed, for his Eternal Solace, and Pleasure in the pure Paradise of undesiled Love and immacu∣late Chastity, the tue Cause of Eternal Joy. Now what is Joy, but the Enjoyment of a thing loved and longed for? But here lieth the great Er∣ror, and here is Mans Misery, he chooseth to eat and wipe his Mouth in a corner, and to sit sotting o∣ver a Cup of Hellish Liquor in Private like a Fool, or Self-conceited Frantick, or Parasite; not con∣sidering that two are better then one: Because they have a good Reward of their Labour: For if they fall the one will lift up his Fellow: But wo to him that is alone when he falleth into Misery: For he hath not his Virgin to help him. Speaking like a Guilty Sinner, and if thou spare to speak, thou'lt spare to speed: O Guilty Soul. Again if two lye together in the Bed of Purity, then they have heat: But how can one be warm alone? And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him: But the threfold Cord, of God, the Soul, and is Virgin is not quickly broken. Or else (rather then Love the Virgin) Man of∣ten chooseth to fall in love with Jezebel, who will not love him again: For as he proved cruel, hard∣hearted,
and cross to the fair Virgin that loved him, (for it is a sad thing that true love should ever be lost, and it is a most sad thing, to love and not to be loved again:) So he is men with and requited in his kind, and shall never attain the thing loved, and this is Mans wo: There is no other Misery nor any other thing, that will be cause of Pain, nor any other cause of Anguish, Horrour, and Eternal Despair, but only this, which is because he slighted his own potentially-good Fortune, whereof he will eternally Repent; God never ordained, muchless created and sramed Man to Eternal Perdition. But Mans Destruction is of himself. And observe this for a certain Truth, Man hated God, before God rejected Man. §. 2. Virgin-Vertue. HEre some one may Object, that this Virgin is meaner, and not of so excellent a Beauty as this Harlot is supposed to be. Answ. In no wise imagine so: the sault lies in the blindness of the Lover. This fair Virgin, is most excellingly Beautiful, both by innate Beauty, and precious Ornaments, wherewith her Mother attired her and dressed her up: She is the Daughter of the Deity, (For an in∣sinite number of Virgins flow from the Fountain of Divine Vertue, and have been Eternally in Heaven, and intended for Brides to the Humane Offspring: There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without number,) but this Divine Vir∣gin is born in Heaven, and is in Heaven in perpe∣tual Youth: And for Man. Souls-sake (and to ful∣fil the Creators Will) Woeth him; appearing at
times unto him, with most glorious and serene Smiles and Speeches. She is called by the Sirname of Fair Vertue, or Divine Form: She is far more Rich than the Soul: More Fortunate: More Potent: More Noble: More Beautiful: More Wise: More Sound then the Soul: And yet she thinks it no disparagement to be espoused to Him. If he would be but willing. First she makes her Address to her Virgin-Mo∣ther, and intreats her that she would grant her the favour of going out to see the Daughters of the Humane Land, as rejoycing in the habitable Parts of it, her delight also being also with the Sons of Men: As one brought up with the Creator, his duily delight, re∣joycing always before him. Yes (saith her Virgin-Mother Gods Eternal Bride) Go, I know thou wilt not suffer thy self to be defiled: Choose whom thou likest, if thou canst gain his Love, and be espoused to him. And when she hath pitched her Affections upon a Soul, she returns back, and shews him to her Mother, and saith, O dear Mother, behold is a Child of Adam which pleaseth my Eye, shall I have him for my Bridegroom? Yes, Win his Affections to thy self, and be eternally united to him. Then she useth all means to compass her ends: First she endeavours to draw him by her looks: And to ravish his Heart with her Eyes (as with one of her Aspects:) And with one Chain of her Neck, which her Virgin-Mother gave her. My Beloved is like a Roe or a young Hart skipping upon the Greening Meadows: Behold he standeth be∣hind our Wall, He looketh forth at the Windows, shew∣ing himself through the Casements of the Creation: Then was I in his Eyes as one that found favour.
He looked again on me, as if he esteemed my Beauty, and counting me all fair as if no Spot were in me. O then, I was in great Hopes to attain nay Ends: I was many times restless; for by Night upon my Bed, I oft thought upon him: I sought him whom my Soul loveth: I sought him but I found him not: For sometimes I doubted, whether he loved me as I loved him. §. 3. The Beginnings of Grace. I'LL rise now, said I, and go about the Streets, and in the Broad-ways; and will count no Labour irksome to seek him whom my Soul loveth: I sought him I went to Bed again: I slept, (in the Platonick Silence) but my Heart waked as in a Divine Dream, it seemed as if the Voice of my Beloved knocking at the Door was calling me: Saying, open to me, my Sister, Gods Daughter, my unspotted Dove: For my Head is filled with Dew: And my Looks with the drops of the Night of Anguish. But me thought I answered in the Vision: I have put off my Coat, How shall I put it on now in the Cold? I have washed my Feet in the pure Fountain, how shall I desile them? Then me thought my Beloved put his Hand in at the hole of the Door, and then my Bowels were moved for him: I rose up to open to my Beloved: And my Divine Hands being perfumed with Myrrh, and my ingers with Odours dropped Odo∣riserous Juice upon the Look of the Door. I opened to my Beloved, but my Beloved had with∣drawn himself and was gore: His Voice still (me thought) sounded in my Ears: My Soul failed to think how pleasantly he spake: I sought him, but I
could not find him, I called him but he gave me no an∣swer. The Watchmen that went about the City, met me, to whom I said, saw ye him whom y Soul loveth: But in∣stead of giving me an Answer and direing me, they smote me and wounded me in the Dark, The keep∣ers of the Wall took m Vail from me. O! Angelical Daughters of the Coelestial City, I charge you if you find my Beloved, that ye tell him how I am sick of Love. My Heart is filled with Perplexity and Sorrow: I expected here no fatal stroke of Mortal Wound, or Contagion of Disease: In the Blessed Regions whence. I came Death is Out lawed, and Sin an Exile, at least wise a Terrour only heard of by the Ear: Pleasures are there boundless, because unli∣mited to the Partakers: For Excess and Intempe∣rance are Strangers in our Courts. Our Rural Fields are blessed with the beanteous Beams of the Orient Sun of Eternity, who shines through the Casement of the New Creation. And our. Radiant Morning can scarce raise a blush, before our Blessed Titan is ready to unvail his splendid Face. § 4. The Excellency of Vertue. WHy (said the Coelestial Daughters) art thou so concerned? Why wouldst thou leave so blessed an Habitation? For whose sake hast thou un∣dertaken this Travail and Trouble? What is thy Beloved more than another Object of Love, O thou fairest among the Angelical Virgins? What is He more than another, that thou dost so charge us? O, said she. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest in my Mind among ten thousand: The Humane Soul is a
little Incarnation wherein God my Father was plea∣sed to propagate himself: The Glorious Son of God himself is an immoral Man. His Cheeks are as a Bed of Spices and fragrant Flowers: His Lips like Lillies dropping sweet-smelling Myrrh: His presence is most lovely: He bears the Character of Divine Meek∣ness upon his Aspect: This is my Beloved, and this is my Friend, O ye Daughters of Paradise. Whither (said they) is thy Beloved gone, O thou fairest among the Virgins? Whiher is He turned aside, tha we may seek him with thee? For we sympathize with thy sad Msery. My Beloved (said she) is I believe gone down into his Rural Garden to the Beds of Odours, to feed in his fragrant Paradise, and to gather Lillies by the Fountains of Living Waters. When she had found him, he breathed forth these Affections and Passions of Love: Thou art beautiful O my Love, O fair Sophia: O blessed Astrea, O Ex∣cellent Virgin-Vertue: Turn away thine Eyes from me, for they have overcome me. Thy Hair is is a flock of Gas, appearing on the Mountains of Pleasures: Thy Teeth are as a flock of Innocent Sheep, which go up from being washed in the Rivers of Chrystalline Purity: As a piece of Pomegranate are thy Templs within thy Locks. There are threescore Queens and fourscore Concubines, the Virgins Hanmaiens, and other Virgins without number: My Love, my undefi∣led is chief in my Eye: She is the onely one of her Virgin-Mother in my account: She is the choice Dar∣ling of er that bare her in the Angelical Regions. The Daughters of God saw her, and blessed her, yea the Queens and the Ladies of Honour, they praised her. Who is she that looketh forth at the Window of true Light which enlightens the Humane House, e∣ven as the most beautiful Aurora, fair as Phoebe, and
Majestick as the Colours in the Army of Heaven. I went down, at this saying into the Garden of Paradise to see the Frutis of the Vallies and Savanna's: And to see whether the Heart-chearing Vine flourished, and the Pomegranates of the Tree of Pleasure budded as Blossoms of Holiness; Or ever I was a ware, my Soul made me like the Chariots of Pite: Then he called her: Saying, Return, return, O Daugher of the Deity: Return into thy Retirement, that we may look upon thee: What will ye see in the Princess? As it were the Banner of an Angelical Army. §. 5. The Gospel of Peace. THE Voice of my Beloved, I hear: Behold he is coming: Leaping upon the Mountains of my Moans, and skipping upon the Hill of my Hopes. How beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of my Shepherd? How far more beautiful are thy Feet (said He) with the Shooes of Gosel-Peace, O Princes Daughters: Thy message of Meekness is joyful to my Heart: Thy Breasts are like two skipping Roes that are Twins. No noise of Oppression shall any more Alarm our Holy Land, for it is like to be restored to its Primitive Purity: Neither need our Fellow-Shepherds dread the sense of Invasion of a Forreign Enemy: Priviledges shall be as sacred as Life: And our Pastures shall be Levelled, as being all in Com∣mon: The Mountains of Pride shall be debased: And every humble Valley exalted: Modesty and Innocen∣cy will be here Alamode: And Simplicity with Loyalty, as of old the newest Dress. The Pelican in these Golden Ages will not pick wounds in her tender Breasts infeebling her self to relieve her Young Ones: Neither will the Ostrich conceal her
Eggs dreading the crush of the Wild Beast: These are the Halcyon Days prophesied of by the Holy An∣gels in the Nonge of Time, wherein the Swan will no more sing an Elegy as previous to her Funeral: Nor will the Phaenix Fire her Urn to generae her species: Alligators will not be so ravenous as to prey upon Passengers: Nor will the Hypocrite-Crocodile dissemble his Tears to moisten the Fune∣ral of his Fellow-Creature. In this Countrey all live according to the immemorial Customs thereof by Sympathy: For Antipathy is a Stranger to these Borders. Here the Hind Calveth without Corus∣cations: Claps of Thunder are not needful to dis∣burden her. Neither doth the Bear lick her Cubs into Shape; for Deformity is exiled from our Pastures. §. 6. The Pleasantness of Vertue. BY thee O fair Goddess the Princes of our Coun∣trey Reign: How fair and altogether pleasant art thou O Love for Divine Delights! O how I delight to walk in the Paths that my Virgin Fair Vertue useh to walk in at her Morning and Evening walks in the cool of the pure Dy of Everlasting Light. The King of Mankind is held in the Glleries: This thy Stature is like a Palm-tree: And thy Breasts to Cluster fo Grapes: I sd, I will go up to the Palm-Tree of Triumph, I will take hold of the Boughs there∣of, as a Trophy of Victory over the vain World: Now also thy Breasts shall be as the Clusters of the Vine of Lise, and the smell of thy fair Cheeks like Ap∣ples of Paradise: And the Odours of thy Mouth like Coelestial Wine of avenly Reireshment for her Be∣loved, that is pleasant to his Palate, causing the Ho∣ly Lips of them that sleep in the beatifical Vision to
utter Angelical Songs, and speak Gods Praise. Here we will eat of the Trees of Life and live for ever: For in our Pastoral fair Fields no Brambles grow: Nor is Sterility known in the Coasts of our Eden: The Trees of Knowledge of one pure property look big as burdened with the Frut of Eternal Life: And their blushing Heads bow down to the Cour∣teous Hands that reach them: The Holy Earth knows nothing but fulness of prolifick Vertue which nourisheth in it slf, the primay cause, the ends of Germination: Whence proceeds the Blossom of the blessed Bud in the new generation. §. 7. Divine Contemplation. O My Dove, that seemest to lurk in the Clefts of the Rocks, in the secret Places of the ascent into Heaven: Let us see thy Countenance: Let us hear thy Voice, for it is sweet: And thy Countenance is come∣ly: Thou that dwellest (faid she) in the Rural Gar∣dens garnished with glorious Flowers: Thy Compa∣nions, the Angels hearken to ahy Voice: Cause me to hear it. Draw me, and my Heart will run after thee: The Royal Shepherd hath brought me to his Cottage of Clay, into his Princely Chambers of Green Flow∣ers: We will be glad and rejyce in thee: We will re∣member and think of thy Love more than Wine of Temporary Delights: The upright Virgins love thee. My Beloved spake and said unto me, rise up, my Love, my Fair one, and come away: For the Winter in this our Climate, while we abide here is eter∣nally past: The Tempest of Afflictions is over and gone: I suffered many a bitter Night for thee; now the Flowers of thy Virgin Beauty appear on my hu∣mane Earth: The Time of Melody of Birds is come:
And the ravishing Voice of my Musical Virgin is heard in my Land. Heark! The Queristers of the Grace-inspiring Air do change their Notes: The Black∣bird and Thrush are my Companions in the Green∣ing Groves: They refresh my inspired Som with a Divine Song of Praise to their Creator: While I endeavour to bear the burden with my slender Shepherds-pipe: And then pretty Philomel closes up the Day of Alacrity with sweet Epithalamiums: And the Lark admiring the Beauty of my late-risn Light, mounts the fair Welkin to partake of its splendour: And the rest of the Aerial Trop ma∣nage the Consort, til the Cool of the Blessed Even∣ing. Here he Plower flyeth with the assel: And the Phesant keep slight with the Flcon: Neither doth the P rtridge know Engine or Noosy Thread, nor dreads the switter slight o the Hawk: Nor is the Lark dared with the Hobby. §. 8. The Contentment of Vertue. THE Figte putteth forth her Green Figs: And the Vines of chearfulness with the tender Grape of Delight in the Pats of pure Vetue, new bud∣ding in the hdge of Distinction of the two Na∣tures gie a ragiant Ss: Let every one enjoy himself in true Rest and Tranqulity under his Vne and under his Fig-tree: Where none shall make him a∣fraid: For now the golden Ages are again return∣ing: Jam redit & Virgo, redeunt Satrnia regna: Arise, my Love, my Fair one, and come away. Come with me from the sair Frrest, my Sister: Go
with me from the greening Grove my Spouse: Look from the Mountains of my late moanings, from the Top of the Rocks of despair: From the Lions Den: From the Laborious Hills of the Leopards: No wild Beast hath Power to hurt us, while thou art our Princess: For the Kds with the Flock Sport with the Wolf, and run about the Bear for Diversion. The Lion lies down with the Lamb, and eats Grass as an Ox: Nor is any thing of Emulation known in this sacred Creation: For the Tyger sports with the Herd, and the Dove, Queen of the Fowls takes Wing with the Eagle, and Vulure, her Subjects: And the little Child may lead the Lion upon the Mountain of the Leopards: And the Suckling may play at the hole of the Asp and Cockatrice; and receive no hurt: As being the Regenerate Babe of the Blessed Birth: None shall hurt or destroy in all this holy Moun∣tain. Come my Dear Shepherd, Let us go into the fair Fields of Eden: Let us lodge in the Agelical Villa∣ges, who live in the next Nature of our Neighbour∣hood: Let us get up early to the Vineyards of Life: Let us see if the Heart-chearing Vine of spiritual Joy doth sloarish: Whether the Grape of the Regene∣ration appears, and the Pomgranates of Eternal Re∣freshments bud forth: There will I give thee my Loves, in the Garden of Dlights: Where no Cankers or Caterpillars bred out of Putresaction: Nor are Northern Blasts injurious to us: Our Fields are full fraught with Flowers and Odorates: For no Ser∣pent hath Admission to taint the Fruit of Life: And our Earth in abundance brings forth Pleasures, whose Womb is the Store-house of Heavenly Trea∣sures. The Humane Plant is Odoriferous, and at ur Gates are all manner of pleasant Fruits of Eternal
Life, which I have laid up for thee, O my Belov∣ed. §. 9. The acceptable Sacrifice. BƲT tell me, O Shepherd, tell me O thou whom my Soul lveth, where thou feedest thy Sheep, and where thou makest thy locks to rest at No n: and I will meet thee in thy Rural Pastures: O let me not be as one turned aside from the Frocks of thy Compani∣ons. O thou Princess, wilt thou condescend to my Rural Recreations? Wilt thou of a Princess be∣come a Shepheress? If thou wilt debase thy self so low, then go thy way forth by the Tracks of the Flock of Innocency, and thou shalt see how I feed the Kids and Lambs beside the Shepherds Tents, and preserve them in their Innocent State. For here the Gold∣en Rule must be kept among all the Creatures, where each one doth justice by kind, and not that the dread of Punishment should compel them: For the Ry of Justice is so generally distributed, that it naturally shines in every one: he Crea∣tures of tis New Creation (which is lso the be∣ginningless live prely by instinct, not making their Bodies the Sepulchre of dead Carkasses: Here the Innocent Lamb (because not knowing the Ter∣rors of Death,) would readily (if occasion were) proffer his Throat to the shrines of the Altar: And the Calf is so far from fear, that he dreads not the formidable stroke of Separation, because he knows by natural instinct, there is no Butcherly or Bloo∣dy Dog in this Land: There is no living here for the Rapacious.
§. 10 The Authority of Vertue. BEhold thu art fair in my Eye, O dear Shepher∣dess: Also this Green place of Repose is plea∣st: The Beams of our Arbors are Cedar; and the Rafer of ou Pastoral House are of Fir. See how the lofty Cedars lif up their Majestick Heads: And the Martial Oak, stand by them: The trembling Asphakes his Palsi Crown: Behold i is calm in this cook av, behind this Bech of Tranquility, where the Vine full-loaded with Grapes of Purity is a Shadow of Pleasure, embracing the Olive un∣der the Holy Mount: And the Eglantine entangles it self with the Rose: The Honey-Suckle ties knots about the Arbortes. Oh! some body take away the Foxes, and chase the Young Wolves that spoil the Vines: For our Vines have tender Grapes, being but newly budding in the Gar∣dn of my Heart. My Beloved is mine, and I am his: He feedeh his Lambs in a Meadow of Lillies. Hunters of tame Beasts and Men of Violence will starve here: For Death being an exile cannot seed their devouring Appetites: The Ditties of the Melodious Birds will fright Fowlers into their own ot and Place: Nor can the Fishes be deceived by the Angler; who is forced to keep within his bounds: For here is no Treachery nor Treason in this Holy Land. Swod are beaten into Plough-shares, wherewith we dig the Gardens not for Necessity but Recreati∣on: Spears are turned into Pruning-Hooks to dress the bowers of Contentment: And murdering Guns are made Instruments of Musick, and sweet Melody. Here the Creatures make Sport and Pastime with Danger, as if Death and Destruction were Sanctu∣aries
aries unto them. When fair Aurora began to appear, and the Shadows of Eternal Death fled away, I saw my Beloved skipping like a Young Hart without Gall upon the Mountains of Manna: Even where fear is alto∣gether unexperienced, and the Grave such a Stran∣ger, that its greedy devouring Jaws are satisfied, not gaping for Carkasses to fill the Womb of Pu∣trefa ion: For nothing can languish or be sensible of Smart: Because Pain is uncreated: And Death altogether unknown. CHAP. VI. The Whores Suit. §. 1. Backsliding. BUT after all these amorous Enjoyments of each others Societies and Embraces, as previous to their future Felicity, the Soul oftentimes shews the inconstancy of Lovers, and as a rolling Stone that gathers no Moss, cuts of the increase of Love in the Bud; and so playing fast and loose does and undoes, gives the slip to the Virgin; though she remains faithful and constant on her part. For the Soul hankers after other Lovers, and dis∣sembling (as the Proverb saith, Holds with Hounds and runs with the Hare.) And thus hunting after other Lovers is never satisfied, but Conceits there is more Pleasure hidden in other pretended Virgins
of the Land, after whom he gazeth, and by whose forged Beauty he is smitten, though they have no real Beauty, their Faces being painted with Artifi∣cial olours to deceive; and so the Soul imagines the Enjoyment of one of these is a Heaven of an higher Degree than the Virgins Paradise: And so Heaven (as the Atheist saith though falsly) were not Heaven, if its Mystery were known. I say the Soul often nourisheth foolish Fancies in it self, and because he finds the Virgin or Pleasant Vertue too easie to be attained, (according to the false Epicure: — Meus est amor huic similis: Nam Transvolat in medio posita, & fugentia captat:) Therefore he aims at those who seem more rare, and harder to be attained in his Judgment: Dis-esteems her Gifts and undervalues her Graces: But here his Judgment is blinded: For he seeth no form or come∣liness in the Virgin, nor any thing in her that might make her worthy to be desired: And becomes gra∣dually infected with false Love: He seeth and look∣eth upon another pretended Delilah or Maid far more fair then God's Daughter; and endued (in his Opinion) with rarer and nober Qualities. Thus the higher the Souls attainments and en∣joyments of the pure Virgin hath been, the more basely he becomes degenerated; For as dead Flyes cause, the most precious Ointment of the Apothecary to cast forth a most nauseous smell: So doth a little Folly him that was in a high Degree of Reputation for Wis∣dom, and honourable Enjoyment of God's Virgin-Child.
§. 2. The Baits of Sin. A Wise Mans Heart is at his Right Hand toward Heaven, but a Fools Heart is at his Left, whose Rumb is Hed-wards: Yea also when he that is a Fool walketh in this way, his Wisdom which he once had faileth him, and he saith to every one he is a Fool, for adds he, I am deepty in Love with such and such a Delilah. But O thou immortal Man, wake not a sleeping Lioness, let the Hellish Properties rest still, O Son of Man look before thou leapest: For the Abs, is deep, which is the Womb of the false Whoe. Keep thou the Covenant and live for ever, and the Law of Wisdom as the Apple of thine Eye, which suf∣fers not thee to be bewitched by gazing after Va∣nity: Bind her Vows upon thy Fingers, and write them upon the Tables of thine Heart, say unto fair Wisdom, Thou art my Sister, and my Spouse: And call plea∣sant Vertue thy near Kinoman: That she may keep thee from the [Whore] and the Stranger: Who is not Kin to thee in the Divine Linage; even from her that can flatter with her Serpents Tongue. She is the Serpents Daughter, [An vil Crow an evil Egg.] For at the Windows of my House, I looked through the Casement of the Creation: And I behold among the humane Fools; there was a young Soul void of Wisdom, passing through the Street near the Angle where two ways lead to the Eternal Life and Death, he went on the Left Hand the way to the Whores House: In the Twilight, in the Evening: When the black and dark Night at last covered him, and thus he began to be blinded.
And there met him a Woman in the attire of an Har∣lot sutiller than this Fool: (She is a Stranger at home, but overmuch acquainted in the Streets of Deceit: Her loud Words are heard in the broad∣ways: She never wears her Eyes but when she goes abroad; Now she is without, now she is in the Street, and lies in wait in every turning:) So she is a Saint, abroad, and a Devil at home: She caught him, in∣vergled him, and bssed him, and impudently spake to him. I have Peace-offerings with me, to appease the Justice of God, and to stifle the secret Convictions of thy Conscience: This day have I paid my Vows, and have vowed to love Thee. Therefore came I forth to meet thee, and have found thee unexpected; I have decked my Bed with coverings of Tapestry: With carved Works according to thy enlarged Phancy, and with fine Linnen of seeming Innocency: I have persumed my Nest with Myrrh, A∣loes and Cinnamon: Come and let us take our fill of Love until the Morning dawn upon us, if ever; Let us selace our selves with Pleasures until the Eternal Aurora appears, though perhaps never: For the Man of the Family is not at home: The Spirit of this World my Husband is gone a long Journey: [This Husband she hath married only as a Cloak for her filthy Lust.] He hath taken a Bag of Treasures with him, to wait upon the Creator his Master, whose Embassa∣dour he is, and wil come home at the day appointed. With her much fair Speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her Lips she forced him. He goes after Her straightway, as an Ox to the slanghter, or a Feel to the Correction of the Stocks: Till a Dart strike through his Heart; as a Bird that is caught in the snare, and is taken in an evil Net, not knowing that it is for his Eternal Life.
§. 3. Seven-fold Vice. BUT, O Son of Man, consider, let not thy Heart be taken with her, incline not towards her Paths: For she hath cast down many wounded: Yea, many Vali∣ant Heroes, who came from Heaven have been slain by her: Her House is a Cave leading to Hell, going down to the dark Chambers of Eternal Death. And as this Pestilent Whore bawleth in every Corner, to watch and inveigle Souls: So also the fair Virgin cryeth in the Gates of every Humane Ci∣ty: Though with a far different Voice, for her Voice is a still small Voice, and yet it is heard in qui∣et, by the Wise, more than the cry of him, that ruleth among Fools: She hath erected a House in Heaven to entertain her Bridegroom, she hath hewen out seven Pillars, whereon are engraven the seven Rewards of Vertue, or the Goods of Fortune? She hath sent forth Maidens, the five senses Virgins to invite Souls: She cryeth upon the high Places of Mans City: Yet being despised, she for the Souls sake invites him. Whoso is simple, let him come in hither: how long O scorner wilt thou scorn me who wish thee well? O Fool how long wilt thou hate that which is for thy good? Because I have called and thou wouldst not answer, though thou didst hear my Voice in thy Conscience: Because I have piped to thee and thou wouldst not Dance: And I mourned for thee, and thou hast not sympathized; therefore the Time shall come that thou shalt call to me, but I shall be married to another: Who was thy Rival, in the time when I would have consumma∣ted the Wedding with thee. Be not entangled with one that will bring thy
Soul to ruine: and who is far inferiour to the Souls Nobility: For there are an indefinite number of these gone out into the World to trapan Mankind: Whereof there are variety of kinds, but especially seven: As sprung forth from the Mystical Mother of Harlots. They Lust after the best, richest, greenest, fairest, strongest, tallest, wittiest soundest, noblest, and most durable Essences: And they find too many humane Souls fit for their turn: They perceive that the Souls of Men are Eternal and Excellent, Fair, Lovely, and Lively Essences: As being made after the Image and Similitude of the Divine Being: Now every Crea∣ted Being lusteth after something that is of a higher Nature than it self, that in the Fruition thereof, it self may be perfected. §. 4. The Blind falling Headlong. FOR every Creature groaneth and travelleth for its own Perfection: But cannot attain it with∣out the Assistance of some one above him: Hence it is, that this sevenfold Whorish Spirit is become an earnest Attractor and Enticer of the immortal Souls of Adam's off-spring. And for to solemnize the Wedding-seast, she furnishes her Table, and presents Man with the de∣licate Dishes of Pleasure, and false Joy: viz. [Coun∣ters for Gold.] But when she hath once got the Poor Soul with∣in her Net, and cropt off the Flower of the noble Affections of the Heart, which the right Virgin should have had, and so spoiled the Spirit of the Mind with a false Vizzard, or Mark of Infection, when Mans Body fall as a Leaf to the Grave, and
the Souls Wedding-day draws on, and he is to be settled in one of the two Eternal States: Then this false Whore creth. Aha! Thou humane Soul, thou art Eternal, I am but Temporal and Mortal and thou dost par∣take of my Mortality: Eternally to seek Death and yet never Die:) I had my Pleasure with the: Go now into Eternity, I indeed was only the cause of alluring of thee to Sin: But how thou must answer for it thy self: I am but for a time: In the end I return to the Original Abyss of Nihility. Now here ariseth a great Question, seeing Mans fate is so dism, Whether hath his unlacky Soul sin∣ned or his Parents, that he is thus born Blind? Answ. No Soul is born stark Blind: But if some one should be so born, yet there is Vetu bestowed, through the Merit of the perfect Sacrifice, upon eve∣ry Soul to open his blind Eyes, if he do not wilfully neg∣lect the means of washing them in the Pool to which he is sent. But if he will not go where his Virgins great Champion and Physician doth sed him, then let him groap in his Blindness: For there is no Man that hath Power over his Spirit, and passionate Mind, (that loves a Harlot,) without the Assistance of the foresaid great Counsellour, Prince of Peace, in Men∣tal Calmness. Now these foresaid Whorish Jezebels have painted their Faces, and adorned themselves with an Image of seeming Beauty (like the Fruits of Sodom which when touched will fall into Ashes) but no real Beauty: They lay wa at the Head of every Humane Street: Some are like Hartors that receive hire: And some scorn hire like Marrons that commit Adultery, and take Strangers to defile their Husbands Beds: And are contrary to common Harlots, in that they give Gifts to all Lovers, that they may come to defile them.
§. 5. For Destruction of the Individuum. FIrst the Thief or surveying [Harlot] that sur∣veys the whole World, comes, and saith, All this will I give thee, if thou Marry me, and be joyned to my Nature in the Bed of my Friendship under Ground: There I will nourish thee, and thou shalt have the Entrails of the Earth for thy Chest and Coffer: But I do not promise thee to see Day-light for many a Year, if ever: But there (like a Slave in the American Mines,) thou shalt see Gold and Silver enough, and thou shalt sleep among the heaped Treasures. But the Spirit of the Soul, cryeth, O this is not Happiness, O who will release me out of this un∣der-ground Prison? If this were Felicity, then my Purse would be better than my self: A Horse is not esteemed by his Trappings, nor a Man by his Rich Concubine. The Womb of this Whore is a snare of Temptati∣on: Which catcheth in the Pit of Perdition: She gapes like a Gulf for the Mind of Man: And spreads like a Sea for his Soul: She is beautified by the Hand of her Whorish Mother: Who writes on her Face, sweet Solace. But O Son of Man, Child of God, legal Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven: If thou hast Oxen, do thou offer Oblations: And if thou hast Sheep, thou shalt Sacrifice to God: And if thou hast Children; thou shalt candidly Consecrate them: With the Wife of thy Wedlock to the Lord: That his Heavenly Bles∣sings may be upon thee: Which the World doth hold for a Curse: And yet knows not the Curse on the earthly Blessings: Nor how they are a Curse un∣to them.
Who strive for Content in much: But when they have much are hungry: Yea they thirst as the ga∣ping Grave, whose Womb consumes them that gape after her. But if thou hast the Virgin, be thou con∣tent: For she will make thee to flourish as a fruitful Field: Thy Gardens shall be garnished with Greens: With the fashions and fragrancies of Flowers: Ha∣ving Hope thy Seed shall spring up: And in Faith shalt thou fill thy Vessels. If this [Harlot] cannot prevail, then comes the Riotous, Luxurious or Swinish [Jezebel] I see (saith she) thou art a quiet harmless Man: Wilt thou therefore live in Joy? Get thee Wine and strong Drink: Drink until the Poyson thereof be enraged: Quaff this noble Liquor in Bowls: Strive to conquer thy Companions in the Valour of Bac∣chus's Souldiers: Eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and Calves out of the Stall: And make thy Body as mine is, a Sepulchre of Dead Carkasses. Put far away the Evil Day: Let not thy Consci∣ence trouble thee, nor Reproofs awaken thee: So thou shalt be an easie-hearted Sot or Voluptuous Flog-like Epicure, of whom much shall be made in the Swine-house, until thou be fully fattened for the House of Slaughter: Come therefore along with me to the Banquetting house: And we will cast away Care, and remove that Melancholick Fit with a che∣rupping Glass: We will treat thee with variety of Dishes (dressd after a new Fashion,) with poi∣nant Sawces: We will rant it, and make merry over the Witness of God in the Conscience: For this Solace is better than Gold or Silver: Spend it a∣way prodigally upon thy Lusts, and gratifie thy Luxurious Palate. And we will anticipate Prayer in the Morning with the Incense of our burning Lusts as preferring Sacrifice before Devotion.
Oh but in the midst of my Mirth, my Heart is sad, saith the Souls Spirit: I was but now bathing in a River of Wine: But what's the Matter? What are these qualms upon my Stomack? They seem now to revenge my out-daring of Bacchus's Foes, because I was not a fit Souldier for his Service: Therefore his Chirurgion hath given me some of his Pills, which now I cast up by filthy Vomitings and Spewings: Sure he will give me a Foil at Wrest∣ling: Thus I shall stumble over the Dead, and reel into a Grave of Worms and Serpents, who will be drunk with my Blood. Therefore, O thou naturally found and healthful Spirit of Man: The Luxurious is as full of Diseases as an Hospital: For as the Night doth call him to the Supper of Surfeit: And as the Morning doth rouze him to his Breakfast: He languisheth in the hunger of his Lust, making but one Meal a Day: Until he hath glutted himself with the Dainties of his Delights: And thus eat∣ing, He wipeth his Mouth in a Corner: Accompanied with his Drunken Hostess: Whose Body is a Pit of Poyson: But to touch it, is danger of Death: Therefore rather than Dine on her Delicates; do thou mingle thy Meat with Mourning. §. 6. For spoiling the Souls Sport. THen comes a Third, the sluggish [Harlot] come my Dear (saith she) we will go to the Gaming-house, or, if thou please, to the Tem∣ple of the Gods, where we will send for the blind Lover our Captive to make us some Sport: We will have Musick and Dancing: We will wheel about our God: Now our Bellies are glutted with the butcherly and bloody Sacrifice of Beasts, we will rise
up to Play: We will lye upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch our selves upon our Lazy Couches: We will chant to the sound of the Viol: And invent to our selves Instruments of Musick like David, the sweet Psalmist of Israel: We will sing his Psalms in Canting and Mocking of God. But O Man consider, Give not thy Heart to the Musick of false Mirth: Tremble to tread in the Tracks of it: Use the Cross as thy Crutches to bear thee upright in the Way: Nail the Flesh to the Fashion thereof: And the Spirit shall save the Soul. Give not sleep, O Man to thine Eyes; nor slumber to thine Eye-lids: Ʋntil thou find an Habitation for thy self with thy Virgin: For thou art born to a good Fortune: When O Sluggard wilt thou awake from thy sleep? The Day is far spent: Go to the Ant Consider her ways, and be wise at last. If not, this Harlot hath prepared a Net of Mis∣chief to ensnare thee: She will hunt thee into her Pit: As thou didst drive the Beasts of thy own I∣mage into the Nooze to be slain: So she will draw thee as a Beast into the depth of her Dungeon: But the Counsel of the Virgi is the safety of De∣ence: Which delivers thee from the sweep of her Dragg: It saves thee from sliding in the slippery Places: And stablisheth thy standing on the Rock. Avoid Her that enticeth into every treacherous Trap: And allureth into the Doors of Destruction: She polisheth her Parlour with artificial carved I∣mages; and with the works of most curious Limners: Her Entry inviteth with the Odors of Perfumes: But her Bed is the Infection of Plague: Her Breath is the Contagion of Death: And her Breasts the Bottles of Bane: He that layeth his Head to repose between them, shall be smothered in a deep sleep.
Enter thou not into the Doors of her House: Lest her allurements should murder thy simplicity: For she will entice thee with all things that are lovely to the Eye: But her purpose is to an end of Slaugh∣ter: Mark the Line of her Path: And behold whom she catcheth with her Hook: He that studies the steps of her Feet; runs swift to the Doom of De∣struction: But he that seeks deliverance from her Door, shall dwell in the Temple of God: He shall draw to a Rest from the Travel of Iniquity, which shall compass his Soul with Salvation. If this will not do, then comes another, the Craf∣ty Witch: Saying, come to my School, and I will make thee a Necromancer: I will teach thee all the Philosophical Learning of the World, and the high∣est Contemplation of things: Thou shalt under∣stand how the Worlds Wheel is rolled about: And how the Chain of Eternity is entangled by an indissol∣vable Band: So thou shalt be accounted the Wise Magus among the People. O! I will not do so, saith the right Spirit of the Soul: I am afraid of the Deep of Deeps: Lest I fall headlong into the Abyss; and by searching and seek∣ing the Universal Tincture, I may get a wound in my Soul, and then I shall be sent to finish my Con∣templation in a Circle of Misery. Therefore O Man be wise: This false Wisdom is a snare of Death; which is hid from the Eye of Man: He seeth not her mischievous End: Because she hath made his Day a Curse: She bewitched by enchantments a couple in Paradise, and dragged them from Life to Death. And bolted their Gene∣rations within the Doors of Darkness: And locked them from the Light of the Day. Beware therefore lest she lead thee by her subtle Art and Serpentine
Wisdom, To taste of the Tree of Knowledge of Evil and Good: Whose Fruit is desirable to make one wise: And to open the Eyes of Curiosity. §. 7. For hindering the Propagation of the Species. BUT anon the Amazonian shews her self, whose hand is against every one, and every ones hand against her: She will accompany thee in a Virile Garb to the Field of Mars, and lead thee to Akel∣dama: She will beat Plough-shares into Swords, and perfume thy Nostrils with the stink of her murder∣ing Powder. She will perswade thee to cut off many of thy fel∣low-Creatures, as a mighty Hunter of Men before the Lord; as if the Earth were too narrow to main∣tain such a numberless number of Men in the same world, saying: Keep up thy Pomp gallantly, and oppress all monyless Wretches and Widows: Make many Martyrs by thy Sword of Cruelty and Ri∣gour. Search for the pths which the Lyons Whelps have not trodden, and which the Vultures Eye hath not seen: For there is a Vein for the Silver, and a Place for the hidden Treasures of Gold: But the Martial Iron is Lord of both: Dig therewith into the Bowels of thy Fellow-Offspring, and see if the Golden Mine be there or no. If any oppose thee, see here, I give thee these snaky Hairs, as so many Furies in the Conscience. O no, I had rather (saith the Souls Spirit) dwell in the Corner of a poor Cottage, in content and quietness, than with a brawling Whore (such as thou art) in a wide Habitation. I had rather sleep in a whole Skin, than to boast of Wounds and Scars upon my Body: Let Cyrus (if he like it) glut himself in his Bowl of
Blood: I love not his Mess; I am weary with such Sacrifices. This Martial Strumpet drags the Valiant by the Nose, and the Lofty by the Fore-lock: Yea, the Mighty do plunge in her Bloody Pit, which swallows them as Sops into her Womb: The Fruit of her Womb is the first-born of Tophet, which was in the beginning a Devil: Whose Jaws are the Gates of Hell to slaughter the Soul, and to spill the Blood of the Blessed: But turn thou thy Windows from her Martial Colours, lest her Drums and loud Musick stop thy Ears from hearing the Virgins Voice: And that she should bite thee with the Teeth of an Asp, and thou be stung to death with her Venom. But O Immortal Man, Love thou the Virgin of In∣nocency, and she shall surround thy Scituation like a Silver Munition, and be for ever to thy Gladness the Glory of a Golden Dwelling. If this cannot prevail upon the Soul, then comes the lustful unsatisfied Harlot; saying: What? wilt thou dye without a Child of thy Lust to receive thy Soul by a Transmigration of the Humane Nature into the Bestial: Behold, the Sylphs and Nymphs of the Woods, Mountains and Waters are in Love with thee, and will entertain thee in the Garden of Delights. O (saith the Soul, having found the deceit of this Strumpets embraces,) now I enjoy the Sweet-heart of my fading Youth, which to fetch I endangered my precious Life, by passing through a fierce Fire of infernal Adultery: The Fire of my Passion is not so fierce as it was: When I was further from my desired Fire, I burned (me thought) with Myr∣rha more violently by a secret Conceit: Therefore now my Mind is variable, and wanders after fresh Lovers: I thirst as the unsatisfied Womb, which receiveth without Conception.
O thou fair Angel, consider, whom thou eagerly longest after: It is the Catamite-Strumpet, He that toucheth her Flesh is tainted with her Filthiness: And he that goeth in unto her, corrupteth his Soul: She makes a Man as a Monster: And an unspotted Lamb, as a Leopard: Her false Pleasures are as ma∣ny Ponds, where Serpents, Toads, and Vipers, do drink: Their Palates do delight to pamper with Poyson: For their Nature is one with the Venom. The Love of their Lust doth Sacrifice their Seed to Molech: And infects them with the stink of the Stews: There is not a Man that dwells in their House, That saith no more, I have enough. But their Heart is as a tired travelling Pilgrim, that cannot find a lodge of Repose They flame in their Bowels as a burning Bush; and cannot find Water to quench it. They fill up their bundle as a Fag∣got of Fuel: To blaze in the Torment of Tophet. §. 8. For degrading the Soul. LAstly, the imperious Harlot saith, if all did bow down before thee as before God: O what a brave sellow shouldst thou be! Then thou couldst rule by force over the Virgin, and make her Hand∣maid to thy ambitious Harlot. But many a Soul in the midst of these enjoyments, is often struck with a Panick fear, and knows not whence it comes: For the Virgin who causeth it, is become a Stranger to her Flesh and Blood: O (saith he) I have conquered in Triumph over one World, now I Lust after another Ʋtopia. But as the Philosopher told the great Conqueror, there are innumerable Worlds: How then doth it seem so difficult to me to gain the Government of
one? I will sit down and weep and search my own little World: Wo to him that wandereth out of it: And wo to him that goes not out of himself, and out of his own mortal World: And yet as lit∣tle as this World is: Many a Man cannot Travel to the utmost bounds of it, in the whole compass of his Live: For it is a very long Journey to their own true Native World. O Man this is she that draws to a draught of de∣sire: To Drink up Dominions like a Dram: And in a Compendious Circle would compass all Crowns: And trample upon Thrones as Trifles. The Entireness of Empires could not extinguish his enterprizes: Except he be greater than God: But wait thou with wariness: That the haughty Hand may not tear down thy Tent: Mark the Ex∣ample of Jesus the Just; who joined not to the Joys that the Jews would have given him. He was a King without Enjoyment of the earthly Kingdom, or Contemplation of the corruptible Crown: He was a Prince, a Pilgrimage of Passions: Without the Propriety of a supposed Palace: Thou shalt tread in the Trace of his Travel: And run in the Race of his Righteousness. Thou shalt obey his Message as thy Master in Meekness; and Honour him in the House of Humility. And then the Bles∣sings which he preached shall be thy proper Posses∣sion; with the Constitution of a Kingdom and Crown. The Glory of the World runs down as a Mi∣nute: But the Crown of Gods Kingdom lasteth for ever.
§. 9. The Divine Reprover in the Conscience. NOW when the Soul is in Love with any thing that it fancies: Give him the choicest Pleasures: Proffer him the fairest Virgins: Yet they are slighted and contemned in Comparison of the one thing loved and longed after. In this sense Love is called Blind. So the Spirit of the Soul is in Love with his ap∣pointed Virgin, and therefore is still unsatisfied, discontented, murmureth, grumbleth, repineth, whineth, pricketh, vexeth, and worrieth Man, and disturbeth his Peace in the Conscience, when e∣ver he goes to look after other Lovers; crying, (as it were plucking him by the Skirt, or twitch∣ing him by the Ear,) This is the right way walk in it, when the Soul is in the Wilderness wandring after his Lovers. And he often sees the burning Bush of his Heart on Fire, and well may he wonder that it is not consu∣med: This Fire is the Flame of the Virgins Love to him. O therefore turn aside and see this great miracu∣lous sight: And look back and listen to the Voice be∣hind thee: And if thou turn thy course; then the Voice that was behind thee in thy own Wilderness; will go before thee, and lead thee into the Land of Eternal Rest. Now these Whores are they that aim at Mans ru∣ine by Emulation, for they envy that Mans Soul should be a Favourite of the Deity: But if Man would Love Gods Daughter, she would keep him from the Strange Woman: Who forsook the Guide of her Youth, and would allure Man to do so too, and
to forget his Contract or Covenant with the Virgin. Her House declineth to Death, and her Paths to Hell: None that go into her return again: Lust not after her false Beauty in thy Heart, neither let her take thee with her Eye-lids: For by means of a whorish Wo∣man Man is brought to a piece of mouldy Bread: And the Adulteress hunts for the precious Life. Can one go on hot Coals of a Phantastical Passion, and his Feet not be burnt as in the Fire of Hell? Men do not despise a Thief, if he steal to satisfie his Soul, when it craves and longs after the right Food being withheld from it by the Fancy: But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold, according to Gods Ballance and right Measure: But whosoever commit∣teth Adultery with the Wife of the Spirit of the World, destroyeth his own Soul: A wound and disho∣nourable stigmatized Mark shall he get, which shall ne∣ver be wiped away, in this World or in that to come. For Jealousie is the rage of a Rival: Therefore he will not spare in the Day of Vengeance; he will not regard any Ransom, neither will he rest Content, though thou givest all that thou art worth: Neither will the Spirit of the Soul be reconciled, though thou shouldst give him all the Substance of thine House for a Bribe. §. 10. Misery the End of Vice. NOW the Covenant is a Lamp, and the Law of Loving the Virgin is Eternal Life: And the reproof of her Instruction is the high Way to Heaven: When thou goest she shall lead thee: When thou sleepest she shall keep thee: When thou art awake she shall talk with thee in Divine Contemplation: By her thy Days shall be multiplied upon the Eternal Earth, and the Years of thy immortal Life shall be endless: Therefore keep
thy Heart true to the Virgin with all Diligence, for out of it are the issues of Life and Death: Believe not the Whore in her flattering Speech, for she is a Lyar, when she cries, Stoln Waters are sweet, and a secret Banquet in a Corner of Darkness is pleasant. Be sure that her Cave leads to the Shadow of Death, and her Guests go to the Depths of Hell. And a desperate wo is pronounced against them that delight to lurk in the holes of Guilt, and despise the light of Pu∣rity, lest their Deeds should be reproved. Come to my Tavern saith she, It is indeed a House of Sin, but not of Darkness: For our Candles and hellish Squibs never go out: It is like a Country near the Frozen Zone, as clear at Midnight as at Noon. Beware therefore O humane Souldier: For arm∣ed Mars doth not so much wound thee as this naked Venus. The Sorceresses Mouth drops as the Honey-comb, and her Lips are smoother then Oil, but her end is as Wormwood; it will cost the Soul that loves her many a bitter Tear: Her Instruments are sharp as a two edg'd Sword: It will cut the Conscience to the Heart. Her Feet go down to the Abyss: And her steps lead to the Hell of Eternal horror. Lest thou ponder the Paths of Life: Her ways are moveable, that thou canst not know them: Remove thy way therefore far from her: And come not nigh the Doors of her House.
CHAP. VII. The Virgins Espousal. §. 1. Reconcilement. IF the Soul recant and change his Mind, Fair Vir∣gin-Vertue bearing no grudge in her pure Mind, welcometh and entertains him again most joyfully, (unless he be stigmatized with the Disease of the Stews,) and so renews their mutual Acquaintance: And the Virgin wandring in her Shepherds Rural Fields: The long absence of her late Beloved had grieved her Spirit: She had enquired of Passengers, did they see a Shepherd passing along that way? They answered: No: It was but a little that I passed from them (saith she) even from the pretended Guides into Paradise, but I found him whom my Soul loveth: I held him, and would not let him go, until I had perswaded him to come into my Virgin-Mothers Ha∣bitation in Heaven, and into the Chamber of her that conceived me of the Divine Seed. Who is this (said the neighbouring Angels, who were Proxime to the Deity, as Princes before a Monarch) Virgin that cometh out of the Wilderness of Wo and Despair, leaning upon the Breasts of her Beloved? I raised thee up (said he) under the Tree of Life, there thy Virgin-Mother brought thee forth, in the upper Paradise: There she conceived thee as an Holy Birth of Newness of Life in the Womb of her Virgin-Pu∣rity. I charge you, O ye Daughters of the Holy City, (said she) by the Roes of Paradise, and by the Hinds of Edens fair Fields, that ye stir not up nor awake my Be∣loved
until he please, for he is very weary after his Journey and long Travel upon the Mountains of Vanity: And requires a due time of Rest from his Labours and vain Wandrings. And now the wea∣ried Bees return home with laden Thighs: The tired wandring Sheep that had forgotten their rest∣ing place, have found their Fold of rest, where they may lye down with the Leopards in a safe and quiet repose. And now when I perceived how he admired my transcendant Beauty, and the form of God in my aspect. My Cheeks being comely with rows of precious Jewels; and how I was adorned with Topazes and Rubies, with Amethysts and Saphires, with Diamonds and Gold: I gave him a present of borders of Gold with knobs of Silver, and the richest Gems. For our Mountains are big with Mines, and the Veins of our hidden Treasures are Infinite. When my Royal Shepherd sits at my Table, my Spike∣nard sends forth the Odours thereof: Abundle of Myrrh is my welbeloved unto me: My Pastoral Friend is un∣to me as a Cluster of Camphire in the Vineyards of Eden. Because of the Savour of this pure Ointment, where∣with I besprinkled thee, thy new Name of Vertue is as heavenly Oil poured forth out of Golden Vials full of sacred Odours. §. 2. Consecration of the Soul. I Am the Holy Rose, and the Lilly of the low Val∣lies: As the Lilly among Thorns, so is my Love (said he) among the Daughters of Vanity: As the Apple-tree of Eternal Life among the Trees of the di∣vided Properties in the Wood. So is my Beloved among the Sons of worldly Wisdom: I sate down under his Shadow with great Delight, and the Fruits of his rural Trees were sweet to my Taste: He
brought me to his Banqueting Arbor, and his Ban∣ner over me was the Canopy of Love. I am come (said he) into my Gardens, my Sister: I have led thee through a Wilderness, my Spouse; I have conducted thee into the Meadows of May: Blessed be the Hour that first I saw thy Face: I have brought thee to the Rivers of Milk and Honey which flow in this Land of Rest and Rural Refreshment. Thou hast accompanied me, my lovely Mate, to the Mountains of Myrrh and the Holy Hills of Frankincense: I have ga∣thered my Flowers (said I) in the Meadows, with my Aroma's in the Vallies. Here in this perfect State of Holiness the Earth is not unburdened with Tillage, neither is it wounded with Culture: Come now (said he) O fair Virgin of Purity, sit down with me under this Vine and under this Fig-tree, where none can make us afraid: And we will take a walk in the calm Evening, in the cool of the Eternal Day, and the Divine Springs and aquaeducts shall refresh our Spirits after our Journey: Thy Breath is as the Odors of Myrrh, as the pure gale of Refreshment upon my late-languishing Spirits: Awake O. Eternally∣breathing Spirit, Come thou Divine Wind, and blow upon the Garden of my longing Heart, that the Spi∣ces thereof may flow out to the rejoycing of our Minds. Come my fair one into my rural Garden, and eat these pleasant Fruits. I have gathered my Spice with my Myrrh: I have prepared my Honey-comb with my Honey: I have mingled my Wine with my Milk: I nourish a Cow and two Sheep: And for the abundance of pure Nectar that they supply me with, I never want Soul-re∣freshment: For Honey and Etherial Cream doth eve∣ry one Eat that is left in this Land of Rest, and such Food that is innocently prepared for the Everlast∣ing health of the Soul. I will treat thee with the
Arabian Aroma's, with the Oriental Gems, the Palms of Asia, the Wine of Pomegranates, the Ame∣rican Pine-Apples, the most delicious Cordials, and the purest Elixir and Quintessential Vertues of Pa∣radise. How fair is thy Love, my Sister my Spouse? How much better is thy Love than Wine: Honey and Milk are under thy Tongue, and the smell of thy Gar∣ments like the odours of the Holy Groves. §. 3. Full Assurance. O Thou my Souls Joy, my Virgin-Solace: The smell of thy Vesture is like a fragrant flower∣ing Meadow which the Lord hath Blessed: Thy Lips (O my Espoused Lady) drop as the Honey-comb, and the smell of thy Heavenly Ointment is more fragrant than all Spices. Therefore come, thou fair Object of my Love, we will ascend to the Top of the Holy Mount; where we shall have a prospect of the Holy Land: There the floriferous Hills look big with innocent Flocks, and the Fruit-bearing Vallies with lowing Herds; supplying the Babes of the new Birth with sincere Milk: The winged Ae∣rials in the Vocal Forrests now turn Serenades: And every flower and flourishing blossom in the florid Plains perfume the chast Air with most delicious O∣dorates. The pretty Lambs true Pictures of inno∣cent Recreation (poor Animals) skip upon the Mountains of Pleasure, bleating in the Pastures of Purity: But the boggy swamps and marishes are crowded with Amphibious Creatures, with whom I care not to converse. The Hares fly not here for fear: For the ravenous Hound in this Countrey finds other Food suitable to his Palate: Thy Plants O Divine Vertue, are an Orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant Fruits of the Tree of E∣verlasting
Life: Saffron and Cinnamon, with Frankin∣cense. This Fountain that watereth the knots of Paradise, this Well-Spring of living Waters springing up in my Soul to Everlasting Life, and the Eternal Satisfaction of my fiery chirst; these Silver Streams that glide so softly, and with their warbling sound and murmuring mlody recreate my tired Pssion of Love: These Rivulets which bound upon the Banks of Eden strewed with odoriferous Galands of Prayers and Praises: This Field of fair Flowers, even all these shall be shut up and sealed to the use of the Divine Nature. Let my Beloved kiss me (said she) with the kisses of his pure Mouth: For his Love is better than the chearing Wine of Pomegranates: Thy Lips, O my Dear Spouse (said he) drop as with pure Manna: Stay me with Flagons of blessed Ne∣ctar (said she) and comfort my Love passion with Pine-Apples of Eternal Life: For I am now sick of Love. §. 4. Perfect Liberty. THen (said he) inspire the odours of thy Soul-ravishing Breath into my Mouth and Heart and let it eternally breath upon the Fire of Love in my Soul. Yes (said she) I will be thy Eternal Sa∣tisfaction, and Everlasting Refreshment to thy late-passionate Spirit: Let thy left Hand be under my Head, and let thy Right Hand of true Love embrace me for ever. I will wipe away from thy Eyes all Tears of Sorrows, over which thou didst swim as over an Ocean of despair to seek after me, and find me to the Joy of thy Heart, in this thy Rural Paradise the Suburbs of Heaven: So naturally is Innocency planted here, that nothing knows its Enemy, be∣cause no Enemy to know: Unity and Harmony are
inseparable Companions: And every Individuum knows no Argument but Love, whose Law is alike forcible to others, as the Law of Harmony is uni∣ted in it self: For nothing doth Sorrow, nor can any thing grieve, in as much as there is no cause of Suffering, or desire of Revenge. Of late I wished thou wert as a Brother that sucked my Virgin-Mothers pure Breasts: And now my wish is fulfilled: When I should find thee without thy Shepherds Arbour, or if I should light upon thee in thy late-forsaken plea∣sant walks, I would be so familiar with thee that I would kiss thee, and fill thy Soul with the Odori∣ferous Myrrh of my Holy Breath: Yea now I know and am Confident I should not be despised. I will lead and guide thee by the motions of my pure Spirit, and by the Inspiration of my Vocal Gale, into my Virgin-Mothers House: Into the Habitation of Gods Holy Bride: She will instruct me how to please thee: There I will cause thee in token of gratuity for all thy loving Kindnesses and Courtesies which thou hast shown unto thy endeared and faithful Spouse, to drink and be refreshed with the spiced Wine which I prepared for thee, and the pleasant Juice of my Pomegranate. §. 5. Religious Vows. I Remember thee, and the kindness of thy Youth, and the Love of thine espousal: When thou wentest after me into the Wilderness, into a Land that was not sown: Behold thy Time is a Time of Love. Behold O Virgin, I will enter into Covenant with thee: Then said I, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, and his de∣sire is toward me. I will anoint thee with Holy Oil: I will cloath thee with broidered Work wrought by the Virgins of Heavens: I will gird thee with the Linnen
of Innocency, and cover thee with the Silk of Sinceri∣ty: I will deck thee with Angelical Ornaments: I will put a beautiful Crown upon thy Head: I will deck thee with Gold and Gems: I will write thy Injuries upon the Dust: And thy Kindnesses upon Eternal Mar∣ble. Thou shalt eat with me in my Fathers Palace, fine Flower, Honey, and Oil: And thou shalt be exceed∣ing beautiful, and shalt prosper into a Kingdom, and thy renown shall go forth among the Heathen for bravery: For it shall be perfect and eminent through my comeliness which I will put on thee. O Virgins! behold the Shep∣herd, behold the humane King, go forth O ye Daugh∣ters of the Deity: And behold him with the Crown wherewith his Mother Gods Eternal Bride crowned him in the Holy Day of his blessed Espousals, and the glad∣ness of his Heart; for it is the best work that ever he did to make a Covenant, and be betrothed to the Virgin fair Vertue, if he do not break it: Else it will be his Eternal Horrour and cause of Everlasting Repentance, if he prove faithless: Better it is he should not Vow unto me, then Vow and not perform. §. 6. Resolution. I Gave my Royal Shepherd a Cha∣riot of the Wood Lebanon (i. e.) white Moon: In the Origi∣nal it is Leba∣nah, and signi∣fies the white Moon. of the Coelestial For∣rest: The Pillars were of Silver, the Bottom of Gold, the Canopy of Purple, the midst thereof being paved with the Love of fair Vertue, or pure Pleasure for the Divine Daughters of the Holy City. Now set me as a seal upon thine Heart: As a Divine Stamp upon thine Arm: Think upon me, and the ways of Vertue, as thou walkest in the way, and as thou sittest and oestest and as thou risest up. For my Love to the
is as strong as Death: My Jealousie will be cruel as the Grove, it will devour the perjured Soul (if thou prove false to thy Vow) in Eternal Death: But O God my Father, may that never be! For the coals of Jealousie are as coals of Eternal Fire, which hath a most cruel Scorching Flame of Torment: Ma∣ny Waters of Sorrows cannot quench my Love to thee: Neither can the Floods drown it: Neither can the Ri∣vers or Tears of a thousand Suitors and Rivals to thee stop the burning thereof. If one should give all Substance of his House for my Love, it would be utterly contemned. And so if thou abusest me hereafter, and runnest gadding in thy Mind after other Lovers, though thou shouldst give all that thy Soul and Bo∣dy are worth, and all the Substance of thy House for the enjoyment of me the third time, it will be utterly rejected and despised as a vain trifle. Take notice of it: And be true to me thy Spouse. After this Day the Divine Damsels saw me and praised me with this Blessing: Be thou Mother of thousands of Millions: And the Author of a numberless number to People the Coelestial City by the new Regeneration: And let thy Seed effess the Gates of Heaven which Lucifer lost: Build thou the House of the Humane Off-spring: Thou art our Sister: Do thou worthily in Heaven and be thou famous in Paradise. And this was the Con∣tract, that the Wedding must be solemnized in the presee of the King our Father, on the Day of my Tridgrooms tting off his Earthly Tabernacle and Elementary Robe. Now Happy is the Man that can arrive to the Haven of so great a Happiness as this: so as to find Virgin Vertue, God's most Beau∣tiful Daughter, called also pure Pleasure, or Di∣vine Delight of the Son of Man: For her Prie is far bove Res.
§. 7. Seven-fold Vertue. NOW these Coelestial Virgins are of different Degrees; for some Vertues are predomi∣nant in these, which are weak in those: And yet all cloathed with the Garments of Unity. 1. One is a good House-keeper and diligent as the Bee: The Heart of her espoused doth safely trust in her: So that he need fear no spoil: She seeketh Flax and Wool, she worketh willingly with her Hands: She is like the Mer∣chants Ships: She bringeth her Food from a far: She considereth a Field in fair Eden, and buys it: With the Fruit of her Hands, she planteth a Vineyard of Re∣freshing Bowers: She lays her Hands to the Distaff, and her Candle goes not out in the Eternal Night: She reacheth forth her Hands to the needy: And all her houshold are cloathed with Scarlet: She makes her self coverings of Tapestry: Her Garments are Silk and Pur∣ple. 2. Another is skilled by Divine Wisdom, in playing upon Instruments of Musick: She inventeth means for the Recreation of Humane Life: She ma∣keth Songs in the Praise of her Creator and Father: The Workmanship of her Tabrets were prepared in her in the Day that she was Created; whereby she cha∣seth the evil Spirit, that troubleth the Humane Mind. 3. A third by her Politick skill in Martial Discipline, delivereth a besieged Microcosmical City surrounded by Lucifer and his Souldiers, by causing one Man the Offender to dye, whose Head shall be thrown over the Wall, that the whole City perish not. This is the anoynted Virago. 4. Another is more beautiful and amiable in her Divine Form, as cloath∣ed with the Shape of God, and bearing the very Picture of her Virgin-Mother in her Lovely Visage, as they indeed all do, but this in an especial Man∣ner:
She is most meek and courteous in Carriage, and Communication, therefore the froward and grudge-bearing Sycophant shall never partake of her Love. 5. Another is wise in true Wisdom, and foretelleth of Evils which are like to befal a Hu∣mane Soul that is espoused to her, if he observe the Divine Motion of her pure Gale in the ool of the blessed Day: She reveals hidden Mysteries to the Humane Spirit that loveth her: Thus though also she be acute and eloquent, yet she is intirely Sincere. This is the Angelical Philosopher and Prophetess. 6. Another is sound and healthy, and by that means hath skill in the Plant of Life, and the Vertue thereof for the healing of Maladies in Humane Body and Soul. This is the Coelestial Physitianess. §. 8. Seven-fold Reward. LAstly. The most Noble is she whose Cloathing is Divine Honour and Magnanimity; Majesty, and an Heroick Greatness of Spirit is in her Coun∣tenance: She is adorned with a generous Bright∣ness, and she shall rejoyce in time to come, in Eterni∣ty, and shine as the Celestial Star in the Holy World, as being brighter than the rest, as parta∣king more of the solar property: She openeth her Mouth as one speaking with Authority, yet in Modesty and Wisdom; yea, in her Tongue is the Law of Kind∣ness: Her Children in the new Birth arise up and call her Blessed: Her Husband also, he praiseth her: Many Daughters have done Vertuously, but thou excellest them all: Tho' not equal with the Bride of the A∣nointed Champion, the Sister and Friend of the Great Messias. Fawning Favour is deceitful, and coun∣terfeit Beauty is vain; but this Divine Virgin that
obeyeth her Father, shall be praised: Give her of the Fruits of her Hands, and let her own Works praise her in the Gates of Heaven. Thus in particular, Fair Vertue (which is pure Pleasure of the Soul) gives to the Soul that accepts of her, according to the capacity of the Receiver: 1. Treasures of Eternal Life. 2. A Clue of Thread to direct Man out of the Labyrinth of false Pleasures and Sports. 3. An Armour to resist Luci∣fer. 4. Jewels and Ornaments. 5. A Book of Pro∣phecy, compiled by the Prince of Philosophers, and a new Name written therein. 6. Food, Bread, and Wine, without end; proceeding from the Tree of Eternal Life. 7. A Golden Scepter to rule over the adverse party. Thus Man by accepting of a good Fortune proffered to him, doth become Rich, Sound, Prosperous, Wise, Potent, Fair and Noble, and so preferred to an Heavenly Dignity and Office. §. 9. Grace turned into Wantonness. O Man therefore be not so self-conceited and ob∣stinate: Be not Osor Mulierum, one that Dis∣regards God, and the Desire of Women, Dan. 11.37. An Hater of the fair Virgin: Be willing to enter into the holy Estate of Matrimony, for to this thou art purposely born: Else thy Soul (if thou refuse) will be left to be tormented by the De∣mons, and thou wilt die the Eternal Death, for Love of a Harlot, whose Love thou shalt never enjoy. If thou art in love with the fair Virgin, have a care of abusing her, and offering Violence to her, by deflowring her: Tho' thou indeed shalt never be able to make her comply to thy false Will: Yet thy evil attempt before the Wedding (which is the Day of the Fall of the outward Body) will make thee guilty of her departure, and the fault shall Eter∣nally
lie at thy Door. Do not thou like a Vagabond combine to put a trick upon the Virgin thy Spouse, and to murder thy dear Companioness: If thou dost, be sure the Murder will come to light, for she will rise again to judge you both. Be not hasy in thy Choice, lest thou do that in a day, or unlucky hour, which cannot be undone in an Age of Eternity. But some may say, Nature seems cruel in this, That a fair young Man, the Soul, cannot dart his Eyes upon a supposed Beauty, without great peril of being wounded himself. Answ. Leave the Cross, and lose the Crown. The youthful Soul, who formerly took pleasure in Exploits and brave Actions, is now turn∣ed devout, and become a Zealous and Religious Vo∣tary, to some Feminine Beauty. O humane Soul, beware of Idolatry. As Christ descended into Hell, so must the Soul of Man too: That is, if he finds himself unworthy of all comfort in this World, and if things should fall cross with him in outward things, and i he should become the scorn of Devils, yet he esteems it all just, and according to his Desrts, so he obtains the Favour of God, and the Virgin again. He must decond into the Infernal Shadows, to seek and fetch her home again. §. 10. By Double-Heartedness. HE that keeps not the Virgins Love, for Love-sake; but supposeh he hath it for a Reward; to him it is most grievous, and he desires to be soon rid of it; and this is the Property of every Hireling, to desire and wish an End of his Toil. Whereas a true Lover thinks no Pains, Labour or Time too much and grie∣vous, so he may but retain his love. If Vertue could be seen by Men in her own Natural Beauty, Naked, (said the Philosopher) Men would be wonderfully in
love with her. But the Soul suspects the Virgins Purity, thinking to find the same impure lascivious∣ness in her, which he finds in himself: Another would willingly enjo both: He loves the Virgin a little, and Jezebel a little: But the Virgin never appears in the Society of the incestuous Strumpet: And that is the Reason that the Soul often longs after her, and fetcheth many a deep sigh for her, when in the midst of vain Mirth and Laughter, the Heart is sad and heavy. Tho'at long run, the Soul becomes tinctured by a false Ferment b the Whores Society: Also if the Virgin should appear in the House of this Trull, all the Ra∣venous Birds would have a peck at her. And that is the Reason, when any goes to the House of Feasting on vain and counterfeit Food, he cannot hear the Voice of Wisdom, (as Christs Voice could not Ec∣cho forth to the Questions of them that envied him at his Examination:) For two Contraries cannot be of equal Authority at one and the same time in the same Subject. CHAP. VIII. The Virgins Farewel. §. 1. Beware of Falling from Grace. GIve not thy Honour, thy honourable Soul, to ano∣ther: Nor thy Eternal years unto the Cruel: Lest Strangers be filled with thy Wealth, and thy Labours be in the House of thine Enemies: And lest the Jewels of the Virgin, which she gave thee, be ridiculed by them that emulate her happiness: And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh is consumed in the Grave of Despair, and
say, O now I wonder that I could not esteem her: How was I such a Fool as to despise the Instruction of my Virgin. Ah! What did I call her MY Virgin? She is not mine, but she was mine: O that I could say she never was so now! But there is my Eternal Hell: Because I crossed the Mind of my Creator, who ap∣pointed her to be mine: But I appointed her Enemy for my everlasting Companion, who will not lead a loving Life with me, but torment me with the Snake∣like Scourges of her Scorpion Furies. Now observe, here is the crossing of the Eternal Fancy of the Soul, (if thou call it a Phantasie) the Spirit of the Soul must have his Will, his desired Object, the Virgin; Or he will die, and that Eternally. And the false Mind will enjoy Jezabel, the Object of his Love, or he will also dye the Eternal Death. And so Man lies in a great strait, as compassed about with Nets on eve∣ry side: And there is no way to escape the Gulf, but by being faithful to his Virgin: For tho' Man prove faithful to the said Humane Sorceress, yet she will not be true to him, but will play the Harlot, and defile his Bed in Eternity. Therefore, O Man, (poor Wretch) consider thy self here: Drink Water out of thine own Cistern: And running Waters of Eternal Pleasures out of thine own undefiled Virgin-Well. Let thy Holy Fountain be blessed everlastingly, and Rejoyce with the beautiful Maid ef thy ever-flourishing Youth: Let her be as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe, and let her Breasts satisfie and refresh thee at all times: And be thou ravished world without end with her chaste love. And why wilt thou be ravished with a strange Woman, and embrace the Bosom of a Whore, that is common to the evil Demons, who will not love the again in truth? Go then thy way from this Trull: Eat thy Bread of Life in Joy, and drink thy heart-chearing Wine of eter∣nal
Beatitude with a merry heart: For God now (if thou art true to his Virgin-Daughter) accepteth thy Works: For this is the Antepast of Heaven. Let thy Garments be always pure, clean, and white, and let thy Head, bles∣sed by thy Virgin-Mother, lack no Ointment of hea∣venly Oyl. Live joyfully with thy Espoused Virgin, whom thou lovest all the days of the Life of thy Vanity, which God hath given under the Sun all the days of thy temporal Vanity, for that is thy Portion in this Life, to thy Labour which thou takest under the Sun of Time, and that only is the end of thy Travail, and the final Cause of thy Journey, which to perform, necessity is laid upon thee by the Creator: He sets thee upon this Work and Labour, to see whether thou wilt love his Virgin-Daughter by the Light of the Sun, and not suffer thy self to be blinded, by not looking for true Light in the Virgins Face, and so be dazled and struck blind for love of an unworthy Guest at her seeming Beauty. §. 2. Or there is no third Recovery. SIn not against the Virgins holy Spirit, for thy Sin will never be forgiven. If thou prove faithful to the Virgin here, under the Sun of her Light, which is pure, thou shalt Eternally enjoy her pleasant Aspects and Smiles, and loving Communications, under the Sun of an ever-shining Light in Heaven. Whatso∣ever thy hand findeth to do, in reference to the Nods and Pointings of the Virgin, do it with thy might: For there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave of Eternal Death, whither thou goest, if thou break her Law: Neither can any one help thee out of that Grave, for out of the Eternal Hell there is no Redemption. Nay if Angels and Saints did all joyn their Skill, and Device, and Wisdom together,
they can afford thee no help from thence. Besides, if thou do'st not now use all thy Skill, and do thy best endeavour to forsake Vice and Sin, (the form of this Jezabel in the Abstract) and to do good with all thy might, and love God (or Vertue, which is God and the fair Virgin in the Abstract) with all thy strength and Soul, thou wilt never have space granted thee to mend thy work in the succeeding World, or to re∣ctifie and make straight that which is made crooked in this World, or to fill up the measure or number or weight in Gods Ballance: For that which is wnting here, cannot be numbred hereafter: And two cannot be substracted out of one. For by Slothfulness the Buil∣ding decayeth, and through Idleness of the Hands in this World, the House of the humane World will drop thorow, and be swallowed in the Abyss And while I was passing by the Soulish Field of the Sluggard, I look∣ed, and behold it was all grown over with Thorns; It be∣came a Wilderness, wherein the Owner was intang∣led, and knew not which way to turn to find Ease and Refreshment. I went by the Vineyard of the lazy Labourer, and Lo, Nettles had covered the Face thereof: And the Stone-Wall thereof was broken down. Then I saw and considered it well: I looked upon it, and set it forth for an Example; that he that sleepeth in the Sum∣mer shall starve in the Eternal Winter: So shall his Po∣verty come as a fugitive Beggar, who travaileth in the boundless Wilderness; and his want as an armed Soul∣dier in Lucisers Camp. O Man repent in time. §. 3. Vertue Rare. TAke no heed to all Words, or Affronts, that are cast at thee, lest thou hear the Servile Handmaid (or else the Whorish Woman) curse her legal Mi∣stress. For oft times also thine own Conscience knows
that thou thy self hast cursed thy Rivals. All this (saith the Great Prophet) have I proved by Philosophy: I said I will be wise: But Wisdom is not easily attainable: For that which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out, without heavenly Skill in Theosophy? And by Mans Churlishness the Virgin oft removes far from him. I applied my heart to know, and to search, and to seek out by Wisdom the reason of things, and the deep Cause of Causes, and the Wickedness of Folly, even of Foolishness and Madness. And I find more bitter than Death the Woman whose false Heart is a Snare, and whose Fingers are Nets and Bands to bind the humane Soul: Whoso pleaseth God, and loves the Virgin, shall escape from her, but the Sinner against Gods Law of Obedi∣ence, shall be caught in her trap, as a Woodcock in a Snare, or Fishes in an evil Net. Behold this have I found, (saith the Preacher of Truth) Counting one by one to find out the Account by Mathematical Calcula∣tion: Which yet my Mind seeketh, but I find not clear∣ly. One humane Soul among a thousand have I found, but scarce a Virgin can be found now a days, among a Thousand Handmaids and false Women, for the Earth being stained with humane Blood, hath forced the Divine Spouses of Mankind to disappear, and enter into their own Principle. The way that leads to the Whores lodging is broad: Yea even the blind finds it without a Guide. And the path of Vertue is narrow, yet it is easie and straight to him whose Eyes are in his Head. But when the Virgin is lost, (as the Epigrammist said) so may the Soul say to the Virgin, thou hast given me a Looking-glass as a token of thy Love; wherein I may see my own shape, and if I had not been a Fool, might have learnt by it to know my own self. I had rather thou wouldest now send me one wherein I might
see thee and the Signs of thy Favour and Accep∣tance, and thy most beautiful Aspect once more, attracting my longing Mind: But it is too late. I may indeed see my own ugy Form infected by the Whore of false Lust. The Fire of this Harlot is like the Fire of Hell, which burns another, but gives no Light, whereby her Lover may find her. §. 4. Christs proffered Service slighted. FOR three things the Earth is disquieted: And for four which it cannot bear: For a Servant the Worm of the Soul, when he reigneth over the noble Mind: And a Fool, the false Affection or Delight, when he is filled with Meat, which is not the true Food of the Soul: and so cannot relish Food by a longing hunger which is the best Sawce. For an Odious Strumpet, when she is married to her Superiour the Soul: And for the Virgins Hand-maid, who is Heir to her Mistress. But Virgin-Vertue cries to the Spi∣rit of Man, Oh canst thou be cruel? Canst thou be so hard-hearted? Wilt thou now forsake and dis∣pise me after all thy pretended kindnesses? Must I now be a Bond maid to thy Concubines, who was born a Princess? Thou hast not brought me any Gifts, thou hast not sent me any tokens: I have not caused thee to serve and wait upon me with an Offering of thy devoted Soul, nor wearied thee with the Sacrifi∣ces of thy vowed self: Neither hast thou honoured me with the Incense of thy promised Service. But thou hast made me to serve with thy Sins: Thou hast wearied me waiting upon thee in thy Debauchery. And the Jewels I gave thee thou hast bestowed upon Harlots. Many take occasion to blame the Virgin for a small seeming Offence, when they wink at this Jezebels Impudence: yea though the sincere
Virgin do but whisper a Word to one of her Com∣panions, it must be judged to be Treason. If thou wouldst be wise and retain thy Jewels, not bestow∣ing them upon thy unworthy Harlot, thou should∣est soon see how she would pack away to her own Companions: Now therefore see thy Folly at last, thy entrusting of thy Jewels with her, believe her not, reject her fair Promises, for she waites to de∣ceive and intrap thee. §. 5. A seared Conscience. THen bethought her self, when the valedictory parting Kiss was given her: O this Wed∣ding Song is become a Threnetick Song. When the Virgin fair-Vertue perceives the Soul continues obstinate, and will not commiserate her woful Condi∣tion, whereunto she hath plunged her self for his sake, by letting her Affections of true Love after him, he being unworthy thereof, and slighting her kindness, then she goes into a solitary Wilderness to bewail her doleful fate: And now saith she, I have piped unto thee, but thou hast not danced. I have Sung an Elegiack farewel to thee, but thou hast not sympathized with my Griefs. And it grieves her to think how she hath been trampled upon, and causlesly kicked out of his Society; though she wished him well, and did all for his good and everlasting welfare (Oh, saith she, How long thou simple one wilt thou hate me, and neglect thy own Mercy? How long O scorner wilt thou scorn me?) Yea He was the first occasion which moved her to set her Affections upon him: But it seems with an intent to mock and deceive her, and make a May-game and Derision of her before his Jezebelish Companions. Yet when she sees there is no Hope or Remedy, (for she resolves never to leave or forsake him,
while the least Oil capable of receiving the flame of Love remained in him:) And when she finds that his Mind is resolved another way, then she considers with her self: And muttering saith, Why do I pine and waste thus? I do not profit at all to my self, nor promote the means of regaining his Affe∣ctions towards me, I will again return to Paradise to my Mothers House, even where I was raised up un∣der the Tree of Life by the Fountains of Eden, and where I was snatched away while I was securely gathering Flowers by the upper Springs of the Coe∣lestial Groves; and hurried away into this fair World. There in Paradise, I shall see my dear and heavenly Mother again, and I will complain to her of my hard Fortune, and dismal Fate, the result of the unkindness of my late Lover. There I will open my Mind in Sincerity to her: Perhaps she will af∣ford me some comfortable Advice. Being come home, her Virgin-Mother perceives by her looks that she has not sped well, and saith unto her. What's the Matter with my sweet and dear Daugh∣ter? Is this she who I thought was lost, whose love∣ly Face I almost despaired ever to see again? What? have not things occurred well with thee? Hast thou no Fellow-Traveller? No Recreator of thy tedious long Journey? What? Come through such a terrible Wilderness alone? What are those wounds on thy late beautiful Face? How is thy fair Visage more marred than thy Sisters, and thy form seems more disfigured than pretended Maids? Oh dear Mother, saith Virgin-Vertue, many have been astonished at me: My Virgin-Play-fellows did not know me: It seems I have no Form nor Comeliness which Mans Soul can see in me, no Beauty that he should desire me: I am despised and rejected of my Com∣panion:
I am a Virgin of sorrows and acquainted with Grief, my Mate hath hid his Face from me, I was dis∣pised and be esteemed me not: He looked on me as stric∣ken, smitten and forsaken of God. And now who shall declare my Generation, and the Children of my Womb? Yet I have done no Violence, neither was de∣ceit found in my Mouth: I was true to my Lover: But he proved false to his late Companion in Tribu∣lation: I was deceived and inveigled into his Wiles by his fair Speeches: He seemed to prosess great kindness at the first, and drew me into his Nt with smooth but deceitful Promises: But now he hath utterly slighted me. I received these Marks on the Palms of my Hands, by the Malice and Treachery of his false Companions, who drew my Lovers Heart from me, and the Watchmen of the Night did smite and wound me. Then do thou (saith her Vir∣gin-Mother) slight him as much: If he suffer his Eyes to be so blinded, that he cannot see his own Good, forsaking his own Mercy and the Day of his ten∣der Visitations; let him thank himself. Choose ano∣ther and let him go: Be not so concerned my bles∣sed Daughter, the Child of my Womb: Take Heart and raise thy drooping Mind out of the Grave of Despair. §. 6. The Talent given to another. WHY dost thou take on so? Why art thou so affected with thy Sorrow? Leave thy Sob∣bing: Sigh no more: Stay with me in thy Mothers House as a desolate Widow, and she shall cherish thee with the Oil of Joy again. And thou shalt again rejoyce in Eternity: Come take a drop of this Coe∣lestial Wine into thy fair Mouth, it will chear thy dejected Heart, and comfort thy pure and sincere
Spirit: And thou shalt have a sweet nap of refresh∣ment upon my Breasts. And when thou awakest, this hard-hearted Beloved of thine will be cast out of the Church of thy Affections, and committed to the Hell of Oblivion. But (saith Virgin-Vertue) where are my dear Sisters? Oh! saith God's Bride, they all sympathize with thee, and bemoan thy hard Hap, and yet congratulate thy safe return from wandring in the wide Wilderness among wild Beasts: Blessed art thou my Daughter, that hast found thy Native Haven of the Holy Heaven again. When she hath had the enjoyment of the sweet So∣ciety and Communication of her heavenly Friends a small Season, she gradually receives Comfort and a Refreshment of pure rejoycing with a Divine Hal∣leljah, praising the Creator with Songs of Tri∣nph in her Mouth, that he hath delivered her from the Fury and Cruelty of her envious Rivals, who laid wait for her Halting, and looked for her Ruine. Now I being weather beaten, and having swum over an Oce∣an of bitter briny tears, am now arrived at my fold of Everlasting Rest. Her Virgin Mother saith, O my Virgin-Danhter; thou shalt be yet in Love with a faithful Companion, and divinely inamoured with one who will equally love thee again, as thy loveliness deserves. The next true Friend, whom thou shalt shew knness to, in a real Commiseration of their ruireable Condition, shall resalute thee with an An∣swer of  kindness, neither will it ever enter in∣to his Heart to receive thee, when he shall be espou∣sed to thee, with whom thou shalt Eternall, abide in the and undefiled ed of Eternal Joy At this her Virgin Sisters come forth out of a retired Room or Closet in Heaven, saying: O is this our Sister marked with the Scars of an unfortunate War in the
Fields of crossed, and unfaithful Love? Alas for thee! our dear Sister. I am black, O ye Daughters of the Holy City, and Swarthy, and my former Comeliness can scarce be perceived. Look not upon me, because I am Black; because my Skin was become Tawny in the parched Wilderness: Because the scorching Sun of deceitful Lust and false Love hath looked upon me, and sought to infect me. My Mothers Stepsons were angry with me: They made me the Keeper of their Vine∣yards, I waited upon them in their Superfluiies and Pleasures, and would faintaste of the Gleanings, and the Grapes that they refused: And so mine own Vineyard I have not kest, and now you see my beautiful Flowers are laid in the Dust. Alas for thee? say they, Alas and well a day! We have a little Sister, and she hath no Breasts, she seems to be Eternally Barren, and incapable of propagating her Divine Species according to the Creators Law. O what shall we do for our Sister in the Day that she shall be spoken for, and invited to the great Wedding-Din∣ner? If she be a Wall of Defence against impure Lo∣ers, we will build upon her a Palace of Silver, which shall be as a Golden Temple of Gladness to enter∣tain her Noble Beloved. And if she be a Door of In∣vitation, we will enclose her with boards of Coelestial Caedar, to receive her saithful Shepherd in her Ho∣ly Habitation, and Tent of Contentment under the Trees of Eternal Life. §. 7. The Soul's Anguish. THus, as it happened to the Fool, that is in Labour and Travail to obtain his false Delilah: So it happened to this fair Virgin: But they shall not have the same Catastrophe in the end of the Act or Play. For they shall dye in a different manner, which
when they shall have sacrificed their Souls, devo∣ted to the service of their Lovers: The one shall dye to his Condemnation: The other to the Resur∣rection of Everlasting Life and Joy. Now the Soul that slighted this fair Virgin, being deceived by a blind Fancy of false Passion, forsakes her for ever; and falls in love with an unworthy Harlot far infe∣riour to himself and his nobility, whereby he de∣generates into a bestial State, by a Soul-Transmi∣gration. Verifying the Proverb. Pares cum paribus facillimè Congregantur. And this Delilah only plays the Fool with him to sport her self, and make a Mock play of him with her Companions, and her fellow-Harlots: And will not Love him again, as he Loves her: (It is hard to rob a Thieves House.) And so he becomes a Vagabond, and Fugitive upon the Earth, and Eter∣nally seeks after her, but can never obtain her Love. And though perhaps he may so far prevail with her, as to have the favour of defiling her in the Bed of obscene wantonness, yet that is only to give him a Taint of her Infection, which will Eternal∣ly burn in, and wast his griping Bowels. And this is a Description of Mans Hell (almost without a Metephor) viz. A Separation of the Soul from God his desired Object, in his dying Hour and last Minutes; when he finds himself by Reason of a wilful and continued course in deadly Sins excluded the En∣joyment of Heaven, nor can he lay any claim to the Be∣nefit of the Sacrifice, having shut himself out by false Lust, falling in Love, and being inamoured with a blind Passion: A false Delilah having had the Flow∣er of his youthful Love, he is no more for her turn. And so to speak in a similitude, Mans Soul shall be
confined to an Eternal Wilderness: So that it is ve∣ry clearly understood how the labour of the foolish Souls will weary every one of them, because they know not the way to go to the City of mutual Love and So∣lace. All which ways leads him to endless Sorrow and Miseries, being the effects of Sin, which confine him to an un-openable Prison, in which he shall feel within him a Fire of Eternal Pain and aking of his Mind, whereby his Heart shall burst in pieces, and yet remain whole by renewing it to endure a fresh wracking Torment in the Grim Life. §. 8. The Soul's Despair. ANd all this because he would not allow the right Spirit of the Soul, the thing that he earnestly begged and cryed after: Yea he shall as through a Goal-Grate at times behold this Harlor, who was the occasion of his Misery, mocking him, and saying, O Fool! now pay Eternally for thy Folly in believing me: Now eat thy sower Sawce after thy sweet Meat. Also he shall see Heaven above him, by looking at times beyond the great Gulf, and he shall to his Repentance ever to be re∣pented, and to his Grief never to be expiated, at times espy his once fair Virgin, whom he might have Eternally enjoyed to his unspeakable Solace, and mutual Refreshment; for she was (if he had not undone the knot of true Love) his own pro∣per Right by the Law of Eternity. And be∣cause he refused her, there must be a Transmi∣gration of Souls, and out of his Ashes must spring another, who will gladly step into his Throne, and Love his Virgin who never was defiled: And this his Rival-Successor, he shall look at with an envi∣ous Eye embracing his Virgin, who is now become
his Rivals own, by the unalterable Law of the De∣ity. Thus this spiritual Adulterer shall see his Late Virgin in the dear Arms of another, but he shall never in Eternity receive so much as one smile, nor so much as one of her looks to refresh him, where∣with his Heart used lately to be ravished. Instead of this he shall Conceit she frowns upon him, tho' indeed her Nature is ignorant of the manner of frowning: And so shall feel intolerable Pain and Griping in his Conscience, which is a difference or Combustion between the Soul and Spirit of the Soul, because he hath foolishly squandred away his fair Virgious Gifts, and scorned or refused a good or blessed Fortune which the Creator had appoint∣ed him. And upon the Monument set over his Hllish Grave shall be this Epitaph engraved: Here lies the cursed Ashes, (the Object of Scorn) once the Seat of the Fire of pure Love, who deceived his own Soul like a Fool, and now suffers the Pu∣nishment of his own procuring, and burns in the Fire of his own kindling. Therefore O Man have a Care, defraud not the pure Mind of the true Pleasure it earnestly cryeth, longeth, and panteth after, or of the Virgin it laboureth and travails for: think not that it will be put off with Foperies, and shammed with Toys of Vanity, or lusled asleep by a Song of Vanity. If it be cast by some Soporife∣rous Poyson into Sleep, yet it will again awake to thy Condemnation: And will never cease craving for the right Food that is proper for his Eterna Health and Life, and will by his Officer, Scourge and Torment thee, till he obtain his Desire.
§. 9. Late Repentance. THerefore spend not thy Money for that which is not Right Bread, nor thy Labour for that which profi∣teth not the Spirit of the Soul: For I say again he will not be cheated. For when the Body comes to drop as a Leaf from the Tree of the Soul to the Grave: Death will by no means in the World, by no fair Speeches be bribed to put off the time, when the forcible Wind is sent to blow it down. When the guilty Sinner sees that Death will not be put off, then he endeavours to bribe the Souls Spirit, and to speak him fair, saying, O be reconciled to me in my extremity. The Soul's Spirit saith, Fly hence; thy House doth Crack, it falls: Get under Ground for safer Walls. The Soul answers, Oh but give me a token of thy sa∣vour, before the thread of my Life be cut off by the Sword of the Cherub: I have done brave Exploits for thee in former days. O, saith the Spirit, so Luci∣fer's Cities were once famous, where Satyrs now dance, and doleful Birds howl: No, I will never be reconciled in Eternity to thee: The time is past: Where was this desire of Reconcilement before, when I was willing to keep peace with thee, on con∣dition I should have my will, and the end of my longing, which once was easily attainable: But now thou art wise too late. O but, saith the Soul, now I repent from the bottom of my heart: O be favour∣able to me, and shew me some kindness, remit that rigour which thou threatnest me with, now at my last gasp, where with I will pray Heaven to requite thee. Keep thy thanks to feed thy hellish Brood, (saith the pure Mind) This is but to gain the time, be∣cause thou seest the thing I longed for is gone from me:
Thouhast prepared lying and corrupt Words to speak before∣me till the time be changed; therefore there is but one De∣cree, Either procure to me my dear Virgin, and wash thy Blackmore's Skin white, or thou shalt be utterly destroyed, and thy House shall be made a Dunghil. §. 10. The Soul's Hellish Blasphemy. BUt, (saith the Soul) O be not so cruel, and rigid. She is unattainable, she is taken into thy Rivals Favour: It is impossible to substract a greater num∣ber from a lesser, that I cannot do: Only remit the penalty of this severe Law: Nay (saith the Noble Mind) I must proclaim an Eternal War against thee; For as thou hadst not Power over the false Spirit, to re∣tain the Spirit of thy Affections, so neither hast thou power in the day of Eternal Death; neither hath any one the Power to retain the Virgin, when she is gone into her place, and quite rejected. And therefore I say, There is no discharge in this War, no redeeming of thee from the Fury of the bloody Souldiers, and avenging Officers, who will now cast thee into Prison: Neither shall wickedness deliver them that have been all their time given to it. Therefore, O humane Soul, think not that thou shalt escape, and that the Spirit of the humane Soul shall die for the rest of the humane Commonwealth, and come under the Lash for the loss of his dear Virgin, (for tho' thou shouldst give all the Substance of thine House, and all that thou art worth, to be reconciled to her, it cannot be, when the day of Grace is sinned out) and that this Divine Essence shall suffer for thee. No, no, this Divine Essence shall remain as an Image in a Looking-glass, and thou shalt endure the Pain, as being condemned by this said Essence, who will arise again out of the Grave which thou hast digged for him, and condemn thee,
as being thy Eternal Judge. And here is seen what part suffers; for where the sore is, there will be the Hand. And here begins the great and Hellish Blas∣phemy of a Soul in the real Tophet, the Soul will gnaw his Tongue for pain and vexation, and Revenge against the Spirit of the Soul, as if he were in sault; where∣as himself was the cause of Bringing this tormenting Wo upon himself. And now the dumb guilty Soul may be long at the Gate of the deaf Spirit, who will not hear his Cries, because he himself was lately as the deaf Adder who would nor hearken to the Charms of the Spirit, charming never so wisely: And struck his Con∣science oft-times as dumb as a Sheep before the Shearer. Yea the Soul will rave and rage as if he would tear the Deity it self in pieces. And when a poysoned Arrow does light upon his Flesh, he knowing not whence it comes, he will receive the Blood into his hands, flushing out, and throw it up to the Abyss, crying out, O Almighty Power thou hast conquered me; and so blaspheming, dies the Eternal Death. CHAP. IX. The Souls Rest. §. 1. Where is this Rest? IF the Soul do but attain the End of his Journey, which was appointed as the true final Cause of his Travail and Labour by the Creator, then he becomes happy, and not before. The Sleep and Rest of the Labouring Soul is sweet, whether he sleep little or much; but the bundame of the covetous Rich and conceited Soul, who conceits he needeth nothing, as
being not beholden to God, will not suffer him to sleep, and to take a quiet Nap of sweet Repose. But where is this Rest to be found, There's the Question: The Elements say, It is not in us: The Depth saith, It is not in me: Hell and Death say, We have heard the Fae thereof with our Ears: There is a Path which the s∣tillest Fowl knows not, and which the quick sighted Vul∣tures Eye hath not seen. Nay, let Man search and grope into every Corner and Cranny of the whole Creation, yet he shall never find Rest for his Soul, until he come and return to Virgin Vertue, Gods fair Daughter, his appointed and predestinated Spouse. As the Stars and Astral Powers bear sway over Mor∣tals, so also the Minds of Men have a reflexive Influ∣ence upon the Starry Natures: For Evil Minds, by Sympathy or Simile attract the Evil Influences, which infect the Air, and so alight upon the first Authors. Even as a Not oft-time generateh within it self that which destroyeth it, namely, the Worm of an evil Influence. In like manner also vertuous and holy Souls attract the good Influences of the Astral Pro∣perties by Sympathy. Now who knoweth the Spirit of a Man that goeth upwards to his own natural Heaven, and attracts the good and sweet Influences thereof? For, God with a lofty Mind did Man indue, And bid him Heavens transcendent Glory view; As being his Natural Scope and right Home. But if any humane Soul approve not of this Form, choo∣sing a prone or downward Look, and to be leaded with the guilt of an evil or guilty Conscience, he shall sink down into the Abyss.
§. 2. Not God's Fault, if missed. THo' God commands the Soul to choose Life and Eternal Joy, and let every Bird delight in his own Note, which th Creator hath inspired into him, to praise the Inspirer, yet most Men choose Death, and let them thank themselves. But now Heaven is the appointed Home of Mans Soul: And if the Soul miss to find his home, there's his Hell, and there's the Inverting of the Mind of God, or frustrating of the Intent of the Almighty, which makes the Wo and the Hell. But some may say, Hell was also appointed to some Men, as Heaven was pre∣destinated to others. Answ. Yes, Hell was conditio∣nally appointed to Adam and all his Posterity, upon their slighting of Heaven: But Heaven was Mans na∣tive Place or Home: And thither he must return, if the Causes of Man co-work and suit together in their genuine coherence. And to say that Hell was the si∣nal Cause of some Mens Creation, is absolute Blas∣phemy. But as the younger Brother said in the Epi∣gram (Sum pauper, non culpa mea, &c.) It was not my Fault that I am poor, but the Fault of my Parents, who have not begotten me before my Elder Brother, who had the Inheritance: This is the case of the Fool, that lays the Fault upon the Almighty Father of Mankind. As it was affirmed by the old Hea∣then Polytheists, that one Idol-God or Power could not undo what another did: So it is true in this sense, That whatsoever is made Crooked by the hellish Power, can never be made Straight again, no not by the Power of the Almighty Creator himself: For it cannot be expected that God should or would help Man any more, having created him like himself, and also created him a new, when there was possibility
lest of Recovery: But if Man becomes his own Cre∣ator, and a Necromancer in the Hellish Operation, a third Relief can never be: And why? Because God himself cannot work against the Truth, or the right Order of Eternity: He himself being the Prince of Order. And he cannot deny himself, and belye his own Nature: Neither will he call back a Day that is past. §. 3. God alloweth Time. NOw, now, now is the time: It may be possible to day to do a thing which cannot be done to morrow: Yea, the true Hour must be waited upon to do it: Go not about a Business against the Hair. Be∣cause to every thing and business there is Time and Judg∣ment, which Man ot times neglecteth, therefore his Misery is great upon him. Lose not the Tyde of the Eternal Ocean, which should carry the Soul to Para∣dise, for it stays for none. Now is the time to work with all thy might, and to lay up for Heaven, the end of thy Labour and Work: For in the Grave whither thou goest it cannot be attained. To' God promises Forgiveness to Repentants, yet he doth not promise to morrow to repent in: For many shall strive to enter in at the Gate of Heaven, but when the day of Grace is past, they shall not be able. Whoever he be that sin∣neth out his Day, or despiseth the last Day of his Visi∣tation, by Obstinacy, slighteth the Holy Ghosts last Reproof, rejcts him out of his Company, and be∣comes Reprobate: A Man in a Christian Warfare may quarrel with his Reprover oft-times, and be re∣conciled again; considering that those Reproofs were for his Good: But the Reprobate is past Re∣proof, and hates to be Reformed: He shall not be forgiven in this World, nor in that which is to come: No,
tho'he, Esau-like, doth seek to repent, for his Re∣pentance is too late: And tho' he work at the Hour of Death with all his might, what soever his hand sindeth to do towards his New Creation, yet the Mystery of the false Nature prevails: And it is folly to seek the Living among the Dead. It is true, God and his be∣nign Powers or Influences wait for an Advantage against the Devils Temptations at all times: And therefore the good Genius will not leave the very worst Sinner till the last gasp: For according to the Right of the Deity, the holy Angels claim the first sifting and searching of the Soul, when Man is a dying. As a Physitian, when he seeth his Patient mortally sick, yet he gives him some Cordials to ease him: So God may lessen the Punishment and Damna∣tion of one that hath sinned out his Day of Grace of∣fered once to him, and now repents heartily (that he hath passed by the Gate of Mercy at such and such times, which is now fresh in his Memory) and is for∣ry by late repentance: But he can never enter in at Heavens Gate: For the Door will be shut in its right time, and arries for no Mans lingering: And the Tyde of the Eternal Ocean will wait no Mans leasure. §. 4. And Tallents. SEranimis Vita est Casina, vive Hodie: To Mor∣row's Life is too late, Live to Day: Feed on thy true daily Bread to Day, or to Morrow thou wilt dye Eternally. Post Mortem Aeternam nulla Voluptas. Ex∣pect not therefore, after thou hast eaten thy Morsel in wantonness, to have it too when there is need of it to refresh thee in thy Journey. Thus Men complain now-a-days of the hardness of the Times, not consi∣dering how they spend in a Day many times, in a Drunken Feast, what might naturally supply them
with sufficiency (as to the maintenance of their Bo∣dies in Health) for a Month. This is abusing, or ra∣ther a Fascination of Gods Blessings. Therefore (as One said, In this World is the Place of Mercy; in the Other, of Justice and Judgment: And, The Ee∣ginnings of Things are in our own Power, but the End in God's. And, He that considers what is past, may foresee what is to come. One scoffingly said to one that lost his Watch, or Horary Engine, Time will away, all the World cannot help it: So may it be said to the Fool, that lost his spiritual Instrument of dis∣cerning Time and Eternity. O Man! Provide Oyl and Treasures for Heaven before-hand; Trimmed Lamps without Oyl, are of no real Use. Tho' one of thy Feet may be already in the Grave of Hell, as being one that came when the Door of Mercy was shut; and tho' thou may'st be an old and reprebate Sinner, and yet wouldst now repent at the Twelfth Hour, after thou hast been working for thy Master the Devil (as being one of those that stood idle in the Market-place, expecting Work from the Lord of the Vineyard) tho' it be too late now; Make thy self a Friend in time, for old Friends and old Wine are best. Thou wilt perhaps hope, God will make thee his new Friend at the last Hour, but that is too late: For saith Christ, It is not mine to give you, to sit on my Right or Left Hand, but to whom it is prepared of my Fa∣ther, according to the condition of the Covenant: But whosoever comes to God in time, God can in no wise cast out: For such a one takes Heaven violently by Force, and (as one said) overcomes God, and claims Heaven as his Right, as tho' Heaven were his true native Home, and God his real Father, as indeed he is: Tho' it must be confest, Mans Fall made Heaven to become a Free Gift.
§. 5. The Seed sown at Death. SOme may object, If Man be a small Incarnation, wherein God was pleased to multiply himself; Or if Man be God's Off-spring and Essence, how can God pass Sentence upon his own Essence? Answ. Here lies the great Mystery: The Work of Eternity is the World not yet made, and yet ever made by Eterni∣ty: viz. This World was made in six Days, but the World for which this was made, will scarce be finish∣ed in less than Six thousand Mystical Days or Years. The Soul as to the stamp, mold, or eternal shape thereof, will not be finished till the death of the Bo∣dy: Even then the Signature of the Soul's Spirit, (or else of its Worm) will be charactered for Eter∣nity. Every wicked Soul is but an Embryo: And the Divine Child, or Pious Soul, is now a forming in the Womb of the outward Body, and not perfected in an holy Man till the fall of the Body. Therefore whatsoever God doth, it shall be for ever established by his Graver, the Spirit on the Souls Beast-Plate. Con∣sider his Work: For who can make straight that which he hath made crooked, by the Law which altereth not. And say not thou, What is the cause that the former Days in the outward Life, were better than these dark and gloomy Days nigh Deaths Door: For thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this: And the Day of Death (if the Soul be perfected in its formation) is better than the Day of the false Birth. Dici{que} beatus ante Obitum nm suprema{que} funera debet: No Man before Death should be accounted happy: This World is a wide Prison, and every Day is Execution Day.
§. 6. The Heavenly Feast stays for us. THe Apostate Soul is like the Viper, dying at the parturition of her young ones. But the Right Soul is perfected at the Death of the Body: Being formed a perfect Divine Man, whose Form is the Image of the Deity. Even then is the Marriage and full fruition of the Virgin of God, who is to be cloathed in fine Linnen clean and white, the Purity and Righteous∣ness of a holy Soul, as being her Delight and Orna∣ment: And therefore, O Man, be sure thou be rela∣ted by Affinity to the Great Messias, whose Bride will shortly make her self ready in the presence of God and the holy Angels: Blessed art thou that shalt be called to the Wedding Supper of the Lamb-like Prince of Inno∣cency: These Sayings are Faithful and Real: Not a Scene of an Imaginary Phantasie. God would have all to be saved: The Devil none: And so neither of them is a Respecter of Persons. The Reprobate wrongs himself, yet seems to do the wrathful Powers a kindness: Yet his kindness is no kindness: He is like one that throws Brine into the Sea: For Hell is never satisfied. Come therefore, O Man, to Hea∣ven, and there thou shalt be welcome: If thou art fairer than another, he shall not envy, but rejoyce at thy Beauty: God himself desires thy company, for there is a Superfluity of Dainties at his Feast: The Profit of the Holy Earth is for all: The King himself is served by the Fruits of Eden's Field. But if we speak properly, we must acknowledge God hath no loss by a Reprobate Soul, seeing he is Perfection it self: But the loss is thy own: Thou hast not cheat∣ed the Virgin, for she hath another appointed her up∣on thy Refusal: But thou hast fooled, deceived, and put a Cheat upon thy elf, and art fallen into the
Snare which thou hast prepared for another: And it is an ill Bird that defiles her own Nest. They use to say of a Dunkard, or some such luxurious Fellow, He doth no Hurt to any, but what he doth to himself: I pray who can trust such a  a harmless Man? He is the greatest Cheat of  who cheats himself: Seeking to undermine God and his Virgin. To be fore such a one (if he finds but opportunity) will prove false to his Neighbour also, and to the whole Creation. I love thee as my own Soul, (said a fat luxu∣rious Man to his Sweetheart.) Then you love me not as your Body (said she) or you love me not at all: For I see you love not your self, because you repent not of your sins. §. 7. Mans Self-Enjoyment Gods primary Glory. THus many a Soul thinks to advance himself, by a vain expectation of the Death of God, Christ, and the Soul's Spirit, whose Officer is like to tor∣ment him in a Fiery Lke. There was a rich thri∣ving Man, that had a Servant who thrived not at all, but was very Unfortunate in outward things: The Master indeed pitied him, because he proved honest in his place, and perhaps there was a vigilant Eye over him, that he could not cheat his Master: But his Master payed him the Arrears of his Wages, and turned him away from his Service, saying, While you thrive not your self, you cannot be profitable to another; and therefore you are no servant for me, and so God less you. This is the Case between God, the Master of the great humane Family, and us his Servants: Therefore every Man for his own Soul chiefly, and God for us all. And so where nothing is to be had, God loses his Right, as it were: Yet he is accidental∣ly glorisied by the Reprobate. Heaven is the true End of Man, or final Cause of the Soul: And if the
End be frustrated, the whole Work is in vain. It is the Glory of a King, and the Ornament of a Kingdom, that his Subjects are Populous and Vali∣ant; And Children are the Riches of a Parent: So Man attaining the  his Generation, becomes the Glory of God a his Coelestial Kingdom. But all is Vanity and a Frustration of the Right End, what∣ever excludes and vexeth the pure Spirit of Soul, and hinders him from reaching the scope of his Desire and Labour. It might be judged that he that adven∣tureth his best Jewel (his precious Life) in behalf of his Prince, is a Magnanimous Man: But as the Poet said, Vivere pro patriâ dulcius esse puto: So it is the case of the Soul: And it is very clear: For if the final Cause be marred or cut off, the whole Action is vain: As for instance: A Man whose House is on fire, and leaps into the Fire to save his Goods, spoils the End: And so doth a Thief that adventures his Life for the enjoyment of a sum of Money; for he disesteems the End, and undervalues it, in comparison of the Mens to preserve and promote the said End: The End of the Treasure stolen is to preserve Life: If therefore he haards his Life in the attaining of it, whe it might he preserved without such hazard, he is a Fool, and a vain Fellow. Just so is the Case of one that hazards his Soul in the attaining of some strange Lust, or supposed Means of promoting the well-being of the Soul: What is a House good for, if the End, which is Dwelling in it, be frustrated?  one that angleth with a Golden Hook, and  own Flesh; and rather than sleep in a whole , igatizeth his Soul.
§. 8. Spoil not the End for the Means. ONe feared to go on a Message to the Grand Vi∣zier, saying, He is so unconstant, he may take my Head off upon no occasion given: The Go∣vernour that sent him, said, I would he durst; I will have a thousand of his Mens Heads off in lieu of it: Yes, but I question said the Embassador whe∣ther any of them will sit my Shoulders. Thus may the Souls Spirit upbraid the Soul, when sent by him upon desperate, and unlawful hazarding of his Life. Take another Example or Comparison: A Disso∣lute Fellow under pretence of honouring his Prince, and wishing well to his Patriots, and Praying for the Health of his Friends, Drinks large Healths (as he calls them) as in remembrance of his said Friends, and to the Commemoration of their Pros∣perity. And what is all this for, but chiefly to gra∣tifie his greedy Belly tub which like a sink receive these Health-resisting Bowls, under pretence of Praying for the Health of another? But let any impartial Man judge; whether these impious pre∣tended Salutations, do add any thing to the Health or Happiness of him who is pretended to be the Sub∣ject of these flatteries: Nay, it is plain robbing of the King, and his Honour, and a diminishing of his Revenues. O Immortal Man, to thee I speak, and not to him that prefers Mortality to Eternal Life, Love Vertue, and her Gists, Long Life, Health, Peace, Plenty, Joy and Rest from Labour: Accept thou of the Fair Virgins Heavenly Balsom, where∣with she will so embalm thy Soul, that it shall ne∣ver turn to Putrefaction, but continue an Immortal Mummy for Gods use. Now it is well known,
that the Humane Body, while it is kept in Health and Fresh by the natural Balsom or Oil; the Tin∣cture of Life its natural Ferment: it is preserved free from Decay or Rottenness: For we well may see and observe, when the Oil is corrupted by the Impur ties of Vnus or some other anomalous means, the Body many times gradually begins to rot above the Earth. Live thou therefore Eternally O Humane Soul, lest thou become also Subject to such a Fate: And be thou Immortal: For there is no Profit to God in the spilling of thy Holy Blood, neither can they that go down into the Pit of Eternal Death, Praise and Celebrate his Blessed Name. §. 9. Seven Properties of a future Being. LAy therefore thy Hand upon thy Heart, O no∣ble Soul, and consider: For the choice lies at thy own Hands: Whether wilt thou choose to re∣possess thy Native Inheritance: Or like a Fool to become Surety for a Stranger, the Serpent or Worm who would invade thy proper Right: Consider what thou dost before thou sign the Bond, lest thou make a forfeiture of Heaven thy natural home, and so suffer thy Soul to be fined, and taken for a Pledge. For what will it profit thee, if thou shouldst gain the whole World; while thy Soul which should enjoy it, is amerced by a Mulct which never can be redeemed by any Ransom by the Law of the Solish Court? And so thou shalt look upon Hea∣ven with doleful Eyes, as a Prodigal that is become a Beggar, and begs a piece of Bread at the Door of his Fathers House, to which he was born Heir, now possessed by a Stranger. But perhaps thou mayest say, I have purchased a new Birth-right, the King∣dom
of Hell: Nay, Hell also spews thee out, as being thy sworn Enemy, and loaths thee as a false out coming Renegado or Traytor, aiming to be∣come Lord in the Kingdom whereunto thou wast not created. Whether wouldst thou choose to feed on the Tree of Eternal Life in Paradise? And to drink of the Living Fountains of Water, or to be confined in the barren Heath of the Abyss, where thou shalt be starved to Death? Or else thou shalt Eternally Vomit out thy own Blood and the Poyson (which thou didst swallow in this Life) in Ever∣lasting Pain and Sickness. And when thou art a∣bout to fill thy Belly, thy Enemy shall cast the Fu∣ry of his Wrath upon thee. Wilt thou refuse Rest after thy Travails, and a soft repose in the Beatisi∣cal Vision, and Divine Recreation and Heavenly Joy? And in stead thereof choose to sport with Hel∣lish Squibs in Hell-Fire with Evil Angels? Where thou shalt be terrified (as a feaverish Body) with broken Sleeps and frightful Dreams? And all this, for thy slothfulness in this Life: Because thou wouldst not Labour in Harvest, thou must want in the Eternal Winter: While thou madest as if thou ob∣servedst the Wind and the Clouds, for an excuse to thy Laziness, when the time of Sowing and Reaping was: Now therefore thou shalt neither Day nor Night see a sweet Repose of Sleep with thine Eyes. O Poor Prisoner, hard is thy Fate. Wilt thou refuse Fair Wisdom the Virgin for thy Consort? And choose to be a Fool, or else to know Pain opposed to Pleasure, and to be wise like God? Or to become a raging Bedlam whose Wheel of the inward Seuses wants Reason to guide it: Longing for strange things which are impossible to be attained. Whe∣ther wilt thou choose to be a Valiant Hero in Hea∣ven?
And a Conqueror of the World? Or to pine away the Remainer of the Days of thy Eternity as a wounded Souldier? Lurking in Holes from the noise of the Battel, for fear of thy Enemies who won the Field: And now a dreadful sound is in thy Ears, as of a Hound or Hellish Fiend pursuing thee Day and Night, and waiting to apprehend thee as a Catchpole by the Authority of Lucifer, who will deliver thee to the Judge and so to the Offi∣cer, who will do Execution upon thy cursed Body. O faint-hearted Coward: Now thy fears are in the way, and lay wait to seize upon thee. Wilt thou refuse the Bosom of thy chast Spouse, for the em∣braces of a Harlot? Wilt thou be the Devils Cata∣mite? Wilt thou loose thy beautiful Garments to sit in the Dust? Wilt thou refuse Divine Honour of a Prince in the Kingdom of Heaven? And choose to be hissed and mocked by them whom thou hast scorn∣ed and despised in this Life time? Wilt thou leap down into the Abyss and Hellish Fire, and there burn Eternally in the slame of aspiring self-love? Wilt thou cast thy self down from the Pinacle of thy false Imagination and Fancy by highmindedness and Pride? O stop the Carrcer of thy Mind, lest thou fare as Luciser doth. §. 10.  Described. O Heaven the Eternal source of all Joy! O Pa∣radise  Garden of Everlasting Delight How shall I describe thee? Even as the Holy Spirit worketh from Eternity to Eternity, and continual∣ly manifesteth the inite and number less Forms o the  Virgins of God: Just as the Earth produ∣ceth fair Forms of Plossoms, Herbs and Fruits, and
putteth them forth sometimes more fair, and ma∣nifesteth their Vertues more soveraign and power∣ful than at other times: And when one ariseth in the Essence, another falleth down: And there is a continual lasting uncessant Enjoyment and Labour. Thus likewise is the Paradisical blossoming in the Holy Bud of the Divine Pregnatress: Where the Plants of Holy Souls stand (as in a sweet odorise∣rous Meadow) by one another: And all is as a per∣petual Love-combate or Wrestling-delight: A blooming of fair and curious Colours, in the Beau∣ty of Gods Virgins: An Harmony of excellent Heart-chearing Musick from their sweet Voices: A pleasant ravishing Smell of Odorates in their Ho∣ly Breath: A continual pleasant taste of Love in their Divine Kisses: And a full Frnition of their Vertues, as being the Productions of the Blessed Deity in the pure Garden of Everlasting Pleasure, and Joy, The Prince of Salem had a fair Vineyard in the Fields of Eden: He set out the Vineyard unto Keepers of the Humane Race: Every one for the Fruits and Prosits thereof was to bring and pay a thou∣sand Pieces of Coelestial Gold: My Vineyard which is mine by free Gift is before me, saith the Virgin, the Companion of the Holy Soul: Thou O Price of Sa∣lem must have a thousand: And they that keep the Fruit thereof five hundred Pounds, or five Talents: Now O Man, dost thou know where to sind thy Souls Sa∣tisfaction? Beware of despising the means: A Ses∣vant being sorced to stay with a Master against his Will whom he loves nor, will never seek to please him: You shall never have any good of a Maid that is compelled to Marry against her Will: She will be but the more perverse, the more you endeavour to humour her. Have a Care lest thou negl thy
own Good: And when thou art well, hope not in vain for higher preferment, lest thou justle thy self out of all, and repent too late. A Hen or some o∣ther Fowl aiming at the End of Procreation by the impulse of the natural Spirit, counts it no toil to sit upon her Eggs a whole Month or more or less, and is willing to be confined without the Element of her Pleasure and Recreation. Mayest thou be as willing to promote the Glory of God, the End of thy Journey and Labour: which to promote is the right Heaven of Mans Soul: To which place O King of Heaven direct us all: Amen. CHAP. X. The Souls Transmigration. § 1. Christ the Lawful King. BEtter is a Poor and Wise Child, the innocent off∣spring of God, than an old and foolish King that tyrannizeth over the pure Seed, who will no more be admonished, as being Reprobate or past Reproof. For out of an infectious Prison or Dungeon of Dark∣ness he cometh to Reign, as being no lawful Heir, and not of the Right Line; He is an Usurper: Whereas also every Subject (the Faculties of his Mind) that is born in his Kingdom becomes Eternal Beggars. I considered all the Living which walk under the Sun of Time, with the second Child of Regeneration that shall stand up and sit in the Divine Throne Eternal∣ly in his stead. There is no end of all the People and Subjects of illegal Tyrants, even of all that have been before them in cifers Apostacy, whose Seed lives
in the Humane Generation. They also that succeed or come after either before or after the end of this World shall not rejoyce in Lucifer, or an Humane Usurper. This also is Vanity and Vexation of God's Holy Spirit. The Humane Commonwealth comes to Ruine under a Foolish Prince, even as the Feet stumble by the Intoxication of the Head. In the Day of Prosperity be joyful; and when things fadge well between thee and thy Virgin, let thy Heart be merry. But in the Day of Adversity, when thou art crossed in thy Desire or Love by the Sorceress, consider what thou art a doing. God also hath set the one over against the other, to the end that Man should find nothing after and Superior to the fair Virgin of God, worthy to be sought after. §. 2. His Right to Reign. THe Fire of Hell, and the Ocean-Womb of Eternity are good Servants, but bad Masters. The Virgin (it is true) should be Queen in the Hu∣mane Republick: And the Spirit of the Soul Vice∣Roy: But if Man inverteth the right Order, he himself must pay the Forfeiture or suffer the Penal∣ty: Yet the Rebel must have his due: And as the Proverb saith. He that cannot bear to be a Ser∣vant, let him be his own Servant. When thy Work is done, and the Crown obtain'd, then rest in Security; but wo to him that hath an ill Name in his Youth, He will be suspected by the Virgin: As having put the Crown of blooming Youth upon the Serpents Head. But if thou follow Vertue. thou mayest become the Head of all thy kindred, Therefore O Son of the Virgin, if thou seest the op∣pression of the Poor Spirit of the Soul in the Humane
Republick: Marvel not at the matter, and if thou be∣holdest a violent perverting of Justice and Judgment in the Soulish Province for a time, wonder not: For he that is higher than the proudest and highest Mind re∣gardeth: And there be higher than they: For the Spi∣rit though ost as a Servant walking a Foot in low place is higher than the Rebel Soul. O Man mark what I say: I the Preacher returned, and reflected upon all the Oppressions that are done under the Sun of this vain Light: And behold the Tears of such as were oppressed, and the sighing of the Spirit of the Soul, and they had no Comforter. And on the side of the Soul, there Oppressour, there was Power, (for there was no Com∣pulsion to draw him to Sin against his Will,) but he would not open his Ear of Compassion. Where∣fore I praised the Dead, that are already Dead, even the Mortal Animals, more then the Living that are yet alive for a time, but are like to dye the Eternal Death. Yea, better is he then both they which have not yet been, who hath not seen the Evil that is done under ehe Sun of Time and Eternity: An Embryo is more happy than the false Birth. Yea an Eu∣nuch is happier than he that is joyned to the Witch like Traduction of a false Will, which rebelleth against the Will of the Deity. All these things have I seen in the Days of my Conversation in the Vani∣ty: There is a Just one, the Spirit, that perishe; (or rather vanishes) in his Righteousness. And there is a wicked one, the false Mind, who prolongeth his Life of Eternity in his wickedness, and yet would willing∣ly Dye, but shall not find Death.
§. 3. False Judgment. THis also have I seen and applied my Heart to eve∣ry Work that is done under both Suns, there is a Time wherein one Ruleth over another (as the Soul ove the Spirit) to his own Eternal Hurt. And so I saw the wicked buried in the Abyss, who had come and gone from the Place of the Holy by his Apo∣sacy: And they were forgotten in the Holy City where they had done any good, for their good Works did not follow them. This is a great Vanity. Because Sentence against an evil Work is not executed speedily (for the Spirit of the Soul or Conscience hath not Power to pronounce it till the Day of Death) therefore the Heart of the Soul, Son of the Humane Root is fully set upon mischief, by plotting against his own Judge, and working wickedness against God's Friend. But know this though a Sinner do evil an hundred times, and the Days of his Eternity be prolonged in Pain and Horrour. Yet surely I know that it shall be well with the Spirit of the Soul that fears to Sin against God's Law, and to the Soul that consents to the Spirit and fears before him: And so all is well that ends well. But it shall not be well with the Wicked, neither shall he prolong his Days of Vanity in this inferiour World, which are as a Shadow, and whose Spirit will vanish as an Image in a Looking-glass, because he feareth not God, and to offend his Virgin. There is a Vanity which is done upon the Earth of Humanity, that there be Just men, unto whom (if they Apostatize) it happens ac∣cording to the Work of the Wicked: And if the Fa∣ther hath eaten sower Grapes, the Child of this Apostate, as by Transmigration of or into an un∣lucky
off-spring,) his Teeth shall be set on Edge: Again there be wicked ones to whom (if they retract) it happens according to the Work of the Righteous, I said, that this is also the result of Vanity. §. 4. Retaliation. THe Soul that diggeth a Pit for the pure Spirit of the Soul shall fall himself into it: And who∣so breaks an Hedge the Fence betwixt the two Pro∣perties, a Diabolical Serpent shall sting and bite him. Whoso removeth Stones or the true Land-mark shall be hurt therewith, and the building of his false Imagi∣nation shall fall upon him: And he that cleaveth the Pillars of Heaven shall be endangered thereby. If the Iron be blunt and there be no Stone to what the Edge, because it is lost by Negligence, then thou must put more Strength in the Gate of Purgatory in this Life, but Wisdom (if in time she had been embraced) would have directed thee. Surely the Serpent will bite without Inchantment: And a Babler or false Accuser of the Spirit of the Soul is no better. The Tongue will break a Bone: Yet it is the best weapon of De∣fence, if skilfully handled. The Words of a Wise Man is Gracious, and refresh the Spirit of the Soul with his good News, and Story of his Travels and escape in Shipwrack; but the Self-accusation of a Fool will condemn and swallow up himself in the Abyss. He needs no Bell at his Neck: His Bolt is soon shot. The beginning of the Words of his Mouth con∣tradicting his Conscience is Foolishness: And the end of his talk at the Day of Judgment is Mischief and Madness and an eternal Frenzy. Curse not there∣fore the King O Man, no not in thy thought: Speak not reproachfully against the Princely Spirit in the Bed-Chamber
of thy Whorish Companion: For the An∣gel-Guardians of the Air shall carry the Voice: And the winged Cherub shall discover the High-Treason. For Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft: And as a Witch is a Rebel in Physicks: So (reversing the Point) a Rebel is a Witch in the spiritual Poli∣ticks. §. 5. The Souls Metamorphosis. ALso I said in mine Heart concerning the State of the Sons of Men, that God might manifest them, and they may see that they themselves are of a Bestial Shape in the inward Signature, except they be new-born in the right Humane Shape. For that which befalleth Men, befalleth the outward Animals: Even one thing befalleth them, as the one dieth the Ex∣ternal Death so doth the other: Yea they have all one Breath drawn from the Airs Power: So that a Man hath no preheminence above a Beast, for all is Vanity, which is in the outward Love, and vanisheth as a Shadow. All Animals, Humane and Bestial, Sensi∣tive and Rational go unto one Place, the Grave of the four Elements, the Womb of their first Mo∣ther which conceived them swallows them again: All are of the Dust, or of the hoil of Atoms, and all turn into the same Chaos again. Now (observe this Mystical Ancient Philosophical Point) who knoweth the noble Soul or Spirit of a Right Humane Being that goeth upward into his own Heaven, and the Spirit of the Bestial Man by the Transmigration of his Soul into an Eternal Brute, (or rather by the Metamorphosis thereof into a degenerated Viper or Toad, or other sensual Animal, according as his Soul was inclined in its Nature in this Life)
that goeth downward into the Opacious Cave of the gross dark Earth in the bottomless Abyss This is not set down here to reproach Mankind, but be∣cause it is certainly known in the Light of the Eter∣nal Sun: O Man consider thy self here. §. 6. Work in Time. CAst thy Bread into a Ship floating upon the Wa∣ters of thy Eternal Ocean, as Treasures laid up in Heaven, and thou shdt find it after many Days in Eternity. Give a Portion to seven; thy seven Pro∣perties, and also to the Eighth hidden in the seven the beginning of a new Harmony: For thou knowest not what evil may be hereafter in thy Humane Earth. If the Clouds of blessing be full of Rain and Heavenly Dew, they empty themselves upon the Earth of Man: And if the Humane Tree falleth by Ballance toward the pleasant South or toward the Grim North, in the Place where the Tree falleth, there it shall be to all E∣ternity. He that observeth the Mystical Original of the Holy Wind or Spirit or Breath of God (think∣ing God will come by force into his Heart to com∣pel him to come to Heaven) shall not sow Divine Seed: And he that regardeth the Clouds of Darkness, (thinking the Time of the spiritual Harvest is not yet come) shall not reap a spiritual Crop. As thou knowest not what is the way of the Spirit of the Soul, nor how the Bones do grow in the Womb of the Virgin that is with Child of the Regenerated Birth: Fven so God thou knowest not the Works of who maketh all. In the Morning of thy Youth betimes while it is called to Day sow the blessed Seed, and in the cool of the Evening-Gale of God's pure Breath withhold not thine Hand: And commit the Improvement to God
by Resignation. For thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or that: Or whether they both shall be alike good. §. 7. Before the Evil Days come. REmember therefore (O Man) thy Creator and Father in the Days of thy renovated Youth: Think of the Ancient of Days in the beginning of thy New Regeneration: And he will prolong thy Eternal Days, call to mind thy Everlasting State, before the evil Days come, in which thou shalt say, I have to Pleasure in them. If thou Love God and the Virgin of Eternal Youth, and perpetual Beau∣ty, the Evil Days or Years of Sorrow will never draw nigh, or overtake thee, or if they come they shall not continue: For an Everlasting Calm will come after a Storm of true Repentance. There∣fore remember the kindness of her Youth, and the Love of thy Spouse, while the Sun of the Eternal Spirit of the Soul, or the Mind of the Affections of the A∣stral Nature be not clouded in blindness, nor the Clouds of Darkness return after the Shower of a Purgatory in this Life. In the Day when the Keep∣ers of the Humane House and the Maintainers of the Soulish Family tremble and quake, for Rottenness in their Bones, and the strong Men that carry Pro∣vision to the Mill shall bow themselves under their burden. And the Milstones cease, because they are worn ut, and the sound of the Mill is low; and the Voice that calleth to Repentance is not audible: And the Sentinels that keep Watch and Ward at the Windows of true Light be darkned and blind∣ed by false Phantasie: And so cannot prevent the Invasion of the Whores Brats, which will
seize upon the Castle. And the Door of the Lips shall be shut in the Streets of the little City, and will not be opened to the cries of the miserable Beggar and Wanderer, and yet are open from within to utter Blasphemies: And Self-accusati∣ons in Despair. And he shall rise up as being frighted at the noise and terrour of his own Evil Con∣science: Because he would not in Time attend to the Crowing of Aurora's Bird. And the Daugh∣ters of Musick shall be brought low, that they can∣not hear the Voice of their chief Musician. §. 8. Before a second Apostacy. ALso when they shall be afraid of an high Preci∣pice, on the brink of the great Abyss, or Depth of Depths; And a panick fear shall seiz upon them in the way of their Wandring. And the Almond-Tree of Fading Youth shall flourish in its last Leaves ready to fall. And the Grashoppers singing which calls them to labour in the Harvest, shall be a tedious Note: And he that blows with the Bellows upon the Fire of Life, shall spoil them by unstopping them; or fit them for kindling the Eternal Fire of a false Passio∣nate Love. And Desire of Generation in the Virgins Love, shall fail: Because Man leaves this Country of his Pilgrimage, and seeks to wander to his long home, but cannot find it, except in the Grave of Silence and Darkness. And his Oil in his Lamp is wasted in his Virgins Hand, which should shew him the way whi∣ther he should go. And the Mourners, the Virgin and his good Genius, and the Spirit of the Soul, go cloa∣thed in black about the Streets of his little City: And the Conscience rings a sad and doleful Passing Bell. Or ver the silver Cord be loosed from the Pitcher (which
should draw Water out of the Fountain of the holy Blood) be cracked: Which Pitcher, tho' it went oft to the Well of Salvation, yet comes home broken at last by Negligence: Or the Wheel of the circular mo∣tion of the incorrupted Juice, be discompacted by Retroversion at the Cistern of Living Water. Or the Golden Candlestick of a Pyramid-Figure, be broken: Or the Sieve of Separation of the impure Recre∣ments from the pure parts, be crushed: Or the Sink of the Hellish Fundament be stoppd, whereby the whore House becomes an Infectious Jakes. Thn shall this confused Chaos, without form, and void, return to the Womb of the Earthly Mother as it was: And the Spirit of the Soul shall return to God that gave it, to re∣ceive a Commission to apprehend the Soul, and the Soul shall go back to the Original Matrix of its own Worm. Vanity of Eternal Vanities, (saith the Im∣mortal Preacher:) All the Actions, and Qualities, and Passions in the dark World, is Vanity, and the real Scene of a false Phantasie in the insinite Abyss. O Man, beware of thy self: This Abyss is the cause of thine own Being. Be therefore advised, O Man: Of Searching the Original Books of Science falsely so called, (i. e.) vain Philosophy, of which there is no end: And too much study therein is a weariness of the Soul. §. 9. No Redemption out of Hell. KNow this, O Man, if thou doubtest whether of the Two Ways thou oughtest to choose, and thou perhaps lightest on the wrong, and so comest to a bad Misfortune; then thou wilt say, I intended to go the other way once: When thou art already come into the irrevocable Pit. Now (I say) know thou therefore what was the cause of this; Because
thou by some evil Imagination a little before, didst stop the Ear of the Spirit of the Soul, which only is capable to hear the Voice of Fair Wisdom, the Pure Virgin. Tho' the Virgin did at that Instant direct thee aright, at the Parting or Turning of the Two Ways, yet thou hadst not an Ear to hear her, who cried behind thee in the Wilderness, This is the Way, walk in it. When thou shalt come to be hid from the pre∣sence of thy dear Relations, and banished as a Va∣gabond from thy right Native Country, this may be thy Note, Ah Wretch that I am! How am I become a Wanderer and Fugitive, or Renegado! Why can∣cannot I find my dearly Beloved whom I long after? Must this be my Eternal Work and Labour, to long uncessatly after the end of my Journey, and yet ne∣ver find the true Joy of my Soul, and Refreshment of my Spirit? O Almighty Creator of us all, canst thou not break forth to me, tho' I cannot rush for∣ward to thee? For I know thou bearest no malice to∣wards me: It is a thing inferiour to the Nobility of thy Nature, to bear a grudge to a Delinquent, and that Eternally. O must I continue for ever in this Labyinth, seeking my Beloved, and nver ejoy the Fruit of my  What prsit is in my mrtal Blood? Those that go  into the  cannot add to thy Praise. The Answer from God wi be, Those that would come from thence , cannot: And they that woud go from hence thither, cannot , so as to etch out a Captive thence, ad redeem him, This is thy woful Work and Wages to Eternity.
§. 10. Conclusion. LEt us hear the Conclusion of the whole System: Fear God: Fear to break his Law: Which Law is Three-fold in the Root, and Seven-fold in the Bran∣ches, viz. Love God above all: And the Virgin as thy self, as being thy own Flesh and Blood: She it is whom God hath appointed to preserve thy Seven Proper∣ties in an Harmony of Joy, which Joy thou art bound to be Eternally affected with: For this is the Whole Du∣ty of Man. But feed not on the false Mandrake-Tree of the Hellish Jezebel's Property, which is Pain op∣posing Pleasure, by vertue of her Baneful Breath. But if thou art one that meanest (thinking thou mayst be able (as a Self-conceited God) to alter the Fundamental Constitution and Law of the Coelestial Realm, by calling Good Evil, and commanding Pain to be Pleasure, or the contrary: Thou must first begin thy self: That is, A King or Law-giver ought to prescribe the same Law to his Subjects, which he himself is willing to keep: As Gods Law is to promote the heavenly Joy; so he himself doth so: But if thou art minded to frame a tormenting Engine, a self-invented Idol for others; If thou de∣sirest as a pecullar God, to correct Gods work, and make a new Repugnant Law; that is, Let the sight∣ing Properties be thy right Food; or let the Hellish Pain be promoted; then thou must begin and do so thy self, and so thou shalt become a God in the dark World, and thou shalt sit in a Throne of Anguish, as being inspired by a malignant Blast from Hell, by the Whore's side, in the Chamber of Contagious and Fiery Infection without end, and all Creatures shall wonder at thy ever-abiding the Flame of Consum∣ption
never to be consumed, and at thy Necroman∣tick Fabrick, never to be blown up by thy self-produ∣ced Powder-Plot. For God will bring every Thought, Word, and Deed to Judgment, to be weighed in the Ballance of his Sanctuary, by the motion of the Se∣ven Wheels; and every secret thing must be tried in the Eternal Fire, which discovers the inward Impu∣rities, that it may be known whether it be good, or whe∣ther it be evil; that is, Whether the Good or Evil Property be predominant in moving the Souls Wheel Backward or Forward. As Gods Law was in the Beginning, So it is now, and ever shall be: World without End, Amen. FINIS.
