W3237 12592170 63979
Wittie APOPHTHEGMES of K Iames K Charles E of Worcest Lo Bacon & Sr Tho. More Reuiued
WITTY Apophthegms DELIVERED At Several Times, and upon Several Occasions, BY King James, King Charls, The Marquess of Worcester, Francis Lord Bacon, and Sir Thomas Moor. Collected and Revised. LONDON, Printed by W. R. for Matthew Smelt, and are to be sold at his Shop, next to the Castle, near Meor∣gate, 1669.
TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, HEre is presented to thy View, the time∣ly fruit of those once Fa∣mous Monarchs, and Peers of this Realm, whose yet living Fame for Majestick Wisdom and high Discretion, is a∣ble still to gain them life and glory, maugre all the
dirt, and filth, which this ungrateful Age hath flung both upon their Persons and works. I should but hold a Candle to the Sun, if I should go about to say any thing of their excel∣lent use and worth: only thus much I assure thee, that these Apophthegms, which for the singular Wisdom that is in them are worthy of Record, are collected with exact∣ness and choice, and now published for the profit
and delight of all those that are willing to search into this store-house of Wit and Wisdom. Vale.
ROYAL APOPHTHEGMS OF K. IAMES. 1. THat it is a Maxim in the Romish Religion, declared by most of their own wri∣ters, that the Pope may if he will, at one Mass free all the souls out of Purgatory: his Majesties inference on this Position was, with bnegation of the Popes charity, and admiration of his unparalelled cruelty, that being granted, to have a power so to do, dot not nor may not apply his will unto it. 2. That the wearing of Leeks on Saint Davids day by the Welshmen, was a good, honourable, and commen∣dable
fashion, seeing that all memora∣ble Acts have by the Agents something worn for distinction, and also to pre∣serve the memory thereof unto posteri∣ty: even as the Passeover was to the Jews, that when their children should ask why they were girded with staves in their hands, they might shew them the cause; so the Welshmen in comme∣moration of the great fight by the black Prince of Wales, do wear Leeks as ther chosen Ensign. 3. Doctor Baily holding conference with the King touching the Popes Ar∣rogancy, alluding to Christs answer to his Apostles; He that desires to bear Rule, let him be the least amongst you, and therefore the Pope doth some∣times colourably term himself servant of servants: to which the King reply∣ed, that by such an inference he could prove the Pope to be humbly minded, to which the Doctour answered, that he did not alwayes so account himself, save only when he had purpose to de∣ceive, otherwise he esteemed himself Lord of Lords. His Majesties determination was, that the Popes calling him∣self servant of servants, was rather in a more strict and peculiar sense, as that
he was a servant of his Church, and so by consequence, the servant of the ser∣vants of God, but towards all other, Lord of Lords; so likewise to be a pro∣fessed Catholick, is to be a true Chri∣stian, but to be a Roman Catholick is it, which marreth the matter. 4. That whereas our Saviour saith it is as easie for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, as for a rich man to en∣ter into the Kingdome of heaven, the Pope perverteth that saying, for that none shall have no pardons, but such as pay for them: so consequenly the rich are more easie to enter into heaven then the poore, because the one can have pardons when he will, but the other is not able to purchase it, and thereupon his Majesty concluded the Pope to be justly called a Merchant of mens souls, as is set forth in the 18. of the Revelation. 5. His Majesty observed a quaint inter∣rogatory put to a jealous Lover, out of that famous Comedy of Ignoramus, the which his Majesty highly commended, viz. whether he desired most, or ra∣ther to be termed Publius Cornelius, or Cornelius Tacitus; in further approbati∣on of which Comedy, besides in op∣position and dislike of another Come∣dy
performed and acted before his Ma∣jesty by the Scholars of the University of Oxford, that as in Cambridge one Sleep made him wake; so in Oxford, one Wake made him sleep. 6. That Tobacco was the lively image & pattern of hell, for that it had by al∣lusion in it all the parts and vices of the world wherby hell may be gained; to wit first it was a smoak, so are the vanities of this world. Secondly, it delighteth them who take it, so do the pleasures of the world delight the men of the world. Thirdly, it maketh men drun∣ken, and light in the head; so do the vanities of the world, men are drun∣ken therewith. Fourthly, he that ta∣keth Tobacco, saith he cannot leave it, it doth bewitch him: even so the plea∣sures of the world make men loath to leave them, they are for the most part so inchanted with them: and further, besides all this, it is like hell in the very substance of it; for it is a stinking loath∣som thing, and so is hell: and further, his Majesty professed, that were he to invite the Devil to a dinner, he should have these three dishes. 1. a Pig, 2. a Pole of Ling, and Mustard, and 3. a pipe of Tobacco for digestare.
7. That he had heard an old Mini∣ster say, touching conformity, that it would be a scandal for him to conform, and yet will allow that his son may do it, as if he living a fool all his life, desi∣red so to die. 8. Heaven is governed by order, and all good Angels there; nay, hell it self could not well subsist without some or∣der, and the very devils are divided in∣to Legions, and have their Captains. How can any Society then upon earth subsist without order or degrees? 9. That the often mentioning of A∣braham, Isaac and Jacob in the Scripture, is to signifie that we should celebrate the memory of good men above others, and of all men above beasts. 10. That all humane Laws cannot be perfect, but that some must rest in the discretion of the Judge, al∣though an innocent man do perish thereby: as his Majesty further con∣ceived, that a Jury may cast upon evi∣dence, and a Judge may give a just sen∣tence, yet the party innocent. 11. We should not be like the Puritans in our prayers, who speak to God, as to their fellows, and sit at Christs Ta∣ble, as with their companions. Let us
joyn reverence with the sweet confi∣dence we have in Gods love. 12. That no man can thrive that keepeth a whore at Rack and Manger, to sit openly with justification. That to rove is proper to expresse the action of the body, but to rave is an action of the mind. 13. His Majesty would not admit publick, disputation betwixt twelve Papists, and twelve Protestants, him∣self being chosen umpire, because he might lose more, that would not be satisfied, then he could win, although the Papists side were convicted: and further his Majesty declared, that in 88, he almost converted a Papist, un∣till my new convert heard of the Spa∣nish Invasion. 14. Vertue is easier then vice, or the essential difference betwixt vice and vertue, is truth and falshood; and it is easier and lesse pas to tell truth then a lye, and for vices of the senses custom is all in all; for to one that hath lived honestly, it is as much shame to com∣mit sin, as for another to abstain. 15. The art of Physicians is very im∣perfect, for I doubt not but for every disease, there is in nature a several sim∣ple,
if they could find it out, so that these compounds do rather shew their ignorance then their knowledge. 16. The Popish Religion is like ∣mers Iliads of the siege of Troy, or Vir∣gils Aene des of the beginning of Rome, both of them had a foundation of truth, so had the Papists of the Bible, but they have all added so much, that the first truth is almost lost. 17. That Monarchicall Government by Secular Kings and Priests, is the only Ordinance of God, and the Republick only a depraved institution of man for depraved ends, as appears manifestly by the whole current of Scripture, even from Adam to the Primitive Church after Christ. 18. A Preacher preaching before his Majesty on the 29. Psalm, that I offend not in my tongue, he could have wished might have bin before so many women, because they are most unruly therein. 19. That there were many wayes to find out truth besides evidence of reall witnesse, as it was in the businesse of Mr. Haddock, who was reputed good, yet was found at last a great oflender, whereupon his Majesty replyed, the case in him was not after his meaning,
and thereupon insisted further to exem∣plifie his offence, confessing the same to be high & capital in respect of God and man, meaning Mr. Haddock, who preach∣ed in his sleep, that his Majesty did God and the Countrey good service, in discovering that man. 2. That his pra∣ctice was diabolical & a new way to sin, that his Majesty never heard of before. 3. That he did therein practice against God himself, in that he did endeavour to make his own inventions as the ora∣cle of God, and by that means to bind mens consciences thereto to believe. 4. That his Majesty discovered him by his own papers and notes which were brought unto the King, the which Mr. Haddock confessed to be his own hand∣writing, and the notes of his Sermon which men say he preached in his sleep, but for answer thereunto, said he only noted his Sermons first in writing, and so in the night dreamed thereof, and of the same thing that he had penned be∣fore, but by his answer his Majesty con∣vinced him upon his own experience concerning dreams and visions in the night, that things studied or mentioned in the day time may be dreamed of in the night, but always irregularly, with∣out
order, but not as his Sermons were, both good and learned, as in particular in that very Sermon which he preached before his Majesty in his sleep, concern∣in Davids waters, Psalm 69. where in he treated. 1. physically, then theologically, which is not usual in dreams so to do. 5. That Mr. Haddocks sin being granted for liberty, and good, then would all sinnes bee protected and allowed, as blasphemy against God, Trea∣son against the King, slander against any man; and at last all defended un∣der colour of being asleep: and further his Majesty declared his opinion, that the reason that moved the aforesaid Mr. Haddock to put in practice his prea∣ching in his sleep did proceed from two natural infirmities, to which he was subject, the one was stammering in speech, so finding himself more ready to speak being quiet in his bed, and his eyes shut from any object to trouble his mind, he could utter himself more per∣fectly. The second reason was his pra∣ctice to talk in his sleep: these two as the King conceived, put him on to that soul practise and illusion of Sa∣thans. 20. The King professed, that he
would chuse rather to turn Turk, then in some fables to believe Bollarmine: and further declared on this subject, that miracles, as now used and maintained amongst the Papists, to the end to con∣firm a false belief on Saints, according as at first Christ used miracles to cause and confirm a true belief on himself, as is further declared in this story of a popish miracle. In Naples, one of the chief Cities in Italy, in a time of a famous siege which it endured, the Viceroy thereof made a severe order, wherein it was death for any man above and under such an age to walk without a sword in any parts throughout the City, which not long time had passed before it hap∣pened, that as himself and train was ri∣ding through the streets to see how well this order was put in executi∣on, that he espied a Gentleman with∣out a sword, which being brought be∣fore him the order was read, and die he must for contempt, and accordng to the order he was to be hanged upon the next sign post: the Gentleman pleaded several things in his own behalf, which were availing, and seeing he must die, desired this favour of the Viceroy, that
he might not die so ignominious a death as to be hanged, but that as he was a Gentleman, so he might die like a Gentleman, & therefore did desire hat the next Gentleman that past by, with his sword might run him through, which request being so reasonable, the Viceroy could not in civility deny him, and so prorogued the execution till the next came, which was to do the busi∣nesse, which was not long before one appeared, and exactly qualied for the business., Now you must take notice, that this man that came on, had nly come from a gaming house, imomach that he had lost all, even the very ade of his sword, and in regard of that severe order dst not go home, untill a woodden one was fied to ast and bard; so being stopt, the dying Gentlemans reqst was said opn unto him, which knowing his own ffici∣ency for that , so starled him, that he fained and took on  terms as these, What make a common Execu∣tioner of me? what, stun my bod to Eternity? with  like, w all proving   he was hard prest to it,    Viceroy, and the dying Gentleman, he waved all fur∣ther
excuses, and prepared himself to the work, and so putting off his loose garments, he began his work, with a prayer to this effect, O Lord God, which seest all the transactions here below, judge I pray thee the right of those that suffer wrong, and in an especial manner grant, that if this man here ought not to dye, may this my sword be turned into wood, so plucking it forth, and it being accordingly as we mentioned before, the dying Gentleman was relea∣sed with abundance of joy: the wood∣den sword was carried with much so∣lemnity, and hung up in the Cathe∣dral Church, as a true link to the chain of Popish miracles. 22. Let no man think that he may frame and make his wife as he pleaseth, that deceived Solomon, the wisest King that ever was. 23. That his Majesty confested, that he read more Popish books than Prote∣stant, and from thence findeth matter to confirm him in the Protestant Reli∣gion: and he farther related, that he stiled a book once being sent him by the name of Melchisedeck, being without beginning or ending. 24. That many learned writers have
recorded things for truth, which ex∣perience hath falsified: as for instance, his Majesty gave his own experience touching the worms found in a Stags head, which are reported to dy, if put in∣to water, but will live in wine, the which being tryed, they live equally in both. 25. If the Pope may erre as a man, but not as a Pope, I would know why the Pope doth not instruct or reform the man, or wherefore the man doth not require the Popes instruction. 26. Not only the deliverance of the Jews till they came to the Land of pro∣mise, but even their daily preservation was miraculous; for there was never a∣ny noted plague in Jerusalem, though it stood in a hot Climate, which had it been, would have endangered the whole Nation, it being to assemble thither twice every year of necessity. 27. That to have any imployment in any Republick in that State is dange∣rous, for do he well or ill, he is sure to rue it, and he speedeth best that doth worst, like a Scottish Tale, I have heard of one that never sped well amongst the Lawyers when he had a good cause, be∣cause he then least suspected it, & the o∣ther side bribed and countermanded, &
so the greatest carried it for the most part, even so in Republicks. 28 That a Germane was naturally most constant to himself, for although he could well fashion himself to any Countrey he travelled unto, yet return∣ing home to his own, he would ap∣pear to any mans judgment, nothing changed from the manner and condi∣tion of his own Nation, and so in him is most truly fulfilled this saying, That the Heathen change not, but all persons and things here below are subject to change, but with the English or any other Nation, it is otherwise; nay, farther on this sub∣ject, his Majesty said, that a Frenchman though never so grave and sober of countenance, yet one time or other would have his frisk of vanity. 29. That he is not of opinion, that all speeches in Scripture, touching beasts or sowls, by allegory, doth agree with the proper and peculiar nature of them, as of that, Be nise as Serpents, or that comparison of the Ostrich, that seem∣eth to neglect her young by leaving her eggs in the dust, which is not the proper nature of them, as hath been approved by Barbary Merchants, that have seen them, but itseems so outward∣ly,
because she hideth her eggs in the sand, and so removeth a little from them, but for no other end, but to pro∣tect them, that at the time of need, and in the hatching to break the shell, which of it self cannot. 30. Sir Francis Kinaston by experience falsified the Alchimist report, that a hen being fed for certain days with gold, be∣ginning when Sol was in Leo, should be coverted into gold, and should lay golden eggs, which beng tryed, was no such thing, but became indeed very'sat; his Majesties conceit thereupon was, that surely somewhat was omitted in Sir. Francis experiment, to wit, he want∣ed faith to believe, as himself did always in the like, or such matters, but one thing more might have been added more amply to satisfie the experiment;  the Cock had been first fed with gold, and afterwards have trodden the hen, might happily have succeeded the better. 31. That upon report made to his Majesty of a Goose that loved a man, that it would never be from him, whereso∣ever he went, and upon occasion would guard him from offence, whereupon his Majesty remembred the Goose of the
Capitol; and further he said, he thought it as easie to prove the deceit of the aforesaid Goose from that Goose of the Capitol, as the Heralds now adayes for gain do prove the deceit of the Gentlemen of these times. 32. Whether boldness or bashful∣ness did soonest prevail in Court? his Majesties opinion was, that bashfulness did, alluding to the Lord Duke of Buck∣ingham, who at his first coming to Court, exceeded in bashfulness, and when his Majesty had cast his eye upon him, the Lord of Arundel being asked by his Majesty what he thought of him, he an∣swered, that his blushing bashfulness was such, as he thought he would do but little good in Court favours. 33. That if there were no other quar∣rel between the Papists and the Proe∣stants, but the number of Sacraments he himself would be a Papist: for he held it not worth the quarrelling, as appear∣ed by a Tale of two friends in Scotland, being great in friendship, and in their cups falling out about that subject, the one a great Papist, and the other a Pro∣testant, so they fought and were both slain: a third said, before he would have lost his life in that quarrel he would have divided the seven into three and
twenty & half to end that controversie. 34. That he would never use any o∣ther Argument to convince the Papists of their opinion of Miracles, but by their own Doctrine, whereunto most of their miracles are altogether repug∣nant: as for example, a fable they have that the picture of our Lady should stir; their Doctrine is, that these images are but Representative, now what dispro∣portion appeareth between their opini∣on and their Doctrine? 35. God is never better honoured, than in giving him true worship: the King at that time declared himself resolved alwayes to kneel at the Sacra∣ment, and that for to testifie his humi∣lity towards God, being a King, and the rather for example sake to others that are set under him, he said he would not have willingly a gout in the knee, alluding to Doctor Lawds Sermon on that subject a little before, and his Ma∣jesty confessed the gout of the knee very troublesom, and that by a particular experiment of his own upon an ac∣cidental hurt, which he received on his foot at New-Market, being to receive the holy Communion on Christmas-day fol∣lowing, and resolved to take the same
kneeling as aforesaid, provoked his whole body into a very great sweat, and anguish, and therefore conclu∣ded the gout in the knee to be a main impediment for sacred duties; and fur∣ther said he, Shall we not exceed the Turks, who in their false worship, do fall down flat on their faces, rise often in the night to perform their false wor∣ship? and this they are injoyned to do, or otherwise they account themselves damned. 36. That it was strange to look into the life of Henry the eighth, how like an Epicure he lived. It was once de∣manded by King Henry the eighth, of one, what he might do to be saved? who answered, that he had no cause to fear, having lived so mighty a King, and done so many worthy acts in his life time: but oh, said he, I have lived too like a King, which King James inferred was rather like no King; for the office of a King is to do justice and equity, but he only served his sensuality like a beast. 37. No Country can be called rich, wherein there is war, as in the low Countries, there is much money, but the Souldiers have it in pay from the
Governours, the Boors have it for vi∣ctuals of the Souldiers, the Governors have it from them again in Taxes, so there is no center, no honour. 38. That it hath like operation to make women learned, and to make fox∣es tame, which teacheth them only to steal more cunningly, the possibility is not equal, for where it doth one good, it doth twenty harm. 39. On an espousal of marriage, his Majesty let all this silver saying, that Parents might forbid their children an unfit match, but they may not force their consent to a fit. 40. The Devil alwayes avoids the mean, and waits upon extremity: so hath he alwayes sought to delude the world betwixt Atheism and Supersti∣tion. On extremity of war, his Ma∣jesty further observed, that no man gains by war, but he that hath not wherewith to live in peace. 41. All extremities come round to one end, the simple obedience of the Papists, and the non-obedience of the Pritans, the one bred confusion, the other ignorance and security. 42. There was a politick Sermon,
that had no divinity in it that was prea∣ched before K. James, the King as he came forth, said to Bishop Andrews, call you this a Sermon? The Bishop answered, & it may please your Majesty, by a cha∣ritable construction it may be a sermon 43. Bishop Andrews was asked by King James at the first coming over of the Bishop of Spalato, whether he were a Protestant or no: he answered, truly I know not, but he is a detestant of di∣vers opinions of Rome. 44. An ill name may be free from dishonesty, but not from some folly, we should not only be free from  but from suspition; for it is not enough to be well lived, but well reported, and oftentimes weighty matters, are as much coloured by reputation, as sub∣stance. 45. Misfortunes are not acceptable in any kind, yet those are endured with most ease, that come rather by destiny than deserving. 46. Cresus said to Cambyses, that peace was better than war, because in peace the sons did bury their fathers, but in wars, the fathers did bury their sons. 47. Justice should be blind and friend∣less; it is not by it, that those that
be in authority should reward their friends, or cross their enemies. 48. Cato Major was wont to say, that wise men learned more by fools, than fools by wise men, as appears by this following example: a certain Duke kept a fool, the Duke falling sick of a quar∣tane ague, it in a short time came to pass, that the distemper grew to that height, that his Physicians gave it forth that nothing would cure him of that malady, but a great fright, which thing coming to the fools ear, he waited an opportunity to effect a cure for the Duke, which he thus brought about, taking notice in what part of his gar∣den he used frequently to walk in near a River, he got himself into a hollow ree near hand, and when the Duke was ast by him, he rusheth forth, & thrusts im into the river, & calls out to those that waited aloof off, look to your Duke, or he will be drown'd else, so they un with all speed, & pluckt him forth, nd in two or three dayes, the Duke was perfectly recovered, the fool absents imself, for fear, but after a years absence eturns to Court, where being brought efore the Duke, the Duke aggra∣vates
his fault to him, and told him, that on the morrow he should dye for it; the fool replyed, that he thought the Duke no harm by it, and many words to the like purpose; but all not serving, he the next morning appeared on a Scaf∣fold the Duke had caused to be erected, to lose his head; so the hour being come, the fool laid his head on the block, & as the Duke had appointed, instead of cut∣ting his head off, he caused warm water to be poured upon his neck, and the fool with very fear expired, to the great grief of the Duke, who broke forth in∣to this expression upon it, That it was wisdom for fools to jest with wise men, but the greatest folly in the world, for wise men to jest with fools.
ROYAL APOPHTHEGMS OF K. CHARLS. 1. AFflictions cannot be esteemed with wise and godly men any argument of sin in an innocent person, more than the mpunity of wicked men is amongst good men any sure token of their innocency. 2. That in the direct worship of God himself, we ought to be guided by the word of God, and not otherwise, but in the form and order of Ceremonies, that indeed is solely left to the Church. 3. When the King first entered the Castle of Ragland, the Marquess kissed the Kings hand, and rising up again, he saluted his Majesty with this comple∣ment,
my Lord, I am not worthy: the King replyed unto the Marquess, my Lord, I may wel answer you again, I have not found so great faith in Israel, for no man would trust me with so much money as you have done: to which the Marquess replyed, I hope your Majesty will prove a Defender of the faith. 4. Prepare for war when thou pro∣poundest for peace, otherwise thy peace will be hardly obtained, or too high∣ly prized, whatever thy first Article be, let disbanding be the last. A cunning Cur, though he wag his tail will shew his teeth, the best Treaty is with a drawn sword, and the safest peace is concluded under a buckler. 5. As it is one of the most convincing Arguments, that there is a God, whilst his power sets bounds to the raging of the Sea, so it is no less that he restrains the madness of the people, nor doth any thing portend more Gods displeasure against a Nation, then when he suffers confluence and clamours of the vulgar to pass all boundaries of Law, and re∣verence to authority. 6. The Devil of Rebellion doth com∣monly turn himself into an Angel of Reformation.
7. When King Charls had made his re∣pair to Rapland, after the Battel of Nase∣by, taking occasion to thank the Mar∣quess for some mony lent his Majesty, the Marquess returned his Majesty this answer, Sir I had your word for my mo∣ney, but I never thought I should be so soon repaid, for now you have given me thanks, I have all I look for. 8. The lower sort of people are desi∣rous of novelties, and apt for change, weighing Government with the scales of their own fortune, they are too ser∣iole of evils in present, to fear worse in future, let such now they move in their particular orbs, not in the com∣mon sphere, and that the alteration in the heavens makes no star greater, which way soever the change moves, a Cobler shall be bat a Cobler still. 9. It is a Princely alchimy out of ne∣cessary wars to extract an honourable peace, and more beseeming the Majesty f a Prince to thirst after peace than Conquest. Blessedness is promised to the Peace-maker, not to the Conque∣or. It is a happy State whose peace th a peaceful nd, and a Martial heart, able both to use peace, and to anage war.
10. Upon a discourse of the singular parts, which Doctor John Donne Dean of Pauls, was indowed withal, he took occasion to speak of his marriage, who marrying into a rich and honourable Family, being much above his Degree, and against his wives fathers consent, insomuch that the father would give her no Portion, which the Doctor then perceiving, took his Pen and writ (and sent it to the old man) in this manner, John Donne, Anne Donne, undone, which wrought good effects on the old man. 11. Aristippus being accused by a strumpet for having go her with child answered, thou mayest as well going through a thorn hedge tell certainly which thorn pricked thee. 12. His Majesty being very wel grounded in the true Protestant Reli∣gion, in a Discourse concerning Secta∣ries, said truly, That there were bu two good sentences in a Sectaries ser∣mon, the first of necessity good, whic is the Text, the second by consequent which is the end, and thereby an en of an impertinent Discourse. 13. The merits of a deserving Lad would serve her for a Protection a∣mongst
the savage Indians, whilst their rudeness and barbarity knows not so perfectly to hate all vertues, as some mens subtilty doth. 14. God blessed the modest respect and filial tenderness, which Noahs sonnes bear to their father, nor did his open infirmity justifie Chams impudency, nor exempt him from that curse of being servant of servants, which curse must needs be on them who seek by disho∣nourable actions to please the vulgar, and confirm by ignole acts their de∣pendance upon the people. 15. A Bishop rising up in arms a∣gainst his Prince, was overthrown, and himself being then clad in Armour, was taken prisoner, and by the Kings ex∣press command clapt up: the Pope hear∣ing of it, sends to the King, complain∣ing or breach of the Church-priviled∣ges, that one o her sons should be im∣prisoned: the King sends back the Mes∣senger, and with him the Armour ta∣ken from the Bishop, desiring the Pope to send him word, whether those were the garments of any of his sons. 16. Popular tumults, are not like a storm at Sea, which yet wants no its erroar, ut like an earth-quake, sha∣king
the very foundations of all, then which nothing in the world hath more horror. 27. It matters not much, whether in Government thou tread the steps of se∣vere Hannibal, or gentle Scipio, so thy actions be honourable, and thy life ver∣tuous, both in the one and in the other, there is defect and danger, if not cor∣rected and supported by the fair repute of some extraordinary indowments: No matter black or white, so the Steed good. 28. That it is an hardiness beyond true valour, for a wise man to set him∣self against the breaking in of a Sea, which to effect at present threatens im∣minent danger, but to withdraw gives it space to spend its fury, and gains a fitter time to repair the breach. Certain∣ly a gallant man had rather fight to get disadvantages for number and place in the field in an orderly way, than se us∣sle with an indisciplin'd Rabble. 29. Sir Henry Bard, who was Lord Bellameunt, coming into the Hall of Ragland, and seeing so many Tables fur∣nished with food, and seeders, sware that his Majesty had a plo to destroy that Family, first in borrowing all the
old mans money, and then in coming thus to eat up his victuals: which hs Majesty hearing smiled at: but the Mar∣quess asked the man who made the re∣lation unto him, of what Garison the Lord Bellameunt was Governour; it was told his Lordship, that he was Gover∣nour of Cambden house; the Marquess replyed, that when the King had done as he said, that then his Majesty mght go to his Garison, and there he mght have Cambdens Remains. 30. There be three sorts of Govern∣ment, Monarchical, Historical, De∣mocratical, and they are apt to fall three several wayes into ruine. The first by Tyranny, the second by ambition, the last by tmulr. A Common-weal grounded upon any of these, is but of short continuance, but being wisely mingled, either guard the other, and makes the government exact. 31. A certain Court Lady, being ve∣ry extravagant in all pleasures of this life, was admonished to steer another course, and being prest hard by the Mi∣nister, of the vanty of all earthly things set forth so fully by Solomon, she answer∣ed, What tell you me of Solomn? Solo∣mon never said they were vanity ntil
he had tried them, even so will I do, and then I will tell you my judgement of them: His Majesties opinion of it was, That she was led more by sense than faith. 32. The Mahometans live in such ex∣emplary concord, that they seldom break into ill language, but if they do so, a third man will reprove them, with a Fye Mussel-man fall out! and all is ap∣peased, hs Majesties determination on this was, That Christianity would be far more beful than it is, if it could be brought to such a degree of perfection. 33. A man being a great observer of Dreams, dreamed, that all Dreams were vain; which when he awoke, he was in a maze to consider of it; but at last recol∣lecting himself, he thought that if all Dreams were vain, then this was vain and all the rest true; but them again, if this Dream was true, then all his other Dreams were vain; so in this labyrinth I leave him. His majesties judgment on it was, That dream had much altered the case of his former judgment on that subject. 34. Sir John Hotham a notable mo∣nument of unprosperous disloyalty teached the world by so sad and unfor∣tunate a spectacle, that the rude carri∣age of a subject towards his Soveraign
carries alwayes its own vengeance, as an unseparable shadow with it. 35. Some men have so much of the Serpents subtilty, that they forget the Doves simplicity. 36. No men are prone to be greater Tyrants, and more rigorous exactors upon others to conform to their ille∣gal novelties, than such whose pride was formerly least disposed to the obe∣dience of lawful constitutions, and whose licentious humours most preten∣ded conscientious liberties. 37. In the war, the King came to a Ca∣stle, and told the Lord thereof, that he thought not to have stayed with his Lordship above 3. days, but his occasion requiring a longer stay, and consider∣ing that it was a Garrison, and that his provision might be spent by so great a pressure, was willing his Lordship should take what provision the Countrey would afford for his present main∣tenance, and recruit to which his Lordship answered; I humbly tha  Majesty, but my  will never stand , i it lens upon the , & I had rather be brought to a mrsel of bread, than any mrsels of bread should be brought in to cu∣in your Msty.
38. Carry a watchful eye upon dangers till they come to ripeness, and when they are ripe, let loose a speedy hand, he that expects them too long, meets them too late, and he that meets them too soon, gives advantage to the evil. Commit their beginning to Argus his eyes, and their ends to Brareus hands, and than art safe. 39. Fortune hath no power over wis∣dom, but of sensuality, and of Lives that swim and navigate without the load∣stone of discretion and Judgment. 40. Aristarchus scoffingly said, That in old time hardly could be found seven wise men throughout the world, but in one day, quoth he, much ado there is to find so many fools. 41. After Antigenus had been sick a long time of a lingring disease, and well recovered again, We have, said he, got no harm by this long sickness; for ths hath taught us not to be so proud, by ptting us in mind, that we are but mortal: his Majesties determination of it was, That were he real, he had by it learned a most divine Lessn. 42. That an infallid thing may be discerned and known by a fallid means: As for example, our senses are fallid,
but by them we know many things in∣fallid; whence the Papists inferre, that because the Church is visible, therefore the chief head must be visible. The uni∣versal Church consisteth of two parties, the one visible, the other invisible; to wit, a visible body, and an invisible spi∣rit, and therefore the chief head of the Church should rather be visible, but we grant many visible substitutes over the Church, as subordinate Rulers un∣der the chief. 43. Sir Thomas Somerset, brother to the Marquess of Worcester, had a house which they called Troy, five miles from Ragland Castle: this Sir Thomas being a compleat Gentleman of himself, delight∣ed himself much in fine Gardens and Orchards, where by the benefit of art the earth was made so graceful to him at the same time, that the King hap∣pened to be at his brothers house, that it yielded him wherewithal to send his brother Worcester a present, and such an one as the time & place considered was ble to make the King to believe, that the Soveraign of the Planets had new chan∣ged the Poles, and that Woles, the re∣use and outcast of the fair Garden of England, had fairer and riper fruit than
Englands bowels had on all her beds, this presented to the Marquess, the Marquess would not suffer to be pre∣sented to the King, by any other hand than his own, in comes the Marquess at the latter end of Sapper, led by the arm, with a slow pace, expressing much a Spanish gravity, with a silver dish in each hand filled with rarities, and a lit∣tle basket on his arm, as a reserve, where making his obeysance, he thus speaks, May it please your Majesty, if the four Elements could have been robd to have entertained your Majesty, I think I had but done my duty; but I must do as I may, if I had sent to Bristol for some good things to entertain your Majesty, that had been no wonder at all, if I had procured from London some goodness, that might have been acceptable to your Majesty, but here I present your Majesty (placing his dishes upon the Table) with what, that came not from Lincoln, that was not London, that is not York that is to be, but I assure your Majesty, that this Present came from Troy; whereupon the King smiled, and answered the Marquess, Truly my Lord, I have heard, That corn now grows where Troy Town stood, but I never
thought there had grown any Apricocks there before. Whereupon the Marquess replyed, any thing to please your Ma∣jesty: when my Lord Marquess depar∣ted the presence, one told his Lordshp, that he would make a very good Cour∣tier, the Marquess said, I remember I said one thing that may give you some hopes of me, Any thing to please your Ma∣jesty. 44. The first night his Majesty came into Ragand Castle, the King desired to see the great Tower, where his Lordship did use to keep his Treasure, his Maje∣sty spake auo Doctor Baily then stand∣ing by to fetch the keys; he ran down to the Marquess and acquainted him with the Kings pleasure, who would needs bring them to the King, and shew him the Tower himself: when the King saw the Marquess bringing the keys himself, he aus spake unto the Marquess, My Lord, there are some men so unreasonable, as to make me believe, that your Lordship hath good store of gold yet lest within ts Tower, but I knowing how I have exhausted you, to∣gether  your own occasions, could never have believed it until now I see
you will not trust the keyes with any but your self: to which the Marquess made this reply, Sir, I was so far from giving your Majesty any such occasion of thought by this tender of my duty that I pro∣test unto you, that I was once resolved that your Majesty should have lain there, but that I was loath to commit your Majesty to the Tower. 45. When the King first entred the gates of Ragland, the Marquess deliver∣ed his Majesty the keyes according to the ordinary custom, the King resto∣ring them to the Marquess, the Mar∣quess said, I beseech your Majesty to keep them if you please, for they are in a good hand, but I am afraid that ere it be long, I shall be forced to deliver them into the hands of those who will spoil the Complement. 46. Hs Majesty professed that he could not fix his love on one that was never angry; for as he that is without sorrow is without gladness; so he that is without Anger, is without Love. 47. Upon discourse of life, his Majesty observed that it was one of the foles of man, that when he was full of dayes,
and near his end, that then he should love life most. 48. Cato said, to which his Majesty assents, That the lest way to keep good Acts in memory, was to refresh them with new. 49. King Charls coming to Ragland, it being when the tall Cedar of our Le∣banon was brought so low, and those Sycomores flourished, when the Royal Oak was in the fall of the leaf, it hap∣pened that his Majesty was at bowls up∣on Ragland Castle Green, a place proud∣ly situated, where after he had ended his Recreation, his Majesty was pleased to delight himself with observing the Contrey round about, it happened, that one Prichard, the Kings partner at bowls, presuming more upon his good bowling, than good manners, conti∣nued that familiarity, that should have ended with the rubbers, shewing the King where his house stood, & told his Majesty that he must look through the wood, and he might see a white thing, and that was it: moreover acquainted his Majesty, what the Lord of Wercester had advised him, viz. to cut down some of those trees, that the house might plainly be discerned from the Green, whereby his Lordship when he wanted
a good bowler, might make a sign, and so have him at a beck: to which the King replyed, Mr. Prichard, let me give you better advice, put up more trees where the trees are so thin, that my Lord of Worcester may not see thy house at all. The Marquess of Worcester supposing the King had dreamed of this greedi∣ness, of purchasing all the Land which was near unto him, shewed his Majesty a row of trees, and told the King, that beyond that row of trees stood a pretty Tenement, and because he would not have Naboths vineyard to be an eye-sore to him, he had planted those trees to hoodwink his eyes from such tempta∣tions. 50 God made one part of man of earth, the basest element, to teach him  li∣ty, his soul proceeded from the bosom of himself, to teach him goodness; so that if he look downward nothing is viler, if he cast his eyes to heaven, he is of a matter more excellent than the An∣gels. The former part was a type of Adam, the second of Christ, which gives life to that which was dead in it self.
APOPHTHEGMS OF THE EARL OF VVORCESTER. 1 AT the Kings being at Ragland, there were some information given of some Gentlemen of the County, who were supposed to have done his Majesty many ill offices, by withdrawing the hearts of the people from his Majesty: these men thus accu∣sed, were ordered to be laid hold of, and it was executed accordingly, and they being brought before his Majesty, it was moved by some, that they should be forthwith tryed by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, others advised his Majesty they should be sent to Hereford, and there to be kept in safe custody, un∣til further consultation might be had concerning them, they excusing them∣selves
as well as they could, one of them protesting his innocency with tears in his eyes; the King ordered, that he should be released, being always prone to lean to pity rather than Justice, and to fa∣vourable rather than rigid constructi∣on. The King coming back from Aler∣geveny, where this was put in exe∣cution, told the Marquess what he had done, and that when he saw them speak so honestly, he could not but give some credit to their words, so se∣conded by tears, and withal told the Marquess that he had onely sent them to prison, whereupon the Marquess said, what to do? to poyson that Ga∣rison? Sir, you should have done well to have heard their accusations, and then to have shewed what mercy you pleased. The King told him, that he heard they were accused by some con∣trary Faction, as to themselves, who out of distast they bore to one another upon old grudges, would be apt to charge them more home than the nature of their offences had deserved: to whom the Marquess made this return, Well Sir, you may chance to gain you the Kingdom of heaven by such doings as these, but if ever you get the Kingdom of England, by such
wayes, I will be your bond-man. 2. The Marquess had a mind to tell the King as handsomly as he could of some of his (as he thought) faults, and thus he contrived his plot against the time, that his Majesty was wont to give his Lordship a visit, as commonly he u∣sed to do after dinner, his Lordship had the book of John Gower lying before him on the Table, the King casting his eye upon the book, told the Marquess, that he had never seen it before, O said the Marquess, it is a book of books, which if your Majesty had been well versed in, it would have made you a King of Kings; Why so my Lord, said the King? Why said the Marquess, here is let down how Aristotle brought up and instructed Alexander the great in all his iudiments and principles belon∣ging to a Prince; and under the per∣sons of Alexander and Aristotle, he read the King such a lesson, that all the stan∣ders by were amazed at his boldness, and the King supposing that he had gone further than his Text would have given him leave, asked the Marquess, whether he had his lesson by heart, or whether he spake out of the book: the Marquess replyed, Sir, if you could
read my heart, it may be, you might find it there, or if your Majesty please to get it by heart, I will lead you my book, which latter proffer the King accepted of, and did borrow it: nay said the Marquess, I will lend it you upon these conditions, 1. That you read it, 2. That you make use of it: but perceiving how some of the new made Lords fretted and bit the thumbs, at certain passages in the Marquesses Discourse he thought a little to please his Majesty, though he displeased them, the men who were so much displeased already, protesting unto his Majesty, that no man was so much for the abso∣lute power of a King, as Aristotle, de∣siring the book out of the Kings hand, he told the King he would shew him one remarkable passage to that purpose, turning to that place, that had this verse, viz. A King can kill, a King can save, A King can make a Lord a knave. And of a knave a Lord also. Whereupon there were divers new made Lords, who slank out of the room, which the King observing, told the Marquess, My Lord, at this rate you will drive away all my Nobility;
the Marquess replyed, I protest unto your Majesty, I am as new a made Lord, as any of them all, but I was never cal∣led knave and rogue so much in all my life, as I have been since I received this last honour, and why should not they bear their shares? 3. The Marquess travelling, was as he thought surprized by enemies, but recovering the top of a high Moun∣tain, by the advantage of the ground he could see the enemy marching off an∣other way, at which sight the Mar∣quess dwelt with his eyes a little lon∣ger upon that object, then the L. John Somerset his son thought convenient, whereunto the Marquess made this re∣ply, O son, I love to see my own danger, especially when it is marching of. 4. The Marquess travelling on the way, happened to come to a place wherein was seen a miracle, which the tradition of those parts reports to have been wrought, occasioned upon Saint Davids preaching unto 3000 people, who that he might the better be heard, the ground it is said to rise up in a round knob, whereupon Saint David pitched his Cross whereon he leaned whilst he was preaching, which Cross
was yet standing with some words, and letters, which time had made unlegible, and that Saint David had caused a Church to be erected in that place, as a memorial of so great a miracle: this relation made the Marquess very de∣sirous to view the place, the Church, and the Cross, and standing in the Church yard, every man endeavoured to make something of the obliterated superscription, and no man could, for there were only these worn pieces of characters to be seen, viz. Crx. Xt Dd. and a piece of an S. which my Lord presently read it Crux Christi Da∣vidis, which we all wondring that no man could find it out, it afterwards appearing to be so plain, he told, as look you now, I without my Spe∣ctacles and ill eyes could read it sooner than all you that needed none, and had good eyes, it is not a good eye, but a good faith that attains to the knowledg of such things which you pore so much upon, the like you lose the meaning, now I will tell you how I came to find it out, I considered what had been told me, with the help wherof I came to un∣stand what the words might signifie, so that in this I am sure tradition was a
means to help me to the true understan∣ding of the Scripture. Leaving the place, as we were going along by the Church yard rails, there was an old woman naked as ever she was born, who kept her Hermitage between the roots of an overgrown hollow tree, she was the most lamentable spectacle of Mor∣tality that ever eyes beheld, her eyes as hollow as a dead mans scul, and her head as bare, nothing but skin and bone, her breasts hanging down like two leathern pockets, and her belly like a Satchel, her tawny skin looking rather as if it had been loose garments to the boes, then confines to any flesh and blood, in a word it frightned us all, only the Marquess was in love with her, protesting that he never saw a sight wch did him so much good, saying, How hap∣py were it for a man that is going to bed to his grave, to be first wedded to this woman. 4. The Marquess on discourse about Religion, said, That God was fain to deal with wicked men as men do with frisking jades in a pasture: that cannot take them up till they get them to a gate: so wicked men will not be taken up till the hour of death. 5. Treating of youth, the Marquess said, that it was the best course for Pa∣rents
and Tutors to teach children: that when they are young, they may put in practice, when they are grown up in riper years. 6. Philo Judes saith, to which the Marquess assents, that the sense is like the Sun, for the Sun seals up the globe of heaven, and opens the globe of earth, so the sense doth obscure heavenly things, and reveal earthly things. 7. He was wont to say, that a plain dealing friend, whose friendly Coun∣sel was requited with choler and dis∣gust, was like a turf, that whilst a man bestowed breath upon it to enliven it, it returns thanks to the well-willer, by spitting fire in his face. 8. Dr. Baily living at Ragland castle three years, in all that time never saw man drunk, nor heard an oath a∣mongst any of all his servants, and very rare it was to see a better ordered Fa∣mily, but that which was most won∣derful was, half his servants being Pro∣testants, and half Papists, yet never were at variance in point of Religion: which was brought about by prohibiting dis∣putation, neither was any man less ac∣cepted for his Religion, if his service was acceptable, but when the Castle,
was filled with Officers & Souldiers, he used to be much grieved to hear and see the Oaths and drunkenness, that was then and there too much practised; in∣somuch, that when some of his chief Officers had told him how they had for∣tified such and such a place so and so, and that here the enemy could not come, and there it was impossible, I, but said my Lord, you have left the main place open and unfortified; you have made no fortification against hea∣ven, for there is such swearing and drunkenness amongst you, that I fear me, that from thence will come you greatest enemy, and you have made no provision against him. 9. As the Marquess was in his travel from Dneb. shire toward Ragland, he de∣termined to lye in a poor Town called Bala in Merneth shire, where being come, upon misinformation, that they were enemies, the people gazed on them like Owls, and no Officer belonging to the Town, would be spoken withal: At last, one of the Marquesses retinue espied a young man, who had a Rib∣bon on his hat with Vive le Roy in it, to whom he applyed himself, and told him, that he by his favour should be one
that loved the King, and that there was such a Nobleman, who had served the King in no small measure, who was likely to ly in the streets for want of a Lodging: the young man shewed im∣mediately great respect, telling his Lordship, that he should be welcom to his Mothers house, who kept a poor Inn. So into the house his retinue went, finding it a most lamentable receptacle for such a person, yet better than none at all; the Parlour where my Lord was to lye, was a soft and loose ground, wherein you might sink up to the an∣cles every step, the top of the house being thatched with ill thrasht straw, the corn was left in the straw, where∣with the house was thatched, grew, and was all as green as grass. The Mar∣quess by that time that we had got a good fire, and laid some loose boards over the sloor, came near the house, who seeing the manner of the house top, and the parlour bottom, said, That he lay over a bog, and under a Mea∣dow: but it being known who he was, the Mayor of the Town with singular respect and much humanity, came to the Marquess, excusing his ignorance, and misunderstanding, offering all the
civilities of his own house, for which my Lord gave him many and hearty thanks, breaking forth into this Meditation, Lord what a thing this misunderstand∣ing is! I warrant you might but the King and Parliament confer together, as you and I have done, there might be as right an understanding betwixt them, as there is now betwixt you and I, some body hath told the Parliament, that the King was an enemy, and their believing of him to be such, hathwrought all the jealousies which are come to these di∣stractions, the Parliament being now in such a case as I my self am, having green ears over their heads, and false ground under their feet. 10. The Marquess of Worcester cal∣ling for a glass of Claret wine, it was told him by his Physician, that Cla∣ret wine was naught for his gout; What, said the Marquess, my old friend Cla∣ret? nay, give it me in spight of all Physicians and their books, it never shall be said, that I forsook my friend for my enemy. 11. The Marquess discoursing of the small profit generally got by disputati∣on in matters of Religion, said, That men are often in arguing, carried by the
force of words frther asunder than their question was at first, like two ships going out of the same haven, their journeys end is many times whole Countries distant. 12. Drunkenness is a beastly vice, and hath this property, that it is one of those vices, that increaseth with age: which Discourse the Marquess prosecuted by a certain story of a cer∣tain Philosopher, that having a drun∣ken man brought before him, to know what suitable punishment he should suffer for the offence, the vice was so rarely known in those dayes, that the Philosopher was wholly ignorant of it, and therefore caused him to be brought before him the day following, in the interim of which time, the Philosopher drank himself drunk, and thereby was so sick, that he judged nothing but death would immediately ensue, but it being once over, and the man appearing the next day to know his doom, he said, I adjudge thee to no other pu∣nishment, than to bedrunk again, for certainly that crimecarries its punishment along with it. 13. The Earl of Worcester travelling toward Ragland, at a certain Inne in a poor town, where he lay, by the
carelessness of servants left behind him 1000 l. in gold, being hid under a Bench, and forgot to be taken away, the money was never missed until they came to their journies end at night, and it being told my Lord that so much was missing, and where they had left it, my Lord made no other words of it but these, you talk of a cheap reckoning, but I never paid so dearly for a nights Lodging in all my life: who would think that a man should leave so much money behind him in such a lousie Inn? One that stood by told the Marquess, that it was a hundred to one if ever he heard of his money again, it was such a beggarly house, O peace, said the Mar∣quess, if they will not be known of the money, you shall see it will be a brave Inn in a short time: this mony was sent after, and very honestly restored, and de∣livered into the Messengers hands that came for it. Being brought unto the Marquess, there was much wondring at the honesty of the woman of the house, others praised the whole town seeing it was generally known. The Marquess told them, It may be the town never saw so much mony before, and therefore they knew not what to make of it.
14. The Marquess journeying on his way to Ragland, happened to come to a place that was called Strata del stori∣da, in Cardiganshire, which made him say that he was brought to the West Indies already, an old ruined, but sometimes a most famous Monastery, with whose ruines was built a pretty tolerable Welsh Gentlemans house, where my Lord lodged that night, in which house there was shown an old old woman, who was credibly reported to have been living, and of years able to remember when the Monastery was in its flourish∣ing condition, and to have been at Mass oftentimes when the place was in∣habited by Monks and Friars: this strange relation was no sooner carried up, and presented to my Lords ears, but my Lord was as greedy to glut his eys with such an object, as they to fil his ears with the relation: the woman being sent for came, coming, the Marquess questioned her concerning the manner of the Monks behaviour, both in their Service, their Orders, Habits, Cu∣stoms, and all other particulars, who gave his Lordship so exact an account, that he believed it to be true, and con∣fessed that it must needs be so; and que∣stioning
of her further, about her age, she said she was an hundred years of age: then the Marquess asked her, And what when the Religion altered, you altered with the Religion? she answered, no in truth Master, I staid to see whether or no the people of the new religion would be better than the people of the old, and I could see nothing, but grew worse and worse, & charity to wax colder & col∣der, & so kept me to my old religion, I thank God, and by the grace of God mean to live and die in it. The Marquess turned to the Gentleman of the house, who was a Protestant, and asked him whether or no, she had been noted for a Papist all her life, the Gentleman said, that she had, & could never be brought from it; and that she would oftentimes steal into the Church alone with her beads, and there she would be praying by her self; the Marquess dismissed her for the present, but after Suppen sent for her again, and had some more private conference with her; amongst other things he asked her how she did to serve God, and when she had seen a Priest last, when she had been at Mass, or received the Sacrament: the woman answered, that she had not seen a Priest
not in sixty years, but she did her of∣fice daily, and never missed, and once a year upon Goodfriday she received the Sacrament at the Parsons hands, pray∣ing unto God, that seeing she could not attain unto the means, that God would make the Parson a Priest to her at that day, which she believing God Almighties judgment to be such, as that he did hear her prayers. The Mar∣quess fell into such a fit of Laughter, and then into such expressions of admi∣ration, that it was rare to see him trans∣ported into such extreams, so at last he ended in pity and commiseration, which wrought in the Marquess this effect, and to the poor woman this in∣tended advantage; the Marquess gave her ten pieces of old Gold, telling her, that if she would go with him to Rag∣land, and spend the remainder of her dayes with him she should be welcom, and there enjoy the means of bringing her thither, where now she had but a little way to go, meaning heaven. The woman fell a crying, saying over and over again constantly, God hath sent him, God hath sent him, he was a good man, and so she departed, resolving to go as soon as possible toward Rag∣land.
The next news that was heard in the morning was, that the poor wo∣man was dead, whereupon the Mar∣quess excessively grieved, and wept, all concluding that she died of an excessive joy, whereat the Marquess said thus, If this poor soul died for joy that she should come into a place where she might serve God, bo joyfully will she serve him when she comes into a place where she shall never dye? 15. The Marquess discoursing once of the Essence of God, excellently com∣mended the wisdom of Simonides, who being asked of Hiero, what he thought of God, asked a seven-nights time to consider of it, and at the seven-nights end he asked a fourtnights time, at the fourtnights end he asked a moneth, at which Hiero marvelling, Simonides an∣swered, That the longer he thought on it, the more difficult he found it. 16. The Earl of Glamorgan, the Marquess of Worcesters eldest son, accompanied with divers of high rank and quality, as they were on their journey for Ire∣land, quartered in the town of Carnar∣van, a Sea Town in North Wales, where they were entertained with Discourse at the Table, by some of the Country Gentlemen, who informed them of the
falling of an old Welsh Prophesie at that very time and place, which was viz. That there should come a Magpy, and build her nest in the Crown, then should come a Jackdaw, and beat a∣way the Magpy, and after that there should come a Buzzard, that should beat away the Jackdaw, and then there should be seen no Crown, but that of thorns upon the Kings head, at last there should come a Band of men from a far Countrey, & take away the thorns, and then the Crown should appear a∣gain: this they said, was thus hither∣to accomplished, viz. Over the gate of Carnarvan Castle, there was the picture of King Edward the first, in full pro∣portion, with a Crown upon his head, there did come a Magpy, and did build her nest in the said Kings Crown, and a Jackdaw did beat away the Magpy, and the Buzzard the Jackdaw: this we as∣sure your Honour to be true; for all our Townsmen have observed it. Din∣ner being ended, they all went unto the Castle gate, being greedy to satisfie their eyes with the sight, as well as their ears with the Relation; where being come they beheld the sight, the nest being disordered by the fighting
of the combatants, and the materials of the nest made such a mournful a∣spect, as if they had bin artificially plea∣ted upon the Kings head. The Earl of Clamorgan could not endure the sight, but straightway commanded the nest to be pulled down, the materials of which was such, as never any bird builded her nest with, viz. White thorn: the sto∣ry being related to the Marquess of Worcester, after some pause he said, that is the nick-name, which the Round∣heads use to give to the Bishops: and none about him guessing at his mean∣ing, he said, as I take it, they used to call the Bishops Magpies, whom they reproach for building their nests in the Crown, then came the Presbyterian Jackdaws, and beat them out, and the next thing that you shall see, will be the Independant, Buzzards, which drive them away, and who comes next God knows: but asking further, whether it was an open or an Imperial Crown, answer being made that it was open, O then, said the Marquess, that was the reason the Kings Crown was too open, had it been close at top with the Cross over head, such unlucky birds could never have come there to have built their nests.
87. Antisthenes being asked of one, what Learning was most necessary for mans life, answered, To unlearn that which is naught. 18. The Marquess would often say, that all the inconveniences that the frailty of humane nature was incident to fall into, ever happened through the vvant of this, Consideration had at the end of every action before ever we en∣terprised a beginning, viz. What then, what will be the effects of it? 19. On the marriage of my Lord Edward Herbert, with the Earl of Cr∣narvans daughter, there happened this merry passage or mock-wedding, as an ecco to the voices, that were heard in Hymens Chappel, between that love∣ly couple, who had newly left being wholly themselves by being half of each other, one pair of Lovers had no soon∣er united two hearts in one, and had seated themselves by one of the many properties belonging unto the honour∣able state of matrimony, viz. the board, but one Thom. Deputy, an old Bachel∣lour, chanced to cast his eye upon a pret∣ty piece of waiting woman, one of the appurtenances to this honour∣able Bride, he this jovial Them,
having whetted his wits by the sides of the marriage bowl, fixes upon being ena∣bled sufficiently thereby to follow any humour, as a fit subject to make their Ladiships some sport, which happened to be so suitable to the occasion, and so well performed, that it soon captivat∣ed the ears also of all the Masculine No∣bility, thus incountring the fair Bride, Madam, you have the prettiest piece of necessity yonder at the side Table, that I know not how any man can be without her, that may have her for asking, Ma∣dam, will you give her me? I protest I will marry her, & fancy my self to be a Lord, & her self a Lady, My mind to me a kingdom is, which shall make her a suffici∣ent Jomture, Thom. Thom. said the Mar∣quess, such men as you and I, whose joints are enfeebled with the strokes of many years, must not think to win young maids, by promising to make Jointures of the mind, but will you make her Deputy of Deputy Hall, and Landlady of all the Land that is be∣longing to it, & mistris of all the stock that is upon the Land, and goods that is within the house, and then you shall hear what my daughter and her wo∣man will say unto you? With all my
heart said Thom. and all the hogs and Poultry that are about the house to boot, & she shall lie upon six Feather∣beds the first night. Why then it shall be a match, said the Lady. With all myheart, give me your hand Madam, sayes Depu∣ty, I will have her, if there be no more necessary evils in the world, and pre∣sently makes his addresses to the pretty little Gentlewoman of the said Table, who had heard all the Discourse, and was perswaded then upon his approach to answer his humour with a condescen∣tion at the first word, and informed, that he was an old rich whoreson, he accosting her after this manner, This pretty moppet, now thy Lady hath gi∣ven her consent that I shall have thee, if thou sayest so too, we will be in bed as soon as they. With all my heart, and thank you too, said the young Gentle∣woman, By my troth, a match said he, give me thy hand, 'tis done, I will break such a jest this day, as I never broke in my life. But do not break your prom se, said the Gentlewoman. What before all this company, said Thom. that were a shame. Up he goes again to the Lady, and tells her that they were agreed. My Lady drank to him upon the same con∣dition,
he pledgedher, & wished thewine might be his poison if he did not mar∣ry her after dinner; the Lady willing to prefer her woman to such a fortune, held him to his word, and required performance of his promise, giving her many and high commendations. Thom. went not from any part of his promise, only the time excepted, and that in regard he meant to buy himself some wedding cloaths. The Marquess willing to remove that obstacle, told him that he thought his cloaths would fit him, and bid him go into his ward∣robe, and take what he had a mind to. Give me your key said Thom, it was de∣livered unto him. Up went he, and then came down with his Beaver hat, Sattin cloak, said with plush, daubd with a gold & silver lace suit of the same, silk∣stockings, with roses and garters suita∣ble, inside and outside, cap a-pe, all as brave, as if he carried a Lordship on his back. The Lady Bride takes her woman aside, and dresseth her in one of her newest and richest gowns, with all things answerable thereto, not with∣out some store of sleight jewels, and brings her down as glorious as the morp, that breaks from the Eastern hill,
and chases night away, they look upon one another, and all upon them both, Thom. cries out, I had best be in good ear∣nest, said my Lady, I thought you had been in sober sadness, you will not now make us take all this pains for nothing, No by no means, said he, if ever we re∣pent, we will sell our fine cloaths & buy cattel, it is better being a Lord for a week, than a slave for ever. Come thy wayes, Happy is that wrong, that is not long a doing. Married they were in the great∣est pomp and Ceremony, and the Queen of beauty took delight in loosing the eyes of the vulgar, which by this time was altogether fixed on the Lady of the May. Thom. acted his Scene of mirth in the Hall, which proved to be a thing of that convenience, as if it had been an act of some set policy to keep the crowd out of the Parlour, that the Marquess might have room enough to dance in. At last when the Masque was ended, and time had brought in Supper, the Cushion led the dance out of the Parlour into the Hall, and salu∣ted the old new made Bridegroom and his Lady, leading them into a Parlour, to a Table which was furnished with the same allowance that was allotted for all
the Nobles, where they were soon forced to sit down, first Thom. taking upon him, as much as they could give him, in fine, Supper being ended, the Marquess of Worcester asked the Lady, his daughter, if she had an hundred pounds about her, she answered, No my Lord, but I can send for as much, I pray do said the Marquess, but it must be all in gold. She sent for it, and presented it to her father, who pulled out another purse of an hundred pieces, and put the two hundred pieces into a basin, saying, Madam, if you do not give earnest, Deputy will tell you in the morning, that he married your woman but in jest. Whereupon some gave fifty, others forty, some gave twenty, others ten, the least gave five pieces, who fate at the Table, in all seven hundred pounds, the apparel and other gifts amounting to no less a value, than one thousand pounds, which so transported the old man, that he protested, that now he was in the humour, he would marry all the waiting Gentlewomen that they had, one every day in the week, as long as the wedding lasted, My Lord Mar∣quess replyed. I, but Thom. you have left, out one thing that you should have
said, viz. at this rate, not to be too te∣diòus. The man, what with bounty, and what with that, which was as free to every man as were their purses unto him (which was good wine) was not himself, when he should have gone tobed to another, which being related to my Lord, his Lordship took an occasion to tell the company the story of the beggar, who was made believe he did but dream of the happiness that was really acted; & thereupon the Marquess was desirous to make experiment, whether it could be related in the person of old Thomas, in order whereunto he gave command, that my friend Thomas should be disrobed of his new wedding garment, the rest of his fine cloaths taken from him, and him∣self carried unto his old Lodging in the Porters Lodge, and his wife to respite the Solemnization of the marriage-bed until his comportment should deserve so fair an admission: which was done ac∣cordingly, the next morning made the experiment to answer the height of all their expectations; for news was brought unto the Marquess, all the rest of the Lords and Ladies standing by, that Thom. took all yesterdayes work but for a dream, or at least seemed to do so, to
humour the fancy I should be endless, if I should relate unto you the sport that this fellow made. To conclude, the Mar∣quess called them both before him, and delivered unto them the money, with many good exhortations to them both, moralizing upon the premises. 20. The Marquess talking of an old drunken fellow, who having used his body to disorder in drinking all his life tme, at last giving it over, presently dyed, Oh, said the Marquess, if you take a brand out of the fire, that is throughly burnt it will fall in pieces, but if you let it lie there still, it may remain a pretty while before it turn to ashes. 21. Doctor Baliy, walking one day with his Lordship in a private walk, that was about the round Tower, and there esping where a bird had made her nest, whom they disturbed from hatch∣ing her young ones, and sitting upon her eggs, which act of nature my Lord compared unto the manner of the Cre∣ation; for said he, God having made his nest in the world, and brought forth his young at first imperfected, did by his spirit breath, and by his wings of pro∣vidence spread over them, he gave them
life and power, and by his word he brake the shell, and so the world was gloriously peopled. 22. They are fools, quoth the Mar∣quess, who because it is said, Examine your selves and come, will not communi∣cate, till they be as they think perfect, forgetting, that Christ came into the world, not for the healthful, but sick, and that we come unto that Table to be refreshed with that spiritual food, bringing nothing with us, but a purpose to amend. 23. On a Discourse of the several windings and turnings that have been in the compass of twelve years: he thus delivered himself, that every age breeds some exorbitant spirits, who turn the edge of their own sufficiency upon whatsoever they can devour in their own ambitious apprehensions, seek∣ing rather a name, than a good fame, and holding it the chiefest honour to be thought the wonder of the times, which if they attain unto, is but in the condition of monsters, that are ge∣nerally much admired, but more ab∣horred. 24. During the Siege of Ragland, there came a musquet bullet in at the window of the withdrawing room,
where my Lord was used to entertain his friends with his pleasant Discourses af∣ter Dinners and Suppers, which glan∣cing upon a little marble pillar of the window, and from thence hit the Mar∣quess upon the side of the head, and fell down flatted upon the Table, which breaking the pillar in pieces, it made such a noise in the room, that the Coun∣tess of Glamorgan who stood in the same window, ran away, as if the house had been falling down upon her head, crying out, O Lord, O Lord; but finding her self more afraid than hurt, she returned back again, no less excusing her self, as she was pleased to call it rudeness to her father, than acknowledging her fears to all the company: to whom the Marquess said, Daughter, you had rea∣son to run away, when your father was knockt on the head, and pausing some while, and turning the flatted bullet round with his finger, he further said, Gentlemen, Those who had a mind to flatter me, were wont to tell me, that I had a good head-piece in my younger dayes, but if I do not flatter my self, I think I have a good head-piece in my old age, or else it would not have been Musquet proof.
25. One was telling the Marquess how strangely Doctor Baily his Chap∣lain escaped a shot, by the bar of a Window, looking out into the Lea∣guer, as thus, Standing in a window of the Castle, there came a musquet bullet, & hit falling against the edge of an iron bar of a Chamber Window, so that it parted the bullet in two, the bar exspatiating it self by degrees towards the middle, one half of the bullet flew on the one side, & the other half on the other side, so that by Gods providence no harm was done. The Marquess hea∣ring this, asked in whose chamber it was, his Chaplain told him, his Lord∣ship said, that the Window of that chamber was cross-barrrd, and you will never believe me how safe it is to stand before the Cross when you face your enemy. 26. The Marquess on a Discourse of images related this story of a Papist, being opposed by a Protestant, that they had no Scripture for images, answered, yes, for you read, that the people laid their sick in the streets, that the shadow of Saint Peter might come upon them, and that a sha∣dow was an image, and the obscurest of images. 27. Talking upon occasion of Christs miracles, viz. of his turning water in∣to
wine, and of the five loaves and two fishes, Why said the Marquess, these Mi∣racles he works amongst us every day, but that they are so ordinary unto us, that we take no notice of them, God sends rain upon the earth, this wa∣ter gets up into the vine, and the sap of the vine tree God turneth into wine, and as few grains of corn as will make five loaves, being sowed in the earth, will multiply & increase to such advantage as will feed 5000 with bread, and two fishes will bring forth so many fishes as will suffice so many mouths. 28. There was an old rich usurer and foricator, who had a plot upon the body and estate of a handsom young widow, and an inheritrix of an estate, which the old Miser thought rather convenient than great enough for him; wherefore having a mind rather to en∣joy than have her, and knowing that she was in Debt, courted her with offer∣ing to leave her monies, as an argument of his affection, which she accepted of, offering to bindher estate for repaymen hoping that the tye of his person would be a freedom of her estate: thus with his money, he got his foot into here∣estate, and by a false promise slept in∣to
her bed, as often as he had a mind to lye doubly. Six years he staved her off, who bed-staved him in, within her own sleeping room, but at last, that she might be sure of the substance, she urged him to the Ceremony, and that so much, that at last he gave her a flat denial, wherupon she flatly denies him the for∣mer familiarity, he seizes upon her estate and answers, the kindness of he ad∣mittance of him into her own bed, with the Discourse of turning her out of her own doors: She makes the Mar∣quess her friend, declaring unto him how much she had been abused by him, and withal that she was willing to pay him his money, but not the use of it, as he required: The Marquess sends for this whoreson, and offered himself a mediatour, the man was unwilling to that, yet knew not well how to deny him: which the Marquessperceiving, cal∣led him aside, and bid him get her to be bound with him in a bond of five hun∣dred pounds, to stand to such an award as he should make between them, pro∣mising him faithfully, that he would a∣ward-him use upon use. O my Lord, said he, if you do so, I shall be much obliged to your Honour, and will be
bound with all my heart, and will send you a couple of the bravest colts of your Lordships own breed, as any is in the Countrey. Well, well, said the Mar∣quess, let it be so. Then all was done accordingly, and when the business was examined, & found to be as was before related, the Marquess made this award, viz. Sir said he, to the man, she hath had the use of your money so long, and you have had the use of her body so long, and there is use upon use; so I have allowed you what I promised. 28. The Marquess on a Discourse of Temptation thus delivered himself, that we pray in vain to God to save us from temptation, if at every occasion we run into it: Like one who voluntarily sticks in the dirt, and cries for help from those that pass by. 29. Thales said, that life and death was all one: one that was present asked him, Why do not you dye then? Thales said again, because they are all one. And being further asked, how a man should order his life, answered, as if a man should live long, or die quickly. 30. There was a great man in the Kings Army, between whom and the house of Ragland there was at this time
animosity, the Marquess of Worcester had heard, how that this party should cast a dubious saying, as the case then stood, viz. that he intended to take Ragland in his way, and was so far good as his word, as that he marched into the Park, & there drew up his men, and faced the Castle, whereupon the Line was man'd, and Command was given, that none should be suffred to come near the Line, which Command was so observed, that some of the Officers of the Army ap∣proaching within the place prohibited, the Centinel bid stand, they did not, the Centinel called to them again to stand, they refused, the Lieutenant cal∣led upon the Centinel to fire, the Cen∣tinel preferring the knowledge of his friends before his duty to his Officer, did not give fire, but swore he would give fire if they would not stand, whereupon one of them told him, that it was such a General, and wondred that the Officer would bid the Souldier give fire upon him, the General forth∣with coming to the drawbridge, and de∣sired to speak with the Lord Charls, whom he no sooner faluted, but requi∣red satisfaction for the affront, he was desired to come into the Castle, and
told that the matter should be exami∣ned before him, and if any affront was given, he should receive satisfaction: whereupon being come within the Ca∣stle, the Lieutenant was sent for, who told the General, that though he knew him to be a General, yet as a Souldi∣er he was not to take any notice of him, until such time as he had decla∣red himself, which when he did, he re∣spected him accordingly: & further said that rewards he had seen given on the like occasion, but never knew it a fault before: all this would not serve, but the General said he was affronted, and must have satisfaction, and so took his leave. The Marquess of Worcester sleeping upon his bed all this while, and not dreaming of any of all this that had hapned in the interim, hearing the whole Relation, he askt all the Officers, whether the Lieu∣tenant had offended, they unani∣mously answered no, and commended him for what he had done; then said the Marquess, this is but a pretence, they have a mind to quarrel with us; there∣fore I will send him to the General, and a Guard with him of such Soul∣diers as are able to witness the truth of it, and let him try him at his Councel of War, and see what Law he hath for
it, and so we shall break the neck of the quarrel, and so said the Lieutenant I shall be hanged by the neck for my la∣bour. Whereat the Marquess replyed, What friends hast thou in the Garison? The Lieutenant made answer, I have a wife and a daughter: then said the Mar∣quess with some vehemence, I protest unto thee, if they hang thee, I will mar∣ry thy wife, and provide for thy daugh∣ter. The Lieutenant replyed, I had rather you would marry my daughter, and provide for me; I protest said the Mar∣quess, I will marry thy daughter, and I will provide for thee an honourable grave, but you shall be hanged first. My Lord, said the Lieutenant, shall I be∣speak my grave? thou shalt said the Mar∣quess; then said the Lieutenant, I will be laid in the vault in Ragland Church, be∣twixt your father, and your Grandfa∣ther, and I pray God I may be hanged before I see you again; and so flung out of the room, leaving my Lord in a most merry vein, as possibly could be, who remembring himself sent him five pie∣ces to bear his charges. The Lieutenant being brought to the General at Mon∣mouth, the General dismissed him of his Guard, and sent him to Hereford with an oath at his heels, that he would
hang him, if there were no more men in England; then the Lieutenant cryed out, This makes for us, I do but think how finely I shall lie between the two old Earls, and how finely the old Earl will lie between my daughters two young legs: the particulars whereof being brought to the Marquess, the Marquess was not a little perplext be∣tween fear of having his new Mistris, & losing his old friend, which he had run himself into between jest and earnest, but the greatest sport of all was, con∣cerning the hopeful Lady Marquess, who was ever and anon enquiring and asking many questions concerning the Marquess, whom she never saw, what manner of man he was, how old, whe∣ther he went with a staff, or no? What was the reason he kept his cham∣ber so much, and did not come abroad? Sometimes, what diseases he had? and how long it was ago since his Lady died? with many other necessary questions to be asked by a woman in her condition: nevertheless, it stood the Marquess up∣on to be sollicitous in the business, be∣ing so prest between two strong Passi∣ons, Love and Pity, and so he sends immediately to Hereford, where making
some sport of the business there, the Lieutenant at last was brought home to his Wife and Daughter, who ever after was called, my Lady Marquess. 32. Discoursing before the Mar∣quess concerning the error of the Ma∣nichees, who held there were two cau∣ses of Heaven and earth, viz. that the good and white God made the heaven, and man from the middle upward, and the black and evil God was the efficient cause of the earth, and of man from the middle downwards, that was but a fool∣ish conceit said the Marquesse, for Gods power and wisdom is shown and seen, as well in an Ant as in an Ele∣phant, as well in a worm as in an An∣gel, so his Godhead and might appears as well in the earth, as in the heavens, but methinks it had been a pretty fan∣cy, and not far from truth or reason, if they had held that Heaven and Earth had been as man and Wife, or male and female, seeing the Heavens were made as the male part of the world, by whose influence, motion and dews, the earth as the female part thereof out of her womb brings forth all necessary and living creatures.
33. On a Discourse of Necromancy, the Marquess thus delivered himself, that as none can be Scholars in a School, and not be subject to the Ma∣ster thereof: So none can study and put in practise the Circles and Art of Magick, without committing a horrible defection from God. 34. The Marquesse was of a dispo∣sition alwaies inclinable to charitable constructions, which suffered him not to want excuses, or fome cloak or other to throw over any mans imperfections. There was a Gentleman of high desert, who chanced in the Marquess his hear∣ing to come under the lash of some mens ceasures. Alas Gentlemen, said the Marquess, Will you have corn to grow without chffe, or light to be without its ad∣joyning darkness, or the sweetest hony with∣out unsavoury wax, or the pleasant wines, or liquors without their Lees and Dregs? As soon shall corn gr without chaffe, as a man of his parts shal be free from vain glry; worthless chaffe keeps the corn warm, and vain glory fires him to all those brave at∣chieviments. If you set a man on his horse, le him have his spurs. 35. It was ordinary with the Mar∣quess
to entertain Discourse with eve∣ry man according to the condition and profession he was of, and most com∣monly from the beginning of his Dis∣course, you should never know what the end would be, taking delight to de∣ceive the expectation of his Auditor: Upon a time, there was presented un∣to him a Lawyer, and he was inform∣ed hefore-hand how excellent a man he was in his profession; the Marquess thought with himself how he might pose him, and being brought in with other Gentlemen, after they had dined he was presented unto the Marquess. Sir, said the Marquess, I have received a very good character of you, they say you are very learned in the Law, I would very fain ask you one question, Any thing my Lord, said the Lawyer, that lies within my poor ability. I pray, said the Marquess, who was the first man that ever had a Dedimus potesta∣tem granted unto him? the Lawyer was so confounded, that he knew not what to say for a long time: at last he made a long and learned discourse concern∣ing the original of that Writ, and the Marquess gave him the hearing, but when he had done, he told him,
that hè came far short of the original thereof; for Adam was the first, that ever had fulness of power granted unto him, viz. when God gave him power to subdue the earth, and to have domi∣nion over every living creature. The Lawyer thankt his Lordship, and told him, that he thought the Law had not been so antient. Antient, said the Mar∣quess, there was the beginning of all your Courts of Justice, but I see you are but a common Lawyer that cannot derive your Pedigree from thence. 36. Aeneas Silvius said, to which the Marquess assents, That the Christian faith and Law, though it had not been confirmed by miracles, yet was most worthy to be received for the honesty therof. 37. There was a new married cou∣ple presented before the Marquess, the Bride a goodly proper woman, her face well feitured, an excellent eye she had, but was pitifully disfigured with the small Pox: the Marquess looking much upon her, and saying nothing to her a long while, we all knew that Silence was in labour for some notable Production, at last he advanceth to∣ward the young Bride, and asked he
Gentlewoman, Do you know why it is said, that God Almighty created man and builded woman? the Gentlewoman somewhat out of countenance, answe∣red, No indeed, my Lord: The Marquess asked her again, Do you know why you women are called Housewives? I think my Lord said the Bride, because good wives should keep at home, and not gad abroad. It is a good answer said the Marquess, but not the right, for women may be bad wives at home as well as abroad. The answer to my first question is, women are not said to be made as Adam was, which only signi∣fies plain work, but to be built, which signifies curiosity and cotrivance, and therefore as to my second question, a woman is called a housewife, because she is a house out of which all the Royal Families of Kings and Empe∣rors derive their extract: neither are you only compared unto houses, but unto Cities, Kingdoms, Churches, and Common-wealths. But do you know what house you are like? No in∣deed my Lord, said the Bride, why then I will tell you, when God builded the first woman, he made her his storehouse wherein he laid up all the race of man∣kind,
wherewith he replenishad the whole earth, but I must tell you Lady, God Almighty did not make you coa∣ches nor waggons, that you should al∣waies be gadding abroad. Whereat the Bridegroom made answer, My Lord, I think you for this, I hope my wife will remember it. My Lord, said the young Bride, you will read such a lecture to my husband, that he will never let me go abroad: O Lady said the Marquesse, he must not debar you of that liberty, provided, that you will never go a∣broad, but when you go like the Snail, who seldom stirs abroad, but whilst that blessing the dew of Heaven is up∣on the earth, that she may gather bene∣fit, and by her greatest care, and equal management, still carrys here house up∣on her back. O my Lord said she, if I should go abroad like the Snail, I should carry a house upon my back, and horns in my forehead. No Lady said the Mar∣quess, though she forks at you, yet they are no horns, the Snail can soon draw them in if you touch them, which no horned creature can perform, but she car∣rys them in her head, to teach you what you should provide & bear in your mind against you go to hay-making: but the
Marquess fearing that he had a little displeased her, he thought to make her amends by the following discourse. Sir, said he to the Bridegroom, you know I have compared your wife to a building, and I must commend your choice, for said he, alluding to her dis∣figurement, a goodly house must not be chosen by the smoothness or white∣ness of the wall, for such an one may be but a dairy-house, or a milk-house, nor according to the colours or paint∣ing on the outside, for such an one may be but a Tavern or an Alehouse; but if I see a house that is lofty and stately built, and have fair windows though the outside be but rough cast, yet I am sure there are goodly rooms within: and so both parties were well pleased. 38. It was told the Marquess that such a Romane Catholick, being sorely prest to take the oath of Supremacy, and being acquainted with another Gentleman that was a Protestant, and so like unto him that you could hardly distinguish them whilst they were to∣gether, much less asunder, this his image, as if Nature had chosen him to be his Representative, as the others part,
the right stone being pulled out, and a counterseit set in the right Ring, and what with the likeness of his countenance and his apparel, he pas∣sed for currant, which jest my Romane thought so good, that he must needs brag of it to the Marquess, but the Marquess no way liked it, asking him, Would you put another upon that which you would not do your self? What if the Devil, (you two being so alike one another) should mistake you for him, I assure you he would go near to marre the conceit. 39. Vespasian asked of Apollonius what was the cause of Neroes ruine; who an∣swered, That Nero could tune the harp well, but in Gvernment he did alwayes wind up the strings too high, or let them down too low. 40. Tere was a young and beautiful Lady, who was shewing the Marquess, that the colours that hung off such a Tower, was one of the curtains of her bed. To which my Lord replied, Madam, I would you would set that little boy that uses to stand behind the curtain, on the top of that Tower, that we may see whether or no he would drive away all those men with his bow and arrows. To which the Lady replied.
Cupid never raised a siege in his life, but he hath taken many a strong hold: then said the Marquess, I will tell you how you shall make yours impregnable. How my Lord, said the Lady? the Mar∣quess said unto her, whensoever you see a handsom young man be sure you shut your eyes, or else he will take the Fort of your Virginity, flying in at your Windows. 41. The Marquess highly commen∣ded Queen Elizabeth's wisdom and pru∣dence, thereupon relating this story, Queen Elizabeth being to resolve upon a great Officer, and being by some that canvased for others, put in some doubt of that person whom she meant to ad∣vance, called for Mr. Bacon, and told him, she was like one with a Lanthorn, seeking for a man, and seeming unsa∣tisfied in the choice she had of men for that place. Mr. Bacon answered her, that he had heard, that in old time there was usually painted on the Church walls the day of Doom, and God sitting in Judge∣ment, and St. Michael by him with a pair of Ballances, and the Soul, and the good deeds in one Ballance, and the aults and evil deeds in the other, and the souls Ballance went up far too light:
then was our Lady painted with a great pair of Beads, casting them into the light Ballance to make up the weight: So he said, place and authority which was in her hands to give, was like our Ladies Beds, which though men, through divers imperfe∣ctions were too light before, yet when they were cast in made weight competent. 42. There was an old servant of my Lords, who would needs make a young Captain; and at last took an opportunity to shew himself an arrant coward. This Captain upon a time, was to com∣mand a party to go out to make a mock salley, but as soon as ever he came within sight of the enemy, he squatted upon his belly behind the refuse of an old Brick-kill, for which his behavi∣our he was laughed at sufficiently: af∣ter that he came into the Castle, some there were who told this unto the Mar∣quess, who being willing to bring his old servant off with better credit, than he had brought off himself, told them, I thought I had heard you say, that it was a mock Salley, to which they an∣swered, that it was so, then said the Marquess, If it was but a mock salley, he can be but a mock coward, if you had been in
earnest, it may be he would not have played the fool in jest. 43. The Marquess was one day reading of us a Lecture of patience in our adver∣sity: amongst the rest of those witty say∣ings, which came from him, he told us that there was nothing so bad, but was good for something; for said he, if there were no silence, there would be no Musick; for the sudden stops which are in Musick add to the grace and per∣fection of the Art. Ignorance is a spur to knowledge, darkness a Pavilion to the Al∣mighty. A Cabbin or drawn chamber for us to sleep in. A Dungeon for the Judge to punish his Delinquents, and a foil for the Painter to make his shadows: so are afflictions good for our instructions, and adversities for our a∣mendments. 44. The Marquess had a new ser∣vant to wait upon him, who had the ill luck to think himself wiser than he was thought by others, insomuch that upon an occasion, he told the Mar∣quess, that he was not wise in such a thing, and that if he were as the Mar∣quess, he would do so and so: the Marquess hearing of him made him this gentle reply, Truly, if I knew
where to find a servant, that were wiser than his Master, I would give gold for such an one, but to have a servant that thinks himself wiser than his Master, for such an one I would not give a rush. 45. On a Discourse of vain glory, the Marquess related this story, That Archidamus King of Lacedemon, having received from Philip King of Macedon proud Letters, after the said Philip had won a victory over the Athenians, writ back to him, That if he measured his own shadow, he should find it no longer now, than it was before his victory. 46. When it was told the Marquess, that some would warrant him, that if he would, he might be Duke of Somer∣set, he made them this reply, When I was Earl of Worcester I was well to live, since I was a Marquess I am worse by one hundred thousand pounds, and if I should be a Duke, I should be an arrant beggar; where∣fore I had rather if I might go back again to my Earldm, than at this Rate keep on my pace to the Dukedom of Somerset. 47. At the beginning of the long Parliament, there were certain Rusticks who came unto Ragland Castle to search the Castle for arms, my Lord being a
Papist: the Marquess met them at the Castle gate, and desired to know whe∣ther they came to take away his mony, seeing they intended to disarm him; they answered no, but what they did, was because he was a Recusant, he said he was a Peer of the Realm, and no convict Recusant, and therefore the Law could not in reason take notice of any such things, and further, some sharp and dubious words coming from the Marquess, they were at last willing to take his word, but the Marquess not willing to part with them on such easie terms, having before resolved to return them one fright for another, which he thus effected; having carried them up and down the Castle, he at length brought them over a high bridge that arched over the Moat, that was be∣tween the Castle and the great Tower, wherein the Lord Herbert had lately contrived certain water-works, which when the several Engins and Wheels were to be set a going, much quantity of water through the hollow convey∣ances of the aquaeducts were to be let down from the top of the high Tower, which upon the first entrance of these wonderful Asinegoes, the Marquess
had given order that these catarrhacts should begin to fall, which made such a fearful and hideous noise, by reason of the hollowness of the Tower, and the neighbouring ecchoes of the Castle, and the waters that were between, and round them both, that there was such a roaring as if the mouth of Hell had been wide open, and all the Devils had been conjured up, that the poor silly men stood so amaz'd, as if they had been half dead, and yet they saw no∣thing: At last as the plot was laid, up comes a man staring, & running, crying out before he came at them, Lock to your selves my Masters, for the Lions are got loose: whereupon the searchers gave us such a loose, that they tumbled so over one another down the stairs, that it was thought one half of them had broken their necks, never looking behind them till they were sure they had got out of sight of the Castle. 48. There was a Colonel, who came unto the Marquess after the Ca∣stle was delivered, whom the Marquess very well received until such time, as the Colonel desired reparation of certain losses which he had sustained by
his son Clamorgan, the Marquess pray∣ed him not to call him to an account for other folks, for he had enough to do to answer for himself: whereupon the Colonel clapt his hat upon his head, and sate himself down in a chair of State, which was upon my Lords right hand, which the Marquess ob∣serving, gently said unto one of his servants, I pray reach him the footstool. 49. After much conference betwixt the Marquess, and General Fairfax, wherein many things were requested of the General by the Marquess, and be∣ing as he thought himself happy in the attainment, his Lordship was pleased to make a merry Petition to the General as he was taking his leave, viz. in the behalf of a couple of pigeons, which were wont to come to his hand, and feed out of it constantly, in whose be∣half he desired the General that he would be pleased to give him his Prote∣ction for them, fearing the little com∣mand that he should have over his Soldi∣ers in that behalf. To which the General said, I am glad to see your Lordship so merry. Oh said the Marquess, you have given me no other cause, and as
hasty as you are, you shall not go until I have told you a story. There were two men going up Hol∣born in a Cart to be hanged, one of them being very merry and jocond, gave of∣fence unto the other, who was as sad and dejected, insomuch as that the downcast man said unto the other, I wonder brother that you can be so fro∣lick, considering the business that we are going about. Tush, answered the other, thou art a fool, thou wentest a thie∣ving, and never thought what would become of thee, wherefore being on a sudden surprized thou fallest into such a shaking fit, that I am ashamed to see thee in that condition, whereas I was resolved to be hanged before ever I fell to stealing; which is the reason, no∣thing happening strange, or unexpect∣ed, I go so composed unto my death: so said the Marquess, I resolved to under∣go whatsoever, even the worst of evils that you were able to lay upon me, before ever I took up arms for my Soveraign, and therefore wonder not that I am so merry. 50. There was a Romane Catholick, who had been converted unto the Pro∣testant Religion, and giving the Mar∣quess of Worcester a visit, the Marquess
questioned him very seriously concern∣ing his revolt, and the ground of his di∣sertion; the Convert told him, that the ground of his departure from the Church of Rome, was because she had de∣parted from her self. You say very well said the Marques, but how do you prove that? to which demand the convert made this reply, viz. the Scriptures tell me so: whereupon the Marquess called for a Bi∣ble, giving command it should be a Bible cum privilegio Regis, which being brought unto him, he said unto the Gentleman, I will see whether it wil tell me any such thing, and holding it in his hands a pret∣ty while, at last he opened the Bible, and held it open as long, then he protested unto the afresaid Gentleman, that the Bible told him no such matter, and that he believed it to be so ful of truth, & sin∣cerity, and that it respected the salvati∣on of mens souls so much, that if there were any such thing, it would in charity (with which it was so fully fraught) do no less than acquaint him also with it. To which the Gentleman replied: My Lord, it is not the letter, cover or paper that tells me so, it is the sense & mean∣ing. I cry you mercy said the Marquess, who shall be judge of the meaning,
you or I? to whom the Gentleman gave his Lordship this answer, who comes nearest the truth. Then said the Marquess, how should we know who comes nearest the truth? we shall know that said the Gentleman by the word it self. I have told you said the Marquess, that the word it self sayes nothing: then said the Gentleman, there is a perswa∣sive spirit that directs every man & leads them into all truth who are seekers of her meerly for love of her self. Indeed said the Marquess, I have heard of such a Sect that is newly sprung up, who go under the name of Seekers, but I had ra∣ther be on the finders side. To which the Gentleman made answer. Seek & ye shall find. To which my L. replied, you must have day-light, or candle-light, or else your eys will do you no good: the Gen∣tleman made answer, that Christ was so easie to be found of all that sought him, that if we did but grope after him, we should find him. I said the Marquess, you say wel, but not when there is a light in the room; & thereupon the Marquess en∣tred upon a large discourse, perswading the gentleman to return to his mother a∣gain, whose arms were always open rea∣dy to embrace all that should return into her bosom, to whom the gentleman said
if I should turn now I should be despi∣sed on all sides. Oh, said the Marquess, if that be all, then all is nothing, for what can any man say more to you, than this, you have been abroad, and you are come home a∣gain? 51. The time being come, that the Pro∣phecy of Henry of Windsor must now fit the fatal destiny of Henry of Ragland, like a thunder-bolt, that splits down∣wards from the higher to the lower branch of the same tree, viz. that he should live long, and lose all that Ga∣rison, had the honour to make good the rear hope for a time, when the main body of the whole Kingdom was quite forlorn; and in her last for∣tunate and successfully sally, like a dy∣ing Taper to make one great blaze be∣fore she went out, in which exploit some of her Gentlemen were so gallant, as to bring home Trophies of her victo∣ries, Colours, which were no sooner dishevelled, but they spread to gather with themselves the praises of these ta∣kers, these being presented to the Mar∣quess, he turned away his face, saying, These are no natural colours, they are but bor∣rowed, intimating how unnatural the war was, and how soon these Colours must be restored.
52. When it was told his Lordship not long before he dyed, that leave was obtained by the Parliament, that he might be buried in Windsor Castle, with∣in the great Chappel, and wherein di∣vers of his Ancestors lie buried, with some sprightliness he spake aloud, God bless us all, why then I shall take a bet∣ter Castle when I am dead, then they took from me whilst I was alive. 53. The Marquess a little before he dyed, having addressed himself to the House of Peers, and having found very hard usage from them, broke forth into these expressions. Oh said he, When the Noblest and highest element, Courts the noise of their Waves, the ruest Emblem of the madness of the people, and when the high∣est Region stoops unto the lower, and the lowest gets up into the highest seat, What can be expected but a Chaos of confusion and desolation of the u∣niverse? I do believe, that they are so near unto their end, that as weak as I am, there is Physick to be had, if a man could find it to prolong my days, that I might outlive their honours. Not many hours before he died, reflecting
upon the Articles that he had waived upon the Surrender of Ragland into the Parliaments hands, Ah Doctor said he, to Doctor Baily, If I had made use of the Articles, which you had procu∣red in my behalf, I had not been now so near unto the end of my life, and the beginning of my happiness, I for∣sook life, liberty & estate which I might have had, and threw my self upon their mercy, which when I had done, if to seise upon all my goods, to pull down my house, to sell my estate, and to send for up such a weak body, as mine was, so enseebled by diseases in the dead of winter, and the Winter of mine age, be merciful, What are they whose mercies are so cruel? Neither do I expect that they should stop at all this, for I fear they will persecute me after death: you tell me, that when I am dead, you will petition the Parliament for money to bury me, then will they appoint those who will dispose of the time and man∣ner of my burial; and you shall see, that they (being it is so near the good time) will cause me to be buried ac∣cording to the directory in spight of Christmas day upon Christmas: and so they did.
APOPHTHEGMS OF THE LORD BACON HEnry the fourth of France his Queen was great with Child, Count Soisons that had his ex∣pectations upon the Crown, when it was twice or thrice thought, that the Queen was with Child before, said to some of his friends, that it was but a pil∣low, this had some waies come to the Kings ears, who kept it till when the Queen waxed great, and then called the Count of Soisons to him, and said, laying his hands upon the Queens belly, Come Cousin, it is no pillow: Yes Sir, answered the Count Soisons, it is a pillow for all France o sleep upon.
2. Pace the bitter fool, was not suffer∣ed to come at the Queen, because  his bitter humour, yet at one time some pressed the Queen, that he should come to her, undertaking for him, th he should keep compass, so he wa brought to her, and the Queen said Come on Pace, now we shall hear  our faults, saith Pace, I do not use talk of that, that all the Town talks of. 3. My Lord of Essex at the Ste of Rhoan made twenty four Knights, whch at that time was a great matter; divers of those Gentlemen were of wer and small means, which when Queen Elizabeth heard, she said, My Lord mi have done well to have built his Alms here before he made his Knights. 4. A great Officer in France was  danger to have lost hs place, but h Wife by her it and means making made his peace, whereupon a pleasa fellow said, that he had been crusht,  that he saved himself upon his hrns. 5. Caesar Borgia after long devisi between him and the Lords of Romagn sell to accord with them, in this accor there was an article that he should no at any time call them all together  person, the meaning was, that know∣ing
his dangerous nature, if he meant them treason, some one might be free to revenge the rest, nevertheless he did with such art and fair usage win their confidence, that he brought them all together to Councel, where he mur∣tered them all, this act when it was related unto Pope Alexander, Caesar Bor∣gias father by a Cardinal, as a thing hap∣py, but very perfidious, the Pope said, It was they that had broke their Covenant first in coming all together. 6. Pope Julius the third, when he was made Pope, gave his hat unto a youth, a favourite of his, with great scandal, whereupon at one time a Cardinal that might be free with him, said modestly to him, What did your holiness see in that young man to make him Cardinal? Julius answered, What did you see in me to make me Pope? 7. The same Julius upon like occa∣sion of speech, why he should bear so great affect on to the same young man, would say, That he found by Astrology, that it was the youths destiny to be a great Pre∣late, which was impossible, except himself were Pope, and therefore that he did raie him, as  drer n of his own frtune.
8. Clodius was acquit by a corrupt Jury, that had palpably taken shares of money, before they gave up their ver∣dict, they prayed of the Senate a guard, that they might do their con∣sciences freely, for Clodius was a very seditious young Noble man, where∣upon all the World gave him for con∣demned, but acquitted he was. Catu∣lus the next day, seeing some of them that had acquitted him together, said to them, What made you to ask of us a guard? were you afraid your mony should have been taken from you? 9. Diogenes having seen that the King∣dom of Macedon, which before was contemptible, and low, began to come alost, when he died, was asked how he would be buried, he answered, With my face downward; for within a while the world will be turned upside down, and then I shall lie right. 10. Sir Nicolas Bacon, being appoint∣ed a Judge for the Northern Circuit, and having brought his Trials that came before him to such a passe, as the passing of Sentence on Malefactors, he was by one of the Malesactors mightily importuned for to save his life, which
when nothing that he had said did a∣vail, he at length desired his mercy on the account of kindred: Prethee said my Lord Judge, how came that in? Why, if it please you my Lord, your name is Bacon, and mine is Hog, and in all ages Hog and Bacon have been so near kindred that they are not to be separa∣ted. I but replied Judge Bacon, you and I cannot be kindred, except you be hanged; for Hog is not Bacon until it be well hang∣ed. 11. Two Scholars and a Countrey man travelling upon the Road, one night lodged all in one Inn, and supt to∣gether, where the Scholars thought to have put a trick upon the Countrey man which was thus; the Scholars ap∣pointed for supper two Pigeons and a fat Capon, which being ready, was brought up, and they having sate down, the one Scholar took up one Pigeon, the other Scholar took the other Pige∣on, thinking thereby that the Coun∣trey man should have sate still until that they were ready for the carving of the Capon, which he perceiving, took the Capon, and laid it on his trencher, and thus said, Daintily contrived, every one a bird.
12. Themistocles in his lower fortune was in love with a young Gentleman, which scorned him; when he grew to his greatness, which was soon after, the young Gentleman sought to him, but Themistocles said, We are both grown but wise too late. 13. Jack Roberts was desired by his Taylour, when the reckoning grew somewhat high, to have a Bill of his hand. Roberts said, I am content, but you must let no man know it; when the Taylour brought him the Bill, he tore it as in choler, and said to him, You use me not well, you promised me that no man should know it, and here you have put in: Be it known unto all men by these Presents. 14. Sir Walter Raleigh was wont to say of the Ladies of Queen Elizabeths Privy Chamber, and Bed Chmber, That they were like Wies, they could do hurt, but they could do no good. 15. Bim that was an Athlest, was shewed in a Port City, in a Temple of Neptune, many Tables or Pictures, of such as had in Tempests made their vows unto Neptune, and were saved from shipwrack, and was asked, How
say you now; Do you not acknow∣ledge the power of the Gods? she said o, but where are they painted, that have been drowned after their vows? 16. Bias was sailing; and there fell out a great Tempest, and the Marriners, that were wicked and dissolute fellows called upon their Gods, but Bias said unto them, Peace, let them not know ye are here. 17. There was a Minister deprived for inconformity, who said, to some of his friends, that if they deprived him, it should cost an hundred mens lives, the party understood it, as if be∣ing a turbulent fellow, he would have moved sedition, and complained of him, whereupon being convented and opposed upon that speech, he said his meaning was, That if he lost his benefice, he would practise Physick, and then he thought he should kill an hundred men in time. 18. Michael Angle, the famous Pain∣ter painting in the Popes Chappel, the Portraiture of Hell and damned souls, made one of the damned souls so like a Cardinal that was his enemy, as every body at first sight knew it, whereupon the Cardinal complained to Pope Cle∣ment
desiring it might be defaced, who said unto him, Why, you know very well, I have power to deliver a soul out of Purga∣tory, but not out of Hell. 19. Alcibiades came to Pericles, and stayed a while ere he was admitted, when he came in, Pericles civilly excused it, and said, I was studying how to give my account, but Alcibiades said to him, If you will be ruled by me, study rather how to give no account. 20. Cicero was at dinner, where there was an ancient Lady that spake of her years, and said she was but forty years old, one that sate by Cicero, round∣ed him in the ear, and said she talks of forty years, and she is far more out of question: Cicero answered him again, I must believe her, for I have heard her say so, any time these ten years. 21. There was a Souldier, that vant∣ed before Julius Cesar, of hurts he had received in his face: Julius Cesar know∣ing him to be a Coward, told him, You were left take heed next time you run away, how you look back. 22. Secretary Bourns son kept a Gen∣tlemans wife in Shropshire, who lived from her husband with him, when he
was weary of her he caused her husband to be dealt with to take her home, and offered him five hundred pounds for re∣paration: The Gentleman went to Sir Henry Sidney, to take his advice upon this offer, telling him, that his Wife promised now a new life; & to tell him truth, five hundred pounds would come well with him; and besides that some∣times he wanted a woman in his bed. By my Troth, said Sir Henry Sidney, take her home, and take the mony, then whereas o∣ther Cukolds wear their horns plain, you may near yours guilt. 23. When Rablais, the great jester of France, lay on his death bed, and they gave him the extream unction, a familiar friend of his came to him af∣terwards, and asked him how he did, Rablais answered, Even going my journey, they have greased my boots already. 24. When Vespasian passed from Jury to take upon him the Empire, he went by Alexandria, where remained two fa∣mous Philosophers, Apollonius, and Euphrates; the Emperour heard them discoursing touching matters of State, in the presence of many, and when he was weary of them, he brake off in a
secret dersion, finding their discourses, but speculative, and not to be put in practice, said, O that I might govern wise men, and wise men govern me. 25. Mr. Bromley Sollicitor, giving in evidence for a deed, which was im∣peached to be fraudulent, was arged by the Councel on the other side with this presumption, that in two former sits when Title was made, that deed was passed over in silence, and some other conveyance stood upon: Mr. Justice Ci∣line taking in with that side, asked the Sollicitor, I pray thee Mr. Sollicitor, let me ask you a familiar question, I have two geldings in my Stable; I have divers times business of importance, & still I send forth one of my Geldings and not the other, would you not think I set him aside for a Jade? No my Lord, said Bromley, I would think you spared him for your own Saddle. 26. Alphonso Cartillo was informed by his Steward of the greatness of his ex∣pence being such as he could not hold out with, the Bishop asked him, wherein it chiefly rose, his Steward told him in the multitude of his Servants; the Bishop bid him make a note of those that were necessary, and those that
might be put off, which he did, and the Bshop taking occasion to read it before most of his Servants, said to his Steward, Well, let these remain, because I need them, and these other, because they need me. 27. Queen Elizabeth was wont to say other instructions to get officers, That they were like to garments, strait at the first putting on, but did by and by near hose enough. 28. Thales as he looked upon the stars, fell into the water, whereupon it was after said, That if he had looked into the water he might have seen the stars, but looking up to the Stars, he could not, see the water. 29. The Book of deposing Richard the second, and the coming in of Henry the fourth, supposed to be written by Doctor Heywood, who was committed to the Tower for it, had much incensed Queen Elizabeth, and she asked Master Bacon, being then of her learned Coun∣cel, whether there were no Treason contained in it, Master Bacon intending to do him a pleasure, and to take off the Queens bitterness with a jest, an∣swered, No Madam, for Treason I can∣not deliver opinion, that there is any,
but very much felony: the Queen ap∣prehending it gladly, asked how and wherein? Master Bacon answered, Be∣cause he had stollen many of his Sentences and conceits out of Cornelius Tacitus. 30. A man and his wife in bed toge∣ther, she towards morning pretended her self to be ill at ease, desiring to lie on her husbands side, so the good man to please her came over her, making some short stay in his passage over, where she had not long lain, but desired to lie in her old place again, quoth he how can it be effected, she answered, come over me again, I had rather, said he go a mile and a half about. 31. A Thief being arraigned at the Bar, for stealing of a Mare, in his plead∣ing urged many things in his own be∣half, and at last nothing availing, he told the Bench, the Mare rather stole him, than he the Mare, which in brief he thus related, that passing over several grounds about his lawful occasions, he was pursued close by a fierce Mastive dog, & so was forced to save himself by leaping over a hedge, which being of an agl body he effected, and in leaping, a Mare standing on the other side of the
hedge, leaped upon her back, who run∣ning furiously away with him he could not by any means stop her until he came to the next Town, in which Town the owner of the Mare lived, and there was he taken and here arraigned. 32. Popham when he was Speaker, and the lower house had sate long, and done in effect nothing, coming one day to Queen Elizabeth, she said unto him, Now Mr Speaker, what hath passed in the lower House, he answered, If it please your Majesty seven weeks. 33. Pope Xystus the fifth, who was a poor mans Son, and his Fathers house ill thatcht, so that the Sun came in, in many places, would sport with his ig∣nobility, and say, he was Son of an illustri∣ous house. 34. When the King of Spain conque∣red Portugal, he gave a special charge to the Lieutenant, that the Souldiers should not spoil, lest he should alie∣nate the hearts of the people. The Army also suffered much scarcity of victual, whereupon the Spanish Soul∣diers would afterwards say, That they had won the King a Kingdom, as the King∣dom of heaven useth to be won, by fasting and
abstaining from that that is another mans. 35. Master Savill was asked his opi∣nion touching Poets, who answered, He thought them the best Writers next to those that write Prose. 36. Master Mason of Trinity Colledge, sent his Pupil to another of the Fel∣lows to borrow a Book of him, who told him I am loath to lend my Books out of my Chamber, but if it please thy Tutor o come and read upon it in my Chamber, he shal as long as he will. It was winter, and some daies after the same Fellow sent to Mr. Mason to borrow hs Bellows, but Master Mason, said to his Pupil, I am loath to lend my Bellows out of my Chamber, but if thy Tutor would come and blow the Fire in my Chamber, he shall as long as he will. 37. Nero did cut a youth, as if he would have transformed him into a woman, and called him Wife: there was a Senator of Rome, that said secretly to his friend, It was pity Nero's father had not had such a Wife. 38. A notorious Rogue being brought to the Bar, and knowing his case to be desperate, instead of pleading he took to himself the liberty of jesting
and thus said, I charge you in the King name, to seise and take away that man (mea∣ning the Judge) in the red Gowns for I go in danger of my life because of him. 39. Galba succeeded Nero, and his age being much despised, there was much li∣cence and confusion in Rome, whereup∣on a Senator said in full Senate, It were letter live where nothing is lawful, than where all things are lawful. 40. In Flanders by accident, a Fle∣mish Tiler fell from the top of a house upon a Spaniard, and killed him, though he escaped himself, the next of the blood prosecuted his death with great violence, and when he was offered pe∣cuniary recompence, nothing would serve him, but Lex talionis, whereupon the Judge said to him, That if he did urge that sentence it must be, that he should go up t the top of the house, and then fall down upon the Tiler. 41. Queen Elizabeth was delatory e∣nough in suits of her own nature, and the Lord Treasurer Burleigh to feed her humour, would say to her, Madam, You do well to let Suitors stay (for I shall tell you) if you grant them speedily, they will ce again the sooner.
42. They feign a Tale of Sextus Quintus, that after his death he went to Hell, and the Porter of Hell said to him, you have some reason to offer your self to this place, but yet I have order not to receive you, you have a place of your own, Purgatory, you may go thi∣ther: so he went away, and sought Purgatory a great while, and could find no such place. Upon that he took heart and went to Heaven, and knocked, and Saint Peter asked who was there? he said Sextus Pope, whereunto St. Peter said, why do you knock? you have the keys, Sextus answered, It is true, but it is so long since they were given, as I doubt the wards of the lock be altered. 43. A rough hewn Seaman being brought before a wise Jst ass, for some misdemeanour, was by him sent away to prison, and being somewhat refra∣ctory after he heard his doom, insomuch as he would not stir a foot from the place he stood, saying, it were better to stand where he was, than go to a worse place. The Justice thereupon to shew the strength of his learning, took him by the shoulder, and said, Thou shalt go Nogus vogus, instead of Nolens volens.
44. Charles King of Swedon, a great enemy of the Jesuits, when he took a∣ny of their Colledges, he would hang the old Jesuites, and put the young to his Mines, saying, That since they wrought so hard above ground, he would try how they could work under ground. 45. In Chancery, one time, when the Councel of the parties set forth the boundary of the Land in question, by the plot, and the Councel of one part said, we lie on this side my Lord, and the Councel of the other part said, we lie on this side. The Lord Chancellour Hatton stood up and said. If you lie on both sides, whom will you have e to believe? 46. Sir Amice Pawlet when he saw too much hast made in any matter, was wont to say, Stay a while that we may make an end the sooner. 47. The Deputies of the Reformed Religion, after the Massacre which was upon St. Bartholomews day, treated with the King and Queen-mother, and some other of the Councel, for a peace, both sides were agreed upon the Arti∣cles, the question was upon the securi∣ty of performance, after some particu∣lars
propounded and rejected, the Queen Mother said, Why, is not the word of a King sufficient security? One of the De∣puties answered, No by Saint Bartholo∣mew, Madm. 48. When the Archduke did raise his siege from Grave the then Secretary came to Queen Elizabeth, and the Queen having intelligence first, said to the Se∣cretary, Wot you what, the Arch∣duke is risen from the grave! he an∣swered, What without the Trumpet of the Archangel? the Queen replied, yes with∣out sound of Trumpet. 49. Francis the first of France, used for his pleasure sometimes to go dis∣guised: so walking one day in the com∣pany of the Cardinal of Burbon, near Paris, he met with a peasant with a new pair of shoes upon his arm; so he cal∣led him unto him, and said, By our La∣dy, these be good shoes, What did ey cost thee? the Peasant said gesse, the King said, I think some five fols, saith the Peasant you have lied but a Carlois, What villan said the Cardinal of Burbon, thou art dead, it is the King, the Peasant replyed, The Devil take him of you and me that knew so much.
50. Dionysius the tyrant after he was deposed and brought to Corinth, kept a School, many used to visit him, and amongst others, one when he came in opened hs Mantle, and shook his cloaths, thinking to give Dionysius a gentle scorn, because it was the man∣ner to do so for them that came in to him whilst he was Tyrant, but Diony∣sius said, I pray thee do so rather when thou goest out, that we may see thou stealest nothing away. 51. Hanniball said of Fabus Maximus, and of Marcellus, whereof the former waited upon him, that he could make no progress in his victories, and the latter had many sharp fights with him, That he feared Fabus like a Tutour, and Marcellus like an enemy. 52. One was saying that his great Grandfather, and Grandfather, and Father died at Sea, said another that heard him, and I were as you, I would never come at Sea, Why saith he, where did your great Grandfather, Grandfa∣ther, and Father die? He answered where, but in their beds? saith the o∣ther, And I were as you, I would never come to bed.
53. Aristippus was earnest suitor to Dionysius for somewhat, who would give no ear to his suit, Aristippus fell at his feet, then Dionysius granted it, one that stood by said afterwards to Aristippus, you a Philosopher, and to be so base as to cast your self at the Tyrants feet, to get a suit, Aristippus answered, The fault is not mine, but the fault is in Dionysius, that carries his ears in his feet. 54. There was a young man in Rome, that was very like Augustus Cesar, Augustus took knowledge of him, and sent for the man, and asked him, Was your Mother never at Rome? he answer∣ed, No Sir, but my Father was. 55. A Physitian advised his Patient that had sore eyes, that he should ab∣stain from Wine, but the Patient said, I think rather Sir, from wine and water, for I have often marked it in blew eyes, and I have seen water come forth, but never Wine. 56. Solon when he wept for his sons death, one said to him, Weeping will not help, answered, Alas, therefore I weep, because weeping will not help. 57. Solon being asked, whether he had given the Athenians the best Laws, an∣swered,
yea, the best of those they would have received. 58. One said to Aristippus, It is a strange thing, Why should men rather give to the poor than to Philosophers? he answered, Because they think themselves may sooner come to be poor than to be Philo∣sophers. 59. It fell out so, that as Livia went abroad in Rome, there met her naked young men that were sporting in the streets, which Augustus was about to punish severely in them, but Livia spake for them, and said, It was no more to chast women than so many Statues. 60. A debaucht Seaman being brought before a Justice of Peace upon the ac∣count of swearing, was by the Justice commanded to deposit his Fine in that behalf provided, which was two shil∣lings, he thereupon plucking out of his pocket a half-crown, asked the Justice what was the rate he was to pay for cursing, the Justice told him six pence, quoth he then, A Pox take you all for a company of knaves and fools, & there's half a crown for you, I wil never stand changing of mony 61. Augustus Cesar was invited to
supper, by one of his old friends, that had conversed with him in his lesse for∣tunes, and had but ordinary entertain∣ment, whereupon at his going away he said, I did not know that you and I were so familiar. 62. Augustus Caesar would say, That he wondred that Alexander feared he should want work, having no more to conquer, as if it were not as hard a matter to keep, as to conquer. 63. Antigonus when it was told him, that the enemies had such vollies of ar∣rows, that they did hide the Sun, said, That falls out well, for it is hot weather, and we shall fight in the shade. 64. Augustus Caesar did write to Livia, who was over sensible of some ill words that had been spoken of them both, Let it not trouble you my Livia, if any man speak evil of us, for we have enough, that no man can do ill unto us. 65. Agathocles after he had taken Sy∣racusa, the men whereof during the siege had in a bravery spoken of him all the villany, that might be, sold the Sy∣racusians for slaves, and said, Now if you use such words of me, I will tell your Masters of you.
66. Dionysius the elder, when he saw his son in many things very inordinate, said to him, Did you ever know me do such things,? his son answered, No, but you had not a Tyrant to your Father; the fa∣ther replied, no nor you if you take these courses, will have a Tyrant to your Sn. 67. Calisthenes the Philosopher, that followed Alexanders Court, and hated the King, was asked by one, how one should beme the famousest mn in the world, answered, by taking away him that is. 68. Sir Edward Coke was wont to say when a great man came to Dinner to him, and gave him no knowledge of his coming, Well, since you sent me no wrd of your coming, you shall dine with me, but if I had known of your coming, I would have dined with you. 69. Diogines begging, as divers Philo∣sophers then used, did beg more of a prodigal man, than of the rest that were present, whereupon one said to him, See your business, that when you see a liberal mind, you will take most of him, said Diogines, but I mean to beg of the rest again. 70. Sir Nicolas Bacon being Keeper of
the Seal, when Queen Elizabeth in Pro∣gress came to his house at Redgrave, and said to him, My Lord, what a little house have you gotten? said, Madam, my house is well, but it is you that have made me too great for my house. 71. Agesilaus, when one told him there was one did excellently counter∣feit a Nightingale, and would have had him heard him, said, Why, I have heard the Nightingale her self. 72. A great Nobleman upon the complaint of a servant of his, laid a Citizen by the heels, thinking to bend him to his servants desire, but the fel∣low being stubborn the servant came to his Lord, and told him, your Lordship I know hath gone as far, as well you may, but it works not; for yonderfellow is more perverse than before. Said my Lord, Lets forget him a while, and then he will remember himself. 73. One came to a Cardinal in Rome, and told him that he had brought his Lordship a dainty white Palfrie, but he fell lame by the way, saith the Cardi∣nal to him, e tell thee what thou shalt do, go to such a Cardinal, and such a Cardinal, naming him half a dozen Cardi∣nals,
and tell them as much, and so where∣as by thy horse if he had been sound, thou couldst have pleased but one, with thy lame horse thou maist please half a dozen. 74. A witty Rogue coming into a lace-shop, said he had occasion for some lace, choice where of being shew∣ed him, he at last pitched upon one pattern, and asked them how much they would have for so much as would reach from ear to ear, for so much he ad occasion for, they told him for so much: so some few words passing be∣tween them, he at last agreed, and told down his mony for it, and began to measure on his own head, thus sang, One ear is here, and the other is nailed to the Pillory in Bristoll, and I fear you have not so much of this Lace by you at present as will erfect my bargain; therefore this piece of Lace shall suffice at present in part of pay∣ment, & provide the rest with all expedition. 75. Iphicrates the Athenian, in a Treaty that he had with the Lacedemoni∣ns for peace, in which question, was a∣bout security for observing the same, said, The Athenians would not accept of a∣y security, except the Lacedemonians did yield up unto them those things, whereby it
might be manifest, that they could not h them if they would. 76. Euripedes would say of persons that were beautiful, and yet in some years, In fairest bodies not only the spring is pleasant, but also the Autumn. 77. After a great fright there came to the Camp of Consalvo the great Captain, a gentleman proudly hors'd and arm'd, Diego de Mendiza asked the great Cap∣tain, Who's this? who answered, It is St. Hermes, that never appears but after a stor 78. There was a Captain sent to a exploit by his General, with forces tha were not likely to atchieve the enter∣prize, the Captain said to him, Sir, ap∣point but half so many, why saith the General? the Captain answered, Be∣cause it is better fewer dye than more. 79. They would say of the Duke o Guise, Henry that had sold and mortga∣ged all his Patrimony to suffice th great gifts that he had made, That  was the greatest Usurer of France, becaus all his estate was in Obligations. 80. There was a Harbenger who ha lodged a Gentleman in a very ill room who expostulated with him somewhat rudely, but the Harbenger carles said, You will take pleasure in it when yo are out of it.
82. There was one that died greatly in Debt, when it was reported in some company, where divers of his Cre∣tors were, that he was dead, one began to say in good saith, then he hath car∣ried five hundred ducates of mine with him into the other world; and another of them said, and two hundred of mine; and some others spake of several sums of theirs: whereupon one that was a∣mongst them said, Well, I see now, that though a man cannot carry any of his own with him, into the other world, yet he may carry other mens. 83. Francis Carvaniel, that was the great Captain of the Rebels of Peru, had often given the chase to Diego Centeno, a principal Commander of the Emperors party, he was afterwards taken by the Emperors Lieutenant Jsoa, and com∣mitted to the custody of Diego Centeno, who used him with all possible courte∣sie, insomuch as Carvaniel asked him, I pray Sir, who are you that use me with this Courtesie? Centeno said, do you not know Diego Centeno, Carvaniel nswered, in good saith, Sir, I have been so used to see your back, as I knew not your face. Carvaniel, when he was drawn to execution, being fourscore and five
years old, and laid upon the hurdle, said, What young in Cradle, old in Cradle? 84. There is a Spanish Adage, Love without end hath no end, meaning, that if it were begun not upon particular ends it would last. 85. Cato the elder, being aged, bu∣ried his wife, and married a young wo∣man, his Son came to him and said, Sir, what have I offended you, that you have brought a step-mother into your house? the old man answered Nay, quite contrary Son, thou pleasest me so well, that I would be glad to have more such. 86. Philip, Alexanders Father, gave Sentence against a Prisoner, at which time he was drowsy, and seemed to give small attention, the Prisoner after sen∣tence was pronounced, said, I appeal: the King somewhat scared, said, to whom do you appeal? the Prisoner answered, from Philip when he gave no ear, to Phi∣lip when he shall give ear. 87. The same Philip maintained an Argument with a Musician in points of his Art somewhat peremptorily, but the Musician said to him, God forbid Sir, your fortune were so hard, that you should know these things better than I.
88. There was a Philosopher that disputed with Adrian the Emperor, and did it but weakly, one of his friends that had been by, afterwards said, Methinks you were not like your self last day in argument with the Emperor, I could have answered better my self, Why? said the Philosopher, Would you have me con∣tend with him that commands thirty Le∣gions? A woman being suspected by her hus∣band for dishonesty, and being by him at last prest very hard about it, made him quick answer with many protestations, That she knew no more of what he said, than the man in the Moon: Now the Captain of the ship called the Moon was the ve∣ry man she so much loved. 89. Diogenes was asked in a kind of scorn, what was the matter that Phi∣losophers haunted rich men, and not rich men Philosophers, he answered, Because the one knew what they wanted, the other did not. 90. Demetrius King of Macedon, would at times retire himself from business, and give himself wholly to pleasures, one day of those his retirings, giving out that he was sick, his Father Antigo∣nus came on the sudden to visit him, and
met a fair dainty youth coming out of his chamber, when Antigonus came in, Demetrius said, the Feaver left me right now. Antigonus replied, I thinkit was he that I met at the door. 91. There was a Merchant far in debt that died, his goods and houshold stuffe was set forth to sale, there was one that bought only his pillow, and said, This Pillow sure is good to sleep upon, since he could sleep that owed so many debts. 92. A Gentleman brought Msick to his Ladies Window, who hated him, and had warned him ost away, and when he persisted, she threw stones at him, whereupon a friend of his that was in his company said to him, What greater honur can you have to yur Musick, than that stones come about you, as they did to Orpheus? 93. When it was said to , The Athenians have condemned you to die, he said again, and Nature them. 94. Demsthenes when he fled from the battel, and that it was reproached to him, said, That he that flies might fight again. 95. Antanaclidas, when an Athenian said to him, the Spartans are unlearned,
said again, True, for we have learned no evil, nor vice of you. 96. Alexander when his father wshed him to run for the price of the race at the Olympian games, for he was very swift, said, he would, if he might run with Kings. 97. When Alexander passed into Asia, he gave large donatives to his Captains and other principal men of vertue, in∣somuch as Parmenio asked him, Sir what do you keep for your self? he answered, hope. 98. Antigonus used oft to go disgui∣sed, and listen at the Tents of his Souldiers, and at a time heard some that spoke very ill of him, whereupon he opened the Tent a little, and said to them, If you will speak evil of me, you should o a little further off. 99. Vespasian set a Tribute upon U∣rine, Tits his Son emboldened himself to speak to his Father of it, and repre∣sented it as a thing ndign, and fordid, Vespasian said nothing for the time, but a while after, when it was forgotten, sent for a piece of silver out of the Tribute mony, and called to his Son, bidding him smoll to lie, and asked him whether he found any offence, who said no: Why
lo said Vespasian again, and yet this comes out of Urine. 100. Nerva the Emperor succeeded Domitian, who was tyrannical, so as in his time many noble houses were over∣thrown by false accusations, the instru∣ments whereof were chiefly Marcellus, and Regulus the Emperor; he one night slpp'd privately with some six or seven, amongst which there was one that was a dangerous man, and began to take the like courses, as Marcellus and Re∣gulus had done; the Emperor fell into discourse of the injustice and tyranny of the former time, and by name of the two accusers, and said, What should we do with them if we had them na? one of them that was at supper, and a free spo∣ken Senatour said, Marry they should sup with us. 101. There was one that found a great mass of mony buried under ground in his Grandfathers house, and being som∣what doubtful of the case, signified to the Emperor, that he had found such a treasure; the Emperor made a receipt thus, use it, he writ back again, that the sum was greater than his estate, or condition could use, the Emperor writ a new receipt thus; Abuse it.
102. A Spaniard was censuring to a French Gentleman the want of devoti∣on amongst the French, in that, where∣as in Spain, when the Sacrament goes to the sick, any that meets with it turns back, and waits upon it to the house where it goes, but in France they only do reverence, and pass by, but the French Gentleman answered him, There is reason for it, for here with us. Christ is se∣cure amongst his friends, but in Spain, there be so many Jews and Marannos, that it is not amisse for him to have a convoy. 103. Coranus the Spaniard, at a Table at dinner, sell into an extolling of his own Father, and said, if he should have wished of God, he could not have cho∣sen amongst men a better Father, Sir Henry Savil said, What not Abraham? Now Coranus was doubted to descend of a race of Jews. 104. Gonsalvo would say, The honour of a Souldier ought to be of a strong web, meaning that it should not be so fine and curious that every little disgrace should catch and stick in it. 105. One of the seven wise men were wont to say, That laws were like cob∣webs,
where the small flies were caught, and the great brake through. 108. An apprentice of London being brought before the Chamberlain by his Master for the sin of incontinency, even with his own Mistress: the Chamber∣lain thereupon gave him many Christi∣an Exhortations, and at last he men∣tioned and prest the chastity of Joseph when his Mistress tempted him, with the like crime of incontinency. I Sir, said the Apprentice, but if Josephs Mistress had been as handsom as mine is, he could  have forborn. 109. Plato the Divine Philosopher, was wont to say, That the Devil was a Painter to many whore masters, in their lea∣ving afair wife for a soul whore. 110. Bias gave in precept, love as if you should hereafter hate, and hate as if you should hereafter love. 111. Aristippus being reprehended of Luxury, by one that was not rich, for that he gave six Crowns for a small fish, answered, Why, what would you have gi∣ven? the other said some twelve pence, Ari∣stippus said again, and six Crowns is no more with me. 112. Julius Cesar, as he posted by was by acclamation of some tha  ∣orned
called King, to try how the peo∣ple would take it; the people shewed great mmute, and dstast at it: Cesar finding where the wind stood, fleight∣edit; and said, I am not King but Ce∣sar, as of they had mistook his name, for Rex was a sirname amongst the Ro∣mans, as King is with us. 113. When Crosus for his glory shew∣ed Solon great. Treasure of Gold, Solon said to him, If another come that hath better Iron than you, he will be master of all this gold. 114. There was a Gentleman that came to the Tlt all in Orange Tawny, and air very ill, the next day he came all in green, and ran worse, there was one of the lookers on askt another, what's the reason that this Gentleman changeth his colours, the other answer∣ed, Sure, because it may be reported, that the Gentleman in the green, ran worse than the Gentleman in the Orange tawny. 115. Aristippus said, That those that studied particular sciences, and neg∣lected Philosophy, were like Penelope's Wooers, that made love to the waiting wo∣men. 116. Plato reproved secretly a young
man for entring into a desolate liouse, the young man said to him, what for so small a mater? Plato replied, But Cu∣stome is no small matter. 117. Pyrrhus when his friends con∣gratulated to him his victory over the Romans under the conduct of Fabrilus, but with great slaughter on his own side, said to them again, yes, but if we have such another victory we are undone. 118. Cineas was an excellent Ora∣tour and States-man, and principal Friend and Councellour to Pyrrhus, and falling in inward talk with him; and discerning the Kings endless ambition, Pyrrhus opened himself unto him, that he intended first a war upon Italy, and hoped to atchieve it, Cineas asked him, Sir, What will you do then? then saith he, we will attempt Sicily, Cineas said, well Sir, What then? said Pyrrhus, if the gods favour us, we may conquer Africk and Carthage, What then Sir, saith Cineas? nay then saith Pyrrhus we may take our rest, and Sacrifice and feast every day, and make merry with our friends, Alas Sir, said Cineas, may we not do so now with∣out all this ado? 119. The Embassadours of Afiami∣nor
came to Antonius, after he had impo∣sed upon them a double Tax, and said plainly to him, That if he would have two Tributes in one year, he must give them two seed times, and two Harvests. 120. Lamia the Curtizan had all power with Demetrius King of Macedon and by her instigations he did many un∣just and cruel acts, whereupon Lysima∣chus said, That it was the first time that e∣ver he knew a Where play in a Tragedy. 121. Bisquet, Jester to Francis the first King of France, did keep a Calen∣der of Fools, wherewith he did use to make the King sport, telling him ever the reason why he put every one in∣to his Calendar: so when Charles the fifth passed upon confidence of the no∣ble nature of Francis, through France, for the appeasing of the Rebellion of aunt, Bisquet put Charles the fifth into the Calendar, the King asking the cause, he said, because you have suffered at the hands of Charles the greatest bitterness that ever Prince did from other, and therefore I account it great folly in him that he should trust his person in your hands. Why Bisquet said the King, what wilt thou say, if thou seest him pass in as great safety, as if it were through the
middest of Spain, saith Bifquet Why then I will put out him, and put in you. 122. Lew the eleventh of France, having much abated the greatness and power of the Poets, Nobility and Court of Parliament, would say. That he had brought the Crown out of ward. 123. When Peace was renewed with the French in England, divers of the great Counsellours were presented from the French with Jewels, the Lord Henry Howard was omitted, whereupon the King said to him, My Lord, how haps it, that you have not a Jewel as well as the rest, My Lord Henry answered again, alluding to the Fable in Aesop, I am no cock, and therefore have found no Jewel. 124. Aleander sent to Phocion a great present of money, Phocion said to the messenger, Why doth the King send to me; and to none else? the Messenger an∣swered, because he takes you to be the only good man in Athens, Phocion re∣plied, If he think so, pray suffer me to be good still. 125. Coso Duke of Florence, was wont to say of perfidious friends, that we read, That we ought to forgive our ene∣mies,
but we do not read, that we ought to forgive our friends. 125. At a Banquet where those that were called the seven wise men of Greece, were invited by the Embassadour of a Barbarons King, the Embassadour related that there was a neighbour King mightier than his Master, pickt quar∣rels with him by making unpossible demands, otherwise threatning war, and now at that present had demanded of him to drink up the Sea, whereunto one of the wise men said, I would have him undertake it. Why, saith the Embassa∣dour, how shall he come off? thus saith the wise man, Let that King first stop the Rivers that run into the Sea, which is no part of the Bargain, and then your Master will perform it. 126. At the same Banquet, the Embas∣sador desired the seven, and some other wise then that were at the Banquet eve∣ry one of them to deliver some Sentence or Parable, that he might report to his King the wisdom of Grecia, which they did, only one was silent, which the Em∣bassador perceiving said to him; Sir let it not displease you, Why do you not say some∣what, that I may report? he answered, Re-port
to your Lord, that there are of the Gre∣cians that can hold their peace. 127. One of the Romanes said to his friend, What think you of one who was ta∣ken in the act and manner of adulterie? the other answered, Marry I think he was slow at dispatch. 128. Epaminondas, when his great friend and Colleague in war was suitor to him to pardon an offender, denied him; afterwards when a Concubine of his made the same suit, he granted it to her, which when Pelopidas seemed to take unkindly, he said, Such suits are to be granted to Whores, but not to Personages of worth. 129. The Lacedemonians had a Cu∣stome to speak very short, which being in Empire they might do at pleasure, but after their defeat at Leuctra, in an As∣sembly of the Grecians, they made a long invective against Epaminondas, who stood up, and said no more but this, I am glad we have taught you to speak long. 130. Fabius Maximus being resolved to draw the war in length, still waited upon Hannibals progress to curb him, and for that purpose he encamped up∣on the high grounds, but Terentius his
Colleague fought with Hannibal, and was in great peril of overthrow, but then Fabius came down the high grounds, and got the day, whereupon Hannibal said, That he did ever think that that same cloud that hanged upon the Hills, would at one time or other give or produce a Tempest. 131. There was a Cowardly Spanish Souldier, that in a defeat the Moores gave, ran away with the foremost, af∣terwards when the Army generally fled, this Souldier was missing, whereupon it was said by some that he was slain, No sure, saith one, he is alive, for the Moores eat no Hares flesh. 132. Hanno the Carthaginian was sent Commissioner by the State after the se∣cond Carthaginian war to Rome, to suppli∣cate for peace, & in the end obtained it, yet one of the sharper Senators said, you have often broken with us the Peace whereunto you have often been sworn, I pray by what Gods will you swear now? Hanno answered, By the same gods that have punished the former perjury so se∣verely. 133. Thales being asked when a man should marry, said, Young men not yet, old men not all.
134. A Company of Scholars going together to catch Conies, carried one Scholar with them, which had not much more wit than he was born with, and to him they gave in charge, that if he saw any he should be silent for fear of scaring of them, but he no sooner e∣spied a Company of Rabbits before the rest, but he cried aloud, Ecce multi Cu∣niculi, which in English signifies, behold many Conies, which he had no sooner said, but the Conies ran to their bo∣roughs, and he being checked by them for it, answered, Who the Devil would have thought that the Rabits understood L∣tine? 135. Cesar after first he had possest Rome, Pompey being fled, offer'd to enter the sacred Treasury to take the monies that were there stored, Metellus Tribune of the people did forbid him, and when Metellus was violent in it, and would not desist, Cesar turned to him, and said, Presume no further, or I will lay you dead, and when Metellus was with these words somewhat astonished, Cesar ad∣ded, Young man it had been easier for me to do this, than to speak it. 136. The Councel did make Re∣monstrance
to Queen Elizabeth of the continual conspiracios against her life, and namely of a late one, and shewed her a Rapier taken from a Conspiratour that had a false chape being of brown paper, but guilt over, as it could not be known from a chape of metal, which was devised to the end, that without drawing the Rapier might give a stab, and upon this occasion advise her that she should go lesse abroad to take the air weakly accompanied, as she used, but the Queen answered, That she had rather be dead, than put in custody. 137. Chilon would say, That gold was tried with the touch-stone, and men with gold. 138. Zelon was the first of the Otto∣mans that did shave his beard, whereas his Predecessors wore it long, one of the Bashawes asked him why he altered the custome of his Predecessors, he an∣swered, Because you Bashaws shall not lead me by the beard, as you did thm. 139. A Welshman being at a Sessions house, and seeing the Prisoners hold up hands at the Bar, related to some of his their acquaintance, That the Judges were good fortune tellers, for if they did but look
upon their hands, they could certainly tell whether they should live or dye. 140. Queen Elizabeth was entertained by my Lord Burleigh at Theobalds, and at her going away, my Lord obtained of the Queen to make seven Knights, they were Gentlemen of the Countrey of my Lords friends and neighbours, they were placed in a rank as the Queen should passe by the Hall, and to win Antiquity of Knighthood in order as my Lord favoured, though indeed the more principal Gentlemen were pla∣ced lowest: The Queen was told of it and said nothing, but when she went along she passed them all by, as far as the Skreen, as if she had forgot it, and when she came to the Skreen she seem∣ed to take her self with the manner, and said, I had almost forgot what I promi∣sed, with that she turned back, and knighted the lowest first, and so up∣ward, whereupon Mr. Stanhope of the Privy Chamber a while after told her, Your Majesty was too Politick for my Lord Brleigh, she answered, I have but ful∣filled the Scripture: the first shall be last, and the last first. 141. Anacharsis would say concern∣ing
the popular Estates of Greece, that be wondred how at Athens wise men did propose and fools did dispose. 142. Solon compared the people unto the Sea, and Oratours and Councel∣lours to the winds; for that the Sea would be calm and quiet, if the winds did not trou∣ble it. 143. Socrates was pronounced by the Oracle of Delphos, to be the wisest man of Greece, which he would put from himself Ironically, saying, There would be nothing in him to verifie the Oracle, ex∣cept this, that he was not wise, and knew it, and others were not wise, and knew it not. 144. Cato the elder, what time ma∣ny of the Romanes had Statues erected in their honour, was asked by one in a kind of wonder, why he had none, an∣swered, He had much rather men should ask and wonder why he had no Statue, than why he had a Statue. 145. Sir Fulk Greenvil had much and private access to Queen Elizabeth which he used honourably, and did many men good, yet he would say merrily of him∣self, That he was like Robin good-fellow, for when the Maids spilt the milk-pans, or kept any racket, they would lay it upon Ro∣been,
so what the Ladies about the Queen told her, or other bad offices that they did, they would put it upon him. 146. Socrates, when there was shewed him the book of Heraclitus the obscure, and was asked his opinion of it, answer∣ed. Those things which I understood were ex∣cellent, I imagine so were those that I under∣stood not, but they require a diver of Delos. 147. Bion asked an envious man, that was very sad, What harm had befaln unto him, or what good had befaln unto another man. 148. Stilpo the Philosopher, when the people flocked about him, and that one said to him, the people come wondring about you, as if it were to see some strange beast, No, saith he, it is to see a man which Diogenes sought with his Lant∣horn at noon day. 149. A man being very jealous of his wife, insomuch that which way soe∣ver she went, he would be prying at her heels, and she being so grieved thereat, in plain terms told him, That if he did not for the future leave off his proceedings in that nature, she would graft such a pair of horns upon his head, that should hnder him from coming out of any door in the house. 150. Caius Marius was General of
the Romanes against the Cimbers, who came with such a Sea of multitudes upon Italy; in the fight there was a band of the Caducians of a thousand that did notable service: whereupon after the fight, Marius did denison them all for Citizens of Rome, though there was no Law to warrant it: one of his friends did represent it to him, that he had transgressed the Law, because that Privi∣ledge was not to be granted, but by the people, whereunto Marius answered, That for the noise of arms he could not hear the Laws. 151. Mr. Bacon would say, That it was in business, as it is commonly in wayes, that the next way is commonly the foulest, & that if a man would go the fairest way, he must go somewhat about. 152. Augustus Cesar out of great in∣dignation against his two Daughters, and Psthumus Agrippa his Grand-child, whereof the two first were infamous, and the last otherwise unworthy, would say, That they were not his seed, but some imposthumes that had broken from him. 153. A Citizen of London passing the streets very hastily, came at last where some stop was made by Carts, and
some Gentlemen talking together, who knew him, where being in some passion that he could not suddenly pass, one of them in this wise spoke unto him, That others had past by and there was room enough only he could not tell whether their horns were so wide as his. 154. Pompey did consummate the war against Sertorius, when Metellus had brought the enemy somewhat low, he did also consummate the war against the fugitives whom Crassus had before defeated in a great Battel, so when Lu∣cullus had had a great and glorious vi∣ctory against Mithridates, yet Pompey by means his friends made, was sent to put an end to that war; whereupon Lucul∣lus taking indignation, as a disgrace offered to himself, said, that Pompey was like a carrion Cro, that when others had struck down bodies, he came to prey upon them 155. Epictetus used to say, That one of the vulgar, if any ill happens to him, blames o∣thers, a novice in Philosophy blames himself, and a Philosopher blames neither the one nor the other. 156. Hiero visited by Pythagoras, asked him, of what condition he was? Pythago∣ras answered, Sir, I know you have been at the Olympian games: yes sath Hiero,
Thither saith Pythagoras, come some to win the prizes, some come to sell their Mer∣chandise, because it is a kind of Mart of all Greece, some come to meet their friends, and make merry, because of the great confluence of all sorts, others come only to look on, mean∣ing it of Philosophy, and the contem∣plative life. 157. Plato the Divine said, That riches were like muck and dung, when it lay upon an heap, it gave but a stench and ill odour, but when it was spread upon the ground, then it was cause of much fruit:and he further said, That vertuous men were like some herbs and spices, that gave not their sweet smell, until they be bro∣ken and crusht. 158. There was a Painter became a Physician, whereupon one said to him, You have done well, for before the faults of your work were seen, but now they are unseen. 159. One of the Philosophers was askt in what a wise man differed from a fool, he aswered, Send them both naked to those that know them not, and you shall perceive. 160. A Tinker passing Cheapside with his usual tone, Have you any work for a Tinker? an Apprentice standing at a door
opposite to a Pillory there set up cal∣led the Tinker, with an intent to put a jest upon him & told him that he should do very well if he would stop those two holes in the Pillory, to which the Tinker answered, That if he would but put in his head & ears a while in that Pillory, he would lestow both brasse and nails upon him to hold him in & give him his labor in to the bargain 161. Cesar in his book that he made against Cato, did write to shew the force of opinion and reverence of a man that had once obtained popular reputation, That there were some that found Cato drunk, and they were ashamed instead of Cato. 162. Aristippus sailing in a Tempest shewed signs of fear, one of the Sea∣men said to him in an insulting man∣ner, We that are Plebeians are not trou∣bled, you that are Philosophers are a∣fraid. Aristippus answered, There is not the like wager upon it, for me to perish, and you. 163. There was an Oratour that de∣fended a cause of Aristippus, and pre∣vailed, afterwards, he ask'd Aristippus, Now in your distress, what did Socrates do you good? Aristippus answered thus, In ma∣king true that good which you said of me. Concerning mony, he further declared, That he took mony of his friends, not so much to use it himself, but to teach them how to be∣stow their mony.
164. The Lady Paget, that was very private with Queen Elizabeth, declared her self much against her match with Monsieur, after Monsieurs death the Queen took extream grief, at least as she made shew, and kept within her bed-Cham∣ber, and one Ante-chamber for three weeks space, in token of mourning: At last she came forth into her privy Chamber, and admitted her Ladies to have access unto her, and amongst the rest my Lady Paget presented her self, and came to her with a smiling counte∣nance: the Queen bent her brows, and seemed to be highly displeased, and said to her, Madam, you are not ignorant of my extream grief, and do you come to me with a countenance of joy? My Lady Paget answered, Alas, and it please your Majesty, it is impossible for me to be absent from you three weeks, but that when I see you I must look chearfully. No no, said the Queen, not forgetting her former averseness from the Match, you have some other conceit in it, tell me plainly. My Lady answered, I must bey you, it is this, I was thinking, how happy your Majesty was in that you married not Monsieur, for seeing you take such thought for his death, being but your friend, if he
had been your husband, sure it would have st you your life. 164. Sir Edward Dyer, a brave and wise Gentleman, did much believe in Kelly the Alchimist that he did indeed the work, and made gold, insomuch as he went himself into Germany, where Kelly then was, to confirm himself ful∣ly thereof, at his return he dined with my Lord of Canterbury, when at that time was at the Table Doctor Brown the Physician, they fell in talk o Kelly, Sir Edward Dyer turning to the Arch∣bishop, said, I do assure your Grace, that that I shall tell you is truth, I was an eye∣witness thereof, and if I had nt seen it, I should not have believed it, I saw Kelly put of the metal into the crusible, and after it was set a little upon the fire, & a very small quan∣tity of the medicine put in, and stirred with a stick of word, it came forth in good proportion perfect gold to the touch, to the hammer, and to the test: said the Bishop, you had need take heed what you say, Sir Edward Dyer, for here is an Infidel at the board. Sr Ed∣ward Dyer said again pleasantly, I would have looked for an Insidel sooner in any place than at your Graces Table. Wha ay you Doctor Brown? saith the Bishop. Doctor Brown answered after his blunt and had∣ling
manner, the Gentleman hath spo∣ken enough for me. Why, saith the B∣shop, What hath he said? Marry said Doctor Brown he said, he would not have believed it, except he had seen it, and no more will I. 166. A young Maid having married an old man, was observed on the day of marriage to be somewhat moody, as if she had eaten a dish of chums, which one of her Bridemen observing bid her be cheery, and told her moreover, that are old horse would hold out as long, and as well as a young in travel: to which she answered, stroking down her belly wth her hand, But not in this road, Sir. 167. Democritus said, That truth did lie in prefound pits, and when it was got it needed much refining. 168. A Seaman coming before the Judges of the Admiralty for admittance into office in a ship bound for the Indies, was by one of the Judges much sleight∣ed, as an insufficient person for that office which he sought for to acquire, till the Judge telling him, that he be∣lieved, that he could not say the poins of his Compass; the Seaman answer∣ed, better than he could say his Pater Nster: the Judge replyed, that he would
wager twenty shillings with him of that: so the Seaman taking him up, it came to trial, and the Seaman began and said all the points of his Compass very exactly, the Judge likewise said his Pater Noster, and when he had finished it, he required the wager according to a∣greement, because the Seaman was to say his Compass better than he his Pa∣ter Noster, which he had not performed: my hold, quoth the Sea man, the wager is not finished, for I have but half done; and so he immediately said his Compass backward very exactly, which the Judge failing of in his Pater Noster, the Set∣man carried away the prize. 169. Doctor Johnson said, that in sick∣ness there were three things that were material, the Physician, the disease, and the Patient, and if any two of these joyned, then they have the victory: for if the Physician and the Patient joyn, then down goes the disease, for the Patient recovers; if the Physician and the disease joyn, then down goes the Patient, that is, where the Physician mistakes the cre; if the Patient and the disease joyn, then down goes the Phy∣sician, for he is discredited. 170. Alexander visited Diogenes in his
Tub, and when he asked what he would desire of him, Diogenes answered, That you would stand a little aside, that the Sun may come to me. 171. Diogenes called an ill Musician Cock, Why saith he? Diogenes answered, because when you crow, men use to rise. 172. There was in Oxford a cowardly fellow that was a very good Arcer, he was abused grossely by another, and moaned himself to Sir Walter Raleigh then a Scholar, and ask his advice, what he should do to repair the wrong had been offered him; Raleigh answered, Why challenge him at a match of shooting. 173. Whitehead a grave Divine was much esteemed by Queen Elizabeth, but not preferred, because he was against the Government of Bishops, he was of a blunt Stoical nature, he came one day to the Queen, and the Queen happened to say to him, I like thee the better, White∣head, because thou livest unmarried. He an∣swered, In troth Madam, I like you the worse for the same cause. 174. There was a Noble man that was lean of visage, but immediately af∣ter his marriage he grew pretty plump, and fat, one said to him, Your Lordship doth contrary to other married men,
for they at the first wax lean, and you wax fat, Sir Walter Raleigh stood by and said, Why there is no beast, that if you take him from the common, and put him into the Several, but he will wax fat. 175. Diogenes seeing one that was a Bastard casting stones among the peo∣ple, Bade him take heed, he hit not his Father. 176. Doctor Lawd said, that some Hy∣pocrites and seeming mortified men, that held down their heads like bul∣rushes, were like little Images that they place in the very bowing of the vaults of Churches, that look as if they held up the Church, but are but puppets. 176. A Noble man of this Nation, fa∣mously known for his mad tricks, on a time having taken Physick, which he perceiving that it began well to work, called up his man to go for a Surgeon presently, and to bring his instruments with him: the Surgeon comes in all speed; to whom my Lord related, that he found himself much addicted to wo∣men, and therefore it was his will, that the cause of it might be taken away, and therefore commanded him forthwith to prepare his instruments ready for to geld him; so the Surgeon prepared
forthwith prepares accordingly, and my Lord told him that he would not see it done, and therefore that he should do his work the back way, so both parties being contented, my Lord makes rea∣dy, and holds up his A—and when he perceives the Surgeon very near him, he lets she full in his face, which made the Surgeon step back, but coming pre∣sently on again; Hold, hold,  my Lord, I will better consider of it, for I see the rentive faculty is very weak at the very approch of such keen instruments. 177. The Lord Henry Howard, being Lord privy Seal, was ask'd by the King openly at the Table, where commonly he entertained the King upon the sud∣den, My Lord have you not a desire to see Rome? My Lord Privy Seal answer∣ed, yes indeed Sir. The King said, and why? My Lord answered, because, and it please your Majesty, it was once the Seat of the greatest Monarchy, and the Seminary of the bravest men in the world amongst the Heathen, and then again, because it was the See of so many holy Bishops in the Primitive Church, most of them Martyrs. The King would not give it over, and for nothing else? My Lord answered, Yes,
It please your Majesty, for two things especi∣ally, the one to see him who they say hath such a power to forgive other mens sins, to confess his sins upon his own knees before a Chaplain or Priest, and the other is to hear Anti∣christ say his Creed. 178. There was a Noble man said of great Counsellour, That he would have made the worst Farrier in the world, for he never shod horse but he cloyed him, so he ne∣ver commended any man to the King for ser∣vice, or upon any occasion of Suit, or other∣wise, but that he would come in the end with a But, and drive in a nail to his disadvantage. 179. There was a curst Page that his Master whipt naked, and when he had been whipt, would not put on his cloaths, and when his Master bad him, Take them you, for they are the Hang-mans Fees. 180. There was a Gentleman sell ve∣ry sick, and a friend of his said to him, Surely you are indanger, I pray send for a Physician, but the sick man answered, It is no matter, for if I dye, I will die at leisure. 181. There was a Lady of the West Countrey, that gave great entertain∣ment at her house to most of the gal∣lant Gentlemen thereabouts, and a∣mongst
others, Sir Walter Raleigh was one, this Lady, though otherwise a stately Dame, was a notable good house∣wife, and in the morning betimes, she called to one of her Maids, that lokt to the Swine, and asked, are the pigs ser∣ved? Sir Walter Raleighs chamber was fast by the Ladies, so as he heard her; a little before dinner, the Lady came down in great State into the great Chamber, which was full of gentle∣men, and as soon as Sir Walter Raleigh set eye upon her, Madam, saith he, Are the Pigs served? The Lady answered, You know best, whether you have had your break∣fast. 182. There was an Epicurian vaunted that divers of other sorts of Philoso∣phers did after turn Epicureans, but that there was never any Epicurean that turned to any other sect, whereupon a Philosopher that was of another sect, said the reason was plain, For that Cocks may be made Capons, but Capons could neuer be made Cocks. 183. An old Baud, being as she sup∣posed on her death-bed was importun∣ned by one who had been a constant customer to her house, that she would put a Girl into his hand, not onely
handsom but wholsom, which she accordingly promised, and to that end, called up for one, who appearing, the Gentleman was not in all respects sa∣tisfied concerning her, he therefore prest her hard to know assuredly, whe∣ther she was according as the old Bawd promised, to which she answered, That she was, and further left it to him to judge with what comfort and confidence she could expect to meet her Saviour, if she should leave the world with a lie in her mouth. 184. A man having backsden, so as to raise a maids belly, and it being com∣monly known, his friends and relations came together on purpose for to re∣prove him, hoping it might prove a re∣medy from any such future malady, and every one had a saying to him, and the end of all their sayings was a wonder∣ing at him that he should do so, and so: well, he having patiently heard them made this answer, You make a wondering and a wonder that I should get her with child, now that is usual, and therefore no cause of wonder, but you would have had somewhat indeed to wonder at, if you had found that she had got me with Child.
APOPHTHEGMS OF Sir THO. MOORE. BY an excellent similitude, Sir Thomas teacheth us why few do fear death, even as they that look upon things afar off, see them confsedly, not knowing whether they be men or trees: even so, he that promi∣seth unto himself long life, looketh up∣on death, as a thing afar off, not judgng what it is, how terrible, what grief and danger it brings with it: and that none ought to promise to himself long life, he proveth thus, Even as two men that are brought out of prison to the gallows, one by a long way about, the other by a direct straight path, yet neither knowing which is which, un∣til they come to the Gallows, neither of these two can promise himself longer life by reason of the uncertainty of the way, even so, a young man cannot promise himself longer life than an old man. 2. Against the vanity of worldly ho∣nour, he speaks thus: Even as that crimi∣nal person who is lead to execution should
be accounted vain if he should ingrave his coat of arms upon the Prison gate, even so are they vain who endeavour to leave with great industry, monuments of their digni∣ty in the prison of this world. 3. By a subtil  he teacheth us, why we are not to think that we can be hurt by the loss of our supersous goods in this manner, He that suffereth any loss of his goods, he would either have bestowed them with praise, and liberality, and so God will accept his will instead of the deed it self, or else he would have wasted them wickedly, and then he hath cause to rejoyce, that the matter of sinning is taken away. 4. To express lively the folly of an old covetous man, he writeth thus, A Thief that is to dye to morrow, stealeth to day and being asked why he did so, he answered That it was great pleasure to him to be Master of that mony but one night: so an old Mi∣ser never ceaseth to increase his heap of coin, though he be never so aged. 5. He saith also, That those which give themselves to pleasure and idleness in the time of their Pilgrimage, are like to him who is travelling to his own house, where there is abundance of all things, would yet be an Ost∣ler in an Inn by the way, for to get an Inn∣keepers
favour, and to end his life there in a Stable. 6. Pleasure saith he, doth not only draw wicked men from Prayer, but also affliction sometime, yet this is the difference, that af∣fliction doth sometimes wrest some short pray∣er from the wickedest man alive, but pleasure calleth away even one that is indifferent good from all prayer. 7. Against impenitent persons, and such as defer the amending of their lives to the latter end of their daies, he saith thus, A leud fellow that had spent all his life in wickedness was wont to brag that he could be saved, if he spoke but three words at the hour of his death; riding over a bridge that was broken, his horse stumbling, & not being able to save himself from fal∣ling into the water, when he saw him∣self past recovery, casting away the bri∣dle, he said, The Devil take all, and so with his three words he perished in the River. 8. Even as he that passeth over a narrow Bridge, by reason of his fear of∣ten falleth, especially if others say to him you fall, which otherwise he would safely pass over, even so, he that is fear∣ful by nature, and full of pusillanimi∣ty often falleth into desperation, the
Devil crying unto hi, thou art dam∣ned, which he would never hearken to, nor be in any danger of if he should take unto him a good heart, and by wholsom councel nothing fear the Devils out-cry. 9. The prosperity of this world, is like the shortest winters day, and we are lis∣ted up in it as an Arrow shot upon high, where a short breath doh de∣light us, but from thence we fall sud∣denly to the earth, and there we stick fast, either bemired with the dirt of in∣samy, or starving with cold, being pluck'd ont of our feathers. 10. It is a hard thing to touch pitch and not be desiled therewith, a dry stick to be put into the fire, and not to be burnt, to nourish a Snake in our bo∣som, and not to be stung with it: So a mst hard thing it is to be rich and honoured in this world, and not be struck with the dart of Pride and vai-glory. 11. Let there be two beggars, who a long time begged together, one of whom some rich man hath entertained in his house, put him in Silk, give him mony in his purse, but with this condtion as he tells him, within a short space he will thrust him out of his
doors, and take all that away from him again; if he in the mean while being thus gallant, should chance to meet with his fellow beggar, would he be so foo∣lish as for all this not to acknowledge him for his companion? or would he for those few daies happiness hold himself better than he? applying this to every mans case, Who cometh naked in∣to this world, and is to return naked again. 12. If he be called stout, that hath sortitude, he hot who hath heat, wise that hath wisdom, yet he who hath riches cannot be said presently to be good, therefore riches cannot be num∣bred among good things. Twenty, yea, a hundred bare heads standing by a No∣ble man doth not defend his head from cold, so much as his own hat doth a∣lone, which yet he is inforced to put off in the presence of his Prince. 13. He that knoweth certainly, he is to be banished into a strange Country never to return again  his own, and will not endure that his goods be tran∣sported thither, being loath to want them for that little while, rather than ever to enjoy them after, may well be thought a mad man: so are they out of their wits who intic'd with a vain affecti∣ons
to keep their goods alwaies about them, and neglective to give alms for fear of wanting, cannot endure to have their goods sent before them to heaven, when as they know most assuredly, that they shall enjoy them alwaies there, with all plenty, and with a double re∣ward. 14. To ease his thoughts when he was in Prison, He imagined that all the world was but a Prison, out of which every day some one or other was called to execution. 15. When he heard any at his Table speaking detraction, he would inter∣rupt them thus, Let any man think as he pleaseth, I like this room very well, for it is very well contrived, and fairly built. 16. Of an ungrateful person, he would say, That they wrote good turns dne unto them in the dust, but even the least in∣juries in marble. 17. He compareth reason to an hand∣maid, which if she be well taught will obey, and faith to the Mistress,! which is to keep her in awe. 18. He said, That he was a mad man that would drink poyson to take a preserva∣tive after it, but he is a wiseman, that spilling the poyson, leaveth the Antidote for him that hath need thereof.
19. When Sir Thomas Moore lived in the City of London, being one of the Justices of Peace, he used to go to the Sessions at New gate, where it fell out, that one of the ancientest Justices of the Bench was wont to chide the poor men whose purses had been cut, for not be∣ing more careful, telling them, their negligence was the cause that so many cut-purses were brought thither, which when Sir Thomas Moore observed him so often to repeat at one time, especially, the night after he sent for one of the chief cut-purses that was in prison, and promised to save him harmless, and stand his friend too, if he would cut the aforesaid Justices Purse the next day as he sate on the Bench, and then pre∣sently make a sign of it to him: the fel∣low very gladly promiseth him to do it the next day, therefore when they sate again, that Thief was called among the first, who being accused of his fact, said, he did not doubt but that he could sufficiently excuse himself, if he were permitted to speak to some of the Bench in private, he was therefore bid to chuse one who he would, and pre∣sently he chose that grave old man, who then had his pouch at his girdle, as they
wore them in those dayes, and whilst he whispered him in the ear, he cun∣ningly cut his purse, and then solemnly taking his leave, returns to his place, Sir Thomas knowing by a private sign, that the business was dispatcht, pre∣sently took occasion to move the Bench to distribute some alms to a poor needy fellow that was there, and for good example began himself to do it, when the old man came to open his purse, and sees it cut away, and much wondering said, he was confident he brought it with him when he came thither that morning. Sir Thomas repli∣ed presently, What will you charge any of us with felony? but his choler rising, and he being ashamed of the thing; Sir Thomas calls the Cut-purse, and bids him give him his purse again, and withal advised the good old Justice hereafter, Not to be so bitter a censurer of innocent mens negligence, when as himself could not secure his purse in that open assembly 20. When he was Lord Chancellour, one of the house of the Manors whom the King had lately preferred to a great honour, who before that had been a great friend of Sir Thomas Moores, but perceiving now that the world began
somewhat to frown upon him, because he was not so forward as other men to perswade the King to the divorce, and being desirous to pick soe quarrel a∣gainst him, My Lord, said, Honores mutnt mores, Sir Thomas readily replied, It as so indeed my Lord, but Mores signifies in Eng∣lish manners, not More; which answer put my Gentleman to a nihil di. 21. Sir Thomas Moore having let a Gentleman mony in some time after∣wards demanded it back of the Gentle∣man, the Gentleman bid him remem∣ber he must dye, and God knows how soon, and that then he should have lit∣tle use of mony, adding the Seence in Latin, the better to please Sr. h ma, Memento morieris: to which Sir . pre∣sently answer'd, What say you Sir? methinks you put your self in mind of your duty herein, saying, Memento Moriaeris, Remember Moores mony. 21. It happened on a time hat a beg∣gars little dog which she had lost, was sent to the Lady Moore for a Present, and she had kept it about a week very care∣fully, but at last the beggar having no∣tice where her dog was, presently came and complained to Sir Thomas, as he was sitting in his Hall, that his Lady kept her dog from her, presently my Lady was
sent for, and the dog brought with her, which Sir Thomas taking in his arms, he caused his wife to stand at the upper end of the Hall, and the beggar at the low∣er end, and then saying, That he sate there to do every one justice, He badeach of them call the Dog, which when they did, the dog ran presently to the beggar, for∣saking his Lady; when he saw this, he bid his Wife be contented for it was none of hers: yet she repining at his Sentence, agreed with the beggar, and gave her a piece of Gold: so all parties were satisfied, every one smiling at this strange discovery of truth. 23. Another time a certain friend of his taking great pains about a Book which he intended to publish, being well conceted of his own wit, which no body else thought worth of com∣mendation, and because he would Sir Thomas Moore should observe it e're it were Printed, he brought it to him, who perusing it and finding nothing therein worthy the Presse, said with a grave countenance, If it were in verse, it were more worth; upon which words he went immediately and turned it into verse, and then brought it again to Sir Thomas, who looking thereon said soberly, Yea
marry now it is somewhat, for now it is Rithm, before it was neither Rithm, nor Rea∣son. 24. And what ever Jest he brought forth, he never laughed at any himself, but spoke them so se∣riously, that few could discern by his look, whether he were in earnest or in jest, as once talking with another in dispute of his Dialogues by some occa∣sion, they happened to speak of a Dogs Turd, at that very instant one of his men came to tell him that dinner was ready, to whom he said, look that there be better mea provided for us than that; who presently went and told his Lady, that his Lord would have better meat provided for his Dinner, which caused a great disturbance in the house, till at last the mistake being known, the sea of their disturbance was calmed in a fit of laughing. 25. Sir Thomas Moore had only daugh∣ters at the first, and his Wife did ever pray for a boy, at last she had a boy, which after at mans years proved sim∣ple, Sir Thomas said to his Wife, Thou prayedst so long for a boy, that he will be a boy as long as he lives. 26. Sir Thomas Moore the day he was
beheaded, had a Barber sent to him, be∣cause his hair was long which was thought would make him more commi∣serable with the people, the Barber came to him, and asked him whether he would be pleased to be trimmed, In good faith honest fellow, said Sir Thomas, the King and I have a suit for my head, and till the Title be cleared, I will do no cst upon it. 27. Sir Thomas Moore had sent him by a Suiter in the Chancery two silver flag∣gons, when they were presented by the Gentlemans servant, he said to one of his men, Have him to the Cellar, and let him have of my best Wine, and turning to the servant said, tell thy Mster friend, if he like it, let him not spare it. 28. When Sir Thomas Moore was Lord Chancelour, he did use at Masse to sit in the Chancel, and his Lady in a Pew, and because the Pew stood out of sight, his Gentleman Usher ever afte Service came to the Ladies Pew, and said, Ma∣dam, my Lord, is gone: so when the Chancellors place was taken from him, the next time they went to Church Sir Thomas himself came to his Ladies Pew, and said, Madam, my Lord is gone. 29. In Sir Thomas Moores imprison∣ment in the Tower, there came one
from the Court, for to perswade Sir Thomas to change his mind before he di∣ed, of those things which he stood con∣demned in by the Law, and Sir Thomas being wearied with his importanity, said, I have changed my mind, the Cti∣er said, in what? Sir Thomas replied, in this, That whereas he had intended to be sa∣ven, that he might appear to the people, as be∣fore he was wo, now he was fully resol∣ved, that his beard should take such part as his head did. 30. Sir Thomas Pope visiting Sir Thomas Moore in his imprisonment was very sad, and could not refrain from weep∣ing, which Sir Thomas Moore seeing, to put him out of his melancholy, took his own urinal in his hand, and casting his water said merrily, I see no danger, but that this man (meaning himself) might live longer if it had pleased the King. 31. Sir Thomas Moore, who was a man in all his life time, that had an excel∣lent vein in jesting a little before, and at his death delivered himself in this manner coming on the Scaffold, which seemed to him so weak, that it was rea∣dy to fall, he said merrily to the Lieu∣tenant, I pray you Mr. Lieutenant, see me safe up, & for my coming down, let
me shift for my self; and to the Execa∣ioner, he said, pluck up thy spirits man, and be not afraid to do thine of∣fice, my neck is very short, take heed therefore thou strike not away for sa∣ving thine honesty: and at the very in∣stant of his death, having a pretty long beard, after his head was upon the block lift it up again, and gently drew his beard aside, and said, that that had ne∣ver committed any Treason, nor in the least offended the King, and therefore should not be cut off: and thus passed Sir Thomas Moore out of this world, on the very same day on which himself had most desired, being Saint Thomas day, in the year of our Lord, 1537. FINIS.
