W651 09141929 42510
An ELEGIACK VERSE, On the Death Of the Pious and Profound GRAMMARIAN and RHETORICIAN, Mr. ELIJAH CORLET, SCHOOLMASTER of CAMBRIDGE, Who Deceased Anno Aetatis 77. Feb. 24. 1687. On Roman Feet my stumbling Muse declines, To walk unto his Grave, left by her Fall She trespass, in accosting of his Head With undeserved breach. In jingling Rythme She thinks it not convenient to Dance Upon his Sacred Herse; but mournful Steps If Metrically order'd, she computes The most becoming of this Tragick Scene. Could Heav'n signific Ball (whose boundless Womb Millions of flaming Aetna's does ingulf) From Candle's dull and oleaginous Transfused Beams, a glowing Atom draw, Which might a super-added Lustre give Unto its conick Rayes; then might our Verse Swell with impregnant hopes of bringing forth Some rich Disply of Corlet's Vertues rare. But this Herculean Labour forc'd we deem Not second to Impossibilities. This presses hard our tim'rous heart whence flows A Torrent of amazing Fears, whose Waves Bode Universal Deluge to that Verse That dares pretend to equalize his Fame. Creep then, poor Rythmes, and like a timid Hare Encircle his rich Vault, then gently squatt Upon his Grave the Center there proclaim Tho' he subside, yet his abounding Worth Does infinitely supersede thy Layes. Tell to the World what Dowries Nature showr'd Into his large capacious Soul; almost Profuse in large Donations; yet kind Art Still adds unto the store, striving to reach Perfection's Top, during a mortal state. Sagacious Nature, provident that nought Of her dispensed bounty frustrate prove, Boyls up this Font of Learning to an head, Which over-topping of its Banks she glides Through Nature's Conduit-pipes into the Soil Of tender Youth, which gaping sucks it in, Like thirsty Stars Bright Phebus's liquid light. A Master of his Trade, whose Art could square Pillars of rooted strength whose shoulders might. A Common-Wealth uphold. Aholiab-like Divinely qualifi'd with curious Skill To carve out Temple work, and cloath the Priest With sacred Robes, adapted for the Use Of Functions so divine.— Rivers of Eloquence like Nectar flow'd From his Vast Ocean, where a Tully might Surfeit with draughts of Roman Eloquence. Immortal Oakes (whose golden mouth ne're blew A blast defil'd with indisposed Speech) Suspecting his own parts, rarely pronounc'd His Ciceronean lines, until they touch'd This Lydius Lapis CORLET: then approv'd They're Eloquence proof esteem'd, and challeng'd The Roman Tribe of Orators to spend Their subtilty, and pierce their Eagle's Eyes Into their very bottom.— Had Grecian Dialect and Roman Tongue Surviv'd this Age within their native Soyl, Endless had been their Feud; Athens and Rome Had set their Tully's and Lemosthenes to sight With Swords brandish'd with shining Eloquence For to decide the Controverse, and prove To whom by right Great CORLET did pertain. This proving unsuccessful, nought can quench Their flaming zeal, save by (Colossos like) Erecting his large Statue, whose proud feet Might six their Station on the Pinacles Of each of these Metropolies of Art. Nor were his Parts exclusive of his Zeal In serving his rich Donor. No Serpent Bearing a fulgent Jewel in his Crest, While cursed Poison steeps his venom'd heart. But Grace the Crown of all shone like a Sun Fix't in the Center of that Microcosm. Blown to the full, perfum'd with sacred smell, This flower Heaven pluckt. When Natures Too feeble grown to bear such ponderous fruit Elijah's Chariot born on Seraph's wings, Mounts with this Treasure to the port of Bliss. Sic moestus cecinit NEHEMIAH WALTER.
