17846 99841442 6025
A TRVE DISCOVRSE HISTORICALL, OF THE SVCCEEDING GOVERNOVRS IN THE NETHERLANDS, AND THE Ciuill warres there begun in the yeere 1565. with the memorable seruices of our Honourable English Generals, Captaines and Souldiers, especially vnder Sir IOHN NORICE Knight, there performed from the yeere 1577. vntill the yeere 1589. and afterwards in Portugale, France, Britaine and Ire∣land, vntill the yeere 1598. TRANSLATED AND COLLECTED BY T. C. ESQVIRE, AND RIC. RO. OVT of the Reuerend E. M. of Antwerp. his fifteene bookes Historiae Belgicae; and other collections added▪ altogether manifesting all martiall actions meete for euery good subiect to reade, for defence of Prince and Countrey. AT LONDON Imprinted for Matthew Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop vnder S. Dunstons Church in the West. 1602.
TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR EDVVARD SEYMOVR, KNIGHT, BARON Beauchamp, Erle of Hartford, and Lord Lieute∣nant generall for the Queenes most excellent Maiestie in the Counties of Somerset and Wiltshire: Thomas Churchyard Esquire, wisheth long life, happie health, with increase of Honour temporall, and the fruition of heauenly bea∣titude in Christ Iesus eternall. IN CALLING TO minde (Right Honou∣rable) the manifold fa∣uours of your most no∣ble father, shewed me in the raigne of the rare Imp of grace King Edward the sixt,1547. 1. Edw. 6. and weighing I serued vnder him, at the battel of Muscleborough, your father then Lord Lieuetenant Generall of the English Ar∣mie: I found my selfe for sundrie causes much bound to all his most noble house and familie. And so a long season wat∣ching opportunitie to doe some accepta∣ble seruice to his noble children, I could not happen on any matter (touching my pen) worthie acceptation. Then reading
of a booke in Latine, written by a graue writer, called Emanuell Meteranus: who wrote fifteene bookes de Historia Belgica. I found so great profunditie in the man and matter, chieflie because hee exactlie (without adulation) wrote of martiall af∣faires, and exployts done by mightie Go∣uernours and valiant souldiers: that not onlie attained honour in the field (some of them honourablie borne) but also wanne euerlasting fame by their prowesse and seruice. A while considering the conse∣quence and worth thereof, I thought God would be offended, my countrie dishono∣red, and worthie men should be in time to come forgotten and discouraged: where∣on I took in hand to reuiue dead men and their actions (for fames sake which all men shoote at) that time past and time present should be so remembred, as time to come, and all ages should admire on, and meruaile at the most manlie enterpri∣ses (make Sir Frauncis Ʋere and the true Captaines of Ostend an example) that cou∣ragious souldiers dare aduenture, take in hand, and accomplish. I being pricked on
with their incredible valour, diuine vertue of mind, & manly resolution (considering mine own professiō long that way) I took it as an iniurie done to all Souldiers: if I a poore plaine writer should not as much honor them with my pen, as they haue ho∣nored God & Prince with their sword: So in my great age I clapped on a youthfull corage (imagining I saw all the worthines of men) and stoutly stept into the transla∣tion of Meteranus workes of Historia Bel∣gica: but often falling sick, and like to passe from world, I called vnto me one Richard Robinson (a man more debased by many then he merits of any, so good parts are there in the man) one whom I might com∣manud and keepe a long while for this purpose, and who tooke great paines (I being sicke) in the translation, and in wri∣ting the other Collections of this booke: but my studie, knowledge, experience, and eye witnes for all or most actions in this book, perfected euerie point and peece of matter pertaining to the truth of al here in this volume printed: my selfe beholding herein a world for a great personage to
patronage, bethought me of your hono∣rable Lordship. So aduisedly & somewhat fearefully to presume, I haue humbly pre∣sented my paines to the wel liking of your honor: accepting my good wil & boldnes as far as my honest regard leads me. I pro∣test neither matter of State, nor vaine in∣uentions drew my muse to this hard attēpt and presumption: but the loue and lauda∣tion of Lordlie minded souldiers, loyall subiects, vnconquered courages, and aspi∣ring mindes, that dare fight with fortune, flie in the face of all forraine enimies, and daunt the pride of all false harted people of the whole world whatsoever. So for the commendation of an infinite number of Lyonlike champions, this work was com∣piled, printed, & presented: hoping it shal purchase fauour of your Lordship, and of all noble minded personages, that prefer euerie excellent exercise aboue al slouth∣full dronish idlenes. Your good Lordships in all at commandment, THOMAS CHVRCHYARD.
STRENVO, FORTI, SPLENDIDO, GENEROSO, atque Illustri D. D. IOHANNI NORICEO, Equiti Aurato, & Anglorum Militum in Inferiori Ger∣mania Colonello Generali, & in absentia Illustriss. Co∣mitis Leycestriae Supremi Gubernatoris ibidem Praefe∣cto fidelissimo, & Vigilantissimo, Viro ex veteri Prosapia oriundo, & summa quadam Integritate, Iustitia, Pru∣dentia, Temperantia, & rei bellicae gloria, in eaque (quod minimè in multis reperiri est) faelici ac fortunato, admo∣dum Insigni atque conspicuo: In quo sunt omnes Impe∣ratoriae Virtutes, nempe, labor in negotijs, fortitudo in Periculis, Industria in agendo, celeritas in conficiendo, & Consilium in prouidendo. PETRVS BIZARVS, cum nihil aliud in praesentiarum habeat, in quo suam (erga Ipsius Illustrem Dominationem) obseruantiam & summissi animi promptitudinem teste∣tur, hoc breue Carmen dedicauit. VT primum Genitrix hanc te produxit in aurā, Lactauit tenero casta Minerua sinu; Mox solido victu pauit, mensa{que} Deorum. Atque instillauit iussa Verenda Iouis. Addidit & pectus sapiens plenum{que} decoro, Facundum eloquium, Consilium{que} graue: Mars verò vt vidit, quanta sapientia & arte Formasset Pallas, qui sibi Alumnus erat, In Natum accepit, Diua rogitata, & amorem Indidit armorum, ac bella subire dedit.
Et simul ostendit, quo pacto Castra locanda, Quid{que} etiam prosit, Vel nocuisse queat. Bellica quid ratio, seu disciplina requirat, Sedulus vt perstet Miles in officio. Quinam acies media & Cornu dextrum atque sinistrum Instrui & aptari, legitimè deceat: Vtque acie instructa procedere longius ausit, Incensis{que} animis totus in Armaruat; Quo tormenta loco disponi & quid faciendum, Vt Polyorcetes quis queat esse breui. Quando itidem Fabij exemplo cunctandum & inani Spepugnae facta, continuisse iuuat. Infectis donec rebus in Peste prematur. Vel Fame dissoluit Castra domum{que} redit. Num dolus an metus potior sit, quidue petiri Successu efficiat, commodiori Via. Quando Equite aut Pedite est vtendum, quidue moretur, Euentum; Induciae an Pax sit habenda magis, Num pugnare die, Nocturnoue tempore, quid{que} Multos an paucos praestat habere bonos. Quidue agat interea Miles dum cessat ab Hoste Ne se desidiae dedat, Iners{que} siet, Denique faelici postquam fera praelia dextra Egeris, & volitas clara per ora virûm: Parcere num victis deceat, vel perdere prorsus: Quid{que} horum illustret, nobilitet{que} prius. Haec tibi MARS plene ostendit, docuit{que} vt Alumnum, PALLADIS vt fueras ante in amore pari. Et quoniam in bello multum sibi vendicat Ipsa, FORTVNA hanc flexit, quo tibi adesse velit; Annuit, haec siquidem fausto tibi Numine & olim, Praesenti ac prompta se fore dixit ope. Ergò vt caepisti pergas DVX Inclyte bellum,
Quod nunc prae manibus prouehere atque sequi, Donec ad optatum finem perduxeris: aqua Cum sit causa DEO grata & amica bonis. Idem. Ad Eundem. FOrtunae donum est, generis quod Clara propago Te Illustrem efficiat, nobilitet{que} Domum, Quod verò proprijs meritis virtute{que} adeptus, Longe praecellit, splendidius{que} nitet: Nam{que} tua in bello Generosa & fortia facta, Fermè Orbis totus nouit, ad Astra vehens. Haec te perpetua decorabit gloria, laude, Et tibi post obitum Vita perennis erit: Tu, interea PYLII transcendas Nestoris Annos Et placidos habeas ac sine nube dies; Vt Patriae, atque Orbi praesis victricibus armis Et cum Pax fuerit, Consilio atque fide. In illustrissimi eiusdem D. Effi∣giem depictam. MAgnanimi effictam quicunque conspicis arte NORICEI, effigiem, nobile cernis opus: Sed si animum videas, quem picta ostendit Imago, Dices nil toto magis in Orbe micat. Omne Insigne huic vni fata simul dedere, DII superi, vnde hominum constat tutela, Hunc tegite & vestris accumulate bonis: Vt Victor referat multos ex Hoste triumphos, Semper{que} aeterna gloria Illustris viuat. Petrus Bizarus Belga.
A Table of the principall contents in this Booke. THe Translatours Collection of the succeeding Go∣uernours in the Netherlands, and the originall cau∣ses of the ciuill warres there 1565. page 1. The Originall warres there vnder the Dutchesse of Par∣ma. page 4. Captaine Churchyards seruice. page 5. The ciuill warres there vnder the Duke of Alua. pag. 15. The warres there vnder Don Lewis Requisensius. pag. 20. The warres there vnder Don Iohn de Austria. p. 24. The warres there vnder Alexander Prince of Parma a∣gainst the Arch-Duke Mathias for the States. p. 30. Maister Henrie Knowles seruice. p. 46.47. Sir Iohn Norice knight, his first comming into the Nether∣lands 1577. p. 27. His proceedings there vntill 1588. p. 102. The warres there vnder Francis Duke of Aniow for the States, against Alexander Prince of Parma. p. 43. Captaine Edward Stranges seruice. p. 45. The warres there vnder Parma against the Prince of O∣range. p. 54. Fiue seuerall messengers sent to murther the Prince of O∣range. p. 55. His death and funerall. p. 59. His Title and Epitaph. p. 65. The warres there vnder the Prince of Parma and the States. p. 67. The warres there vnder the Prince of Parma & the Erle of Leycester. p. 74.
Captaine Thomas Louel, Captaine Charles Blunt, now L. Mountioy, Captaine Thomas Vauiser, now Sir Thomas Va∣uiser. p. 74. Captaine Iohn Pryses seruice. p. 79. Sir Phil. Sidneyes seruice there, his death & funerall. p. 88. The Erle of Essex his seruice at Zutphen. p. 89. The Lord Willoughbie his seruices there. p. 88.103.104. Sir Thomas Cicil now Lord Burley. p. 84. Sir Henrie Norice. p. 88.89. Sir William Russels seruice there. p. 95. In Ireland. p. 145. The wars there vnder the Prince of Parma against Count Maurice. p. 103. The death of Parma where the Belgick historie endeth. p. 111. The seruice of Sir Thomas Morgan p. 18.19.32.41.47.106. The seruice of Sir Roger Williams. p. 38.42.97.98. His seruice in the Portugale voyage. p. 113. The voyage to Portugale. p. 112. Sir Edward Norice his seruice there. 113.116. A Iournall of Sir Iohn Norices seruice in Fraunce. 1591. p. 119. His memorable seruice at Brest in Britaine 1594. p. 134. A briefe discourse of his seruice in Ireland against the Arch-rebell Tyrone 1595. p. 144. Sir Thomas Baskeruil, Sir Francis Vere, and Colonell Hunt∣ley. p. 98. Sir William Pelham. p. 101. Sir Thomas Knowles. p. 74.138. FINIS Tabulae.
THE TRANSLATORS COLLECTION OF THE succeeding Gouernours in the Ne∣therlands, and originall causes of the warres there. BEfore I come to the Consequent, I must begin with the Antece∣dent; before I frame the vpper building,Exordium de quatuor cir∣cumstantijs. I must fixe a founda∣tion: so before I come to the cau∣ses of the Ciuill warres in the Netherlands, I must by due course of the Dutch and Latin Historie (which I fellow) set downe the succeeding Gouernours in those Countries, by foure circumstances, briefly gathered out of my Au∣thors first booke Histor. Belgic. as he largely by substance deliuereth for former causes of later consequents. The first circumstance is this: The deriuation of the gouernment of those Countries,The first cir∣cumstance. Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 1. by processe of time for many yéeres vnder foure Dukes of Burgundy, and as many Archdukes of Austrich: of which, that Philip was the later Archduke, who (being sonne of Maximilian, be∣fore Archduke of Austrich, and Emperour of Germany, and sonne in law to Ferdinando King of Spaine, leauing behind him his two sonnes, Charles the elder, and Ferdi∣nando the younger, with foure daughters suruiuing) deceased out of this mortall life in the yeere of our Lord. 1505.
The second circumstance.The second circumstance is this: That the said Charles (as elder brother Archduke of Austrich and King of Spaine) sailing by sea thence into the Netherlands Anno 1517. taking possession of those Countries for his owne behoofe,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 1. within two yéeres after (that is to say An∣no 1519. on the 28. of Iuly) was elected at Frankford in Germanie, both King of Romanes and Emperour of Germanie, by the name of Charles the 5. Emperour: and so continuing in magnificent and memorable honour and renowne many yeeres gouerned those Countries: yet, not without some seueritie, as it is said: Much like the Eagle, which (seeming naturally to affect her young ones) will yet nourish them with great austeritie. Al∣though euen in his time (for the Religion of the Gospell) the ciuill broyles beginning in Germanie, he sought by his great wisedome and grauitie to appease the same: yet happily liued he after this in great honour and felicitie: for he liued and saw his foresaid younger brother Ferdi∣nando chosen Caesar at Colen Anno 1530. and on the fift of Ianuary 1531. crowned King of the Romanes, who became an earnest fauourer and furtherer of the Gospell. He liued also and saw the felicitie of his lawfull begot∣ten sonne Philip, both Duke of Burgundy, Archduke of Austrich and King of Spaine Anno 1542. but he liued not to see the life and death of his base begotten sonne Don Iohn de Austria, who died (as afterwards shall appeare in this historie) Anno 1578. To be short, he liued yet to see his said sonne Philip married with Mary Quéene of England on the 19. of Iuly 1554. and in the next yéere following 1555. he gaue this his said sonne Philip full possession and principalitie ouer the said Countries of the Netherlands, which hee had himselfe so gouerned (not without some seueritie) 38. yeeres. Finally, omit∣ting larger discourses of this Charles the 5. Emperour, (of his so many notable and memorable expeditions in in his life time performed) let these few words suffice; that he made nine into Germanie, seuen into Spaine, se∣uen
into Italy, tenne into the Netherlands, foure into France, and two into England, which in all were nine and thirtie. After all this (to make an end of his memo∣rials) he resigning vp the Empire and iurisdiction there∣of vnto the Princes Electors of the same, in the yeere of our Lord 1557. and so leauing Germanie departed into Spaine, where he finished the race of his mortall life on the 20. day of September in the yeere of our Lord 1558. hauing been Emperour for the full space of nine and thir∣tie yeeres. The third circumstance is this: That his aforesaid younger brother Ferdinando,The third cir∣cumstance. succeeding him in the Em∣pire, on the 18. day of March 1558. did so godly, and so re∣ligiously gouerne the same,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 1. from his first inauguration thereunto, that he had much adoe to be confirmed in this Imperiall dignitie, by Pope Paul the 4. of that name Bi∣shop of Rome; because he this good Emperour granting peace vnto the Churches of Germanie, & preferring the Gospell, the same Pope Paul withstood him in Italy, and thwarted him with warlike forces out of France, to come of purpose to Rome, there to disgrace and disanull his gouernment euen in that same very yeere 1558. afore∣said. This good Emperour notwithstanding perseuering an Imperiall sincere Patrone of the sacred religion (to his great comfort) saw his sonne Maximilian also chosen and crowned King of Romanes, in the moneth of No∣uember 1564. And so he himselfe hauing been Emperour sixe yeeres and vpwards, was by the God of peace called out of this troublesome world on the 25. of Iuly An∣no 1565. The fourth and last circumstance, yet not the least which I gather out of my Authors first booke is this:The fourth circumstance. That as the said King Philip of Spaine had been from the yeere of our Lord 1555. aforesaid,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 1. possessed in his soue∣raigntie ouer the Netherlands, vntill this yeere 1565. aforesaid; so his father Charles the 5. Emperour in his time was not so seuere an Eagle, but this his sonne now
becomes as sore a Lion, ioyning hands as it were with the Pope of Rome: And whereas they two made other Christian Princes beléeue they became right restorers of Christian policie; in processe of time they prooued themselues to be destroyers of the peace and weale pub∣like of a good gouernment, in sending foorth the Spanish Inquisition, as the ground of al the griefe in the Nether∣lands, and the originall cause of the ciuill warres there, now following. The originall ciuill Warres in the Netherlands vnder the Du∣chesse of Parma. FOr first by the said Inquisition sent from the Pope and the Spa∣nish King into the Netherlands,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 2. against the professors of the Gospell, or of the reformed re∣ligion, thus it fell out: That the King hauing chosen new Bi∣shops for the purpose,Anno 1566. sent them thither to execute the said In∣quisition amongst them.The States fin∣ding thēselues greatly iniu∣ried and grie∣ued by ye Spa∣nish Inquisitiō, do exhibit vn∣to the Regent a iust protesta∣tion of their cause. They of the reformed religion hereupon exhibit to the Lady Margaret Duchesse of Par∣ma and Placencia (sent by the King thither for their Re∣gent and Gouernesse vnder him) a little printed booke: wherein they craue mitigation of the Kings Decrée, ho∣ping (as they alleaged) that he would not infringe and frustrate their ancient priuiledges and franchises in those points, and for that cause they were reputed and called Geusij, viz. poore men. Which thing being interpreted to
the worst in Spaine, and sore stomacked by the King, they of the reformed religion perceiuing the same fire euery day more and more to burst foorth (to quench,The keyes and custodie of Antwerpe in Churchyards hands at this vprore, witnes Master Ioseph and his bro∣ther Master Richard Can∣deler. or at least as it were to auoide the same) by publike assemblies at Sermons, and conuenient places, doe prouide for their profession and for protection of their particular estates. Hereupon on the other side began Idolatrie to outface and disanull their doings by the Papists: yet for all this the said Ladie Margaret Duchesse of Parma, then Re∣gent, was commaunded by the King, to graunt securitie vnto the Nobilitie of the professors (who had béen before suiters vnto her for the same) that they might fréely haue their assemblies and Sermons, till further order were taken therein. Then they of the reformed religion laid away their weapons, and some Idolatrous personages were put to death. Meane while the Regent hauing ga∣thered vnder her some forces,Churchyard Captaine of 30. thousand in this time at Antwerpe. began to sow discord and debate amongst the reformed Nobilitie: whereof the les∣ser part being stirred vp, or rather enforced by her mena∣cings and threatnings, doe againe take them to their weapons: whereupon at Antwerpe did sedition and tu∣mult arise. To auoide future daunger, William Prince of Orange and Counte Nassaw hereupon departeth out of the Netherlands in happie time.The Prince of Orange and Counte Nas∣saw departeth out of the troubled Low Countries in happie time. Againe at Antwerpe was commandement giuen in certaine places that Ser∣mons should be prohibited; and so all things seeme to stand in vncertaintie, though some hoped that the Kings displeasure would be pacified. To conclude, yet so many as were suspected of the reformed religion were taken and violently put to death: many others taken endured long imprisonmēt: many others fearing worse to come,Churchyard then fled to England in a Priests appa∣rell, and came to ye Queene. fled these Low Countries, dispersing themselues into di∣uers parts of Europe. And all this continued vnder the said Duchesse of Parma, Regent for the space of twentie moneths. In the time of these troubles and graunt of an Inte∣rim (to haue frée libertie in preaching the Gospell) there
fell out a bloodie conflict neere Antwerpe, at a place called Austeruile: for one Monsieur de Toloze a Protestant (sus∣pecting bad practises of the Regent) gathered and assem∣bled two thousand souldiers in a fortification, not fullie accomplished at the said Austeruile, meaning with that force to aide them of Antwerpe, if ill measure were offe∣red them; which the Regent went cunningly about: for she (in all secret manner) raised a thousand horse and foure thousand footemen, and gaue the charge of them to a gal∣lant Captaine called Monsieur Beauvois (albeit a cruell man) who immediatly marched priuily towards this new fortification, and before Monsieur Toloze could make himselfe strong to withstand his enemies, the Regents power in the breake of day set vpon the vnreadie and féeble force of Toloze, and charged them so furiously and hotly, that they entred the weake fortifications, & ouer∣threw the whole companie of Toloze, sauing a few that escaped dangerously into Antwerpe; among which soul∣diers Captaine Churchyard saued himselfe and entred Antwerpe. Notwithstanding Toloze being slaine, and almost all his men, the enemie (after the victorie gotten) marched with all possible spéede towards Antwerpe, where fortie Ensignes of the Regents power were in battell on the Market place readie to receiue them, and kept the Towne gates as open as they could for that purpose: but the Protestants fearing mischiefe and mi∣serie, ran to the gates in all haste and shut them fast, ca∣rying away the keyes into the hart of the towne. The Prince of Orange, the Counte de Horne, and Counte Hostraet, with Monsieur Decardes, and many more Seigneurs and Noblemen beholding the daunger they were in, knew not what to doe, nor durst make any resi∣stance, for offending the Regent, and losse of liues, goods and lands: and so refusing all charge against the Re∣gent, they left the common people in a great vprore and hazard: to auoide which extremitie, the Commoners be∣gan to clap on armour, and made a most resolute muti∣nie,
crying Viue les gueulx, that is to say, liue poore men: and beholding ouer the walles Monsieur Beauvois and his people proudly marching (after so much bloodshed) within a mile of Antwerpe, the Protestants resolutely determined to encounter Beauvois in the fields: but wan∣ting a generall Captaine, and horsemen to match against horsemen, they fell in a great murmuring, and knew not what was best to take in hand: yet seeing all their go∣uernours refuse them, called courage to themselues, and so resolued to make a stranger their Captaine, they be∣ing enterlarded with many valiant souldiers (that came from the siege of Valenciana) came suddenly to Cap∣taine Churchyards lodging and burst open his doore, commaunding him in all haste to come out, and take the charge of those that would fight for the Gospell, which attended his comming well armed in the stréetes: Churchyard told them he would serue among them,The Prote∣stants chuse Churchyard their Captaine but was vnable to gouerne a multitude. Whereon they bent their pikes on him, and threatned to kill him if he did refuse their louing offer. He thereupon gaue his promise to obey, and so without any armour came into the stréet, where was raised such a shout and noise of people (and so many caps flung vp) that it was a wonder to heare and see it: he presently gessed their number was great and their quarell good, so in a few words he desired that such as would not fight, to depart to their wiues and children: whereat all the people shouted and cried, Goe forward and we will follow. Then vnto the gates goes the as∣semblie of 25. thousand, sauing the souldiers were left by direction to make head and beard the fortie Ensignes in the Market place: so the Protestants breaking with barres of yron a posterne gate (because the keyes were hidden) their Leader still aduancing his Ensigne full in the enemies view, their horsemen somewhat slacke (for the rifling Tolozes Campe) cast in the Reregard: and not readie to charge the forefront of the Protestants, made the Protestants vse the more aduantage both of shot and
seruice, whereby they gat so much blood and victorie, that their Leader (of some great consideration) made his peo∣ple retire into the towne againe, the number that sallied were eight thousand. They were no sooner entred but the Prince of Orange and Noblemen welcomed (with embracings) the Leader and all his followers, promising great matter for their boldnes. But the Captaine and his people hoping to rid the whole towne of Spaniards, marched with the aduantage of the time (the gates fast shut) towards the Market place, order being giuen that fiue thousand shot should enter at the backes of the ene∣mies, when one shot of Canon should be discharged a∣gainst the Protestants from the Market place (where 24. great pieces were rammed full of stones and chaines) and resolutely the Protestants holding this course, marching thorow Cooper strote in as great brauerie and terror as may be imagined, they approched néere the e∣nemies with such a thundring noise and crie as seemed marueilous. The Prince and great Earles before na∣med, pitying the great slaughter that might follow this bold attempt, on horsebacke (as all the Nobilitie were) the Prince presented peace to the Protestants: who dis∣daining his offer cried kill him, and so bent their pikes on him. What, what (quoth the Captaine) will you kill your gouernours, fie for shame, hold still your weapons: but the Prince and the rest with him, drew backe their bridles so hard and so disorderly, that downe came the Prince and his companie all flat backward in the place. The enemie then amazed at that sight (besides regarding the priuie stratagem or practises at their backes neere the riuers side) began after their musing and amaze to discourage themselues, in so much that the Cannons they would haue shot off, and the seruice they intended was vtterly forgotten, so that suddenly they let fall their pikes, and at the Protestants approch then at hand, the enemies cried (to saue their owne liues) Viue le gueulx aloude, and in such sort that they suffered all their Cap∣taines
and Leaders to the number of sixe score to be ta∣ken prisoners, losing all their Cannons and Munition, putting euery thing they had into the Leaders hands of the Protestants, he vsing victorie in the great aduaun∣tage of that season, caused all their Cānons to be drawne with ropes from the Market place to the Méere brugge, a great stréete néere the Burse, and filling euery window full of shot to flanke each part and corner of the stréetes and Burse, he chained carts together with shot in them, and thereon pitched straight waies a Campe full vpon the Méere-brugge, hauing then at commaund thirtie thousand resolute souldiers, for the space of thrée daies and nights: all which time the Generall appointed Captaines and officers for euery companie, and all warlike orders set in stay, he thought all had been well and in suretie: but a vile cunning and vnchristian brute was raised, that the Caluinists would cut the Marti∣nists throtes: on which false brute, in one night the Pro∣testants lost much more than ten thousand men, who ioyned as they might with the Papists: yet God mo∣uing the mindes of good men, made the Protestants and their Generall couragiously to plucke vp their hearts, and the Generall with fiue hundred shot, match fired in cocke, marched to the Prince of Orange his presence, and told him that this drift of the Martinists going from the Protestants, smelled of two much suttle smoke, the smoother thereof might set all Antwerpe on a flaming fire, desiring him to see a quicke redresse herein, or else presently the Protestants would giue all the enemies a battell, to the whole spoyle and ouerthrow of the towne: and therewithall he departed from the Prince, and vsed his fiue hundred shot, to house and driue in all the Mar∣tinists into their lodgings: for as yet they had not ioy∣ned with the enemies force, they were so wearie with watching before, and so glad of rest, libertie, and compa∣nie of their wiues and friends at that present. The Prince then with great prudence and policie,
sent word to the Protestants that they should haue free accesse to Sermons and preachings, which they sought, (for the which was a goodly preaching place built) and further the Prince promised that the Martinises and all other enemies should lay downe their weapons and passe quietly euery man to his lodging, requiring that the Protestants would make no further stirre, but as quiet∣ly as were possible to march by euery mans owne doore, and there to leaue the townes men in their dwelling pla∣ces as they marched: which request of the Prince was to Gods glorie and his honour in perfit order perfor∣med, alwaies the Protestants kept them strong till the enemie were all lodged, and then each man went home in peace. All these things being done and brought to a good end, without shedding of blood or spoyle of any Chri∣stian creature: yet the Prince was after forced to flée to Breda, as the storie now shall shew you following. The noble Prince of Orange in Breda (his owne towne) seeing his sonne and heire taken from Louaine at schoole, by the crueltie of the Duke of Alua, and through∣ly considering the calamitie of Flaunders (by the dealing of a tyrannous gouernour): this warlike wise Prince with a fatherly regard and true affection to Gods word and the Netherlands, began to stomacke the wrongs receiued whē he gouerned Antwerpe (and the imminent danger that Flanders stood in) and calling to minde al pro∣mises were broken that were solemnly made by the late Regent, he consulted and communed of this matter with the States of Germanie and his friends there, who coun∣selled him to take armes in hand and raise a power, at his owne house in Dillenbrough, a parcell of Germanie (ten great leagues from Colen) and these great Captaines and worthie Germanes promised not only in person, but also in purse and munition to assist him, which they per∣formed with great expedition, at the time when he ari∣ued at Dillenbrough, where Churchyard being sent (from the Lord high Chamberlaine of England) saw the mée∣ting
of all this mightie assemblie, and serued vnder Mon∣sieur de Lume (Counte de la March) as Cornet-bearer to two hundred and fittie light horsemen all that warres, which was against the Duke of Alua in his first com∣ming to Flanders. The Prince passed his musters be∣yond the Rhine, betweene an Abbey and Andernake, a walled towne in Germanie, and had in his Armie two and twentie thousand foote, and thirtéene thousand horse, all Swartrutters: so paying his souldiers with Dollars two moneths pay afore hand, he passed this great armie in boates very néere Andernake, marching from thence towards Aken, a strong towne: but by the way was a great mutinie betweene the Almaines and Burgonians, who said the Almaines had lost the battell of Groning, where Counte Lodwick and all his power was ouer∣throwne, those words made many a man be slaine: but the broyle was pacified by the Prince, who marched straightwaies to Aix, a great Citie, and the Armie en∣countred anon after the Duke of Aluaes souldiers, horse∣men, some valiant of minde, and some by sorcerie with words and characters in their doublets, more mad than manly, yet hoping in sorcerie ventured too farre, and could not be killed with shot; a desperate royster beholding the boldnes of these enchaunted persons against shot, drew his sword and stroke one of these men on the face, who quickly yéelded himselfe (as after his fellowes did) to the mercie of the sword. The matter marshally a long while pleaded and orderly by Marshall law disputed, the enchaunted men were all condemned to be hanged, be∣cause against the law of Armes they had vsed vnchristian and vnlawfull meanes to murther men and shed Chri∣stian blood. These men executed the Princes armie (after a good summe of money paied for the raunsome of Aix the great towne) departed towards Senttro, another walled towne, which redéemed it selfe in like manner. All this while the Duke of Alua with thirtie thousand shot and foure thousand horse, waited on the Princes po∣wer,
still skirmishing with braue souldiers against the Princes forces. But almost forgotten at the entring of the Princes armie, he bruted that he would passe thorow Liege, a marueilous mightie towne, where the Duke ad∣uertised by espiall, attended the Prince his comming: suddenly without sound of Drumme the Prince parted a contrarie way towards a foord on the Maze néere Ma∣stricke, marching all the whole darke night very fast, (which lost some men) and at breake of day came to a bare Village where the foord was, to enter into Flanders: so in all haste possible the horsemen passed, bearing a croope be∣hinde them each one a souldier: but the horses so many, and their legges holding vp the water, the riuer rose so hie that many footmen were drowned, and much victuall wet and lost: yet before night all the armie left aliue were landed in as great safetie as could be wished. But resting thrée daies there, the Duke was in Mastrick (not very farre off) to giue the Prince battell: so God sent a most faire day for that cause, in his gracious pleasure. The Prince ranged and set in battell, marched on a good∣ly plaine towards Mastrick, and the order of the field by excellent souldiers set and ranged in the most princeliest manner that might be (Churchyard at all this): The vangard, battell and reregard so shining in armour, and other awfull troupes of horsemen, which seemed a great wood and terror to behold, that in very deede the show and fight thereof would haue delighted any man liuing to behold: for the march and order of the field was mira∣culous to consider on, and most fearfull to match withall and encounter. Yet the Duke of Alua (a great noble soul∣dier) determined (as it was thought) valiantly to fight with all this braue armie, so in short time the very same day the Prince came within shot of Cannon (and at the length of Musket) so néere the Duke, that he sent a num∣ber of horsemen to make a brauado, and plied it so fast with small shot out of the trenches (for he was intren∣ched) that it was thought a great slaughter would ensue.
Thus continuing all the latter end of the day in skir∣mish and great seruice, at night the Prince was faine to lodge his power néere the very face of the Dukes army, farre from water or wood: but in the night season the Duke remoued his Campe, and a farre off waited on the Prince daily, who neuer did march backward, but came (as afore is said) to Aix, Senttro, Tongre, and other townes of good moment, making his profit as he might euery where, because some had broken promise with him in a most odious manner. For some had falsified their faith, besides odde trumperies they deuised, and o∣thersome poysoned the standing waters and pooles: yea and in some places milke and drinke was infected, Milles were all broken downe, and no corne to be grinded: by which Heathenlike & foule hellish practises, the Princes armie was like to perish: yet a shift was found to bring the armie by little & little from these miseries: but forced to skirmish with Alua oftē. The Prince came cunningly to a towne called Tongre, finding there much of the Dukes prouision, and a number of waggons full of corne and other necessaries, succoured and made somewhat in strength, and in hope of good fortune: the armie meant to passe ouer a little riuer néere Tielmount, but by the way were sharply encountred with the whole power of the Duke of Alua, where in hazard the Count de Hostraet was shot in the legge, of which wound he died andn af∣ter. The Duke likewise (a politike souldier and great gouernour) bearded the Prince a while with hot and cruell countenance, and so sent Iulian Romero to lie in ambush betwéene a bridge and passage, full in the face of the Princes Campe, marching to passe the water: which Romero most like a rare great souldier, in a fine warlike sort, couched his force flat on the earth behinde the For∣lorne hope, sent from the Prince to view and make place for his armies passage: Romero came before as one that knew the aduantage of time, couching close as flat as they might, and so the day consuming, all was in rest, and
both parties in a great wood lay as close as they could. The Duke maintaining skirmish, followed still after the Réergard of the Prince. Romero suffered both the Car∣riage, Vaungard and Battell to passe the bridge: and as the Reergard aduaunced themselues to march ouer the passage, Romero descried his power of sixe thousand shot, and so put al the Forlorne hope to flight, or slew the most of them. A noble Frenchman called Monsieur de Mal∣berg, and all his companie of foure thousand braue soul∣diers were there defeated, with others to the number of eight thousand men: which fight and slaughter endured in great and bloodie broyle till the very night approched, and compelled both the Camps to lodge within Cannon shot one of another, and in the night the Duke priuily stole away, for some hidden cause and policie: for the next morning Monsieur Ianlis and seuen thousand footemen, with fiftéene hundred horse, marched ful vpon the Dukes power in a faire plaine néere vnto Namur. The Duke dreading Ianlis boldnes (and the Princes Camp not farre off) turned him backe another way, and made his march very fast, for feare of a blow: then Ianlis and all his noble troupe ioyned with great ioy with the Princes power. Immediatly the Prince prepared to besiege a towne cal∣led Chasteau Cambresi, and marching thitherwards, the Duke waited at hand, but the towne was strongly be∣sieged: notwithstanding the Duke (as the Prince had intelligence) minded to disturbe him: the espials of the Dukes Campe were by the Prince taken, which decla∣red in what disorder the Dukes Campe lay: whereon without sound of Drumme (most secretly) the Prince marched to méete the Duke, and the barking of dogs vn∣der the Ruitters waggons, gaue warning how both the armies were almost mingled together (the night being dark) whereat a great alarme arose on both sides: but the Dukes Campe within two houres was intrenched, and so a great encounter of horsemen a long time passed out the morning in skirmishing, with many slaine and hurt.
The Prince then departing from Flaunders came into France néere Guise and S. Quintins, and marched after to disperse his armie towards Strasborogh: in the which way Churchyard (departing frō the Prince to England) so leaues this true testimonie for a witnes, that the au∣thor which wrote the other historie (which Robinson translated) left partially out of his booke, whereas these matters at that season were worthie of memorie. Written fom pag. 5. hitherto by Thomas Churchyard. The ciuill Warres proceeding in the Netherlands, vnder Don Ferdinando Aluares de Toledo Duke of Alua: sent thither by the King of Spaine as Commander Generall. AFter all this, King Philip still prosecuting his former purpose with further extremities, in the yeere of our Lorde 1567. sent thither Don Ferdinando Alua∣res Duke of Alua, by the title of the Kings Commaunder Gene∣rall: a noble personage no doubt, but a notable cruell Tyrant, tall of personage, leane of bodie (like vnto Brutus or Cassius whom Caesar censured to be feared) strong of members, vpright in stature, long and leane faced, hollow eyed, of fierce and grim countenance, with a long and gray beard, haughtie of minde, stoute of courage, and (as my
Author saith) Magnus Aulicus, Insignis Dissimulator: yet of surpassing skill and knowledge in feates and poli∣cies of warre,The Duke of Alua sent as Gouernour o∣uer the Low Countries vn∣der King Phi∣lip. excéeding therein all Spaniards of his time: who as he exercised most seuere martiall discipline in his warres, so vsed hee great iudgement in leading foorth his armies, pitching his Tents, and pointing out harbours for his souldiers, because he was of long time a continuall practitioner in warres defensiue and offen∣siue: and so bold he was and of such stout selfe-conceit, as one fearing no daunger, that he would take vpon him no charge of any armie, except he might haue the chiefe place and prerogatiue of Commendator Generall, as the Spaniards call it. As certainly he serued both the father Charles the 5. Emperour before remembred, and Philip the sonne now mentioned, in chiefest place or calling of Martiall affaires, and that in most important and dif∣ficult enterprises:Lib. 3. managing their warres in Italy, Spaine, France, Hungary, Germany, Africk and the Ne∣therlands: who now entring there in person all armed, found all things in peaceable state: But within a yéere after, he began to be stirre him in the ininoyned Inquisi∣tion afresh, euery where grieuously vexing and persecu∣ting the inhabitants with new impositions, mutinies, confiscation of goods, imprisonment, ciuill warres, and vnmercifull death: daily inueighing against them, that they had broken their alleageance to the King and his supreame authoritie, and that they had lost all priuiledge of libertie, life and possessions: therefore he calleth a ge∣nerall new Councell of the States, abrogating old, and establishing new lawes, quite contrarie to the ancient former customes of those countries; vrging daily the new Bishops to be diligent in executing the said Inqui∣sition, Summo iure (or rather Summa iniuria) according to that saying, Sic volo, sic iubeo, stet pro ratione volun∣tas: he himselfe setting all things in order for ciuill wars, fortifieth old and erecteth new fortresses, Castles and muniments, making prouision for prisons, and other such
preparations. This being in the yéere 1569. our Eng∣lish Merchants and Marriners (amongst whom, my selfe a poore Clerke trauailing towards Antwerpe, for my preferment) they some in one place, some in another, I at Flushing (vpon Christmas éeue) were taken out of our beds,He made a ge∣neral restraint of Englishmēs ships & goods. and (our ships and goods by the Kings commaun∣dement imbargued) so carried to the Geuarghen huise, as they called it. The cause whereof was, that certaine ships with the Kings treasure driuen néere the coast of England by tempest of weather, were taken by the Quéenes Maiesties ships & brought into the Themes: by meanes whereof both English Merchants and Mar∣riners were detained in prison, and their ships and goods restrained as well in all the Spanish Kings dominions; as also on the other partie the King of Spaines subiects and goods were arested in the Quéenes Maiesties king∣domes of England, Wales and Ireland: which continued for the space of two yéeres following, till that order was then taken for the same: when the Merchants, Marri∣ners and their ships were released and dismissed, but the goods liable to the value of the Spanish Kings treasures was answered accordingly. Thus the crueltie of the time and state in the Nether∣lands increasing most odious vnto other Christian prin∣ces,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 4. it was Gods good pleasure to put into the mindes of the States of Germanie,Anno 1569. also of Charles the 9. King of France (for mitigation of these calamities) to enter a league with William Prince of Orange and Count Nas∣saw,Certain Chri∣stian Princes assist ye Prince of Orange to fortifie the Low Coun∣tries. to leuie forces of men and munition vnder conduct of the Count Lodwicke of Nassaw brother to the said Prince, being also associated with the two valiant Cap∣taines, Ienlisij and the Lord of Laxone: who (with their said forces part Germans, part Frenchmē, part Dutch∣men,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 3. and part English voluntaries) bending their ende∣uours to the surprising of the strong towne of Mounts in Henault, on the 24. of May in the foresaid yéere obtained
the towne by fight, and possessed the same by strong for∣tification thereof. In that yéere (saith my author) King Philip vpon suspition that he had of his only son Charles Prince of Spaine (that hee should prepare himselfe with habiliments by sea to step away into the Netherlands,King Philip imprisoneth his owne son. and ioyne with the States, vz. the Prince of Orange, Count de Egmont, Graue van Horne and others, to ma∣nage ciuill warres against his father and his Comman∣der before named) for that cause cast his said sonne into prison, where continuing a certain time he died, yet as it was thought by bléeding. The foresaid Gouernesse Du∣chesse of Parma and Placencia departed about the end of Iuly home into Italy,The Duchesse of Parma de∣parteth into Italy. being conducted vpon the way to the sea side by the Commander Generall: who retur∣ning to his Court at Bruxels, cited thither the said Prince of Orange,The King of Spaine pro∣scribeth the Prince of O∣range, and two other estates. Count de Egmont and Count Horne (ha∣uing before proscribed them) to appeare vpon their al∣leageance to the King, before him as his Lieutenant generall ouer all those Countries. The Prince of O∣range kept him aloofe out of his daunger: the other were taken, laid in prison, and afterwards beheaded in the Market place at Bruxels. In that yéere also was Ter∣goas besiged the second time by Tseratius for the Prince and the States,Tergoas be∣sieged. who was afterwards made Gouernour of Flushing: there at Tergoas hauing made his ditches and plotted his stations for his Ordinance to be dischar∣ged, by and by made he a breach in two places of the walles. At the which assault the French souldiers vnder Monsieur and the English stipendarie hired souldiers vnder Captaine Thomas Morgan and others, néere vnto the chiefest gate of the towne, being 25▪ paces broade, about midnight made entrance into the Citie: whilest Creitius the Colonell, being by his Frenchmen greatly furthered therein, bestirs him to scale the other side of the gate: but being countermaunded by the soul∣diers within sufficiently defending that place, both hée
and they were repulsed, and forced to giue back frō that assault. Whereby Mondragon the Spanish Captaine (newly thereupon come thither) reserued Tgoas from any further siege (himselfe and his souldiers wading tho∣row déepe waters, sent thither in great oportunitie by the Commaunder Generall) as it were to resist the as∣sault and rescue the towne, which was performed with the losse of two hundred English and French souldiers slaine and fallen into the waters there. Frederick the sonne of the Duke of Alua,Frederick the sonne of Fer∣dinando be∣siegeth Zut∣phen. hauing béen with his said father very forward in all actions, about the 21. of Nouember 1572. with the forces which he had vnder him from his father, besieged Zutphen in Gelder∣land, and shortly after tooke it. Thus the Duke of Alua hauing with great crueltie gouerned for the King, ma∣king hauocke of all with little mercie wheresoeuer hée came, casting downe strong holds, and killing man, wo∣man and child: to make an end of his mischiefes, when now the citie of Harlem in Holland had for her own best safegard receiued the Garrison of the said Prince of O∣range, pitched there his Tents,Harlem forti∣fied by the Prince of O∣range. Captaine Bar∣nabey Rich his notes. bringing thither his ar∣mie, consisting of Wallons and Frenchmen, vnder their Captaines: also Englishmen and their Captaines, by name Captaine Turner, who serued there some 8. yéeres, Captaine Cotton, Captaine Christopher Hunter, Cap∣taine Candish, Captaine George Gascoyne and others, which were all voluntaries; and of certaine Scottish Regiments, sending thither also all kindes of necessarie victuals, furniture and prouision for the said armie: thi∣ther then came the said Frederick sonne to the said Duke of Alua, and with his fresh forces of diuers countries (sent thither by the King of Spaine) laieth great and long siege vnto the same:The same be∣sieged by Fre∣dericke the Duke of Alua his sonne. which enduring from the said yéere 1572. néere at ende, till the 15. of August 1573. hée at length preuailed so farre, that profligating the Princes armie, and dispersing them here and there, he entred the same citie, and obtained and kept it in possession for the
King, vsing the inhabitants thereof with no little extre∣mitie.Anno 1573. About the 20. of August in the said yéere 1573. his said father Don Ferdinando Duke of Alua (partly his crueltie being by the King perceiued,The Duke of Alua depar∣teth out of the Low Coun∣tries. and partly by the States of the Netherlands complaid vpon, leauing his said sonne to gouerne and beae armes for the King) with a conuenient retinue departeth out of those Coun∣tries, not without many a curse, banning and exclama∣tion made vpon him for his farewell, whē he had so there tyrannized about the space of 6. yéers little more or lesse. Vide Hieronymū Connestagium in Historia Portugaliae. The Warres in the Netherlands, vnder Don Lewis Requisensius Go∣uernour for the Spanish King. ABout the beginning of October 1573. succéeding the said Duke of Alua, came thither sent by the King of Spaine another Noble man named Don Lewis Requi∣sensius,Don Lewis de Requisensius a Spaniard suc∣ceeded in that gouernment. he taking gouernment vpon him, smally enterprised to purpose in the latter end of that yéere. In the next yéere follow∣ing 1574. he bestirreth him by all meanes possible to leuy his forces to besiege diuers townes,Anno 1574. and to fortifie some others: amongst which when the Zelanders had at∣tempted to besiege Midleborow, they so farre proceeded that the towne suffered great penurie and distresse of all things both by sea and by land;Midleborow yeelded to the Prince of O∣range. and by meanes there∣of was in the end yéelded vnto the said Zelanders for
the Prince of Orange, who supported their powers and forces therein. What time in the yéere aforesaid 1574. this newcome Commaunder brought his forces to besiege the citie of Leyden, one of the chiefest cities in Holland,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 5. the said Prince of Orange sent thither for safegard thereof vnder Lieutenant Edward Chester an Englishman, ten En∣signes or companies of English souldiers, all volunta∣ries, who appointing certaine of them for a garrison in the citie,Leydon besie∣ged by Spanish forces. procureth the citizens to make speedie proui∣sion of corne and graine for the necessarie sustentation of his souldiers. But finding the want thereof at his comming, and their slownes in preparing the same at that time, he complaineth greatly yt they the lesse regar∣ding or foreseeing the same in time, do not so spéedely pro∣uide for the premisses: and still he earnestly calleth vpon thē to looke well to the present necessitie in time, & so for their safetie and defense he doth the part of a good care∣full Captaine,Lacke of loo∣king to neces∣sitie in time, loseth all in fine. that in the meane time they resisted and repelled the enemies forces for thrée moneths. And he telleth them they should lack no helpe that he could per∣forme or procure any way: notwithstanding they of the citie being to too negligent and slow in following his aduice in time, shortly after (for want of better proui∣sion in due time) fiue Ensignes of those English soul∣diers were constrained to step aside to the enemie, con∣trarie to their promise to the States. This towne was rescued by cutting certaine bankes and letting in the sea, which drowned many of the enemies troupes. In the beginning of the next yéere 1575. the King of Spaine hauing victualles,Anno 1575. manned and rigged a Nauie of souldiers purposely sent to inuade the Netherlands, a great part of the same Nauie ariued by contrary winde and weather vpon the coasts of England: all for the most part of these ships were such as they call Assabres, Pinasses, so small as that they might passe thorow the narrow and deepe riuers of those countries: who when
they chanced vpon the coast of the Ile of Wight in Eng∣land, such a friend was the Quéens Maiestie vnto them, that by the helpe of certaine her Highnes and subiects ships, they were wafted ouer to Dunkerke, where (after they had landed their souldiers and conueied their trea∣sure which they brought to the Commaunder) staying vpon those coasts the latter part of that winter,The Spanish kings Armado sent into the Low Coun∣tries, cast away by tempest. these ships (with those that were left in them) by huge and terrible tempests there arising, were (one frushed with the other) quite sunke and cast away; a thing surely re∣puted for Gods wonderfull worke. This yeere also the States of Holland and Zeland (by the chiefe perswasion of the Prince of Orange) after much and graue consultation, with no lesse aduice and deliberation determined, condescended, and agreed to make suite vnto some forreine Prince, to protect and de∣fend them from the horrible furies and outragious ty∣rannies of the Spanish gouernment. In that yeere 1575. was Ziricksea also besieged by the enemies forces,Ziricksea be∣sieged. which continued for nine moneths space: where when the Prince of Orange had resisted the enemie what he could with men, munition and mo∣ney, to his power, it was afterwards (sore against this good Princes will) yeelded vp vnto the Spanish King and his forces in the next yeere following 1576. The same next yeere following 1576. what time the said Commaunder Generall with his Spaniards and o∣thers,Anno 1576. Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 6. bent their forces to inuade Antwerpe: there then the Marques of Hauery being General, and Champigny another valiant Captaine for the States, ioyned their forces to the full resisting of that inuasion, and valiantly withstood the enemie. But then the Earle Obersteyn making haste from the Offerlings house in Antwerpe (being pursued by the Spaniards) thinking by flight to escape that daunger, rushed into a Flemmish ship in the riuer, where by the way (through the heauines of his armour borne downe) he fell from that ships side and
was drowned. At that inuasion also were missing (pur∣sued by the Spaniards) certaine others of the chiefest personages of authoritie and valour in Antwerpe: There then also the young Count Egmont was taken prisoner in the Abbey of S. Michael, and with him Capreyse and Gogneyse two Noble men, and so caried captiues away. Then the Spaniards thus inuading the noble citie of Antwerpe, entring it with fire and sword most furiously sacked, ransacked and spoyled the same citie in horrible manner: so that they were Lords and conquerours of the same by the fourth day of Nouember in the yeere a∣foresaid 1576. where I note (by the way) that on the selfe same day when the noble citie of Antwerpe most ty∣rannously and most lamentably was thus taken, burnt and spoyled by the Spaniards, euen then the same day Don Iohn de Austria the bastard sonne of Charles the 5. Emperour before remembred, and new sent Comman∣der Generall for the King of Spaine, came into the Ne∣therlands to gouerne the same. As for the late Com∣mander Don Lewis Requisensius, when he had so serued his Prince King Philip as Generall of the Netherlands foure yéeres, he deceased at Bruxels: vpon whose death by the author were written these verses following. IN MORTEM LVDOVICI RE∣quisens. Regis Hispan. Commendatoris magni praedicti in Belgia. 1576. Carmen. ILle Requisensus Regi percharus, & ipsi Vrbis Quirini flaminis, Nunc chlamydem, quando{que} togam, quando{que} cucullum Triplex Chymera gestitans: Belgarum genti Rector datus, ante faeraci Praefectus & Insubriae.
Mitis & Horrenaus, turgens abdomine, Praedo Prouinciarum subdolus; Emunctor populi, Procerum Calcator, Asylum Rasis, Piorum Carnifex. Numen Iberorum, Batauorum terror, Iniquus Belli atque Pacis Arbiter. Ad generum Caereris subito se contulit, illuc, Citatus à Vitellio: O stupidos Belgas, passi qui talia Monstra, Adhuc supini stertitis? FINIS. The ciuill Warres there vnder Don Iohn de Austria. Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 6.IN Ianuary following the next yeere 1577. (after he was there setled a certaine space▪) the Prince of Orange and diuers of the chiefest of the States (by a certaine humble endeuour to doe all things for the best) doe offer him in friendly manner for his present intertainment,The offer made by the Prince and States vnto Don Iohn of Austrich. vse and benefit, the possession of Louaine and Machlin, to the intent to haue some treatie of pacification confir∣med by him: The said Prince and States (at his request first demaunding the same) on their parts giuing for ho∣stages the before named Marques of Haury, the Bur∣graue of Gaunt, and the Abbot of S. Gertrude. He accep∣teth
their proffer made, receiueth the hostages, and bea∣ring them in hand (if he might be beleeued) he would re∣maine either at Machlin or at Louaine, where he would further procéede in treatie according to their former re∣quest to him so made. In so much as the same being on the 5. of Ianuary 1577. condescended, confirmed & published by the afore∣said Prince of Orange and the States at Bruxels: Don Iohn (then as it seemed) being moued by many reasons to make vnitie with the States, promised them first to send away and quite dismisse the Spanish Kings forces out of those Countries, and after that maketh them ma∣ny faire promises on his part to be performed, to the number of 19. Articles,The preten∣ded contract of Don Iohn with ye Prince of Orange, proueth in fine fraud in frend∣ship. which were on the other partie likewise by and for himselfe and his Councell on the 17. of February 1577. condescended, confirmed, exhibited and published. But howsoeuer this appeared in out∣ward shew (as the Poet saith) it fell out Exitus acta pro∣bat, caret successibus opto: For the Prince of Orange and the States looking into his water more iudicially and prudently preuenting the worst, sought by al meanes to prouide in time for their owne securitie and safetie, and like prospecting Patriotae for the protection of them∣selues and their countrie, fortified themselues and the same euery where. Notwithstanding on the 7. Ides of Aprill Anno Dom. 1577. King Philip confirmeth this as a perpetuall decree: Hereupon the Prince and the States doe call vpon the new Gouernour (Don Iohn the Bastard of Austrich) for money, and hauing receiued some certaine pay, doe satisfie in part the souldiers there so long soiourning. So the Spanish, Italians, and Bur∣gundian souldiers, as well footmen as horsemen, on the 11. of May doe forsake and depart from Vtrich, and from all the Castles and Fortresses thereabouts. About the same time the before named Countie Egmont captiue, with the other two Noblemen taken by the Spaniards the last yéere, and besides these, Valdesius with fiue or
sixe others taken by the States, were all dismissed and sent home, and at length all other strangers also, vnto whom (their promised pay being now made) Countie Maunsfeld Gouernour of Luxenberg performeth safe-conduct, departing out of Luxenberg into Italy very rich and passing ioyfull. To conclude, Don Iohn who (before the departure of the Spaniards out of the Netherlands,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 6. could not be made gouernour of the same) now in the meane time prepareth himselfe to take vpon him that gouernmēt at Louaine:Don Iohn made Gouer∣nour Generall for the Spa∣nish King. where (when very many Noble∣men came to congratulate his thither comming on the Calends of May, this said yéere 1577) he with a great number of Noblemen of his traine, in great solemnitie, honour and triumph went to Bruxels: where on the 4. of May he was enstalled Gouernour General for the Spa∣nish King ouer all those Netherlands: The people vere∣ly perswading themselues, that henceforth now perfect stabilitie of peace would possesse their expectations. Anno 1577.But within a while after he (seeing the gouernment of the Countrie in his absolute power and possession) began forthwith to execute that authoritie,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 7. which in se∣cret manner he had from the King enioyned him: And hereupon priuily conferreth out of hand with the Ger∣mane souldiers (as yet staying in the Netherlands) to this end especially, that he may haue certaine chiefe Ci∣ties there by some suttle sleight or cunning deuice ren∣dred into his hands.The double dealing of Don Iohn di∣scouered and defeated. But his Letters mentioning those secret deuices, were intercepted (as God would haue them) in France: and so his fraude or guile being now discouered, he aforehand taketh the citie of Namur. But when he attempted the like thing against Antwerpe, his enterprise had no successe: for the Castle being fortified and defended by Boursius in the behalfe of the States, this meanes, policie and power sufficiently preuailed a∣gainst the enemies enterprise. Againe also Bergen opt Zome, Breda, and Shertogenbusch, this Don Iohns forces were discomfited by Champigny in the States behalfe,
valiantly encountring and ouermatching the enemie at all assates. Hereupon the Prince of Orange and the States doe write vnto the Spanish King,The States write to the Spanish King of Don Iohns indirect dea∣ling. accusing the said Don Iohn of his indirect dealing, contrarie to the confidence they reposed in him: They also certified his Maiestie that this Don Iohn faining peace, and the procuring thereof amongst them, would not sticke to depart the countrie, if he were sure to bring it to passe thereby that the Catholike Religion (as he termeth it) and the kings authoritie might so rest in safetie. And yet in the meane time after all this protestation, this Don Iohn sendeth for the Spanish and other dismissed souldiers to come backe againe. To crosse him therefore another way, preuenting his purpose the States doe cast downe the Castle of Antwerpe, mistrusting he would forth with be their euill neighbour there first of all: and incontinently they prepare them to warre against Don Iohn. There∣fore they send speedely for the Prince of Orange, not farre off as then, whom they condiscend to make the chiefe Gouernour of Antwerpe. Hereupon groweth a ielousie, whereby many of the Noblemen being mooued in some manner contrarily, doe send for the Archduke Matthias,The Archduke Matthias sent for by the States. brother to the then & now still Emperour Ro∣dolphus 2. and sonne of Maximilian before Emperour, hoping vnder his authoritie to haue particular iurisdic∣tion in the seuerall Prouinces there: which thing when they of Gaunt did heare of, they take the Duke of Ascot with others of that faction, and commit them to safe kée∣ping. Here it is especially to be remembred, that on the 17. day of Iuly that yéere 1577. came first to the Prince of Orange,Sir Iohn No∣rice his first comming into the Nether∣lands. a worthie and forward souldier Master Iohn Norice, second sonne to the Lord Henry Norice, Baron of Rycot in Oxfordshire, a Gentleman of great courage and dexteritie, who (as Captaine Peter Cripse, a follower of him in this his first seruice, and in all others after∣wards
for a long time, saith) landed first at Dunkirke with thrée hundred Englishmen,Captain Crip∣ses note. where he arming thē, marched toward Antwerpe with them, where the said Prince of Orange remained: and so from thence to Bro∣kam, where he made pay to all his souldiers the last day of that moneth of Iuly 1577. aforesaid. Duke Matthias being come into those countries, and at the first thus forsaken of them whom he should haue had his assistance, by the perswasion yet of the Prince of Orange, is by the States chosen and ordained their chiefe Gouernour for the King: and Don Iohn is pub∣likely proclaimed an enemie to all the Low Countries, Datum Bruxellae 7. Decemb. 1577. The States in this yéere send their Ambassadours vnto diuers Monarchs and Princes of diuers kingdoms and countries, to excuse themselues and accuse Don Iohn of the misgouernment of the Netherlands: In France they were offered by the King his brother and Quéene Mother both fauour and furtherance for their defence. And here it is to be remembred, that whereas (by rea∣son of the same request of the States made vnto the Quéenes Maiestie of England) certaine euill disposed persons flattering the King of Spaine, bore him in hand that the Quéenes Maiestie did ambitiously seeke to v∣surpe the gouernment of those Low Countries, contra∣rie to his good pleasure: Her Maiestie therefore being giuen to vnderstand of those slanderous and false bruites giuen out against her (to purge her selfe of such sinister dealing,Enuie and slander euer∣more enemies to good enter∣prises. and of that false and vndeserued surmise sugge∣sted to the said King, and dispersed abroad to blemish her Highnes credit and estimation with other Christian Princes) to the intent she would rather be knowne to God and the whole world, To eschue euill and doe good, to seeke peace and insue it, Psal. 34.13. and not to be an intruder into those troubles (as it was falsely surmised) to nourish the ciuill warres in those Countries, labou∣reth by princely and friendly meanes of perswasion to
the Spanish King for carefull conseruation and preser∣uation of the same: and likewise in Christian and friend∣ly manner exhorteth the Prince of Orange and States of those Countries to submit themselues to their soue∣raigne Lord and King in all humilitie and obedience, and so ceasing from ciuill discord, if that they would re∣iect their weapons, and practise to appease those troubles with patience, no doubt of it God would worke in the Kings heart to forget and forgiue all that was past,Iohn Stow pages 1167.1168.1169. to remedie all euils present, and prouide for the best to come. These friendly motions made by her Maiestie for both the King and his subiects, written in Latin and in English, seuerall copies were sent from her Maiestie to the King of Spaine by a wise and learned Gentleman named Master Thomas Wilks, on the 20. day of Decem∣ber Anno 1577. In the beginning of the yéere following 1578. the said Don Iohn brought in a new,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 7. Alexander Farnesius (the sonne of Lady Margaret before named, Duchesse of Parma and Regent of the Low Countries) now by the name and title of Prince of Parma,Alexander Duke of Par∣ma brought into the Low Countries by Don Iohn. as another enioyned Generall for the Spanish King, with his Spanish and Italish souldiers come into those countries: In whom Don Iohn hauing great confidence, proclaimeth open warres against the Prince, the States and those Coun∣tries. The Pope Gregorie (alias ante Hugo) the 13. of that name on the other side, sendeth his Crosse, and de∣nounceth his curse against the Prince of Orange, all the States and their partakers in those warres. Hereupon Don Iohn taking great encouragement vnto himselfe,The States forces then at Gembleu o∣uerthrowne by Don Iohn▪ and those whom he had in charge vnder him, set vpon the armie of the States at the towne of Gembleu in the County Namure: and there discomfited them with great spoyle and ouerthrow of them on the 30. day of Ianuary 1578. And so still prosecuting his purpose in hope of fur∣ther victorie, he subdueth afterwards, Louaine, Phillip∣ville, Limburge, and certaine other townes; which he
together with the Duke of Parma his forces had accom∣plished before Iuly following. Duke Iohn Casimire com∣meth into England.In that Ianuary, vz. on the 22. day about 7. of the clocke at night, Duke Iohn Casimire Countie Palatine of Rhene and Duke of Bauaria, landing at the Tower-wharfe in London, was there by diuers Noblemen and others of England, honourably receiued and conueied to Sir Thomas Greshams house, the Queenes Agent, in Bishops gate streete in London, where he was feasted and lodged till Sunday next, that hee was honourablie brought to her Maiesties Court royall at Whitehall, and after lodged at Sommerset-house on the 8. of Fe∣bruary following; he was made Knight of the Garter: and on the 14. of February hee departed homewards with great rewards, giuen by the Quéenes Maiestie, the Nobilitie and men of honour. This noble Duke be∣ing a valiant Martiallist, became afterwards a stipen∣darie warriour of great valour and accompt, and did much good seruice against the Spaniards, for the Prince of Orange and the States of the Low Countries. The Warres in the Netherlands, vnder the Prince of Parma for the King, and the Archduke Matthias for the States. VPon the first day of August (amongst vs Eng∣lish commonly called Lammas day) in the yéere of Christ our Sauiour 1578. (which day the Spaniards doe highly honour,Captaine Whitstocks note. especially Don Iohn, who as this day ouercame the Turks in a battell by sea) they endeuoured by all meanes to enterprise some great ex∣ploite: so as they sent out of Louaine two scoutes or
espials in very base apparell, to prie about and descrie the Prince of Orange his Tents,The battell on Lammas day betweene Lo∣uaine and the Leger. at that time remaining in the Leger: which two souldiers should indéed vse al their endeuour to burne vp the houses neere vnto those Tents: and whilest they should so set the inhabitants on worke to quench the fire, al the whole Spanish host, which consisted of foure thousand horsemen and seuen thousand footemen,Anno 1578. vnder conduct of Mondragon a Spa∣nish Captaine (although Don Iohn the Bastard of Au∣strich,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 8. and Alexander Fernesius Duke of Parma were both in person there also) should suddenly and at vn∣wares surprise and suppresse the Prince of Orange his armie. But (as it was Gods good pleasure and fauour to the contrarie) those same two Spies were taken, and the e∣nemies were disappointed of their purpose, being va∣liantly encountred by the English,A fierce fight for 7. houres. Scottish & French∣men, from nine of the clocke in the morning vntill foure of the clocke in the afternoone of the same day: and that with a hot and fierce fight (fortune so fauouring the States and their forces) that they put their enemies to flight, and pursued them to the vtmost the space of thrée miles and more. The first of the English Captaines which set vpon the enemies, was that valiant Lieutenant William Marckham, a Nottinghamshire man, sterne of counte∣nance, strong of hands, and couragious of heart, like a Lion casting downe, ouerthrowing, and ouermatching whomsoeuer he met with: In whose commendations the States themselues sent diuers Letters into Eng∣land. But in truth the greatest glorie of this fight fell to the then couragious Colonel Norice, who comming that Lammas day from Brokam (aforesaid) very early in the morning to Remingham Leger,Captain Crip∣ses note. where the States armie were in fight with Don Iohn of Austrich (the Graue van Busshy being Generall of the States armie) he the said Colonell Norice ioyning with eleuen com∣panies
of Englishmen more, vz. of Colonel Candish, Colonel Morgan, and Colonel Cotton (who spent fif∣teene seuerall barrels of powder vpon the enemies at that time, before they entred the Campe of the States) euen there the said Colonell Norice hauing three seue∣rall horses one after another slaine vnder him,Generall No∣rice hath the honour of the field. with greatest valour pursued and subdued his enemies, being only weaponed with single sword and his pistols which he vsed: euen so surely, as who had seene how coura∣giously he laid about him on euery side, might well haue said he had seene a new Hector, another Alexander, or rather a second Caesar foyling his enemies euery where. There were also present at this conflict three English valiant Gentlemen, by name Bingams, all brethren, va∣liantly behauing themselues,Three Bing∣hams brethrē. vntill two of them, vz. Ro∣ger and Thomas, were pursued by the enemie vnto the very death: but the third (which was Richard Bingham, as it pleased God so to fauour him, safely then escaping the enemies danger) suruiued,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 8. a man of good valour, for his seruice afterwards in Ireland was knighted, and there preferred to the gouernment of Connaugh: of whose prowesse and fame they that wil may reade more amply both in Iohn Stowes Chronicle,Sir Richard Bingham de∣ceased in Anno 1598. and in the Histo∣rie of the warres in Ireland. In this fight for seuen houres space were slaine of the enemies fiue hundred, besides a number drowned:Fiue hundred Spaniards slaine. and of our Englishmen and of the Scots were slaine to the number of one hundred at the most: yet it was thought the Camp of the States would haue been vtterly ouerthrowne that day, if the English forces had not come in as they did. Towards the latter end of the yeere 1578. after all these troubles and broyles,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 9. Don Iohn de Austria hauing thus made his last mounting vpon the stage (summoned by Death to sound a Catastrophen) sickened in his Tent at Namours about the Calends of October:The death of Don Iohn. and died (as some thinke) of the plague: others (rather be∣leeuing) haue giuen it out that hée (being sore grieued
with a certaine odious disease) what for sorow in minde conceiued at ye hatred of the countrie vpō bruiting of his base birth, & what for stomacking and furiously fretting at his euill successe in gouernment, tooke such extreame thought, that it shortened his life so much the sooner. This Don Iohn (as my Author saith) was a lustie young man of thirtie yéeres of age, of meane stature, hastle,His birth and properties de∣scribed. rash and proud: yet at length manifesting his malicious minde and furious fierce outrage in vndeserued troubles which he brought vpon the inhabitants of those Low Countries: because he saw he was despised of them for his base and vnlawfull birth. For indeed the high and low Germanes doe most of all others despise and dis∣daine bastards: and the rather for that his mother which bare him was a Germane, at that time dwelling in the Low Countries (whose report being not so good) the Emperour Charles the 5. father bruited of this Don Iohn, caused her to be the sooner conueyed thence into Spaine, that she might there leade a new life, and appoin∣ted her a Nurse there to attend vpon her and the childe: where notwithstanding perhaps the mother after∣wards growing malecontent, would rather name ano∣ther man to be Don Iohns father, then that he was be∣gotten by the said Emperour. In the yéere following 1579. the said Colonell No∣rice, with other English Captaines and their forces,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 9. had many small skirmishes with the enemie in Brabant and Holland: but neither part attempted any notable ex∣ploite for game or losse of that which they had hitherto gotten, but watching their oportunitie from time to time, passed forth this yéere without any memorable thing done. In the winter of this yéere the before named Duke Iohn Cassimire (for a certaine time before retained by the States as a worthie warriour) came with his forces to Teene and Areschot, and lay there in campe all that win∣ter, and now and then skirmished with the said Prince of
Parmaes other forces. But the Prince being too strong for him, driue him to the worse, so that with very little or no great glorie the Duke departed againe into high Germanie, and left his owne souldiers in the Nether∣lands, some vnder one Captaine, some vnder another: but in the end they followed their first Captaine with better contentment to goe then to stay any longer. Anno 1580.Anno Dom. 1580. when the Lord George Lelain Erle of Renenbergh, so commōly called (in times past) a faith∣full consort of the States,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 10. and a valiant Leader: but af∣terwards (his fates so framing, or rather frowning) be∣ing taken prisoner by this Alexander Prince of Parma, became a Reuolt or Apostata: he thenceforth made Lieu∣tenant generall vnder the same Duke of Parma, when (I say) he should take his iourney on the 18. day of Oc∣tober this yéere 1580. towards the citie of Steenwick to besiege it (then being vnder the States) comming with his forces against the same, he found the Citie of very little abilitie or strength to resist him, and very slenderly manned with one small companie in garrison: yet (as he thought) if he might winne this, he perswaded himselfe it would be for his speciall aduantage, seruing to streng∣then Drent, and so in his passage to Frizland fit him for the defence of Vallenhoue. Therefore this Countie Re∣nenbergh laid siege to Steenwick, bringing to the field 28. Ensignes or companies of souldiers, euery one ha∣uing two hundred footemen, seuered in this manner, that is, foureteene bands of Frizlanders, nine bands of new Gelders, and fiue bands of his owne prouince of Renen∣bergh: all which 28. Ensignes or bands contained sixe thousand footmen and moe, and he had moreouer of horse∣men twelue hundred speciall chosen Lansiers. There was for the States within this citie a man of good va∣lour named Olthoff, as chiefe gouernour, hauing but one Ensigne or band of men lying there in the garrison. There was also another worthie man and a notable good Leader named Corruput,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 10. with his band or compa∣nie,
and with these were also two companies of Ger∣manes vnder conduct of the Lord Hohenlo, commonly called Countie Hollock, whose vnder Captaines were Plat and Stuper, with their Leader Iohn Berenbrooke gouernour of Gelders:The Garrison in Stenwick. but the souldiers of these two last companies were in manner Nouices, and vntrained to the warres. There were ouer and besides these about thrée hundred citizens, but yet amongst them scarse fiftie persons which a man might well trust vnto: They had not as yet any Generall sent vnto them, neither had they any great Ordenance, nor any horse; only the officers of the bands had some twelue or foureteene horses for thē∣selues: All these adiuments or helpes thus here recited, were the besieged citizens vtterly voide and destitute of, wherewith they might the better resist and repulse their approching enemies. Wherefore in this present di∣stresse, the Gouernours, Captaines and Burghers (sen∣ding spéedely Letters vnto the States) doe humbly and earnestly entreate them to send them spéedie succour and rescue.The Gouer∣nours of Sten∣wick send to the States for supplie. But yet onely the said couragious Corruput and prudent Leader (before named) was after a sort against this intendement: for he conceiuing and pondring with himselfe another thing, with great héede and foresight sheweth and seeketh other meanes otherwise how to defend the citie: whose opinion the foresaid Captaine Plat and his souldiers doe also well allow of. In the meane time, notwithstanding while the Noblemen of Frizland sent thither for succour and rescue foure En∣signes or companies of footemen and a few horsemen,The first sup∣plie sent, sur∣prised and set vpon. Countie Renenbergh addresseth certaine of his soul∣diers against them: They which were sent for rescue, defending themselues what they could, were by the way set vpon and slaine of the Renenbergers, few or none escaping. Once againe the graue counsell and aduice of the said Corruput the second time giuen in presence of the Go∣uernours, Captaines and Burghers, touching the cities
safetie (as aforesaid) being still contemned or neglected: certaine of the chiefest personages in the citie by writing make and dispatch another motion to the States to haue yet againe more helpe sent vnto them,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 10. and that the citie with all possible spéede might be deliuered from the ene∣mies siege. But now Corruput and the said Berenbrook by their letters perswade the States to deale more ad∣uisedly, least they afterwards repent themselues againe, as they had done once erst before. The States then willing to satisfie the citizens expectation,The second supplie sent al∣so surprised by the enemie. yet for all this send another fresh supplie of sixe Ensignes of footemen vnder Heighmans conduct, and appoint them for S. Iohns Campe, a place so called, not farre from Stenwick: But or euer these came thither they also were set vpon by the Renenbergers; and although they manfully defended themselues, yet were they by the enemies taken, slaine, and put to flight. Hereupon the enemie seeing his ad∣uantage, marcheth with great courage to the citie, fireth the suburbs and scaleth the walles. The citizens seeing the fire fiercely flaming in diuers places, as men out of their wits, be stir them by all meanes (yet little enough) to quench the same, and the souldiers resist the enemie here and there what they can, and with their Ordenance beate the enemie backe from the walles: they so gathe∣ring strength and taking courage vnto them, doe for a certaine season keepe out the enemie and fortifie them∣selues. These things thus befalling, the States (more adui∣sedly consulting how to deliuer Stenwick) goe now ano∣ther way to worke: Here at length preuaileth their purpose: they therefore with all possible spéede hauing prepared a stronger power wherewith to deliuer this stressed citie,The States better adui∣sing thēselues, send now thi∣ther Colonell Norice. leuying and gathering money for their souldiers: for this new prepared supplie, doe ordaine the before named Colonell Norice chiefe conductor and Ge∣nerall of their troupes, sending him with them to raise the siege. Who so soone as he came with his Regiments
to Swart Sluce, found there a certaine fresh band of the enemies newly ariued vnder Othon Sanches a Spa∣niard: These he setteth vpon, killeth most of them, and putting the rest to flight, burneth vp the Village on the 15. of December. From thence he marcheth to Meppell with 24. Ensignes, which scarsely contained sixteene hundred fighting men,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 10. with whom were ioyned a few horsemen: and so leaueth at Sluce thrée Ensignes only for a Garrison by the way as he passeth. Renenberg sendeth thither eleuen Ensignes of foote∣men, and sixe troupes of horsemen, which by a conue∣nient passage through the yce,The now Ge∣nerall Norices victorie ouer the Renenber∣gers besieging Stenwick. set vpon Generall Norice his souldiers. But when they had couragiously defended themselues for a long time against the Renenberg, in the meane season the Generall in person (hauing good opor∣tunitie to succour & rescue his people) with all spéede sud∣denly rusheth vpō the Renenbergers, and putteth them to flight, in such sort as many of them were slaine, and many amidst the broken yce were drowned. So the said worthie Generall departing with victorie, hauing taken two of the enemies chiefe Ensignes, and gotten so much armour as might well serue for furniture of fiue hun∣dred souldiers, sendeth one of those Ensignes into the ci∣tie of Stenwick aforesaid, accompanied with fortie soul∣diers,This affirmed by Captaine Strange. which caried into the same Citie also 570. pounds weight of gunne powder put in leather bagges, very néedfull and necessarie as the time present then requi∣red. The day before the Calends of Ianuary, the said Ge∣nerall againe with his forces made an assault vpon the enemie, still besieging the citie, issuing vpon them hard at their backs beyond the marrish ground: and euen then the very Garrison themselues with a great force fell out of the towne also, who set vpon the enemies in such sort, as they made them to giue ground and runne away, yea and with Smithes hammers brake in peeces certaine Ordenance and field cariages, left there by the enemies
at their fleeing away. The said Renenbergers not per∣ceiuing how they could by any meanes preuaile against the townes men, doe yet (in a bragging brauerie take a kinde of courage vnto them) deuise to passe away the time with some sports: whereupon it happened that a certaine Captaine amongst others of Countie Renen∣bergs souldiers, named Thomas of Alba, chiefe Captaine of those which came from Albania,The enemies bragging cha∣lenge. presumed insolently to challenge the said Generall Norice at the single com∣bat hand to hand with Launce and Sword: vpon whose behalfe that renowmed Captaine and souldier Sir Ro∣ger Williams (since that time for his worth and valour knighted) replied, as Lieutenant generall of the horse∣men vnder the said Generall Norice, that he in his stéede would defend the cause against the challenger,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 10▪ and fight with him hand to hand. Which being determined by both parties in certaine prescribed Articles, the day is appointed, each of these champions enter the lists be∣tweene both the Armies, they marched forth and fall to buckling one with the other; where after certain fierce blowes giuen and taken by either partie (yet neither of them being hurt) the one drinkes a carouse, and the o∣ther pledgeth, and so both of them depart the place. After this, on the 24. of Ianuary this yéere 1580. while the said Generall Norice with his armie was set∣led in S. Iohns Campe aforesaid: against him thither commeth Countie Renenberg in person with all his most strong power, and besieging him round about with great shot,The fight in S. Iohns Camp betweene Ge∣nerall Norice and Countie Renenberg. assaileth and forceth him mightily. Here the said Generall and his souldiers enduring great danger, and suffering great penurie for lacke of victuals (necessi∣tie so compelling them) were enforced to feede vpon horse flesh: vntill such time as the Lord Nienort (sent from the States with his owne souldiers, and sixe other Ensignes of Frizlanders) furnished with wagons loa∣den, brought thither all kinde of prouision to strengthen and relieue the besieged persons: which Renenberg well
perceiuing, secretly and suddenly breaking vp the siege,This affirmed by Captaine Strange. leauing his souldiers there some hurt and some slaine, fled away with great abundance of all things necessa∣rie. And here now this one thing thus happening worthie of memorie, may well be tolde for a miracle, as in truth it proued, that in the time of th siege, three Partridges flying ouer the citie of Stenwick on the 4. of February in the morning, were taken and brought to the before named Captaine Corruput. He interpreting it for a good presage, said: That God in Trinitie who in the old time gaue Quailes (such like foode as these) vnto the fain∣ting Israelites,Exod. 16.13. would also euen now without doubt feed and relieue the besieged and distressed citie of Stenwick. These words spake he, who little knowing what cer∣taintie be fore signified; found not long after the assured euent of his speech.Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 10. For of truth first the aforesaid Ge∣nerall Norice on the 20▪ of that February, sendeth from out of his Campe certaine souldiers which brought to Stenwick so besieged one hundred and fiftie Cheeses,Generall No∣rice relieueth Stenwick (be∣sieged) with vi¦ctuals, the 20. day of Februa∣rie 1580. three hundred and fiftie loaues of bread, and some quan∣titie of gunpowder. Secondly, euen the very same day betwéene thrée and foure of the clocke in the afternoone, he sent thither also by certaine husbandmen a great number of horses loaden with corne, branne and gun∣powder, and certaine of his footemen with speede caried more Chéeses and loaues of bread into the said citie. In Aprill following that yeere 150. the said General Norice, accompanied with Monsieur Charles Leuen, also Monsieur Temple gouernour of Bruxels, and their bands of horsemen and footemen marching in good order with manly courage, leauing Liere in Brabant,Captaine Whitstocks note, confir∣med by Cap∣taine Cripse. where they had béen before, doe now attempt to besiege Machlin in Bra∣bant: on the 9. of that moneth very early in the mor∣ning they skaled the walles and fired the port in such sort, and so valiantly behauing themselues, that before breake of day they entring with their forces surprised
the towne, got great booties shared amongst the soul∣diers, and that with no little slaughter of the enemies, which had so before resisted them within the towne. A∣mongst whom (as saith my Author, and which also o∣thers affirme) that Generall Norice encountring with a Spanish Frier (a tall and stout fellow in armes) named Pedro Lobo (who had before caused all the great Orde∣nance in the towne to be shot off against him and his for∣ces) after a while bickering with him hand to hand, gaue him his deaths wound, whereof the said Frier died pre∣sently. Confirmed also by Captaine Cripse, that after the said Generall Norice with his forces had lien there fiftéene daies, sacked the towne and taken the spoyle, they were commanded by the States to deliuer the towne to Monsieur Famoise: who then to take the charge of the towne (with his Dutch souldiers and Monsieur Temples Wallons) perceiuing the English forces to depart away very rich out of the towne, fell vpon them suddenly for the spoyle, where they killed moe of the English then were killed at the winning of the towne: where Gene∣rall Norice himselfe was shot thorow the buttocke, and had his horse killed vnder him: and euen then Captaine Price a braue souldier forsooke his owne horse, and moun∣ted him vpon the same: and so altogether they marched out of the towne toward Antwerpe. The States againe send the Lord Nienort with his companie thither: he in his owne person with the same companie of souldiers boldly assaileth Renenberg with often skirmishing, he killeth a great number of the ene∣mies, putteth them to flight, and as they were flying pursueth them hard at the héeles euen to the very walles of Groning, giuing them a great ouerthrow, where hée slew aboue sixe hundred of the Renenbergers:The Lord Nie∣nort his victo∣rie ouer the Renenbergers the 9. day of Iuly 1580. so as there was left for the said General Norice foure of the enemies Brasse péeces of Ordenance, a great number of fardels, and very many horses. This victorie by the Lord Nie∣nort, thus gotten the 9. of Iuly 1580. he pitcheth his
Tents not farre from the towne of Groning, there re∣sting in better securitie for a season. And so the citie of Stenwick, after foure moneths siege, was in this manner at length by Gods good prouidence deliuered. And with∣in a little while after,Renenbergs death. namely on the 23. of the said mo∣neth of Iuly Countie Renenberg himselfe (after he had béen certaine daies sick) deceased in his Campe, as some suspect by poyson. After all this on the 17. of September this yéere 1580. a consultation was had at Lewarden in Frizland:Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 11. where it was decréed (on the behalfe of the States) to send the said Generall Norice to resist the enemie. Spéedie dis∣patch herein was made, and an armie was furnished out against a Spanish Generall named Verdugo: They (I meane the States) hauing leuied and armed certaine bands of horsemen and footemen, also mustering their companies, and paying them one moneths pay afore∣hand, doe make the said Generall Norice chiefe Gouer∣nour of them. He with conuenient spéede (hauing these his forces well fortified with sixe Brasse peeces, mar∣cheth manfully to méete the said enemie.Generall No∣rice marcheth to meete Ver∣dugo. But it fell out so that in both armies the plague was very contagious, whereby many officers of this armie died in their Tents. Here for a certaine space, while both armies were thus setled, afterwards Verdugo pitcheth his Tents at Northorne: Him pursueth hard the said Gene∣rall Norice, vnto whom came eleuen Ensignes of Eng∣lishmen, vnder the conduct of the valiant Colonell Sir Thomas Morgan: he himselfe hauing vnder his charge ninetéene Ensignes of all these countries, vz. foure of Nassawes Regiment, nine of Monsieur Sannoy, and sixe of Nienorts Regiment: so being vnder them thirtie En∣signes, which made in all scarsely thrée thousand foote∣men. To these were ioyned the troupes of horsemen vn∣der their seuerall Captaines, as the Colonell Gore, Cap∣taine Elenborne, and Henry van Eky, who were in number scarse fiue hundred: So then with such a braue
armie marcheth forwards the said worthy General No∣rice on the 30. day of September that yéere 1580. to∣wards Newziel,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 10. a place in Frizland. Now Verdugo setting his forces in order and battell aray, had got (to his greatest aduantage) for his station the vpper ground néere the ditches: where the valiant worthie souldier Captaine Roger Williams (before na∣med) with the English horsemen vnder his charge, toge∣ther also with Elenbornes horsemen aforesaid, doe set vpon one great band of Verdugoes footemen, of whom they killed many, and put many to flight. But as euen then one Wingard a Captaine & companion of Verdu∣go, made towards them with certaine especiall troupes (while the horsemen of the States had the enemie in chace) Verdugo with two troupes of Lansiers by maine force charged into the armie of the States:The battaile at Northorne. and so assai∣ling them, not only found Munition, prouision, wagons, and other necessaries, but also caried them quite away, and tooke also from them many Ensignes, where many of the States souldiers were slaine and taken prisoners: but few of Verdugoes company (of any reputation) were then either slaine or taken. And so afterwards Verdugo himselfe confessed, that (if this armie of the States had forborne and prolonged a few daies more from this fight) a great number of these enemies had departed determinately, and would otherwise haue prouided for their safetie elsewhere, without any field there fought at that time. Here in this conflict had the said Generall Norice his right hand hurt with a bullet, and many of his souldiers which escaped the enemies hands, were for the most part spoyled of their armour and weapons: very many of them leauing their armour in those places, where necessi∣tie compelled them either to leape or swimme ouer those ditches. This also confirmed by Captaine Cripse, who being there an actor, was in eight seuerall places hurt at the least. Thus much my author mentioneth of the con∣flict
at Northorne: and thus farre he writeth of the warres managed betwéene Alexander Prince of Parma for and in the behalfe of the Spanish King, and the Arch∣duke Matthias for and in the behalfe of the States of the Netherlands: which Archduke by occasion of displeasure of the King, departed shortly after towards Austrich,The Archduke departeth the Netherlands, the Prince of Orange suc∣ceedeth. leauing the gouernment of those Low Countries and the ordering of the warres vnto the Prince of Orange, who by generall consent of all the States, ordering all things with wisedome and prouident foresight, held the enemie at the sword point for one whole yéere, from the end of 1580. to the beginning of the second yéere after 1582. at what time Monsieur the Duke of Aniow and brother to Henry the 3. King of France, was sent for and chosen to succéed in gouernment of those Countries and ordering of the warres, in manner and forme fol∣lowing. The Warres in the Netherlands, vnder Francis Duke of Aniow a∣gainst Alexander Pr. of Parma. AFter that the said Monsieur,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 11. with o∣ther Noblemen of France ariuing in Kent on the first of Nouember 1581. had beene honourably receiued at London, and intertained at her Maiesties Court at Whitehall,Francis Duke of Aniow cōmeth into England. with princely feastings and ban∣quettings all that Christmas: and being accompanied with the Quéenes Maiestie of England, she with her Nobles brought him on his way to Canterbury, fea∣sted
him there also, and each of them tooke leaue of o∣ther: And after that the Quéenes Maiestie had sent with him in fiftéene shippes the Right Honourable Robert Erle of Leicester, Henry Lord Hunsdon, Charles Lord Howard Baron of Essingham Knights of the Garter, the Lord Willowby, the Lord Windsor, the Lord Shef∣field, Master Philip Sidney, Master George Cary, and Master Iohn and Master Robert Cary his brethren, with many other Gentlemen, who ariued at Flushing in Ze∣land, where he withall these Nobles of England and his owne and their traine in princely and friendly manner was receiued, by the aforesaid noble Prince William Countie of Nassaw,Captaine Churchyard was with the Duke all that while. and the other Nobles of the Low Countries, conducting them from thence to Midleborow and so to Antwerpe in Brabant, where on the 19. of Fe∣bruary Anno 1581. the said Duke of Aniow was crea∣ted Duke of Lothier and Brabant with great solemni∣tie: which being ended, the Nobilitie of England retur∣ned home againe, and left him there Gouernour of those Countries, he repaired with his traine of French Noble∣men and Gentlemen into France, where the King his brother Henry the 3. of that name furnished him with men, money and munition, for the better supportation and countenancing of his princely port and new attai∣ned authoritie in the Low Countries aforesaid: And so on the 27. day of August in the yéere following 1583. for greater securitie of himselfe and his charge now taken vpon him, he returned into Brabant with those forces, containing in all companies foure thousand fighting men.The prepara∣tion of the Prince of Par∣ma and Duke of Aniowes forces for the fight. These being placed in a certaine Village neere vn∣to the citie of Gaunt: straightway the Duke of Parma hereof vnderstanding, and hauing in a readines a great number of his most valiant souldiers, with their caria∣ges and furniture maketh all haste possible to encoun∣ter him. Again, his cōming being no sooner perceiued by the Duke of Brabants espials, but aduertised vnto him, the Lord Pierri a noble Frenchman, Campe-master of
the Duke of Brabant, commandeth his companies quick∣ly to arme and encounter:Lib. 11. and with all carefull dili∣gence and skilfull experience he aduiseth them of due ob∣seruations in their warlike order of fight, and how to march softly and fight slowly with the enemie. Martial∣ling his men on this manner: first in the front of his battell next vnto the enemies were the band of English souldiers, and to them were ioyned the troupes of Ger∣manes, next these were the bands led by Bouquoy, and after these marcheth the worthie Generall Norice in the Rereward with thrée troupes of English horse, & foure troupes of French horsemen: after these followed thrée troupes of French horsemen, with certaine footebands of Flemmings and of Scots: and last of all in the Rere∣ward marched a band of English footemen, and a great companie of pikemen. Contrariwise againe the Duke of Parma had in his Vaward or front all Spaniards, a great multitude whereof were very many footmen, and more then a thousand horsemen: for whom euery where by the way the Duke of Aniowes espials lay in ambush, so as not a few enemies were slaine with the shot of the Ambush; only of the Duke of Aniowes companie a∣mongst others were wanting thrée or foure Captaines of hundreds. After this welcōming made by the Duke of Aniowes souldiers vnto the Prince of Parmaes and his forces thus approching towards him, which was short of Gaunt two Dutch miles, being sixe of our English miles:Captaine Ed∣ward Stran∣ges relation of the seruice at Gaunt. the Duke of Aniow and the Prince of Orange thought good to send Sir Iohn Norice to the Campe where the for∣ces lay: and thither he came with the thrée troupes of English horsemen, and foure troupes of French horse∣men (as aforesaid) for his conuoy into the Campe about twelue of the clock at night aforesaid, where there were of all nations, English, French, Dutch and Scottish some sixe thousand men. And comming into the English quarter, he enquired where his quarter was, and where
Capaine Edward Strange lay, who had the commaund of all his house and his horses: where finding him lying in a little cabbin hard by his Tent, he asked him how he had bestowed all things, for the enemie was hard at hand. To whom Captaine Strange answered, he had de∣liuered all vnto Captaine Peter Cripse to send it away to Gaunt. Then said the General: We haue the Vaunt∣gard to day, but I thinke the French are fled from vs, and wee must then haue the Rereward in spight of our hearts. So he hauing a squadron of horse, lay from the Camp a quarter of an English mile, where one William Winter a tall souldier, being one of the Corporals, and commanding the squadron,The enemies forces disco∣uered at hand. sent out a very good watch, so as the enemie must of force come by them, and by no other way. Two houres before day there came from the Prince of Parma certaine troupes of horse Albanoyses and Italians talking together: and being within hea∣ring of ye watch, those which stood Sentinell discouered them, and presently sent word to their guard lying in a house hard by, to certifie the Generall that the enemies forces were at hand. The word comming to the Gene∣rall, he presently commaunded that euery companie should be ready to answere the alarme: but it was found that as well others as the French were marched and re∣tired towards Gaunt. There the Generall stood fast vntill his owne companie came vnto him: and presently thrée companies of Albanoyses came thither and offered to charge him, he being accompanied with Master Henry Knowles (a most worthie and gallant Gentleman) all that day. So the Generall marched from the quarter downe the hill, and at the foote of the hill, by the counsell of the said Master Knowles, he armed himselfe, asking Captaine Strange where the Turney horse was, for he would ride vpon him that day, hauing thrée other horses led, euery one by two groomes a péece to serue for that day: and being first mounted vpon the Turney horse, the said Albanoyses durst not come downe themselues,
but sent against him those English Rebels, which a little before ranne away from before Bridges. They being both Targatiers and Musquetiers came downe the hill, as the Generall made his retreit towards his owne battell of Pikes, the English Rebels very hardly assaul∣ted him: amongst whom one of them calling to the Ge∣nerall as he was in retreit,Generall No∣rice and Sir W. Knowles foure english miles from Gaunt, assai∣led by English Rebels. which he could not long en∣dure, but turning vpon that Rebell with his Rapier, he strooke the Rebell on the head with such a force, that his Rapier bowed to his very hand: vpon this came downe the troupes of the enemies horse, and charged the Gene∣rall thrée waies, vz. vpon the Rereward, so that he and Master William Knowles were both faine to put their horses among their pikes for their safegard, and so mar∣ching at the push of the pikes foure English mile they continued the fight still, and none but this Generals Regiment consisting of seuen Ensignes, which might be in number some one thousand strong, vntill they came to the very walles of Gaunt. The enemie forcing them so néere that they came and attempted to pill the wag∣gons, putting the whole force of the Campe so néere as the very towne ditch: vntill such time as the Ordenance plaied so fast out of Gaunt, that thereby the enemies were enforced to retire from those places:Coronell Cot∣ton and Coro∣nell North. Where the English forces, vz. Colonell Thomas Morgan, Colonell Cotton, and Colonell North with their forces ioyned themselues together by the Generals direction in conti∣nuall fight, from the Sunne rising vntill the Sunne set∣ting: within which time about foure of the clocke in the afternoone Monsieur Rochpot the Duke of Aniowes Lieutenant, and Monsieur Byron Marshall of the same Dukes Campe, came foorth vnto the said Generall, who said vnto him:Generall No∣rice honoured by the French forces. The Duke of Aniow our Master hath sent vs vnto you, to giue you the honour of this seruice this day, as most worthie thereof aboue all other Comman∣ders. The Generall gaue them thankes, praying them to doe his humble dutie vnto his Alteze, and to the Prince
of Orange, and so continued his seruice till after Sunne set, as is aforesaid. And besides this, there came volunta∣rily diuers braue French Gentlemen out of the towne of Gaunt vnto the said Generall,The offer of the French Nobles to the English Gene∣rall Norice. and besought him to vouchafe to accept of their seruice, that they might traile their pikes vnder his Colours: of which offer he curte∣ously accepted at their request: they also passing through the whole companie, desired the souldiers to accept of them as their companions, vowing to liue and die vnder those Colours. While they were thus bickering both Armies toge∣ther, the Duke of Aniow and with him the Prince of O∣range stand vpon the walles of Gaunt beholding them,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 11. and encouraging their souldiers to the fight, commaund them politikely to goe somewhat aside, to the end that their enemies pursuing them, might be the better beaten and foyled with the shot from of the Rampiers and Bul∣warkes of the Citie. Here againe with hot skirmish∣ing a number were slaine on both sides, as also diuers hurt and killed within the towne with the enemies shot, at which time one Iohn Iux (then seruing the Duke of Aniow,The Prince of Orange and Duke of An∣iow behold the fight. and now the Quéenes Maiesties Trumpeter) standing by the Duke vpon the walles of Gaunt, was shot in at the mouth, and Parmaes forces were compel∣led with the shot of their great Ordenance to retire. So did the Duke of Aniowes armie couet in ranging to ap∣proch néere the citie still, and the enemie returning with some breathing freshly assailed them: From the wailes still was the Ordenance discharged with horrible shoo∣ting, to the great slaughter of the enemies. Here were slaine very many of Parmaes companie, but very few of the Duke of Aniowes souldiers were either hurt or slaine. In the euening Parma with his wearied rem∣nants making haste out of the field, as he that might haue done more harme if he had béen more diligent then he was: néere vnto the citie he burieth about two hun∣dred of his slaine souldiers; the wounded persons hée
gathereth vp where he can finde them, carrieth them a∣way in wagons, and so departeth the field without more fight at that time. That night the English were appointed to lie in a little Iland or péece of ground enuironed with water, and had Réedes to make them cabbins for their succour. Then the towne of Gaunt sent them very great store of victuals, and Sir Iohn Norice at his owne charges sent them a pipe of Rhenish wine, and thrée hogsheads of Claret wine to make merie withall: And vpon this Monsieur the Duke of Aniow made his retreit for Ant∣werpe in Brabant, and all the forces went after him, where happened as followeth. Now come we to the end of this Comedie, interlaced, with an interchaunge Tragicallie metamorphosed, I meane of this Duke of Aniowes faire flourish at the first, where, in his faire shew and sunne shine he said of his honour; Sol discutit & fouet; now contrariwise, nu∣bibus obtenebratur & fallit in the end. The historie af∣firmeth what time this Duke of Aniowes forces by con∣duct of Byron the french Marshall came first out of France (as before we haue mentioned) after spéeches and consultations had with him of diuers waightie enterpri∣ses,The Duke of Aniowes me∣tamorphosed minde and manners. amongst others he deliberately aduised himselfe how he might attempt to take into his iurisdiction manie of the Cities in Brabant, Holland, and Zeland: hee deter∣mined to lose no opportunitie nor occasion to accomplish his desire, and vse his absolute authoritie herein: So as first he tooke Dunkerke, for that was in his way out of Fraunce, next after that Dixmew, and afterwards Den∣dermond: in processe of time he attempted further, but that enterprise brought him euill successe at Bruges, Alo∣ste, Newport, and Antwerpe; especiallie at Antwerpe he had his hardest successe, and greatest dishonour, growne by his minde alienated from his oth, and metamorphosed in his manners. For where before he smothered his af∣fections with a kind of hote friendship, now the sparkes
flie first, and the flame followeth of his fraudulent infi∣delitie. For ambition had kindled the fire, vaine glorie blowne the bellowes, and hypocrisie had made way for the flame: So as attempting to rule all things after his sensualitie, when he went further in wilfulnes then wis∣dome required,The Citie of Antwerpe all on a tumult by the Dukes displeasure. the Citizens of Antwerpe spying the flame of his furious outrage to burst out against them, whereby the Citie was in an vprore, they seeking their owne securitie doe strengthen themselues by force of armes to withstand his wilfulnes: insomuch, as euerie street and gate was out of quiet, and a quarell thus be∣gun was not so soone ended till this Duke had séene the slaughter both of many a Citizen and manie a souldier: who before féeding the humour of their graund Duke and Captaine, by their vnbridled wilfull boldnes, moo∣ning a most cruell tumult in the Citie (spurred forth with hope of rich spoiles) as if they all had béene of one mischieuous minde, with one & the same voice, making a clamorous outcrie vpon the Citizens, they rush and runne against them in hostile manner with their wea∣pons shaken in their hands,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 11. terriblie thus crying, Ville Gaigne, Viue la Messe, tue, tue: the towne is wonne, the Masse preuaile, kill, kill. The cause hereof as it might best be imputed to the said Dukes displeasure conceiued against the Citie; so a little after all this tumult, he rode in a hot choler out of the City into his Pauilion which he had prepared for himselfe without in the fields: whom when a certaine noble French man accompanied, as hée went with the Duke out of the gate called Kipdorp, he (fayning to haue broken his owne legge by mischance) the more exasperated the Dukes anger against the Citi∣zens, & caused here another tumultuous terrible slaugh∣ter of Citizens and souldiers within the said gate called Kipdorp; insomuch as 1500. French souldiers were there, and at that time slaine, amongst whom were a∣bout 320. Noblemen and Gentlemen of great name and authoritie.
The Duke of Aniow hearing the thundering thumps of the gunnes of the Citie, supposing that this should signifie some euill presage to him and his retinue, ma∣king haste away into his Tents, and next day after re∣mouing them thence, got him and his retinue to the Castle of Bercheny, a lodging place scarce fit enough for him, altogether destitute of houshold furniture, victuals and other prouisions néedfull: from thence yet verie greatlie abashed at his owne doings and with penurie of all things distressed, he takes his way towards the Ab∣bey of S. Bernard; from thence purposing to passe ouer the riuer Schaldis and Dermonde, the Citizens of Ant∣werpe with all festination, sending their shippes of war against him, doe stoppe the way at Macklin in Brabant. Hereupon also forthwith was the noble Generall Norice addressed with 23 Ensignes of English men and Scots into the countrie of Waste to withstand his pas∣sage that way,Generall No∣rice sent to meete the Duke. who out of hand drowneth a great part of the countrie néere vnto Dermond with the waters there abouts: but the Duke (necessitie so constrayning him) with great hazard passeth at Duffle ouer the riuer Nete; and so with no little shame returned home into Fraunce,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 11. where he afterwards for very sorrow (sore re∣penting him of these things) ended his life in such man∣ner, as I shall declare truelie reported in the historie thus procéeding. This Duke of Aniow and late Duke of Brabant by the Sates so created as before you haue heard, thus be∣ing sore abashed at his owne indirect dealing, and retur∣ning (as he came first with his powers) by Dunkerke in∣to Fraunce: when he was there ariued, the Duke of Par∣ma presentlie beséegeth the same towne of Dunkerke, and taketh it with certaine other Cities left at all ad∣uentures, being therein aided by the Citizens of Gaunt, and by the Prince of Chymay the Gouernour. And the said Duke of Aniow then being in Fraunce, notwith∣standing all former inconueniences tolerated by the
States,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 11. they yet once againe séeke for mutuall reconcili∣ation with him, and offer their friendships to receiue him againe, vpon good assurance of better expectation: but he (newlie returned with his souldiers,Comming in∣to France he falleth sicke. dismissed, scattered abroad and discouraged) as well falling sicke in bodie, as wearied in minde with thinking vpon his former great misfortunes, saw in himselfe now yt which he loathed; being laughed to scorne of his aduersaries, and besids that little accounted of with manie others, by reason he was at some discord and ods with the King his brother. Againe, the Quéene mother a woman of most subtill wit and perillous mind (who had first fostered the discord betwéene these her two sonnes, to the end shée might preuaile in her purpose otherwise) then practized to reduce them to vnitie,Practise of Queene Mo∣ther. and brought the matter to that passe that the Duke as humble suter for fauour, acknow∣ledging his fault, should craue pardon of the King his brother. Being constrained so to doe that hée might a∣gaine insinuate a renued mind into the affections of the States to make the former breach a more firmer knot of amitie, concord and league with them: who had by ex∣perience well learned that the Duke without the king his brothers countenance and supportation, could not well accomplish any thing answerable to their expecta∣tion: for they hoped hereby only the French forces shuld the rather returne vnto them, and by his more carefull consideration all should yet againe be amended which be∣fore was farre amisse. And in this behalfe the States be∣forehand prudentlie prouiding for their securitie do send the Lord Schonwalley as their Ambassadour vnto the French king and the said Duke his brother:They prouide for their safe∣tie. but or euer this ambassage could take effect, or once be solicited, the said Duke of Aniow remouing himselfe to the Castle of Theodor, incontinentlie fell most grieuouslie sicke, the blood gushing out of all the pores of his bodie, as if his veines had béene burst with too much vehement ry∣ding: So as at length refusing naturall sustenance, after
the fortieth day of his sicknes come & gone, he died on the 10. of Iune in the yéere of our Lord 1584. At his death being in good mind & memory, it is affirmed, he would not haue anie Monke or such other person for his Confessor. He acknowledged, professed, and protested to such as were present at his death, That hee reposed all his hope in the bloodshedding of Iesus Christ onelie, as his onelie and alone Sauiour; which thing for certaine the author of this historie had related vnto him by credible persons then present: which his death some say was not with∣out suspition of poysoning. His desire before he died was to be buried as Gouernour and Duke of Brabant, with his coate armour, shields of armes and such other appurtenances to the same dominions vsuall and accu∣stomed: but his brother the French kings Counsellors thought it not so conuenient,His descripti∣on and pro∣perties. for fauour that they bare to the king of Spaine. He was somewhat aboue the meane stature of men, well compact of bodie, of a swart complexion, blacke eyed, blacke head curled, of a hie fore∣head, a greater nose then anie his ancestors had, he was very fierce of nature, wittie, eloquent, affable, nobly minded, bountifull, ambitious, nothing blood thirstie or desirous of reuenge, but mercifull and curteous: not contemning anie man for religion sake, yet vnquiet, quicke and hastie in his doings, but for all this, as his disposition sufficientlie well shewed) a peaceable person, as appeared by his indeuours when hee went vnto the king of Nauarre (now king of Fraunce) as then being his aduersarie, the Ambassadors of the Low-countries then thither accompanying the said Duke. Men say that he (two dayes before his death) sent a copie of his testament vnto the king his brother, and therein declared the great sorrow of his heart in that he had offended his Maiestie with his doings and enterpri∣ses: he requested of him manie things, especiallie, he humbly beséecheth him to bee gratious Soueraigne Lord vnto many his retained Nobles and Officers at
armes lately seruing him in the Low-countries,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 11. and there impouerishing themselues. And further, where he in conscience was touched with consideration of a cer∣taine debt to the summe of 300000. Florens which he had not yet satisfied, he humblie besought his Maiestie of all brotherly loue betwéene them, to take some order for the payment thereof: acknowledging touching his presentabilitie, that he could not leaue behinde him suf∣ficient restitution or satisfaction, neither should he carrie away with him out of this world into his graue anie o∣ther riches, but the teares and sighes of sorrowfull per∣sons: to conclude he desired neither sumptuous nor state∣lie funerall but wished the monument of his memorie to be founded and fixed in the mindes of his friends and vassals. Whose funerall in decent and honourable ma∣ner the king his brother accordingly accomplished with∣in the Citie of Paris in the month of August that yéere,His funerall. 1584. Thus much for the manner of the gouernment, actions, life and death of the said Duke of Aniow after he was Gouernour in the Low-countries, being for the space of two yéeres and a halfe, as before is declared. You haue heard hitherto what interchange of Go∣uernours haue béene on both sides, as well for and vnder the king of Spaine, as for the States; what wars, what slaughters of men, and what infinite charges and trou∣bles it hath béene for all parts; and yet no placart of peace purchased at the Pope and King of Spaines hands: but rather the one more like blood thirstie Baalac cursing the Israelites, and the other more like Pharao persecu∣ting and oppressing them;Numb. 22.5. Exod. 7.3.31. Prou. 28.15. but both of these most like the roring Lyon, and hungrie Beare which Salomon spea∣keth of, séeking now more and more the pray and spoile of the chéefe godlie Gouernour the Prince of Orange now ruling the Low-countries, and defending their warres with the States, whom the Pope and Spanish King had proscribed certaine yéeres agone, and could no way come by his bodie to bring it into thraldome by
wars, threatnings nor subtil sleights to circumuent him. Now therefore they the said Pope and king of Spaine, practise subornation of murdering messengers to hunt and haunt his Court vnder colour of some far fecht and deare bought false friendship:The first mes∣senger sent to murther the Prince of O∣range 1582. as in the last yéere 1582. one Iohn Iaureg with full purpose sent from the Pope and Spanish King to murder this good and godly Prince and Father of his Countrie, then kéeping his Court within the Castle of Antwerpe, accompanied with the foresaid Duke of Aniow, the Councell of the States and the noble Generall Norice, with others his faithfull friends: euen then the said murthering messenger when he had discharged a dagge at the good Prince, the wound (as God would) was not so desperate but that he reco∣uered within a while after: & the malefactor in the very déed doing was apprehended, stabbed with 27. wounds, and afterwards beheaded, bowelled and quartered in the market place of Antwerpe. And praised he God (who preserueth his Elect) the said good Prince so recouering liued afterwards full two yéeres.The second 1583. one Pe∣ter Dordoigne Lib. 11. Although euen in the next yéere following 1583. another caitiue of Caines crew named Peter Dordoigne a Spaniard, sent from that Romish Babylon and Spanish Periander comming in the month of May to Antwerpe about the like pur∣pose, was taken at Antwerpe before he could doe the déed as God would haue it: who being thereupon impri∣soned, confessed that he was sent out of Spaine from the king himselfe, with whom he had secret conference and encouragement to doe that mischéefe vpon the Princes person: but the king concealing it not to be his fault, commaunded him to lay the fault vpon one of his Se∣cretaries, and so this messenger had his iudgement and was put to death at Gronyng, as guiltie in minde, will, and purpose to kill the said Prince. But now in this yéere 1584. the good Prince being assaulted by thrée other seuerall champions of Sathan, might seeme to haue sufficient warning by the former
persons, whom he should simplie suffer to be brought vnto his presence, when that subtill Serpent the Diuell, that old craftsmaster of theirs, deuiseth sundrie meanes to worke mischiefe by:The third 1584 one Iohn Ian∣son. Lib. 11. As here by the first of these thrée whom I am to speake of, vpon the 13. of Aprill one Iohn Ianson a rich Merchant (vpon hatred which he concei∣ued against the good and harmeles Prince) comming in∣to a seller néere vnto a place where the Prince was then lodged, had prouided with gunpowder to blow vp and destroy the Prince and all his retinue: but though the Prince saw not the person, yet he smelt the rat, found him and laid hold vpon him (as God would) or euer he had power to performe that mischiefe, and so the male∣factor was headed, bowelled and quartered for the same. The fourth 1584. a French man. Lib. 11.The second of these thrée and fourth in number of the murthering messngers hitherto sent, was a Frenchman and Captaine of a band named Gottus, who being cap∣tiued a little before by the Marques of Rombase, one of the Duke of Parmaes Generals, promised the said Mar∣ques if he would set him at libertie, he would worke such way, being very well acquainted with the Prince of Orange, that he would with all possible spéede dis∣patch him out of his life: saying, that as he was very fa∣miliar with him, and could easily vpon any occasion come to his presence, and haue full conference with him; so especially (saith he) if I shall be inuited to the Prin∣ces table, to eate of his meate, I can subtilly cast (that few shall perceiue) into some Eele broth (which the Prince loueth very well) such a powder, as infecting the whole dish of meate, shall (if he eate thereof) without long delay destroy him. But this French Captaine Gottus, hauing gotten himselfe at libertie, haunting the Princes presence, yet not so farre put in trust nor so much made of as he made account to haue béen, and yet imployed in seruice for the Prince and States in a cer∣taine Sconce (before he either put his purpose in practise,
or performed his promise to the before named Marques) was by Gods good will no doubt preuented, and in de∣fending that Sconce, being ouerseene with drinke, was shot into the head by a Musquet, and so died presently in the said Sconce. The last of the thrée missiue Manquellers this yéere sent, being the fift and last of all yt were sent hitherto,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 12. and most mischieuous souldier of Sathans cursed crew, was a yong fellow named Balthazar Gerard a Burgunnian,The fift and last messenger which mur∣thered the Prince of O∣range, Anno 155. of seuen and twentie yéeres old, of short stature, hard fauour, and base constitution (dissembling himselfe o∣therwise to be called Francis Guyon the sonne of one Pe∣ter Guyon, put to death for preferring the reformed reli∣gion) when indeede this is that messenger of Sathan, here of all others chiefly transforming himselfe, as Saint Paul saith, into an Angell of light:2. Cor. 11.14. This villaine com∣meth in the beginning of the moneth of May in the fore∣said yeere 1584. vnto the Prince of Orange his Court, (O that he had here béen so simple as the Doue to haue shunned by flight this mischiefe at the first;Matth. 10.16. or as wise as the Serpent, to haue vanquished the wisedome of the viperous wretch at the last) and pretending to bring letters vnto the said noble good Prince, importing great and rare newes out of France, vsing a certaine protesta∣tion in expresse words of his zealous mind vnto the Gos∣pell, and adding for that cause he came farre to preferre his seruice vnto the Prince himselfe, aboue all other Princes; bringing with him and shewing forth also vn∣to the Prince certaine writings signed by Countie Maunsfeld (called commonly flying seales) vnder colour of friendship purporting enmitie, namely how Luxen∣burge and the cities of other Prouinces might craftily be taken by the Prince of Orange his souldiers. The Prince perusing ouer the writings, and marking well the seales, saying, there could be no great matter per∣formed by them; commaunded him for a while to depart away. Here before he went, this villaine begged of the
Prince some money to buy him hose and shooes: where∣vpon the Prince commanded his Secretarie to giue him some money for his said necessitie,Lib. 12. vpon the 8. of Iuly that yéere 1584: which he no sooner receiued, but incon∣tinently going his way from the Princes presence, and comming to the vttermost court, he bought with that money of two stipendarie watchmen two hand-dags. But when this villaine had bought them,The Caitiues deceitfull do∣ings. calling to minde (as hee afterwards being taken confessed) what the Prince of Parma and one other named Assonuil had before said vnto him concerning this his mischieuous act (they as it seemed setting him on thereunto) he then on the tenth of that Iuly about dinner time repaireth vnto the Prince, and as one falsehearted and fearefull to speak, desireth letters of pasport and safeconduct. With∣in a while after the Prince had dined, he went through the Court and stood at the gate (forgetting, or at least mistrusting not that mischiefe which this Iudas was now meditating, nor yt Ioabs congée which was consul∣ted of before against his person) for notwithstanding all the faire shew of those writings and their seales, yet it fell out this false conclusion:Virgil. Ecloga secunda. O formose puer nimium ne crede colori; Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra le∣guntur. He good Prince beléeuing all for the best, stan∣ding (as I said) at the gate, then comes this villaine vn∣to him, and faining his false purpose vnder a faire shew of requesting his said letters of pasport and safeconduct, he crowcheth and créepeth néere the Prince (not then so well aware of him) where suddenly he dischargeth one of his new bought dagges, hauing thrée bullets in it, full vpon the Prince: who féeling the wound, lift vp his hands and eyes, saying: Lord God be mercifull vnto my soule, I am sore wounded: Lord God be mercifull vnto me and vnto this thy afflicted people. Within a while after, being borne into his parlour (where he had a little before dined) he was laid vpon his bed, and so gaue vp the ghost, to the inspeakable sorrow and lamentation of
the Princesse and her people. The murthering messen∣ger and cursed caitife of Caine,The villanous murthering of the Prince of Orange. or rather of Tubalcains crew, hauing perpetrated this villanous act, tooke his heeles and fled thereupon through the posterne gate of the Princes palace with all haste he could: and casting away his other dagge out of his hands, running by the stréete néere the ditch of the citie of Delph, as he prepa∣red himselfe with two bladders to swimme ouer, he was taken by two of the Princes seruants, brought backe a∣gaine to the Princes palace, and caried to prison. Where he (being of the Senate or chiefe men of the citie exami∣ned) writ and affirmed his intention and confession full and whole: adding most desperately and diuillishly,Lib. 13 that if the déede were againe to be done vpon the said Prince, he would yet doe it, yea if the Prince were guarded with 500000. men round about. For the which cause,The executi∣on of the villa∣nous murthe∣rer. sentence of law and iudgement definitiue being giuen vpon this his mischieuous act, he was condemned to be caried to a gibbet, set vp before the Towne-house or Senate-house of that Citie: here first he had his right hand with a hot yron seared and cut off, which did the déede, and cast into the fire: next of all, with firie hot pincers he had his flesh torne and pluckt off from sixe parts of his bodie which were most fleshie, vz. of his breast, armes, legs and but∣tocks, and those cast into the fire, and his body beginning from the lower part was with an axe chopt in péeces, his belly was ripped, his heart was pluckt out & cast at the villaines face (yet in some life) and afterwards his head being chopt off, was (with other foure parts of his bo∣die, as armes and féete set vpon foure poles on foure turrets or ports of the citie) fastened vpon a long pole set vpon the turret of the Schoolehouse, on the backside of the Princes lodging; and whatsoeuer he had in his life time about him was taken from him and giuen a∣way. This execution was done vpon Saturday the 14. of Iuly Anno 1584. within the citie of Delph in Holland. Now, not without sorrow and lamentation for the
losse of so noble and painfull a Prince,The funerall and solemne order of the Princes buri∣all. let vs returne to describe the manner of solemnitie vsed, and the whole or∣der of his funerall, which in so few words and as briefly as I can I will set downe. Vpon Friday the third day of August 1584. the bodie of the Prince was buried at the ordering of the States of Holland, Zeland, Frizland and Vtrecht, in magnificent manner, according to the dignitie of his excellencie; and specially in remembrance of his honourable vertues and most princely deserts towards them: for he was the fourth of fiue brethren of the house of Nassaw, which lost their liues in the faithfull defence of the States and of those Countries. The order of his buriall or funerall was thus obser∣ued: 1 First went the Citizens of Delph in armour, with long mourning cloakes. 2 The dumbe shew of the Trumpetters in mour∣ning apparell likewise. 3 Then followed eight horses couered with blacke mourning cloathes, euery of which horses were led by two Noblemen, one on the one side, and the other on the other side going on foote: and behinde euery horse was also borne the Militarie Ensigne of so many seuerall Countries as the Prince in his life time had vnder his gouernment, which Ensignes were borne by eight other seuerall Noblemen in mourning cloakes downe to the féete. 4 After them went the Lord Mansert, bearing the Militarie Trumpet. Next to him the Lord Rihouius with the Princes Standerd, and next to him the Lord Naelwik with his Militarie Ensigne, each of them bea∣ring in them seuerall Armes emblazoned. 5 Then followed the foure seuerall Shields with their seuerall Armes of the Prince deceased, which other foure Noblemen mourners bare likewise. 6 After them two other Lords, whereof one bare all
his whole Armes, with his Helmet and his Crest: the other being Captaine of his Guard bare his sword of warre, both mourning also. 7 Then followed the funerall Horse couered all o∣uer with blacke Veluet downe to the ground: being led forth by the Lord Bredroed on the one side, and the Lord Maldre on the other side, two stately personages mour∣ning in foote side cloakes. 8 Next vnto them went two other Noblemen tall and stately personages: the one bearing the Princes na∣ked Sword, the other his golden Coronet, both mour∣ning in long side gownes likewise. 9 And last of all went the Princes thrée chiefe Ste∣wards of his retinue in mourning cloakes, each of them going with a blacke staffe in his hand. 10 After all these was borne the bodie of the deceased Prince in a coffin, embalmed, seared and couered with blacke Veluet hanging downe néere vnto the ground: where about were fired diuers scutcheons of Armes, and penants of the Princes honours and dignities: The bodie being borne vpon twelue tall Gentlemens shoul∣ders, all bareheaded and in long mourning cloakes. 11 Next vnto the bodie went the foure principall Lords of the States, as Iohn of Burgundy Lord of Fruy∣mont, &c. Walraeffe of Bredroed Lord of Loredwod, &c. Iohn of Merode Lord of Soeterwould, &c. with hoods co∣uered ouer their faces, which were the chiefe Mourners for the Low Countries. 12 After these followed Erle Maurice of Nassaw, se∣cond son to ye deceased Prince, in a long black fine mour∣ning cloake, the traine whereof was borne by another Lord: on the right hand of Prince Maurice went the Prince Elector of Colen, by name Truckses: on the left hand of him went the Erle of Hoghenlo. There fol∣lowed these personages, thrée other Lords, vz. William Erle of Nassaw, Philip Erle of Nassaw, and the Erle of
Solmes, which were the last of the chiefe Mourners for this deceased Prince. 13 Then came after these the Generall States. 14 After them the Councell of those States. 15 Next vnto them the States of Holland, 16. and their Councell. 17 Then followed the Prouinciall Councell. 18 The President of Holland. 19 Then the high Councell and the President. 20 The Secretaries of the States. 21 The Consuls and Senatours of Delft. 22 The learned Preachers. 23 The Captaines of the Guard. 24 The Captaines of the warres. 25 The chiefe officers of publike authoritie in the Common wealth, whom last of all followed a multi∣tude of common people innumerable. With this solemne, sorrowfull and mournfull fune∣rall was the good Prince of Orange buried in the chiefe Church of the citie of Delft on Friday the third of Au∣gust 1584. as aforesaid. He liued almost 52. yéeres, vz. 51. yéers 11. moneths and 25. daies, accompted from his birth.The time of his life, and description of his personage. He was of bodie well compact, of stature little more then meane, of good complexion, aburne beard, somewhat full faced. Who so will desire to know his sharpnes of wit and disposition of minde, may best dis∣cerne them by his honourable actions and godly gouern∣ment so many yéeres. 26 His title was this. William by the grace of God, Prince of Orange,Lib. 12. Earle of Nassau, Catzenelenburg, Di∣etst. Viand, &c. Marquesse of Der Vere, and Flushing, Burgraue of Antwerpe,His Stile. Barron of Brede, Dyest, Grym∣berg, Arkize, Nozeroy, &c. Lord of Castebelyne, &c. Gouernour Generall of the Low Countries, viz. of Bra∣bant, Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht, and Frizland, Admirall of the seas in the lower Germanie.
27 His matrimoniall state was first ioyned with the on∣lie daughter and heire of Maximilian of Egmond,His Matrimo∣niall estate. and Erle of Buren and Leerdam, &c. of whom he begot Phil∣lip Erle of Buren, which in the yeere 1577. was captiued by Duke de Alua, & sent into Spaine, who is now Prince of Orange: Also by the same wife he had one onlie daugh∣ter named Marie, married to the Erle of Hohenlo. He had to his second wife the Ladie Anne onelie daughter of Maurice Duke of Saxonie & Prince Elector, by her he had one onelie sonne named Maurice, at this present Ge∣nerall of the vnited Prouinces, and Admiral of their seas: and by his said second wife he had also two daughters, the one named Anne, and the other Emilia.His Issue. He had to his third wife Charlot of Burbon daughter to the Duke of Montpensyer, of whom he begat six daughters, namelie, Ludouica, Iuliana, Elizabetha Flandrina, Katherina Bel∣gora, Charlot Brabantina, & Aurelia Antwerpiana. And he had to his fourth and last wife the Lady Loyse daughter of Iaspar de Coligni, Lord Chastillion and high Admiral of Fraunce slaine at Paris in the yéere 1572: of her he be∣gat two sonnes, the one named Frederick, the other Henry of Nassau: and he left begotten of an vnknowne woman his base sonne named Iustine of Nassau, at this day Admirall of Zealand. These twelue sonnes and daughters left the said deceased Prince of Orange behind him as aforesaid. 28 His progenie was this,His Progeni he was the sonne of Willi∣am of Nassau the brother of Henry of Nassau, who had both to father Iohn brother of Enghelbert: both which had for their father also Iohn Earle of Nassau, and the Ladie Leona his wife to their mother. 29 His brethren were these.His Brethren. This Prince William of Nassau was the eldest of fiue brethren, with himselfe, namelie the foure other were Lodwicke, Adolphe, and Henrie, which three were slaine in these wars of the Low Countries: the fourth being Iohn the second sonne of Nas∣sau as yet liuing at Dilemberge. This Lord hath liuing also manie sonnes and daughters, of which sonnes the two
eldest Earle William and Earle Phillip did beare armes in the Low Countries, stoutlie against the Spanish for∣ces. His Sisters.30 His sisters were many, married to many & mighty personages, full of issues: so as Iulian mother of this Prince William Countesse of Sheerenbergh, a chaste wife and painefull Ladie, when she had liued seauentie fiue yeeres, in the yeere of Christ 1578. saw (which came of her and her issue) Earles Sonnes and Nephewes, to the number of 123. personages. A goodlie, great, and most rare blessing of God no doubt, and a token of Gods great louing fauour and comfort vnto those noble Parents in their life time, and a singular great comfort and mutuall consolation, vnto the posteritie after their death, vpon which Princes death the authour of this Belgicke historie hath written both this title, Epitaph, and verses in La∣tine following.
ILLVSTRISS MEMO GVLIELMI PRINCIPIS AVRAI∣ci, Comitis Nassouiae, Cattorum, Dietzii, Viandae, Marchionis Verae & Vlissingae; Burgraui Antwerpiae,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 12. Vicecomitis Bisontij; Baronis Bredae, Diestij, Grinbergae, Arlei, Nozereij▪ &c. Domini Castrobellini, &c. Proprae∣sidis Generalis per vniuersam Belgiam; Praesidis Brabantiae, Hollandiae, Zelandiae, Vltraiecti∣ni Frisiorum, &c. Admiralij; HEROIS FORTISSIMI, ORTHODOXAE Ecclesiae propugnatoris, literatorum maecenatis; Patris Patriae; Belgarum Assertoris, pro quibus nec sibi, nec suis pepercit; Delphis sclopi ictu transuer∣berati: Ioh. Esychius Quod habuit extremum in Dominum suum Clemen∣tiss: Honoris Monumentum, cum luctu posuit. Vixit Annos, LI. Menses, II. Dies, XXV, obijt Anno Christi, M.D.XXCIV. Sexto Idus Iulij. CARMEN EPITAPHIVM. QVem non Hispani imperiosa potentia Regis, Dirùm tot annos fulminantis impulit; Quem non insidiae, scelerum noxâ, ante reclusae, Terruere; non tot Principum inconstantia Princeps Auraicus Belgarum assertor & vltor Ecclesiae; Ille terror inquirentium
Horrisonis (praesente Deo) Tranquillus in Vndis Burgundio superatur à Qui falsis subscriptioni∣bus insinuatus Aulae. Falsario. Oppetit & Quartus pulchram per vulnera mortem Nassouiorum, qui iacent pro Belgica. Vah Satan? ad facinus quem Auri sitis alta coêgit, Os dum latice Quae pro∣mulgata A.C. M.D.XXC. proposito per∣cussori prae∣mio 25000. coron. Proscriptionis proluis. Infaelix de morte Andegauen∣sis qui obie∣rat eodem die mensis prae∣cedentis. Ducis modò nuntius: atra Nox tequé & Auctorem premant oblivia Sicut agit penna solvi metuente superstes, (Rumpatur Invidens Iberus) Gloria. Auraicum summis certantem Heroibus & iam Dijs fidelium Triumphis institum. Vnum hoc, O Proceres, advertite, quemlibet ista Scelesto ab vno posse tolli machina: Infestam Hispanus capitis septemplicis Hydram Quo iure, quáve iniuria, dum promo vet. AD MAVRITIVM NASSO∣VIVM. G. F. VLturus Patrem & Patruum, Virtutibus, annos, Olim Africanus antevenit Scipio: Mauriti, Patrias si vis vlciscier Vmbras, Paterna stringe Scipio, Vestigia. FINIS.
The Ciuill Warres there vnder the Prince of Parma and the States. MAnifestlie thus it appeareth in the sight of God and all the world, what impietie, malice, mischiefe and crueltie the Pope and Spanish king hath with foxlike subtiltie, & lyonlike force practised against the nobles and States of the Low Countries, infringing their ancient priuiled∣ges, breaking fidelitie in contracts, violating the bonds of amitie, and violentlie oppressing al integritie of loyal sub∣iects and faithfull seruants of God, seeking to make ha∣uocke of high and low, rich and poore, young and old, with more then Turkish tyrrany in those dominions most vntol∣lerable. Neither rest these two there contented with the great effusion of innocent blood like conquerours, preying on, or spoyling euery sillie shéepe with their iawes imbru∣ed, waxing euer more hungrie, neuer rest raging hither and thither, casting down Bulles, threatning silly lambs, swift of foote, and gréedie of tooth to teare in péeces the christian members, and to quaffe vp their blood in their vnquenchable thirst in those Countries: but this Anti-Christ and his adherent vniustlie without cause giuen them (as the iust God iudge and reuenger of all wrongs knoweth) doe now also bend all their forces euen in this yéere, against the most lawfull, naturall, christian, and re∣ligious Phenix of feminine sexe, and the most peerelesse Paragon of true professing Princes, Elizabeth Quéene of England her gratious Royall person, her noble lawfull
kingdomes, naturall faithfull subiects, and happie peace∣able estate and gouernment. This Antichrist, I say this Romish seauen headed, tenne horned, and triple crowned Dragon (whose taile draweth the third part of the starres from heauen and casteth them to the earth) presumeth to approch néere the woman,Reuel. 12. the Church of God, the defen∣der of the faith, and watcheth wililie with inward and out∣ward Serpentine malice to deuour the innocent & harme∣lesse child:Lib. 13. whereupon although this Dragon send forth his angels to war with the woman, though he send forth his Iesuits the English fugitiues, whom he hath nuled vp in Popish abhomination manie yéeres, and though he againe likewise infect,Reu. 15.14.16. and enforce the Locusts and Scor∣pions of the bottomlesse pit with his infernall furie: such as Francis Throgmorton, and manie other vipers, which would haue wrought intestine warres, and ciuill blood∣shed against their naturall most gracious Prince, their countrie and friends by forraine confederacies of the Pope and Spanish King, their abbetters, subborners, and sup∣porters, yet to the perpetuall glorie of God, these wicked Angels, Locusts, and Scorpions (hauing no power to hurt anie good or godlie member, but such as themselues which haue not the seale of God in their forehead) were o∣uertaken by Gods power and prouidence, and cast out into the earth: and so the Lord of hosts fought for our Quéene and vs in peace & mercie to our comforts, but in his iustice and iudgement against our inward and outward enimies, for which God make vs thankefull to his glorie for euer. Historia Belgi∣sa lib. 13.After the death so sought for, and procured of the afore∣said noble Prince of Orange by the said Pope and Spa∣nish king as afore mentioned, the ordering of the affaires both ciuill and politike, rested in the wisedome of the No∣bilitie and States of the Low Countries: who seeing themselues like sheepe left without a Shepheard, a nation without a Gouernour, and a bodie without a head, pluc∣king vp their spirits vnto them, taking heart and christian courage vnto them, in their godlie, iust, and lawfull cause
for defence of Gods true religion, of their auncient priui∣ledges, themselues, their wiues, children and countrie; and for eschewing the horrible tyranny of the forraine vsurping Pope and Spaniard, their Idolatrie, vniust exactions, op∣pressions, vnmercifull vexations, and horrible desolations: doe with most carefull consideration take oportunitie of time, and with mature deliberation to consult vpon some peculiar and speciall protection of themselues and their countries thus grieuouslie distressed. Whereupon in the next yéere following 1585. (after conference had amongst themselues in the month of May that yeere) they dispacht into England an honourable Embassade, which ariued at London on the 26. day of Iune, being personages of great account in the Netherlands: Namelie, the Lord Iames Gryse, the Lord Roger Harsellus in the behalfe of Gelderland, Maister Noelus Caronus, Lord of Schon∣wall: (who at this day is resiant in England, Agent for the Estates) and Iohn Dousta Lord of Nortwich for the south part of Holland with eight others, men of great account, which for breuitie I doe here omit: whom they substitute as their deputies to sollicite their cause vnto the Queenes Maiestie of England: these were lodged about the Tower street, and had their diet in worshipfull man∣ner appointed at Clothworkers hall in London vpon her Maiesties owne charges. On the 29. of Iune they repai∣red to the Court at Greenewich, where they presented vnto her Maiestie, the Soueraignetie of those Countries, which being ratified contained at large 31. seuerall Arti∣cles, as to the Duch historie I referre the Reader. With godlie and neighbourlie commiseration,The articles contained the yeelding of certaine townes as pledges to the Queenes Ma∣iestie. where∣of her Maiestie being pittifullie moued to put forth her helping hand, to saue that which was in extreme perill; considering well by former accidents how sinister a minde the Spanish king by the Popes instigation had of long time vniustlie borne, of late put in practise, and would now likelie proceed further if God and good regard in due time were not her best friends: her excellent Highnes therefore
to preuent the worst, prouideth first for her own safetie and her subiects at home, trayning and mustering of able men in all places of the realme for necessarie domesticall de∣fence whatsoeuer might befall; and afterwardes in the month of Iulie, presseth out of the Citie of London cer∣taine conuenient companies of Souldiers furnished for the warres, at the charges of the Fraternities, or Socie∣ties of the same Citie, and on the 13. of August following, with certaine special braue Knights, approued Captains, and worthie Seruitors ouer them, transporteth all these into Holland, Zeland, Brabant, &c. as other the like Souldiers had beene before time sent out of other parts and places of the realme. Of these seuerall Companies at this time, was sent the before named valorous Generall Norice chiefe Commaunder (who comming from thence for that purpose a little before) taking his leaue of her Maiestie and her Nobilitie, embarked himselfe and his retinue on the 24. of August this yeere 1585. and with a prosperous winde ariued in Holland about the 26. of the same, where his forces being before ariued, he disposed of them as was most conuenient, till time and opportunitie serued for their purpose. About this time the Right noble by birth and for ver∣tue renowmed Knight Sir Philip Sidney (sonne and heire of that most noble Sir Henry Sidney Knight,Sir Philip Syd∣ney sent ouer and made Lord Gouer∣nour of Flus∣shing. Lib. 13. some∣time Lord Deputie of Ireland, and then Lord President of Wales) was by her Maiestie sent ouer after the said Generall Norice on the tenth day of October in the yéere aforesaid: who ariuing in safetie at Flushing, was on the ninetéenth of that moneth by the States esta∣blished Lord Gouernour of Flushing in Zeland: where by his valour, wisedome and great diligence he surprised the towne of Axel in Flaunders, and at Doesburgh in Gelderland,His honoura∣ble actions in the Lowe countries this yeere 1585. made manifest proofe of his valour and mag∣nanimitie. But as he had liued alwaies in honour, excel∣ling by the Lawrell and the Launce (I am but Paruus Laodocus in re tam magna, to describe his demerits of
fame condignely) so yet amongst others, féeling in his life time his honourable fauour, and finding after his death the want of his furtherance vnto my poore distres∣sed Muse) I cannot but in dutie honour his vertuous, godly and learned life, and with dolour deplore his vn∣timely death, with his honorable actions then lastly per∣formed, as in the next yéere following hereafter shall appeare. But to returne to the order and procéeding of the hi∣storie for this yéere 1585. aforesaid, after that the said Generall Norice had disposed those seuerall companies vnder their seueral Colonels and Captaines, and placed conuenient Garrisons in the frontier Townes before re∣signed to her Maiestie, namely Briel, Flushing, Oftend, and Berghenoptzome, the very entries into Holland, Zeland, Flanders and Brabant: the said Generall depar∣ted with his forces into Gelderland, where by the spe∣ciall helpe of God, his owne great valour and diligence of his souldiers, he tooke the Sconce by Arnhem called Iselwerdt, erected where the Isel falleth out of the Rhine: wherein for better successe in the enterprise he placed fiue Ships and two Hoyes, which sped very ill for that they were on ground and in the enemies reach, knowing no way to escape the imminent daunger. Which Captaine Hunnings on the said fifteene of No∣uember that yéere 1585. perceiuing, and seeking to e∣scape the enemies hands (being alreadie hurt very sore) thinking to leape out of a ship into a boate; but by reason of his armour somewhat heauie, and lighting short, hée was vnfortunately drowned. Notwithstanding the said Generall Norice still continued his skirmish on land (in a Sconce which he had butted against them) so manful∣ly, that hauing sore discomfited them by meanes of his Fort and that hot assault, the day drawing néere to an end, they rested without any more adoe. On the next day the Generall, both in respect of his owne valour and his countries credit, continued in his
determination and purpose to giue a new assault. But the enemies knowing the want of abilitie to withstand his force, and being without hope of helpe, voluntarily appealed to the law of Armes, that they might depart with bagge and baggage: and so they surrendring the Sconce into his hands, the said Generall with no small credit to his countrie and honour to his name, yéelding humble and heartie thankes vnto God for his clemen∣cie, entred the said Sconce of Arnhem: in the which hée placed such a Garrison, as was fit and conuenient for the kéeping thereof. Histor. Anglica Anno. 1585.Moreouer, the said Generall Norice determining to leaue no thing vnattempted that might any way annoy the enemie, and profit his Prince and Countrie, with a minde vnconquerable marched with his forces towards the citie of Nimeghem; where by honourable force and Knightly chiualrie subduing another of the Enemies Sconces, he partly cléered the Riuer Rhine: by which déede he opened the passage from Colen and all the high Countries, which was a very profitable and readie helpe to all the English Campe. This done, by serious paines and industrie (as a wise and politike Generall, letting slip no occasion that might profit his purpose) he raised a mount before the citie, and that of such a height and strength, that thereon he planted his Ordenance: for that the situation of the towne was such, that other∣wise he could haue done it small hurt, but by meanes of this new raised mount: On the morrow he shot furious∣ly into the Market place, greatly terrifying the enemies and all the inhabitants of the citie. The Prince of Parma hearing what had happened, presently marched toward the succour of the citie, pur∣posing fully to haue giuen the said English Generall the repulse: who for the better and more easie accom∣plishment thereof intēded to trauell secretly in the night, thinking thereby to take the Englishmen vnprouided for their comming. As indéede so they had done, if the
commendable and diligent care of our Espials had not preuented that inconuenience,The Prince of Parma mar∣cheth to meet Generall No∣rice. by fore warning the Campe of their comming, who at that instant were not farre off. At length the enemies approching, hauing for their guide and gouernour the said Prince of Parma (a man of great force and dexteritie in feates of warres) and the English hauing for their Gouernour the said noble Generall Norice, a man of no lesse courage then actiuitie, he with a most valiant heart and cheerefull voyce encouraged his souldiers to the encounter: where∣in he himselfe,The battell bidden by the Prince, but the Generall had the victo∣rie. for better emboldening of all vnder his charge, and for their only euident example of valour and courage, gaue the first charge, and that so terrible to the enemies, that turning their backs they fled away as mē amazed, not being able to sustaine the force of his hands: which the Englishmen well perceiuing, most ventu∣rously followed their fleeing fainting foes, with such fu∣rie that the Spaniards were by heapes laid leuell with the ground. In which conflict were slaine of the ene∣mies, to the number of thrée thousand: at what time al∣so there was taken from them in the field nine Ensignes, which losse was no small griefe to the enemies, greatly bewayling their vnfortunate successe: which was done with very small losse of the English, as it was found by the due suruey and view made of such as were then missing. This skirmish was sought on Monday the 15 day of Nouember in the said yéere 1585. after our English Ge∣nerall, with those worthie Knights, Colonels and Cap∣taines were employed in the said Low Countries as a∣foresaid. For which gracious victorie by God giuen vn∣to them at this present, great and memorable thankes and praise with singular ioy and comfort as well by the actors as by the inhabitants of those Countries, were rendred vnto Almightie God, and made manifest a∣mongst them with mutuall consolation inspeakable. And not thereabouts only where this honourable ex∣ploit
was performed, but also where and when the said Generall and the Campe returned thence to Briel (be∣ing made Gouernour thereof vnder and for her royall Maiestie) he was in most honourable manner receiued by all the States and Burghers with great triumph and ioy:Generall No∣tice made go∣uernour of Briel. who in euery corner of the Citie made great bon∣fires, in euery Church rung their bels, and many a great volley of shot for to welcome him into the Citie: where all the people with lowd voyces euery where said, God saue good Queene Elizabeth, God saue the good Queen of England. The names of such Captaines as were hurt before this conflict at Arnhem Sconce were these:Captaine Thomas Lo∣uels note. Captaine Thomas Louell Sergeant Maior, Captaine Borowes, Captaine Thomas Knowles, now Sir Thomas Knowles, Captaine Charles Blunt, now Lord Mountioy, Captain Vauisor brother to the now Sir Thomas Vauisor, and Captaine Thomas Wilson. In all sixe Captaines hurt at that time. The number of the English slaine at this conflict at Nemeghem, as Captaine Thomas Louell told me, was some 60. persons and not aboue. The ciuill Warres there vnder the Prince of Parma, and the Erle of Leicester. Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 13.AFter the said Ambassade sent by the Estates of the Netherlands vnto the Quéenes Ma∣iestie of England Anno 1585. (as before by composition in 31. seuerall Articles contai∣ned) which for breuitie I omit: And also after the memorable enterprise by the noble Generall
Norice and the English forces happily atchieued against the Enemie at Arnhem and Nemeghem, last before reci∣ted in the same yéere: it pleased her gracious Highnes to send now ouer into the Netherlands the most nobly re∣nowmed Lord Robert Dudley Erle of Leicester, Baron of Denbigh, and one of her Maiesties most honourable priuie Councell, &c. with a magnificen and worthie traine of Noblemen and Gentlemen attending vpō  into those Netherlands: where he (ariuing at Flushing in Zeland the 19. of December Anno 1585.) was of the Magistrates and Townesmen most honourably enter∣tained, and also with him the Lord Robert Deuoreux Erle of Essex, and other English Nobles and Gentle∣men to the number of seuen hundred horse. From thence out of Zeland they sailed into Holland, where in all Ci∣ties and places as they passed they were ioyfully recei∣ued, vntill they came vnto the Haghe in Holland, in the moneth of Ianuary 1585: and there the Estates gene∣rall and Prouinciall came vnto his Excellencie, friendly embraced him, and honourably intertained him, and all his traine with surpassing ioy and welcome: and on the Calends of February following surrendred vnto him (as to her Highnes Lieutenant Generall of all her for∣ces there) the gouernment of those vnited Prouinces, vz. of the Duthcie of Gelders, Counties of Zutphen, Holland and Zeland, the Seigniouries of Vtrecht, Friz∣land, and Ouerissel, and of other Townes and places which as yet they possessed in Flanders and Brabant. Promising and binding themselues by vertue of their oth in all and euery degrée from the highest to the low∣est, by land and by sea to yéeld and performe al diligence, obedience and fidelitie for their and our generall good of peace and warres, from time to time during his go∣uernment: His Excellencie making like promise of his part for the defence of the said Estates, people and Pro∣uinces accordingly. Actum Hagae in Hollandia Cal. Fe∣bruarij 1585. Subscripsit Aersius.
According to the rule and forme of these ordenances the said Erle Generall taketh vpon him the said gouern∣ment:Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 23. confirmed in full and absolute authoritie there∣unto by common consent of the said Estates in generall, there bearing publike offices with the seuerall Gouer∣nours of those Prouinces, Colonels, Captaines & soul∣diers vnder their charge: for whom and in whose name especially Countie Maurice of Nassaw and Countie Hoghenloe, with other Martiall Gouernours, doe pro∣mise to performe all possible endeuours, assistance, de∣fence and supportation in all points. The Quéenes Maiestie of England receiuing newes hereof, was moued in minde, and (thinking these things chiefly done to the end she should be more bounden or tyed to inconuenience then she determined) sendeth foorthwith thither Sir Thomas Hennage Knight her Vizechamberlaine with letters the 13. of February An∣no 1585. aforesaid:The Queenes Maiesties let∣ters vnto the States of the Netherlands. wherein she signified her selfe hard∣ly to allow the absolute gouernment of those Countries so surrendred vnto the Erle of Leicester, and that it see∣med very absurb vnto her, for as much as her Highnes had refused such proffer to be made vnto her: and to lay the burthen of that gouernment vpon her Minister or Officer (before refused of her Maiestie) without her Counsell, seemed indéede to be a great signe of manifest ignominie or iniurie done vnto her Highnes: as though her Maiesties wisedome and iudgement were wanting, and could not discerne what were to be receiued nor what to be refused. So as that thing was quite contra∣rie and repugnant especially to the Declaration publish∣ed in print, as touching these affaires: wherein was o∣penly testified, that her Highnes gaue only succour vnto the Netherlands, and vnto her Neighbours, and not in∣déede to intrude or thrust her selfe into absolute protec∣tion or supreme gouernment of those people and Pro∣uinces. For these things being so done, now would eue∣ry man take occasion to thinke and iudge otherwise then
her Highnes meant herein: especially such persons would doe that, who thinke they may lawfully censure and iudge vpon Princes doings as they list,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 10. and after their sensualitie, so as thereby her Maiesties fame and honour might chiefly be detracted.Note here her Maiesties meaning and commande∣ment. And therefore that all the world might know, how iustly and vprightly in this behalfe she determined to procoode; her Highnes pleasure is, and she commaundeth the said authoritie to be reuoked, and forbiddeth that the Erle shall not vse any other authoritie, then is contained in the mutuall Contract made and published. And that thing being so obserued, no doubt it would be profitable to the Com∣mon-wealth in time to come. And her Maiestie further addeth, she made not refusall for that cause that she had not any care of the welfare of those Prouinces, but for that she had prouident care of her owne Honour, and how to stop the mouthes of the malignant, and such as were her enemies. The residue which were to be spo∣ken herein, were expressed in her Highnes letters so written. The Estates seeing these letters were in much doubt, and doe send answere vnto her Maiestie touching the same on the 25. of March 1586. out of the Citie of Am∣sterdam:The answere of the States to her Maie∣sties letters. and excuse the same authoritie so giuen to be with all humilitie and commoditie for both parts, and affirme that these things were not done to burthen or binde her Maiestie more then the Contract contained, but (as cause of necessitie so required) they were thus done and passed. They alleage how that authoritie must especially be necessarie, and better it was the Prouinces to haue but one, then two Gouernours, and it seemed farre safer for them to entertaine her Maiesties subiect and Deputie, then to chuse and authorize another: and such a one as they had before, and such authoritie to giue him, as the same might be reuoked at any time.The word Ab∣solute inter∣preted But for the word (Absolute) they alleage, that was only added to distinguish the gouernment, that the same might be
discerned from others, that they (by a Prouiso) might be ordered, and by commaundements and instructions might be bounden and tyed the better to performe their duties: and for better execution of Martiall discipline, and not that sole and soueraigne rule might be giuen him. That it was by example of the Romanes, and o∣ther people (Salua dignitate Principatus & Dominij,Exemplum Romanorum. quae remansit penes populū) sauing the dignitie of the Prin∣cipalitie and soueraigntie which remained in the power of the people: and moreouer to the end they might more easily withstand and resist the enemies practises and enterprises, and that the peoples hearts troubled and altogether brokē with feare and furious outrage, might be the better succoured and comforted. And so they be∣seech her Maiestie not to forsake them now, in their di∣stresse; and promising all dutie answerable to her Ma∣iesties most royall expectation, they returne other moe words of answere by the said Sir Thomas Hennage, to be related vnto her Maiestie at large by word of mouth. Actum Amsterdami in Hollandia, 25. die Martij Anno Christi 1586. This was the manner of the answere made by the E∣states to the Queenes Maiestie, concerning the authoritie wherwith they had inuested the Erle of Leycester as Go∣uernour Generall in those countries, and although her Highnes was with this excuse somewhat pacified, yet (saith my Authour) the Erles authoritie was a∣mongst manie by reason hereof little empaired or dimi∣nished. The Erle Ge∣nerall recei∣ueth contri∣butions, &c.In the Erle Generall his name, were receiued all man∣ner of contributions, payments, taxes, and tallages leuied for maintenance of the warres, and for defence of those peo∣ple and Prouinces: which might amount yeerelie to the summe of 2500000. Florens, besides the commodities of licences and other common prouision made for the ser∣uice by sea, and the assistance or help of the Queenes Ma∣iestie: but vnto the Erle for his ordinarie expences, the
Prouinces allowed 100000. Florens to be leuied and de∣liuered yeerelie. After this be publisheth orders of militarie discipline, and by a decree of the 4. of Aprill 1586. at Vtrecht, hee forbiddeth the transporting or carrying away of all man∣ner prouision of corne, armour▪ and munition, or any mar∣chandise vnto the enimies and their confederates: yea, and to the places or ports of such others as were neutrall.The Generall maketh orders for Militarie Discipline. Moreouer he forbiddeth all traffique and naturall trade by letters, contracts, or whatsoeuer other couenants with the enimies to the Queenes Maiestie, and to the Estates and people of the Netherlands. Besides all this, he leuieth impositions, and contributions vpon all Marriners and Shipmaisters of whatsoeuer forraine Nation comming thither into anie Port within the vnited Prouinces, for their priuate affaires. Here I am now to report of a Honourable, true and rare peece of seruice performed immediatlie after the Erle of Lecister had taken his oth at Haghe,Captaine Iohn Pryse his relation of the seruice perfor∣med at the Ci∣tie of Graue. Anno 1586. and then comming to Vtrecht for special seruice of the land, which the States most earnestlie required for the releefe of the Citie called the Graue being a key into Gelderland: which was be∣tweene the months of Aprill and May Anno 1586. The said Erle of Leycester with the consent of the States, sent for that honourable great souldier Sir Iohn Norice from Arnhem, demanding of him his opinion of the said releefe of Graue: To be short his answere was, that if it would please his excellencie to send him with a sufficient force of Foote, he would be readie to performe the vttermost of his seruice therein. Whereupon Counte Hollock was ap∣pointed to goe vp the riuer of Graue with certaine Ships of war for that seruice, a little higher then Battenborow, and there staid, vntill Sir Iohn Norice then colonell Ge∣nerall of the said land forces came vnto the same Iland on this side Battenborow: bringing with him some eight En∣signes all English, and sending for Captaine Iohn Pryse, who was at that present Sergeant Maior of the Armie.
he came from the City of Amersford with eight Ensignes moe, al English, marching towards Sir Iohn Norice. And so soone as Captaine Pryse was come ye said Sir Iohn No∣rice rose with his troupes, & marched within halfe a mile of Battenborow Castle, which the enimie then possessed, which was vpon a dike for most part, and there the campe set downe for a day or two, vntill they had further directi∣on. Presentlie the said Sir Iohn Norice went aborde of Counte Hollocks Ship, where they tooke counsaile how they should relieue the Graue:Generall No∣rice taketh counsell with Count Hol∣locke how to relieue Graue. for the enimie was set downe being 12000. strong before it, and had also chai∣ned vp the riuer with a bridge made ouer for their men to passe to and fro, and a sconce at eyther end of the bridge. The said Count Hollocke & Generall Norice concluded, that there should be a certaine Loope sconce set vp within a little English mile of the enimies bridge, and so to come nearer and nearer to the enimie: whereupon the said Ge∣nerall sent vnto the said Captaine Pryse (who in his ab∣sence had the commaund of the troupes) to bring him 200. Pioners, and 200. chosen souldiers. Who so soone as they came fell to worke and cast vp the said Sconce, and working most part of that night, and the next day, the eni∣mie (imagining and seeing plainelie that they were about such a matter) sent out 2000. men, and procured a small skirmish with vs, wee hauing aduantage vpon the saide ditch: but what with Counte Hollocks men of war, play∣ing vpon them, and the land forces they were enforced that afternoone to retire to their Campe. But this great soul∣dier Sir Iohn Norice knew very well it was needfull to fall to his worke againe very hard, for he knew well that the next day the enimie would be doing with him againe,The Generall appoynteth Captatne Pryse to his charge. and would not suffer him there to rest, and therefore he cal∣led vnto him the said Captaine Pryse, and willed him to goe backe againe to the Campe and to choose out 300. mo souldiers out of the 8. Ensignes of the best and choise men, which the said Captaine did send him with his owne Lieu∣tenant called Anthonie de Boys. And besides all this the
said Generall Norice sent to the said Captaine Pryse that he should come himselfe, and bring with him 7. whole Companies, which were in all 800. men, and be with him by breake of day or there abouts. But before the said Captaine Pryse could come with these Companies, the enemie was approached and come to the said Generals sconce with 4000. braue choise men of his Armie, the said Generall being in the Sconce with 500. choise men, and a braue Captaine with him named Sir Iohn Burgh, mo∣ther to the late Lord Burgh, the enimie and Generall No∣rice being in fight a long houre vpon the Sconce at the push of the pike, there were manie slaine on both sides: so as the said enimie getting the Sconce, the said Generall was hurt, Sir Iohn Burgh lost one of his fingers, and was hurt verie sore besides: also the enimie following in chase, and killing our men▪ vntill such time as the said Captaine Pryse came with his 7. Ensignes, who hauing great care in placing of his men to gaine all the vantage of the dike, had put with a Sergeant 50. Musketiers on the one side of the dike, which was of some good bredth, and 50. moe with another Sergeant below the dike on the other side,Captaine Iohn Pryses good seruice against the enemies. and also placed two or three Officers in the Reareward, giuing them streight charge that if anie man should re∣tire or runne away to kill him. Presentlie the said Cap∣taine Pryse met with the said Generall Norce all bloodie about his mouth, which was no small griefe to the saide Captaine to see the same. Quoth the said Generall, O Captaine Pryse, welcome, now for the honor of England, behold there is the enimie, which was hard at his heeles. Captaine Pryse hereupon commanded all his Shot cou∣ragiouslie to deliuer a vollie in the verie teeth of the eni∣mie: and presentlie came vpon them with their pikes, so that the enimie retired with the losse of a great number of men, for the said Captaine Pryse and his souldiers had the killing of them euen at his will the space of two Eng∣lish miles and a halfe, vntill he came vnto a place where a windmill stood, whither were sent by the enimie a thou∣sand
fresh men to second the others: the said Captaine Pryse being formost went so fast, and the rest behinde still following the execution of the enimie and wearie, had not with him at the encounter with this supplie aboue 50. or 60. men at the most: whereupon this fresh companie of the enimie deliuered a vollie of shot upon the said Cap∣taine, and shot him through the thigh, and killed some of his men: but the said Captaine by the help of some special men about him was rescued from the enimie, and presently the said Generall Norice sent him a horse to carrie him a∣way downe to the water side. Then the enimie following and killing some few of our men, the ships of warre play∣ed vpon them so hotlie, that they made them to retire to their Armie. The Generall and Sir Iohn Broughe were carried into Counte Holloks Ship, where being verie wearie and wounded, they rested vntill the next day, where there was a generall reuew what men were slaine on both sides,A view of the losse of men on both parts. & there was found by the reuew taken by the Coun∣te Hollocke and the English Officers of the enimy aboue 700. men slaine at the secong charge: besides them which were slaine by the said Generall Norice, at the Fort before the comming of the said Captaine Pryse, being some hun∣dred or there abouts. There were slaine of our men that day, not fullie 150. men, as was found by a generall reuew of the said Officers. And so the next day the said Citie of Graue was releeued, the enimies bridge broken, and Counte Hollocke sent into the towne seauen horses laden with butter, cheese, munition, and other necessaries: which was to the great honour of our English nation, and the great comfort of that distressed garison. The Belgicke historie maketh this report of the field fought at Battenborow aforesaid,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 13. & of the siege of Graue, viz. Parma in the beginning of winter, Anno 1586. by Counte Charles Maunsfield, causeth the Citie of Graue to be besieged and compassed about with foure Bulwarks or Forts, and entring vpon the bridge of Naia neere the riuer, he causeth all the passages to be made sure within,
and without, and all manner of victuals to be kept within the Citie. In the Bulwarks he had placed some 1500. souldiers for a garison, and besides 5000. Spaniards more or lesse, the rest were seruing in the Tents, almost halfe a mile from the Citie. After these had for 3. months space and more besieged the Graue, the Erle Generall came from Haghe by Harlam and Amsterdam in Holland vnto Vtrecht, and sent about 400. horsemen into Velonia or Velna as farre as Niekerke to help the Citizens of the Graue. Generall Norice and Counte Hoghenlo marched vnto them with 2000. footemen which carried victuals and pro∣uision into the Citie, for with their horsemen they could do no good. These footmen at the first inuade the Bulwarke called the Molensconce halfe a mile from the Graue, and after that fortifie themselues in a new sconce not farre from the Spaniards Bulwarks: which they perceiuing came fiercelie vpon them with 3000. of their chosen soul∣diers to surprise them, and at the second or third assault driue away their workemen euen in the verie erecting of their Sconce, who meete some 900. of the garisons, and there make a stand: which the Spaniards perceiuing, char∣ged them a fresh, and droue them away to the next Sconce, though the Spaniards so doing fiue hundred of them were slaine, & manie were wounded: amongst whom were seauen Captaines of companies, and two men of great account, from whom the Englishmen tooke away a brasse peece of Ordinance. And thus was the field fought at Bat∣tenborow, as that historie mentioneth: so of the siege of Graue when Parma had beaten it with 24. peeces of bat∣terie, he so battered and rent the walles thereof, that hee compelled the Citizens and their garisons to yeeld the Towne vnto him: who entred the same with his forces, and gaue them leaue to depart with wife and children and all that they had, whither soeuer they would with bagge and baggage. Immediatly after the seruice so done at the Graue, and
surrendring or yéelding the same vnto the enemie, the Erle Generall caused the Lord Hemert a Martiall go∣uernour, with certaine others, to be apprehended, caried to Vtrecht, prosecuted by order of law, and put to death in the presence of al the Captaines for most part & of the souldiers lately seruing at the Graue: although (saith my Author) they had done no treason, nor made any secret confederacie with the enemie. But through a certaine youthfull want of skill in Militarie seruice, had rendred vp the towne of Graue vnto the enemie: which act of the Generall (saith my Author) turned away the hearts of many Noblemen, and inhabitants there from him, e∣specially because they saw one Welsh, sometimes a Cap∣taine of the English forces▪ and a notable Traytor (be∣fore taken by Countie Hoghenloe) which with others moe such as himselfe was, betrayed the citie Alosto in Flanders, and deliuered it vnto the Enemie) was not put to death, but preferred in Militarie seruice: and also Sir William Stanley and Rowland Yorke, two notable fu∣gitiues and false forsworne Traytors to their Prince and Countrie, escaping vnpunished likewise. The Erle Generall in the moneth of August 1586. hauing gathered a conuenient armie of English, Dutch and other Nations, sent the first companie vnder Sir Iohn Norice and Sir Thomas Cicill,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 13. now Lord Burley, Knights, who placed them neere vnto Seuenter in Cleue∣land, purposing to march towards the Prince of Parma and his forces. But the Erle Generall himselfe the 6. of September Anno 1586▪ departeth from Arnhem in Gel∣derland towards Eltem in Cleueland,The Erle Ge∣nerall mar∣cheth to meet the Prince of Parma. honourably ac∣companied with Prince Emanuel sonne of Anthony King of Portugale, the Lord Truxsis the Prince Elector of Colen, Countie Maurice of Nassaw, Countie Philip of Nassaw nephew to the deceased Prince of Orange, the Counties Solmes and Obersteyn, the Erle of Essex Ge∣nerall of the horsemen, the Lord Peregrin Bartu Lord Willoughby, the Lord Iohn North Baron of Kirtling∣ton,
Sir Philip Sidney Lord Gouernour of Flushing, and others of great authoritie. And hauing taken a view of his hoste, his Excellencie numbred his footemen to be about 7000. and his horsemen 1400. But this armie seemed vnto him insufficient to giue Parma the repulse (who was said to haue 12000. footmen and 3500. horse∣men). And for that he would deliuer the citie of Berck upon the Rhine from the present siege of the Enemie, he determined therfore first by policie to assault Doesburgh in the Countie of Zutphen, to withdraw the Prince of Parma from the siege of Berck aforesaid. This towne of Doesburgh was in times past called of Drusus the sonne of Tiberius Caesar Romane Empe∣rour, Drusburg, who caused the Riuer of Rhine from a very ditch to be digged and inlarged beyond Arnhem a∣foresaid, into an Iland at the towne of Drusburg, which at this day is now also called Drusus Ditch. The citie is high walled, after the old manner, and inuironed with large and déepe Ditches. There were within the same thrée hundred Wallons in garrison sent from the prince of Parma thither, and also armed citizens fiue hundred more or lesse. The Erle Generall sendeth Countie Hoghenlo, Sir Philip Sidney, and others the Leaders of the forces with fiue hundred horse and eight hundred footemen in the night time to discouer and beset the citie about: himselfe with the rest of the armie came after them the ninth day of September: his Excellencie com∣mands them in warlike wise quickly to intrench them∣selues, and to make prouision for a batterie. On the Thursday fiue péeces of Ordenance were mounted, which made two great breaches: which the Townes men with all possible haste and diligence made vp a∣gaine and fortified. And whereas the Ditch being thrée foote broad and more, and thirtie foote high encompassed the Citie, the assault séemed very difficult to be made: but the souldiers being thereunto encouraged, the Erle Ge∣nerall determined to trie the assault: whereunto he ap∣pointed
Countie Hoghenlo with his Germanes and Scots, and Sir Iohn Norice with his Englishmen and Zelanders to giue the assault. When ye besieged towns∣men saw that, they offered to yéeld vpon certaine condi∣tions: which being refused, they yéeld vp the citie (only with safetie of their liues) the Lord Borough and Sir William Stanley (the gouernment being giuen vnto the Lord Borough) entred both into the towne. And to the end his Excellencie might now next of all withdraw the Prince of Parma from the siege of Berck, he taketh his iourney towards Zutphen, one of the foure chiefe cities in Gelders, famous by name in respect of o∣ther cities, populous and well defended: when he vn∣derstood it lacked victuals, he went about either to take it, or else to withdraw the Prince of Parma from Berck, which thing so happened. Zutphen was in the kéeping and defence of Iohn Baptista Taxis, a man couragious in fight, the Lieutenant Colonell to Verdugo Gouernour of Groning: and séeing euen from this citie there situate ouer the Riuer of Issell all the countrie of Velue and Hol∣land were troubled and molested with the Enemie (and therefore the Estates not long before had builded a Fort or Sconce of defence: but by reason of the great floods and too much violence of water there increasing, incon∣tinently after they were driuen away from thence) ther∣fore the citizens of Zutphen strengthened and fortified the same againe. And because they of Zutphen extorted spoyling exactions throughout all the Velue, by reason of the commoditie of these their new erected Fortresses, the Hollanders two yéeres passed besieged the same in vaine almost for ten moneths space. The Erle Generall now increasing his armie, ioyneth a great part of those souldiers (which vnder the Lord Rihouias and Cosmus Pescarengio were gathered to inuade Flaunders) and forthwith pitcheth his Tents by the Riuer side and be∣fore Zutphen it selfe, on the 18. day of September 1586: and with boates chained together crosse the Riuer al∣most
a mile from the citie made a bridge to passe from the one side to the other. When his Excellencie had thus pitched his Tents there, he tooke his iourney thence with all spéed towards Deuenter in Ouer-Issell (for as yet there were iarres and discords within the Citie) and though the citie also did contribute with other cities, yet did it refuse to con∣serue or kéepe orderly mutuall league with them: he en∣treth into the city, hauing for his guard about foure hun∣dred footemen, and two troupes of horsemen: and when he had receiued newes that Parma had left Berck, hée made towards his Tents with all spéede that he could, and strengthened them so soone as possible might be, the more confidently to besiege the said citie of Zutphen a∣foresaid. The Prince of Parma fearing lest the Erle Ge∣nerall should preuaile against Zutphen, and vnderstan∣ding that the towne of Berck aforesaid, was well defen∣sed and hard to be wonne: when he had alreadie fortified the Isle before the towne in the Riuer of Rhene, and blocked and besieged it about with other Forts and Sconces, and thought he had sufficiently furnished it with victuals and all other necessaries, departing from thence on the 22. ot September Anno 1586. he marcheth towards Wesel in Cleueland and the Castle there, and making a bridge of ships had passed ouer the Riuer of Rhene, and had made Forts from the other part of Resa vpon the Rhine and other places, whereby he might both fortifie the Bridge & defend himselfe in his iourney more safely, he came to Bercklo, and from thence he sendeth his prouision to be conueyed into Zutphen aforesaid. The Erle Generall so soone as he perceiued that the Prince of Parmaes prouision so caried in was not suffi∣cient for the Garrison there, the next day he determined to set vpon the Garrison: and committed that seruice to Sir Iohn Norice and Sir William Stanley, with a great number of footemen, and to certaine others with a great number of horsemen. And when on the 23. of Septem∣ber
the Prince of Parma had againe commaunded some more prouision to be that morning conueyed into the towne,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 13. guarded with seuen troupes of horsemen, and two thousand Harquebuziers, they performed his com∣maundement: and in a certaine well fenced place néere the Village called Warresfeld (in the way almost a mile off from the Citie) they made a stand. In the meane time while the cariages and waggons doe enter into the citie, presently the Erle of Essex, the Lord Willoughby, Sir William Stanley, Sir Philip Sidney, Sir William Russell,The English forces sudden∣ly assaile their enemies. Sir Henry Norice, and his brother the Generall Sir Iohn Norice, hauing with him about two hundred horsemen, also fiftéene hundred Musquetters, and Sir William Stanleys Regiment, with as much spéed as they could marching thither, doe suddenly and fiercely charge the enemies sooner then they thought for, by reason of a great mist which dimmed and darkened their eyes at that time. But euen these English forces were by and by encountred by certaine troupes of the enemies foote∣bands out of a very commodious place like vnto a Fort: and yet did the English very couragiously and valiantly passe through and endure the manifold stormie hot bat∣terings of the bullets, and yet not one of them once brake his order: all keeping themselues constantly toge∣ther in a wonderfull manner. Then the enemies not knowing what number of Englishmē these were whom they saw approch néerer vnto them, they quickly send out vnder Captaine George Cressy Albanoys a troupe of horsemen: which being well beaten and dispersed here and there (whereof many were slaine and taken) they send out againe Countie Hannibal Gonzaga with his troupe,The enemies well beaten and scattered. which in like case were ouerthrowne, and hée himselfe by a deadly wound there slaine. So the victors pressing through the thickest of the Harquebuziers, there the third troupe being a troupe of the Enemies horse, séemed as if they would resist them: but by and by they turne their backes, runne away, and so depart the
field, after two victorious troupes of the English forces had slaine and sore wounded 180. of the enemies: them∣selues hauing of theirs onely but thirtie persons of all their companies slaine and wounded: amongst whom was that right nobly renowmed Knight Sir Philip Sid∣ney before remembred, of whose action and manner of death at large I haue thought good here, according to the report of George Whetston and others, actors and eye∣witnesses there, thus to declare the same. I haue before (by occasion ministred vnto me) made mention of the vertuous life and valorous seruice of that renowmed Knight Sir Philip Sidney, the last yéere in the Low Countries, spent to the aduancement of Gods glorie, honour of his Prince, and benefit of Gods Church and of the kingdome of Christ: now is occasion giuen me to set downe his honourable enterprise a little before his death, and so thereby to make his vertuous life, valorous seruice, and honourable death more right∣ly renowmed vnto the posteritie. Thus it happened in the latter end of the next yéere following 1586. the Eng∣lish Nobles,The English forces appro∣ching towards Zutphen. vz. the Right Honourable Robert Erle of Essex, by his valour reuiuing his fathers fame; the Lord Willoughby, the Lord Generall Norice, Sir William Russell, and Sir Thomas Parrot, Sir Henry Norice, with diuers others both Knights and Gentlemen of good ac∣compt seruing then on horsebacke; this famous worthy Knight Sir Philip Sidney as forward as the best (all these being mounted against the enemie, and his power approching on the 22. of September 1586. vnto the towne of Zutphen in Gelderland:Sir Philip Sydney mor∣tally woun∣ded.) This noble Knight like Caesar charged the enemie so sore, that first an en∣uious Musquetier from the spitefull Spaniards espying his oportunitie slew his horse vnder him: who getting to horse againe, was with a poysoned bullet from the enemie shot in the thigh, wanting his Cuisses, which might haue defended him. The wound being déepe and shiuering the bone, yet his heart was good, and his cou∣rage
little abated, one Vdal a gentleman alighted and led his horse softly, to whom he thus spake: Let goe, let goe till I fall to the ground: The foe shall misse the glorie of my wound. And so riding out of the field with a rare and constant courage, his wound was searched, no salue too deare but was sought, no skill so curious but was tried to cure, ease, and recouer this noble Souldier lan∣guishing in paine, all remediles. Who féeling death drawing on, desired yet (were it Gods will so to be) that he might liue to doe his Countrie more good seruice: al∣leaging that he feared not death, but lamented that his yéeres as yet (being but gréene) brought foorth but leaues, the bloomes being faire, no fruite yet appearing, his life could not be lengthened for the enlargement of that good, which both in heart he wished, and in power he would haue performed towards his Prince and coun∣trie, had he liued here longer: who being demaunded if he feared not any whit to dye, answered: No whit be∣cause I liue thereby. Touching the honour of the field there fought, as all our English Lords and Knights by their valours much diminished the enemies force and daunted his courage: so amongst them Sir Thomas Parrot stroake downe Gonzaga at a blow, Countie Hannibal was left for dead in the field, and Captaine George one of the ene∣mies commanders, was by the worthie Lord Willough∣by taken prisoner: onely Captaine Thomas and Cap∣taine Martin amongst our English were slaine in that fight, and not any moe of accompt missing. So by this honour ensued the vntimely death of this renowmed noble Knight on the 17. day of October 1586. liuing iust 25. daies after his receiued hurt, in hope by death to in∣herit with Christ the Crowne of life and glorie. Whose mortall death how greatly it was lamented of all sorts, from the highest to the lowest, who so please may looke and reade in the Reportarie of this action, afterwards penned by George Whetston Gentleman: where he de∣clareth
how the corps of this noble deceased Knight be∣ing brought ouer in the Blacke Pinnis, so called, was shrined in a Hearse within the Mynories in London: and his funerall day being appointed vpon Tuesday the 16. of February next after following in that yéere 1586. The solemne order of the same was thus martialled in honourable manner, vz. hauing thrée Erles and other Lords of the States his chiefe mourners, with all their traine as they followed the Corps. After them went Sir Wolston Dixi Knight then Lord Maior of London, and the Aldermen mourning in their purple robes. And last of al a warlike band of worthy Citizens his welwillers, with weapons trailed in solemne wise, brought the Corps from out of the Quier of the Cathedrall Church of S. Paul in London (after a learned Sermon there made) to the vpper Northeast end of the Isle aboue the Quier by the second piller, where with solemne honou∣rable ceremonie vsuall, the corps was laid to his rest in Christ Iesus: which done, the said souldierlike Citizens bestowed for their last farewell of their beloued noble friend and Captaine, two volleys of shot, and so retur∣ned home euery man to his house, heauie, mournfull and sad for the losse of so vertuous, honourable and true renowmed personage: vpon whose death the aforesaid George Whetston made this Epitaph. HEre vnder lyes Phillip Sydney Knight, True to his Prince, learned, staid and wise: Who lost his life in honourable fight, Who vanquisht death, in that he did despise To liue in pompe, by others brought to passe: Which oft he tearm'd a Dyamond set in Brasse.
There is another Epitaph vsuallie pendant at the said piller vnder his Crest, Cote Armour, and colours there fixed. ENgland, Netherland, the Heauens and the Arts, The Souldiers, and the World, haue made six parts Of the Noble Sydney; for none will suppose, That a small heape of stones can Sydney inclose. His bodie hath England, for she it fed, Netherland his blood in her defence shed: The Heauens haue his soule, the Arts haue his Fame, All Souldiers the griefe, the World his good Name. After the death of this noblie renoumed Knight Sir Philip Sydney, so greatlie lamented as well in the Nether∣lands as in England,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 13. the Erle Generall maketh attempt to take the Fort on the other side of Zutphen, placing his Tents in che Velawe; there is a little Iland before the Towne of Zutphen, whereunto out of the Citie, there is an open passage almost on drie foote, by a Ford which now and then hath beene kept by a garrison of thirtie souldiers onlie,Anno 1586. this he battereth with his Ordinance and taketh it. The Prince of Parma seeing this Iland taken, mar∣cheth to the said Citie of Zutphen, on the fourteenth of October following Anno dicto with a strong power, fur∣nisht with great store of all manner of prouision, and the next day after returneth backe two miles from Zutphen, vnto Barcklo, from thence to Wesel and so to Burck: then making a bridge ouer the Rhene, he falleth sick in his way comming to Bruxels, & there being enféebled by sicknes, be ordaineth the Marquesse of Renty,Parma falleth sicke. Lord of Montigni (dis∣cended of the house of Lalaigne) chiefe Gouernour of the Armie in his steed. The Erle Generall battereth with his Ordinance (on the 16. of October anno dicto) the lesser Fort towards
the North and commaundeth it (after dinner) to be razed to the ground, and in this place there were 300. in garri∣son: but in the greater Fort were 800. and in the Citie 2000. when the Prince of Parma himselfe was absent from thence scarce two miles.The Erle Ge∣nerall assai∣leth the little wing neere Zutphen. So as what time neither out of the Citie it selfe, nor out of the Fort anie man came to resist or withstand the Erles forces, this was by them sharplie assailed: in the assailing thereof Edward Stand∣ley an English Gentleman (together with Sir William Standley being a Colonell) behaued themselues verie cou∣ragiouslie. For maister Edward Standley climed vp the rampere of the Fort, out of which one supposing to strike him through with a pike, the said Edward tooke it per∣force out of his hands, and held it stoutlie, and the more the enimie stroue to wrest it from him againe, the higher hee raised the said Edward Standley so much more out of his reach: whereby he escaped the enimies daunger,Master Ed∣ward Stanley Knighted. which deed was the chiefe cause of the victorie. For which en∣terprise the Erle Generall dubbed him Knight, as by de∣sert, and gaue him a yeerely pension of 600. Florens: in this assault there were no moe but eight of the Generals men slaine, and there the Counte Hoghenlo was woun∣ded in the face. His Excellencie on the next day after this battereth, and so taketh the said greater Fort by commoditie of the lesser Fort, and the Ile on the north part aforesaid, so as thereby he might vtterlie stoppe the passage betwéene the great Fort and the Citie: and while the garrison were in feare thereof, leauing their Ordinance there at randome,The Erle ta∣keth certaine Castles. before the Englishmen had placed their Ordinace, they fled into the Citie, and so these Forts together with the Castels of Newbeken, Boxburgh, and other places néere adioyning were taken, whereby all the Countrie of the Velawe was deliuered from the violent extortions, and burning spoilers there before raging. His excellencie thought not good to assaile the City of Zutphen, because it was stronglie fenced, encompassed
with waters, enuironed with walles, and situate betwéene Deuenter, Doesburgh, Lokam, Doeterum and the saide Fort: for he hoped they would then especiallie yeeld vnto him: if penurie so constrained them by a little and a little. Therefore almost in the midst of winter he remoueth his Campe (which thing also Parma doing) the Erle Generall disposeth his garisons in good order euerie where, aduaun∣ceth certaine Leaders, and English Nobles for their ap∣proued valours with great honour, and made some others of them Knights. And so the Erle Generall hauing performed all these seruices in the Netherlands, was worthilie, well, honou∣rablie & highly reputed of them hitherto: but after this (he is said by my Authour lib. 13. fol. 391. pag. 2. (whether and how he deserued it I know not) to incur the disliking of the Estates in some points, as also in that he placed Rowland Yorke aforesaid Gouernour of the Fort at Zutphen;The Erle in∣curreth the States displea∣sure. for although they had vsed him in diuers seruices for his be∣nefit before time, yet he was not found so faithfull to them in those causes as he ought to haue bin, and as was expec∣ted. Also for that the said Erle Generall made Sir Wil∣liam Srandley knight, giuing him charge ouer 1200. Eng∣lish and Irish footmen, and ouer 200. horsemen: into whose doings the Estates Generall aduisedlie looking, found him also farre more vnfaithfull then eyther he should haue bin, or they worthilie deserued at his hands. The Erle Generall when in the deepe of winter he vn∣derstood that Parma was departed out of Gelderland, and knowing for certaine that the souldiers appointed in the Osteland (by the confederacie and secret conspiracie of certaine false forsworne souldiers which he had in his go∣uernment) had reuolted from him, yea and to their great shame (no necessitie vrging them) to runne away from him: and when hee now also saw, that neither time nor place was giuen him for performance of anie further ser∣uice, and the Towne Berck was deliuered latelie from the siege (from whence Colonell Thomas Morgan was now
returned) the Erle General I say now departeth towards Haghe in Holland. But whē his souldiers leauing at ran∣dome the Ile before Zutphen, remoued their Tents, they were sodainelie & fiercelie charged by Iohn Baptista Tax∣us the Spanish Colonell: but they escaped away from the enimie,Lib. 13. with the losse of some sixe or seauen of the English∣men and no moe. At that time the Estates finding themselues agreeued at the Erles indirect doings (as my Author saith) in those countries, doe make and exhibite vnto him certaine re∣quests for diuers respects: whereof the whole reformation was reserued vntill his returne againe out of England, when God and her Maiestie should so permit. And so his Excellencie taking his leaue of the Estates Generall (not sufficientlie contented with his doings) he taketh shipping at Flushing passeth into England, and ariueth at London on the fourth of December Anno 1586. About this time (for as much as Sir Philip Sidney late Gouernour of Flushing was slaine at the siege of Zutphen,1586. Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 14. as before is said) the Queenes Maiestie of England, in his place gaue the gouernment thereof to Sir William Russell Knight (sonne to the Erle of Bed∣ford) a man of great accompt and worthines:Sir William Russel. He ari∣ued there at Flushing, and with him Monsieur Tyrlone, sometime Admirall of Zeland, who for suspitions in some points, was a long time kept in prison: but being after∣wards set at libertie, and discharged of all matters, went into England to render his due and condigne thankes vnto the Quéenes most excellent Maiestie. Before that the Prince of Parma purposed to besiege Sluce in Flaunders, he leuied an armie throughout all the Prouinces of his iurisdiction, making as though he would take his iournie through that part of Flaunders, which we call the land of Waste: These forces about the beginning of the month of May next following, which was in Anno 1587. were dispersed into sundrie parts about Bridges by little and little encreasing. And to the end they should the
lesse suspect them, they giue out speeches that they were sent with Mounsier de Lamot to the Towne of Ouden∣burgk in Flaunders,Anno 1587. to the end they should represse the out∣ragious spoyles of the Souldiers at Ostend and of Sluce: when now all his hoast was in a readines,Lib. 14. and as well the Bands come out of Germanie as out of the Netherlands, and other Nations were gathered, they passed on fore∣wards to the siege of Sluce. The Prince of Parma him∣selfe on the seauenth of Iune departeth out of Bruxels, and the next day came to Bruges leading with him 9. Troupes or Companies, after whom the rest of his whole host fol∣lowed:Parmaes pre∣paration to march to∣wards Sluce. the comming of these, and the forerunning fame of their prepartion throughout Flaunders greatlie amazed the minds of them at Otend, and Sluce. Insomuch as from the Gouernours of both townes, diuers messengers were sent into Zeland and Holland to prouide themselues of souldiers, victuals, armour, and other necessarie war∣like furniture against the comming of the enimie towards them. I haue seene (saith my Authour) amongst others the letters of Arnold Greeneveld then Gouernour of Sluce, written to the foresaid Sir William Russell newlie made Gouernour of Flushing dated the 9. of Iune 1587. wher∣in he signified vnto him,Sir William Russel made Generall of Flushing. that he (hauing made diligent search and view as well throughout all the publike maga∣zin or garners of the Citie, as through all the priuate gar∣nets within the inhabitants houses of the Citie) could not yet find any more store of corne, and graine in them all, then might serue for sustentation of their owne families euen for a verie few dayes. Sir William Russell being with the reports of these letters throughlie moued, had a few dayes before sent for certaine companies of footemen from the garison of Ber∣ghen, which within a while after came timely enough: and moreouer on the 11. of Iune dicto he writ vnto the States for souidiers also. But for corne, and graine, and warlike munitions, he writ vnto the States of Zeland on∣lie,
by Peter Vanhela, a Netherlandish gentleman, toge∣ther with Nicholas Meetkirck Liuetenant Gouernour of Sluce, sent thither for that verie purpose: of whom when they receiued but onelie promises for their answere (because the Zelanders denyed that the danger was not so much as they made report of in writing.) Sir William Russell therefore by these messengers,Sir William Russels care for prouision. instanteth the Ze∣landers on the tenth and eleuenth of that Iune for speedie dispatch of the requisite prouision, and yet (fearing in meane time their wonted delayes) expreslie commaundeth Vanhela, that (taking vnto him the Magistrate of Flu∣shing for his helper in this case) hee would finde out some store of corne and graine wheresoeuer he could get it, and that he without all delay should send it ouer to Sluce: who the verie same day (by diligent search made) commaunded by authoritie so giuen him, a Ship which he found laden with corne to depart with all speed vnto Sluce, which here∣by was sufficientlie prouided of corne and graine for, and during the whole time of the siege. The same day ariued three Companies in Zeland which came from the garison of Berghen, to whom Sir William Russell adding one of his Companies with cer∣taine chosen souldiers, made vp foure iust cōpanies,Sir Roger Williams. which were in all verie neere 800. men: there ariued then also out of England, that worthie souldier Sir Roger Willi∣ams, and certaine other English gentlemen come thither, by reason of the rumors of the enimies approch, daylie a∣bout Ostend. So the garrison of Sluce by this meanes increased to the number of about 1600. men. For by this time the Prince of Parma had pitched his Tents in Cadsandt, an Iland in Faunders,Lib. 14. & had there the greater part of his host, which was at Bersquin in Flaun∣ders: so that all along that part of the Country they might be safe from the English forces at Ostend: the garrison of Sluce so besieged, made often and stout sallies vpon the enimie, wherein although they made great Skermishes to the foyle of the enimie, yet lacked they manie of their
companie. Amongst the nobilitie and gentrie of the Ne∣therlands great commendation for their valour gayned Nicholas Meetkirck, from whose side his youngest brother Adolphus neuer departed: also Charles Herogier, Nicho∣las Mandy, and very manie other Captaines: amongst the English warriours Sir Roger Williams, Sir Tho∣mas Baskeruile,Historia Belgica lib. 14. Sir Frauncis Vere, and Colonell Hunt∣ley, deserued also most worthie and memorable commen∣dations. In the meane time when no sufficient power came to succour the Slusians, nor anie preparation (before written for) was made by the Estates, al men had then their voyces at large towards the before named Erle of Leycester, their late Gouernour Generall: saying, that of dutie his presence and authoritie was now requisite, that he might the better succour and defend them in this their present daunger. The Erle Generall then being in England well vn∣derstanding these things,The Erle Ge∣nerall re∣turnes into the Nether∣lands. and thinking occasion was now giuen him to gaine praise and glorie, meanes being made thereunto, he embarketh himselfe with a good num∣ber of new souldiers for Zeland: and ariuing at Flush∣ing on the 6. day of Iuly 1587. was there receiued with great expectation and ioyfull welcome of all men. By this helpe of his presence and of the Englishmen ariued with him, the Erle (bestirring him by all meanes pos∣sible to deliuer Sluce from the present siege) prepareth all necessarie adiuments and muniments by sea and by land to repell and raise the enemie from the siege there∣of. Countie Maurice of Nassaw when he had intelligence of the Erle Gouernour Generall his returne out of England into Zeland, came vnto him, leauing Countie Hoghenlo in Brabant with thrée thousand men, hoping greater helpes would come out of Gelderland, Frizland and Vtrecht, to succour him, which came not so well to passe.
In the meane time the Prince of Parma with his for∣ces so mightily battered the towne of Sluce, that he first taking the Fort, battered continually the walles of the towne with thirtie péeces of Cannon, and eight Culue∣rings. To be short, spending vpon them 17400. shot (of which on S. Iames day from thrée of the clocke in the morning vntill fiue in the afternoone, were foure thou∣sand shot made) so that the Prince of Parma himselfe con∣fessed, that (to his remembrance) he neuer performed a∣gainst any others in one day such violent force and con∣tinuall assault. By which great and vehement assault giuen and excéeding batterie of his Ordenance, there was a breach made in the walles of 250. paces long: into which breach the besieging enemies oftentimes with all their forces made assault vpon the townesmen, but were of them with Pikes,The resistance of the Sluci∣ans. Halberts and other wea∣pons so worthily entertained, that after a great slaugh∣ter made of them, the rest were glad to retire into their Trenches againe. In which assault, which lasted from nine of the clocke in the morning one day vntil eleuen of the next at noone, the Marques of Renty was hurt,The losse on both partes. Monsieur Lamot lost his right arme, Strippen the Leader of the Burgun∣dians, with many Captaines of great accompt, besides others, were slaine, and (as the Enemie himselfe after∣ward confessed) as many hurt also: when they of Sluce so besieged lost but 150. men only, as was found by a iust reuiew taken thereof. And although that the Prince with his Pioners often and dangerously annoyed the in∣habitants of Sluce, yet such vigilancie and diligence they vsed, that they met with their enemies in like manner; almost euery houre fighting with them continually for nine daies space, with Swords, Targets and Harque∣buziers, so long, vntill of the 1600. (which were at the first there placed for garrison) there were in fiue but se∣uen hundred left aliue in the garrison, as hereafter more plainly shall appeare.
When the towne had thus béen besieged now full seuen weeks, the Erle Generall hauing gathered his forces euery where by sea and by land, he entreth into conference with the Estates, taking counsell of his Lea∣ders how to relieue Sluce with all possible speed. A great Nauie was then prepared,The Erle Ge∣nerall prepa∣reth forces to relieue Sluce. furnished with souldiers by the said Estates. To him came Iustine or Nassaw Admi∣rall of Zeland, and other Netherlandish Gouernours by sea. The Erle Generall with 31. companies of footmen and sixe troupes of horsemen passeth out of Zeland vnto Ostend: where the Right Honourable Lord Charles Howard Lord high Admirall of England, and the Right Honourable George Erle of Cumberland with certaine shippes, wherein went a great part of the Nobilitie of England, sailed into Zeland, purposely as well to helpe his Excellencie, as to see how he did. His Excellencie had determined to inuade the Port or Hauen of Sluce in the very entrance thereof with cer∣taine shippes, well and strongly furnished, at a certaine déepe place vnder the towne where the ships might ride safely. But the Sea-gouernours, Shipmasters, and o∣thers experienced in marine affaires (especially they of Zeland) were of a contrarie opinion, thinking it not so conuenient a thing to attempt that which they could not accomplish, but in so doing should rather bring their ships into assured danger. Touching this enterprise di∣uers were the opinions, which with great dislike trou∣bled their mindes. Therefore the Erle Generall séeing he could not so do any good with his ships by sea, séeketh now by what de∣uice he can to trie the enterprise by land. Wherefore when he ariued at Ostend on the 30. day of Iuly 1587. and vnto him were come many English Nobles, besides fiue thousand men which he brought ouer with him this later time (though he had not so great a power with him as néedfull it was for him to haue) yet with those which he had going out of Ostend, he giues assault to the Fort
of Blanckberg in Flanders, and with determination to haue taken Blankenburgh,The Erle as∣saulteth the fort of Blanck∣berg. he sent from Ostend some fiue thousand foote, and certaine troupes of horse, with two small field péeces, vnder the commaund of the Lord Willoughby Colonell general, and Sir William Pelham Lord Marshall, his Excellencie went in a Pinnasse by sea: where when they came they found the Sconce too well manned and prouided to be assailed, but with great losse: wherefore his Excellencie commaunded them to retire to Ostend, where the next day they embarked, and sailed to the entrance into Sluce, where they lay seuen daies. In the meane time the besieged towne of Sluce (which had so valiantly endured with so little helpe such and so great stormes with the Enemie, as before is said) now also still for two moneths space fully continuing, and saw not any man come to help them (but two only Eng∣lishman named Captaine Allen and Captaine Hart, which twice or thrice swam ouer from Sluce▪ to make relation vnto the Erle Generall and the Estates of the present estate of the towne): They I say, now halfe de∣spairing of any helpe, by reason the Erle Generall was at some iarre with the Estates, began to waxe faint and féeble both in courage and power. For the enemie was now lodged in the Counterscarfe, and had sapped into the Rampart, daily vndermining further into the town, so as there went a noise amongst them that he was al∣readie come into the citie. Besides these things, of twen∣tie péeces of Ordenance (which they had at first in the towne) they had now but foure only left, which the Ene∣mie with his vehement shot had not yet broken, neither had they so much powder left them wherwith they were able to hold out fight euen for halfe a day. Wherefore by all mens iudgements they were not able to endure the enemies assault twelue houres longer together, no, not by all meanes they could possibly deuise. Therefore incontinently after, hereupon they recei∣ued
compositions from Parma worthie of their valours, vz. That with their bagge and baggage, with their En∣signes flying, the match in cocke and bullet in mouth, they should also presently depart out of Sluce, and march away downe to the ships in Zeland:The yeelding vp of the Sluce. And all these were in number only but seuen hundred (as I said before) resi∣due of that sixtéene hundred, which so left the towne of Sluce, yéelded vp vnto Parma and his forces on the 4. day of August Anno 1587. aforesaid. So the Erle departing on the 17. of August 1587. out of Zeland by ship, he came the next day vnto Bergen, where foorth with he sent away all the forces which hée brought with him, to take the Castle of Hochstrate in Brabant. But that enterprise had no successe. On the 24. of August he passeth from Bergen to Dor∣drecht in Holland, where the Estates doe méete him and take their leaue of him. The 14. of Nouember returning into Zeland to visit the Cities there, and so at Vere in Zeland reconciling vnto him certaine Captaines of the Garrison in secret manner,The Erles last returne into England. he departeth thence the 21. of Nouember, and at length taking ship at Flushing the 17. of December Anno 1587. he returneth the second and last time into England. The Erle of Leycester (late Gouernour Generall, as before remembred) returning into England, liued vntill September following 1588. in which time the Estates were about once more to entertaine him as Gouernour Generall againe amongst them. But he dying on the 14. of that moneth Anno 1588. within a homely house in a certaine wood néere Langley in Oxfordshire at 63. yéeres of age,The death of the Erle Ge∣nerall. was buried the 20. day of October Anno 1588. at Killingworth, trying all fortunes. In the meane time from the Erles said departure out of the Netherlands, let vs leaue him so dead and buried, and returne to the gouernment of those Prouinces a∣gaine by Countie Maurice, against Alexander Prince of Parma.
And concerning the remedie of those euils in the Ne∣therlands, her Highnes sendeth her expresse Letters vn∣to the Lord Willoughby &c. (who had then béen in the Netherlands her Maiesties Lieutenant generall vnder Countie Maurice, since the Erle of Leycesters first re∣turne into England) of whose seruice from time to time I haue here fit place, occasion and time now offered me, to set downe all occurrents, as the order of the present historie requireth. This noble Gentleman by birth, and vertuous Lord by his life, Lord Peregine Bartu (by his title Lord of Wil∣loughby, Eresby and Beck) the only sonne and heire ap∣parant of the Right Worshipfull, or rather Right Ho∣nourable (for his birth, vertue and learning) Master Ri∣chard Bartu, descended of the Noble house aforesaid (who maried the Right noble and vertuous Ladie Katherin Duchesse of Suffolke,The Lord Willoughby his birth. widow of that nobly renowmed Souldier Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke) being borne at Wesell in Duchland in Quéene Maries time (his parents making their iourney out of England for the profession of the Gospell) by the tender care and good education of his parents being named Peregrine (as borne in a strange countrie) in processe of time from his youth forwards to his manhood proued pregnant in wit, prompt in knowledge, and practised especially in Mar∣tiall or Militarie actions: whereby he became the most rare, and surpassing ornament of his noble progenie, and a most honourable and worthie Instrument for the seruice of his Prince and Countrie. In somuch as his first seruice wherein the Queenes Maiestie employed him, was when in his Adolescencie he was sent her Ambassadour vnto Fridericke the second of that name king of Denmark,His seruices from time to to time. towards whom he so wisely behaued himselfe, & from whom he so discreetly demeaned himselfe towards her Highnes in his returne and answer, that seldome a better or the like Ambassade hath beene in the like case found in one of so young yeeres for her Roy∣all
Maiestie vnto any forraine parts, either before or since his time. Next after that his Heroicall spirit, yet further affe∣cting Militarie affaires, as one more desirous to serue his Prince and Countrie, it pleased her Highnes with the ad∣uise of her most Honourable priuie Counsell (vpon the great good opinion and liking they had conceiued of his dexteritie) when the Erle of Leycester was the first time returned into England, to send him ouer to the Ne∣therlands as Lieutenant Generall of the English forces there,His seruice in the absence of the Earle Ge∣nerall. Anno 1586. where his noble courage so conioyned with dexteritie, and his forwardnes with such fortune, that he himselfe was formost in all attempts and enterprises of his forces, fiercelie like a Lyon he assayled the enimies, fought with them, spoyled them, and foyled them, where∣soeuer he came. So verilie and in such sort, as the Duke of Parma then himselfe confessed of this worthie Lord Willoughbie and his seruice (for foure yeers space in those Countries) neuer anie English man enterprised more boldlie to meete his enimies in the face, more brauelie en∣countered them, nor more painefullie pursued and sought them out neere and farre off, to their disgrace, spoile, and foyle, wheresoeuer he found them. At Sutphen (as before is mentioned) when the Prince of Parma came thither to releeue that Town, this worthy Lord Lieuetenant Willoughbie (vnder the Erle of Leyce∣ster who came not into the fight) being in place more for∣ward then the rest, marched well mounted, met the enimies couragiouslie, brake his Launce in the middest of them, made way with his sword euerie where, and so forciblie aduentured his noble person through the thickest of them:His seruice at Zutphen. that all his men nearest him much feared, when his bases were bereued from his bodie, his plumes pluckt awaie from his head, & his Armes be battered with blowes, (ex∣cept God would then mightilie preserue and protect him a∣boue all expectation) he should vtterlie haue beene foyled in the fight, and spoyled both of life and all things els about
him, he was so desperately endaungered euery way. Yet so mightilie God himselfe doubtles preuailed with him, and for him in the instant hazard of his life, that hee pressed through the thickest of them without any bodilie harme, and in this hot broile, with his owne hands caught hold of Seignior George Cresyonyer Albanoys before mentioned page. 88. one of Parmaes chef Commaun∣ders of his horse, carried him away prisoner perforce,He taketh an Albanoys Captiue. and (maugre all resisting force of the enimies) sent him to the Estates to be kept their Captiue. No Conuoy could at anie time escape his victorious hands, neyther durst anie enimie approch the Towne of Berghen, where and while he was then Gouernour. Such by the fauour of God was his vertue ioyned with his for∣tune in his said gouernment,He challen∣geth the Mar∣ques of Gua∣sto. that he was highlie honoured of his owne garrison, and also greatlie feared of his eni∣mies: when he often times made chalenge of the brauest of them, as namelie the Marquesse of Guasto (a Nobleman of chiefest account with the Duke of Parma) who yet for all that refused to encounter with him hand to hand. After the returne of the Erle of Leycester Generall of her Maiesties forces in the Netherlands, this worthie Lord Willoughbie (as Leiutenant) with great wisedome, circumspection, diligence, & fidelitie discharged his dutie so honourablie and vprightly in all points, and at al times, that he withstood the enimies attempt, gained the good will of the people of those Prouinces, appeased their trou∣bles, and ended all controuersies in the Townes of Me∣denblick and Narden in Holland, and also of Camphere and Armude in Zeland to the great peace and common quiet of the same Townes and Countries. For when Counte Maurice and the Estates had with their forces ensconced the Towne of Medenblick afore∣said, and had opposed their forces against the souldiers in that Towne, they did what they could to surprise, and take the spoile of the Towne from Mounsier Snoy Gouernour thereof: but little therein did they and their forces pre∣uaile,
vntill (by her Maiesties most Princelie care, and chargeable expences) this worthie Lord Willoughbie treated a reconciliation betweene the States and those townes: so as those townes were rendred into the States hands againe without bloodshed. After all this the Enemies hauing vainly inuaded the Isle of Thole,Historia Belgica lib. 15. lost foure hundred of their men: They then marched with their forces towards Berghen opt Zome, néere the Riuer of Schalde,Parma mar∣cheth toward Berghen opt Zome. which citie they prepared to besiege, seeing they could not obtaine the Isle of Thole, being therein hindred, by the watchfulnes, vertue and valour of the Count Solme, who in his owne person watched night and day in the Fortresse all the time that the Duke of Parmaes souldiers besieged Berghen. This citie or Marquisate of Berghen opt Zome hath a dignitie, which (after the death of the last Marques of that house named Iohn, being poysoned in Spaine Anno 1567.) descendeth vnto his Sisters daughter begotten by the Lord of Merode and Peterson: who is maried to the Lord of Bersole Baron of Brabant, a follower of the Spanish Kings warres and his adherents, yea though he dwelt at Leyden. This citie is situate in Brabant by the Riuer of Schal∣de, and is very large and commodious, builded at the flood Zoma, now by ouerflowings somewhat distant from Schalde; but with a fit Hauen stretching toward Schal∣de, where it hath a certaine head or foreland, which (be∣ing inuironed with strong Ramparts and munitions) a Garrison did vse to kéepe the same sometime. There was the same time Gouernour of that Citie a certaine Colonell named Sir Thomas Morgan (since for his valour knighted) a Welshman borne, he succée∣ded that worthie Knight Sir William Drury in that go∣uernment:Colonel Dru∣ry. Colonel Mor∣gan. The Garrison in that Citie were English∣men, vnto whom were adioyned some few Netherlan∣dish horsemen; & amongst all these certaine aduenturers which made great spoyle and tooke many booties from
the enemie, and therefore were called Boot-halers,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 15. in Duch Buythaillers. These daily made excursions into Brabant, ransacking all places penetrable, making ha∣uocke of all they could lay their hands on,Outragious spoylers. besetting the high waies to Antwerpe, Bruxels, and Machlin, by land and by water: yea they robbed and spoyled trauellers by high waies (although they were guarded with conue∣nient companies of souldiers) and miserably bereaued them of al that they had about them, carying away back with them into the Citie of Berghen great riches and spoyles euery day. Moreouer, they tooke very many Mer∣chants and citizens of great accompt as their Captiues, which gaue them for their raunsomes, ten or twentie thousand Florences a péece. The Duke of Parma therefore on the 24. day of Sep∣tember Anno 1588. sets his souldiers on worke to fall to the siege: and for spéedier dispatch of the matter he cau∣seth some to conuey thither warlike engins, and great Ordenance for assault and batterie:The Prince of Parma lay∣eth siege to Berghen. and others he ma∣keth to bring thither great and small gabions, Masts, Dealeboords, sparres and boates. He also sendeth thither Carpenters and Smithes with their necessarie tooles: And first he sets vpon the Fortresse on the foreland of Berghen, which is called the North Sconce, to cast it downe, placing his Ordenance vpon a banke, and so bat∣tereth the same Fortresse with many sore blowes: and withall he practiseth by subtiltie also to further the en∣terprise by suborning two Englishmen to serue his pur∣pose (as he made accompt by playing a false cast) whom he knew long since when he kept them his captiues. These making themselues moued by Parmaes request, tooke vpon them (vnder colour that most of the garrison were Englishmen) as they bare him in hand to betray the Citie vnto him:A pretie prac∣tise of two Englishmen to beguile Parma. and to the end they might more probably performe this action, they alleaged vnto him that the Garrison were for many causes growne male∣contēted. These two were called the one William Grim∣ston,
and the other Robert Redhead (both of them being before instructed of the Gouernours of Berghen,The politike deuise of Red∣head and Grimston. how they should herein demeane themselues) with whose pri∣uitie they performed all this seruice. They handled the matter so cunningly, that they had by this time gotten of Parma rich chaines of gold, and withall large and libe∣rall promises. This politike deuice was so farre for∣wards brought, that what was promised vnto Parma from such persons of the Garrison within Berghen, should be performed on the 24. of October that yere 1588. in the chiefe Fortresse which was on the North side of the citie: and to the end Parma should be in the greater securitie and assurance hereof, Redhead pledged vnto him his owne person, and was bound hand and foote to be killed outright, if he brought not Parmaes souldiers within that Fortresse. Now there were some thirtie or fortie of his souldiers receiued into the gate, amongst whom was the said Ro∣bert Redhead, when the Lord Willoughby Gouernour of the towne and of the English Garrison let downe the Port Cullis of wood ouer the gate. But the Captaines and Leaders of the enemies seeing themselues pressed and thrust at their backes by foure thousand of their companie, whereof fiftéene hundred were Spaniards, (and that in a very narrow place) determined with cou∣rage and manhood to assaile the Fortresse.The enemies ntrapped, slaine, and drowned. Vsing the oc∣casion of the low water, and the ebbe of the sea, they pas∣sed through the Ditch, and comming to the Rampart pulled downe the Pallisado, and fought with our men at push of pike vpon the top of the Rampart. But al things were there prepared for Parmaes comming, in such sort that they which gaue the assault, were to their great losse beaten backe. Whereunto also happened that the side of the sea comming in againe vpon them many were drowned in the Ditch, whose number being added to the multitude of those which were slaine, arose to many hun∣dreds, and amongst others were taken there eightéene
or twentie Spaniards Gentlemen of some accompt. This heauie hap and misaduenture Parma tolerating so patiently as he could, all sad and melancholike in minde,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 15. caused his forces by a little and a little to raise the siege from Berghen, and so to depart towards Bruxels.Parma raiseth his siege, and departeth from Berg∣hen. By this meanes was Berghen deliuered from the siege of the enemies, to their great ouerthrow and detriment, many of whose chiefe men of warre and of the Nobilitie were left there behinde captiued: and the towne of Berghen it selfe from thence-forth became in farre much better and safer state, vz. both better fortified and more largely reedified with new and beautifull buildings. After the siege so raised from Berghen, Count Mau∣rice of Nassaw being inaugurate the Marques of Der Vere in Walchern, in the prouince of Zeland,Count Mau∣rice inaugu∣rate the Mar∣ques of Der Vere. on the 20. day of Nouember 1588. there in that solemnitie, caused new Coynes of siluer money to be made, which hée cast abroad vnto the people, hauing the Armes of Nassaw and of Der Vere stamped vpon them with this inscription: on the one side; Nodus Indissolubilis: and on the other side; Ie Meyntiendray. Other péeces of money were by him also cast abroad, hauing two hands the one ioyning with the other, holding betwéene them Mercuries Scep∣ter or Rod, with this inscription: Auxilia humilia, firma consensus facit. In obsidionem Bergensium solutam, Carmen Numerale. Hostes, Ausoniâ vt Rapina par Ma; Zonae Berga tuae auferatur, instant; Cunctas Dux ad istud adhibetque artes: Queis, & te & tua possit occupare; Frustra hos vertere Berga terga cogit. In the moneth of May 1589. three troupes of horse∣men which were of Count Maurices and of the Mar∣shall Villers now deceased, and of Chymscies Regiments issuing out for aduenture, fell amongst the Garrisons of
Gertrudenberg, and others their companies, which put them to flight so farre as the towne of Osse in Brabant:Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 15. There were taken (amongst others of the Netherlan∣ders) Captaine Riscier, and the Lieuetenant of Skymsky with many others. When now Parmaes hoste by the siege of Hewsden, the ouerthrow of Hyemert, the yéelding vp of Heyl and other Fortresses vnto them, they thought themselues now strong and safe enough in that part of Brabant: Their Leaders determined in the moneth of Septem∣ber to passe ouer the Riuer Moza, with a purpose to in∣uade the countrie of Tyle in Gelderland, from whence they would passe either to Buren in Gelderland, or to V∣trecht. But the Spaniards by occasion of a sedition or mutinie risen betwéene them and the Italians (which thing the Duke of Pastrana & the Duke of Ascoly were had in beléefe to maintaine against the Duke of Parma) they refused to passe ouer the Riuer, crying alowd, Viue il Re, fuora il mal gouerno: that is, God saue the King, let vs cast off euill gouernment.A sedition a∣mongst the chiefest of the Spaniards. And when Count Maunsfeld went about to take them, they shot at him with their dagges and great péeces, put him to flight, and droue him into the Garrison of the Citie of Graue. And when Count Maurice hauing now gathered some forces about him, endeuoured to stop their passage euery where againe, planting his Ordenance and Munitions round about Heyl to besiege it: so it happened that Par∣ma was constrained (winter comming on) to dismisse his hoste, and furnishing with conuenient forces of their Garrisons the Castles of Heymert and Heyl and other his defences, he departed to the mouth of the Riuer Deynsa, adioyning néere vnto the towne of Sherteghan∣busch. The Duke of Parma in this yéere 1589. was ouerta∣ken by a grieuous disease or sicknes, many were the cau∣ses supposed to be thereof; namely and first that on the tenth day of Nouember 1588. as he was riding from
Berghen to Machlin, he fell off from a bridge into the water. Vnto which chance happened many other euils,Historia Belgi∣ca lib. 15. such as were the sorrow which he conceiued by the euill successe of the Spanish Nauie in the inuasion of Eng∣land a little before in that last yéere 1588.The Prince of Parma falleth into many griefes. And the siege of Berghen, from whence hee was enforced to depart without any thing done by him. Also that by the Duke of Pastrana and the Prince of Ascoly many things were spoken and done to his reproch and disdaine. And again, because he vnderstood that certaine letters of Exchange (as they call them) sent by him into Spaine (by the insti∣gation of some euill willers which perchance he there had) were neither receiued, nor yet the money for them paid: when those letters mentioned that the money a∣mounted vnto 100000. Ducats: wherefore he labou∣reth greatly by some meanes to satisfie the Italian Mer∣chants, and about the same time deceased his Vncle by his fathers side called the Great Cardinall Farnesius, by whom he had great helpe and furtherance.The Prince of Parma his death. To be short therefore, he falling sicke in the moneth of May 1589. all vnhealthie and heauie in plight, then departed to Spada a Fountaine in the land of Luke, there to vse the benefit of a Bath, taking his lodging at Montfort, or in the towne adioyning: where he dranke the waters of Spada or Spau for his health sake, and liued after that vntill the 12. day of Nouember 1592. and then died in the citie of Arras in Artoys one of the seuenteene Prouinces of the Netherlands. Thus farre translated out of Emanuel Meteranus, his Belgic Historie.
A BRIEF DISCOVRSE OF THE MEMORABLE VOY∣age to Portugall, Anno 1589. by Sir Iohn Norice and Sir Francis Drake Knights, with the English forces. INprimis, to the glory of God and honour of her Maiestie be it spe∣cially remembred, that the two Generals aforesaid made cer∣taine orders in number 14. for the Souldiers and Mariners going to sea: and other 54. or∣ders for the Captaines, Soul∣diers and Sailers, during the voyage, to be by them and euery of them duly and duti∣fully obserued and performed. Their Nauie consisting of Shippes great and small, and of men, set forward from Plimmouth the 17. of Aprill Anno 1589. to the sea. The Admirall, The Arke: Sir Iohn Norice, Sir Fran∣cis Drake two Generals. The Vizadmirall, The Golden Lyon: Captaine Thomas Fenner. The Rereadmirall, The Dreadnot: Captaine Wil∣liam Fenner. The sixe principall Masters of the Quéenes Ships: Thomas West, Robert Wignald, Iohn Bennet, Robert Hart, Roger Tallent, Richard Burnet. The fiue Colonels of the fiue Regiments in the Na∣uie and Armie: Sir Iohn Norice, Sir Francis Drake,
Sir Roger Williams, Sir Edward Norice, and Captaine George Fenner. The fiue Lieutenants Colonels of the fiue Squa∣drons: Captaine Thomas Drake, Captaine Sachuile, Captaine Garton, Captaine Goring, and Captaine Win∣ter. The fiue Captaines of the Watch of the fiue Squa∣drons and their Corporals: Captaine Web of the Re∣uenge, Captaine Champernoune of the Non per illa, Captaine Gifford of the Dreadnought, Captaine Nor∣wood of the Foresight, Captaine George Drake of the Swiftsure. Corporals: Captaine Young, Captaine Seigar, Cap∣taine Thomas Baker, Captaine Wilde, Captaine Cripse. The seuen Commissioners: Iohn Sachuile, William Winter, Alexander Musgraue, William Fenner, Thomas Drake, Iames Lancaster, Iohn Goring. The Secretary of the Nauie, Master Anthony Ashly. The Surueyor generall of the victuals, Master Mar∣meduke Daryell. The Treasurer of the Nauie, The Viztreasurer, Master Stalling. The Surueyor of the Nauie, Captaine Ro. Flicke. The Lieutenant of the Ordenance of the Nauie, Cap∣taine Iames Lancaster. Captaine generall of the Watch, Captaine Bowyer. The Master of the Discoueries and Lieutenant Co∣lonell of the Pinnasses, Captaine Foxcroft. The Transport Master, Captaine Alexander Mus∣graue aforesaid. The Clerke of the store, Master Aldridge. The fiue Corporals of the fiue Squadrons: Captaine Young of the squadron of the Reuenge Captaine Seigar of the Non perilla, Captain Thomas Baker of the Dread∣nought, Captaine Wilde of the Swiftsure, Captaine Pe∣ter Cripse of the Foresight.
A Journall of the Portugall Voyage Anno 1589. WEdnesday the 17. of Aprill 1589. they embar∣ked at Plimmouth. Tuesday the 23. of Aprill they fell with the Coast of Galizia. Wednesday the 24. of Aprill they landed at a little Hermitage East side of the Corunna or Groyne, suppo∣sed 12000. strong. From thence to Andyas, where they had a small skirmish with no losse to the English. The 25. of Aprill being Thursday, our men wasted and burned in the countrey what they could with fire and sword. Saturday the 27. of Aprill they assaulted the base Towne of the Corunna and wonne it, with small losse to them: and the Enemie retired into the high Towne, not aboue seuen Ensignes strong as was thought. Sunday the 28. of Aprill they so battered a great Ga∣leaz (wherein Ricaldo serued the last yéere 1588. as Viz∣admirall of that Nauie sent into England) that the Spa∣niards now not able to kéepe her, discharged her Orde∣nance, fired her, and ranne her on ground, with no hurt to vs at all. The same day they went from Andyas to the base Towne of the Corunna, where they found much Béefe, Salt, Meale, Wheate, Oyle, Fish and Wines as was thought to victuall 40000. men a quarter of a yéere: be∣sides Gables, Hempe, Rosen, Waxe, Pitch, Tallow, and other things for shipping store: which was leuied for a new force to haue come into England this Sum∣mer. But in fourtéene daies there was hardly one bit of bread, wine or other victuals to be had in any quarter of
the Towne, except by some priuate officer or Captaine. The same day the Enemie lying not farre off thence, presented a Brauado before the Towne gates: against whom when our men sallied foorth, without more adoe or any encounter they fled, and twelue of them were slaine. Monday the 29. of Aprill our men summoned the high Towne, who refused all parley. There all the Spa∣niards that our men could gather (after they had taken them) they slew, to the great amazing of the Enemie be∣holding the same. That night the Spaniards desired parley, and not long after fired certaine houses néere their vpper towne walles. Wednesday the first of May 1589. our English laid their battery vnto la Corunna the great, where through the weakenes of the Rampier betwéene our great Or∣denance and the Enemie (which fell downe with oft sha∣king) they were driuen from their péeces by the enemies Musquet shot from the towne wall. There was slaine Captaine Spencer, and some few others, and Captaine Goodwin shot through the face. The same day (in par∣ley time) a Spaniard shot at an Englishman, and was hanged therefore by the Enemie: In this parley the E∣nemie desired to haue faire warres with vs. Saturday the fourth of May they made a breach in the West side of the Corunna, foure of our men making an assault retired againe without hurt. The same day Cap∣taine Young being dangerously shot died soone after. Sunday the fift of May they assaulted the breach, filled vp by the Enemie, to the hurt of some of our armed men. Two Captaines shot thorow, and Captaine Brey∣ton hurt, Captaine Sydenham slaine, and one Cuckfoot an Ensigne to Sir Francis Drake. Monday the sixt of May Iohn Kempston Marshall of the Ordenance was slaine with a shot from the high Tower.
Tuesday the 7. of May we marched foorth nine Regi∣ments vpon the Enemie, which had encamped them∣selues at a towne called Faro, foure English miles from the Corunna, our men charged on them being eight thousand, and tooke their bridge there. On either side the bridge our men entred the water, draue them away, kil∣led some Colonels, wanne their Towne, victuals and prouisions, fired the rest of their Villages néere, draue them to retreite, pursued them in chase thrée miles or more, and slew of them in all thrée hundred at least: of vs Captaine Cooper was slaine, and not aboue thrée moe. There were only hurt of our chiefe Commanders Sir Edward Norice, and Captaine Hender, who recoue∣red both thereof, and Captaine Fulford who died there∣of. Of those Spaniards at Faro was chiefe Don Iuan Pa∣checo Marques de Guasto, and Gouernour of all Gali∣zia, who fled on horsebacke with the formost. Wednesday the 8. of May our Sailers went on shore, ranged the countrie, burned and spoiled aboue fiue miles, returning with some victuall and pillage, without any resistance. The same night the Non per illa was fired about fiue of the clocke by negligence in the harbour of Corunna, and about twelue of the clocke that night the Merchant Royall was fired, sixe men blowne vp with powder, and some few hurt besides, without more harme, praised be God. Thursday the 9. of May we raised our siege from the Corunna, fired some of their ships in the harbour, burnt and rased the base towne and Mils vp to the high towne, and so embarked away thence that night. Friday the 10. of May we set saile from the Corunna, and that day about noone met with vs againe sixe saile of our Fléete, which at our setting foorth parted from vs about the Coast of France. Tuesday the 14. of May we doubled Cape finister, the winde then at the East.
Saturday the 22. of Iune we departed from Vigo in Galizia to goe towards Peniche. From Peniche the Ar∣mie came to Lisbon, where they staied some two or thrée daies expecting the comming of the Fleete to Lis∣bon: of which preparation and stay there Sir Anthony Wingfield writeth thus: It may be demaunded (saith Sir Anthony Wingfield, writing vpon this voyage) why a matter of so great moment should be so slenderly regarded, as that the Generall should march with such an Armie against such an Enemie, before he knew either the fulnes of his owne strength, or certaine meanes how he should abide the place when he should come to it. Wherein (saith he) I pray you remember the decrées made in the Councell at Peniche, and confirmed by pub∣like protestation the first day of our March. That our Nauie should méete vs in the Riuer of Lisbon, in the which was the store of all our prouision, & so the meane of our tariance in that place: which came not though we continued till we had no munition left to entertaine a very small fight. We are also to consider that the King of Portugall (whether caried away with imagination by the aduertisements he receiued from the Portugals, or willing by any promise to bring such an Armie into his countrey, thereby to put his fortune once more in triall) assured the Generall that vpon his first landing there would be a reuolt of his subiects: whereof there was some hope giuen at our first entrie to Peniche, by the manner of the yéelding of the Towne and Fort: which made the Generall thinke it most conuenient speedely to march to the principall place, thereby to giue courage to the rest of the Countrey. The Friers also and the poore people that came vnto him promised that within two daies the Gentlemen and others of the countrey would come plentifully in: within which two daies came many moe Priests & some very few Gentle∣men on horsebacke: but not till we came to Torres Ve∣dras, where they that noted the course of things passed,
might somewhat discouer the weakenes of that people. There they tooke two daies more, and at the end there∣of referred him till our comming to Lisbon, with assu∣rance that so soone as our Armie should be seene there, all the inhabitants would be for the King and fall vpon the Spaniards. After two nights tariance at Lisbon, the King promi∣sed a supplie of thrée thousand foote and some horse: but all his appointments being expired euen to the last of a night, all his horse could not make a Cornet of 40. nor his foote furnish two Ensignes fully, although they ca∣ried three or foure Colours: and these were altogether such as thought to enrich themselues by the ruine of their neighbours: for they committed more disorders in euery place where we came by spoyle, then any of our owne. So while wée staied at Lisbon wée both failed of the aide which the King Don Anthony promised vs, and wée expected, and also because our English Fléete came not vnto vs thither to Lisbon, wée rose vp thence and went for Cascayes: where méeting with our Fléete wée returned altogether into England, where some of vs ariued at Plimmouth, others at Ports∣mouth, and others at London in the be∣ginning of the moneth of Iuly Anno 1589. aforesaid. Here endeth the Iournall of the Por∣tugall Voyage.
A Iournall of the Honourable ser∣uice by the renowmed Knight S. Iohn No∣rie, Generall of the English and French forces, performed against the French and Spanish Leaguers in Fraunce. 1591. THis morning being Sonday, my Lord Generall with Sir Henry Norice,Aprill. 11▪ Captaine Anthonie Shirley, Maister William Deuoreux, &c. tooke Post∣horses at London to ride to South∣hampton: where (in taking order for shipping & for diuers considerations) his Lordship staid vntill Sonday the 25. day. Monday the 26. dict. we embarked and fell downe with the shipping to Portesmouth: where his Lordship staid that night at Captaine Richard Wingfields house. Tuesday morning the 27. dict. we set sayle being of vs in all 23. ships and other small vessels, and hauing a scant shifting winde at north and north east, we cast an anchor before Saint Helenes poynt in the Wight. Wednesday morning about ten of the clocke (being vn∣till then becalmed wee hapned of a small gale of wind blo∣wing N. N. west, wherewith we recouered the Haigue.28. Thursday about ten of the clocke at night,29. we anchored before the Castle of Gernsey: and my Lord Generall and some other Gentlemen with him lay at the Castle that night. Friday morning we set saile from thence,30. and about fiue
of the clocke in the euening we put into the road of Iarsey. Monday my Lord Generall expecting the Companies out of the Low Countries,1591. were this daye ariued with Captaine Anthonie Wingfield Sergeant Maior of the Campe:May. 3. his Lordship went abord, and lay at anchor in the road all that night. Tuesday in the morning we loosed from thence, and ha∣uing a fine winde at North and by West, about eight at night we anchored in the road of Pimpowle ariuing in the road called Lemoys de Guelle neere Pimpoule. Wednesday ye 5. of May we discouered diuers shippings and botes that came from Brehake, and made towards S. Malowes: whereof we tooke one laden with salt and fish. It is to be remembred that those of Brehake and of the Castle taking knowledge of our approch abandoned the Castle, and yeelded themselues to the kings authoritie. Not long after the enimie fled from the Castle of Lan∣tegard, which was fortified for the king by the Prince Dumbeez now Duke Mountpenser at this day. My Lord dispatched letters into England from the Ab∣bey of Beauport. Thursday the 6. of May was spent in vnshipping the horses, munition and souldiers. This day also the Prince Dombeez sent 20. Moyles la∣den with bread to the Abbey for prouision of the souldiers. Wednesday the army marched towardes Guyngamp, and lodged in a small village in the way (neere the Abbey) and this night the Guyngampiers hearing of our appro∣ches,12. set fire on their suburbes, which we might plainelie discerne. This night likewise my Lord Generall rode before to the Towne to take view, and to saue as much as might be of the suburbs for the lodging of the troupes. 13.Thursday, our troupes being with the French accom∣panied, were lodged in such houses and other places of the suburbs as were left vnburned: the same day the enimie sallyed out of the towne in pursuyng vs, Captaine Wolfe
an Englishmans colours were taken, which we recouered againe at the winning of the towne and deliuered to him. Fridaie,May. 14. those within the towne (not beleeuing that we had any Cannon with vs) sent out diuers spies to discouer, which we tooke: This day our Artillerie (being a Cannon and two Culuerings) came to vs. Saturday, it pleased my Lord Generall to put them within the Towne out of doubt;15. for the Artillerie being planted, our first shot was so exceeding well made, as that it dismounted a peece which the enimie played withall from a steeple: the Prince Dombeez beeing pre∣sent. Sonday, Monday, and Tuesday were spent in draw∣ing plat-formes, and in planting the Ordinances. Wednesday the Canons were readie to play being plā∣ted in a Cloyster in the French quarter on the north side of the towne.19. Thursday morning we hauing expected certaine Artil∣lerie of the Princes to haue come from Brest, (which came not to vs) we began the batterie with our owne 4. peeces: continuing the same all that day, and the next vntill three of the clocke in the afternoone to the number of 400. shot: at which time, notwithstanding that the breach was verie vnassaultable and small (the wall being passing strong) yet the French humour vrged my Lord Generall verie hotlie to an assault. Which vpon so small a possibilitie of doing anie good, his Lordship was hardlie drawne vnto: onelie (in regard of the honour of our nation) he made choise of certaine out of diuers companies, wherof Captaine Iack∣son, Captaine Heron, and Captaine Hayes, to haue the leading: and afterwards (the dice being cast) the chaunce fell to Captaine Iackson and Captaine Heron to haue the point of the assault, and to be seconded by Captaine Hayes, as occasion should serue: who being accompanied with Captaine Catesby and manie other English gentlemen (although the breach was very vnassaultable as before, and
exceeding troublesome by reason of the height thereof, and the light falling of the moulder of the wall, and the great number of the fetherbeds,May. and such like (which the Can∣non had beaten downe) yet a great part of our men per∣force obtained the verie top of the breach, where they endu∣red a hot and long assault: Captaine Heron receiuing a push with a pike vnder his gorget was there slaine, and a∣bout some tenne or twelue of the common souldiers, and besides thirtie hurt with stones, the residue not being able to maintaine the assault any longer (for the causes before remembred) were driuen to retire. The Baron Monluc (hauing in this seruice the conduct of certaine French) shewed himselfe verie couragious, and gayned at that time vnto himselfe great reputation: but the residue (for the most part) came forwards verie coldlie. It was thought good that Captaine Hayes and his companie should not at this time come forwards, but be reserued vntill the next day, at what time the finishing of a Myne (then in hand) was appointed: during this assault Captaine Dennis an English man (offering a Scalado on the other side of the towne) was shot with a Musket in the bellie, whereof he died shortlie after. 23.Sonday next following (being Whitsonday) beginning againe to play (after a three or foure tyer) the enimie sum∣moned a Parley: which in fine grew to a capitulation in this sort viz. That the next day the horsemen in the towne should depart with their horses and Harquebusses (lea∣uing the Cornet behinde the footemen with their swords) and the Townesmen to Fine 40000. crownes to the Prince. 24.Monday, they came forth accordinglie, to the number of 200. horse and 260. foote: and the towne possest Mounsier de Cargamart, being appointed Gouernour of the same. There was found in the towne (being yéelded vp) foure En∣signes, one Cornet, one Cannon perier, one demy Culue∣ring, sixe Sacres, and of Mynions 2000. weight. The towne was found to be verie strong, defensible and
sufficient able to haue kept the same for a far longer time, if they within had bin honest men:May. my Lord General doub∣ted not but to haue drawen them of the towne to far strick∣ter conditions then is said, had not the Prince Dombeez seemed to be verie glad of this, and that his hap sorted to so good successe, and therefore would not further stand vpon it. Wednesday then next following my Lord Generall dis∣patched letters to certaine the Lords of her Maiesties most Honourable priuie Counsell,26 to my Lord Norice his father and to my Ladie his mother, and other his friends in England. Thursday the 27. dicto a Muster was taken of the Ar∣mie. Tuesday the first of Iune anno dicto, vpon the taking of Guyngamp,Iune. 1. it was purposed that we should haue gone for Morlayx, but (by certaine after Counsels) that intent was altered: for that it was said that the Duke Mercoeur was remoued from Pontiny, where he ioyned with 4000. Spaniards vnder the leading of Don Iohn de Laguna, who was marching towards Morlayx by the way of Corlay. Monday next following the Duke Mercoeur, ariued at Corlay (a Castle pretending to hold for the King) but in the possession of Madam de Guyneny, whose brother Mounsier de Bodolphin is the Dukes Lieuetenant: so the partie being made before hand, the Castle was rende∣red without one shot of the Cannon. Tuesday we dislodged towards the enimie and lay at Chateau Lodune. To this place the Duke sent a Trum∣peter to the Prince with letters; whereunto he answered, vt patet per copias: here likewise the Prince sent an other Sartell to the Duke, wherewith he seemed so moued, that he vowed to offer battell to the Prince. Wednesday the Duke dislodged and encamped at Que∣remen a village distant a league and a halfe from Chateau Lodune, scituate on the foote of a hill: which (by deepe
ditches, enclosures and hedges) confronted a little heath of two miles compasse. To which heath (vpon discouerie of the approch of the enimie, by my Lord Generall (who then with the Prince was ridden to take view of a place conuenient) our battell was drawen. Thursday the enimie within one quarter of a league of the heath sheweth his whole Armie in order of battell vp∣on the top of a hill:10. whereupon my Lord Generall dispo∣sed the troupes into three battailions, whereof the infantry English made two, and the Launce Knights the third. This day was spent in some sleight skermishes. Friday the enimie drew his Armie to the foote of the hill,11. and placed his Artillerie vpon: he sight of the heath in a place of such aduantage, as it commaunded in the nature of a Caualier the whole heath: where he bordered all the hedge with shot. Now my Lord Generall sent out 200. footmen to see the countenance of the enimie, who droue them to their strengths, put them to their hedges and Ba∣ricadoes, and slew diuers of them vpon the retreit: to these the Duke put forth 500. French and 300. Spaniards to repossesse the place, whom he followed with the Armie. Which being perceiued by the Prince remouing in the heath with Mounsier de la Hunnaday commaunding the auantgard, and hauing his regiment of horse in battell: (my L. Generall, with Mounsier de Pogny, de Pruneanx, Momartin, Bastinay) order was giuen to put forward 300. foot commaunded by Captaine Anthony Wingfield, Captaine Moreton, & the English horse led by Captaine Anthony Sherley: this direction was valiantlie prosecu∣ted by ours, but speciallie by the English: so as the enimies horse and foot which were in the playne were enforced to flee, manie slaine, and the rest driuen to saue themselues within their Artillery: being taken in this charge Moun∣sier de Guybreun Colonell of the foot of the Armie, and slaine Don Rodrigo chiefe Marshall of the Spaniards, one Spanish Captaine, also the number of 200. French, and 60. Spaniards.
This resolute charge so amated the enimie,Iune. as that they suffered within 200. paces of their Cannon to dis∣arme the dead, and to retire at their ease. In this charge Captaine Anthonie Sherley gaue such an example to the French horse as was admired, and the Companies on foote performed their parts with no lesse valour: namelie the Sergeant Maior and Lieuetenant Long, who receiued in his bodie fiue Harquebuz shot: the rest of the day was spent in skirmishes. Saturday the enimie made a great shew to come forth,12. and sent out some number of shot: against whom Cap∣taine Anthonie Sherley with fifteene horse, and some few foote made them quicklie take their heeles, pursuing them to their Baricadoes, where his horse was shot in the head, and some small hurt done. Sonday, little was performed that day.13. Monday being S. Iohns day (as they write after the Roman Kalender) with them it was thought some∣what would haue bin done in the honour of the day, but in deed nothing at all: for the Duke vsed it rather as a co∣lour whereby to runne away, hauing that night with∣drawen his Cannon, and retired himselfe to Queremen. Wednesday the 16. of Iune, Mounsier de la Noë with the troupe of the Counte Mongomery consisting of 100. Curaces, and the Counte de Comburg came vnto Cha∣teau Laudra: whose ariuall promised some good successe to the kings affaires. Thursday being Midsomer day the Natiuitie of S. Iohn Baptist, we dislodged to Quintine.24 This night the enimie being lodged at Corlay within 3 smal leagues of vs, an enterprise was made vpon some of their light horse that lay wide of their Campe: which for that it was not attempted by footmen (as my Lord Gene∣rall earnestlie perswaded them vnto) it tooke no great ef∣fect: sauing that there were killed some 16. of a Corps du Guarde, and their horse taken. The rest might easily haue bin had as good cheape, if the horsemen would haue ligh∣ted
and forced their Baricadoes: the French thought they had done wonderous well,Iune. and so that seruice ended. Mounsier Tremblay (who had the commaund of the French Light horse) was now sleightlie shot in the thigh: other hurt we receiued none. Friday the 25. day the Enemie attempted a reuenge, and came forth with some horse and foote, and gaue vs an alarme: which was performed so fauourably, as they neither hurt man nor beast. Tuesday being S. Peters day, my Lord Generall dis∣patcheth certaine letters by Peter Browne to certaine the Lords of her Maiesties most Honourable priuie Councell,29. to my Lord Norice his father, and to other his friends in England. Iulie. 2.Friday the second of July Anno 1591. the armie dis∣lodged to Pleu or Plessue. Tuesday the sixt day we marched towards Lamball, and lay in a small Village in the way. Wednesday about ten of the clocke in the morning the towne of Lamball was entred at the West South∣west, and by Captaine Symmes and Captaine Richard Wingfields Ensigne, who led two hundred shot: The Southside of the towne was entred by Captaine Hall and Captaine Guest with other two hundred shot. Both these were seconded by Captaine Dolphin with one hun∣dred Pikes, whom Captaine Mayne was appointed to haue followed, if occasion had so serued. But the afore∣said Captaines Symmes and Hall with their troupes came so resolutely vpon the Baricadoes of the Towne, that the enemie was forced to abandon the same, and to make a hastie retreit into the Castle. From whence Captaine Baynton and Barbar Lieutenant to Captaine Symmes were both shot, and died that day: Captaine Ri∣chard Wingfields Ensigne bearer hauing receiued from the walles of the Castle a shot through both his thighes at that time. Thursday there were two of our Cannons mounted
on the Southwest side of the Castle; and that day the Enemie made some proffer of a sallie vpon Captaine Halles quarter. Friday,Iuly. 9. a Spurre which couered the Gate of the Castle was made assaultable: by two of the clock in the afternoone two Frenchmen were sent to discouer the breach; and it was appointed that other French should haue entred the same, who should haue been seconded by the Lieutenants one Guest and Braconbury. But the first of the French performing but badly, and the second flatly denying, Monsieur de Mo Martin was enforced to aduance himselfe somewhat further then his place re∣quired: whereby he receiued a Harquebuze shot in the thigh. Being iudged by my Lord Generall and Monsieur de la Noë, that the Spurre (when it should haue beene taken) was not assaultable, it was thought good that certaine shot should be sent out in the smoke of the Can∣non, to lodge themselues directly vnder a Bulwarke vpon the right hand of the gate, whereby the breach might in some sort be flanked: Whiles Monsieur de la Noë stood behinde a Baricado, to beholde how those that were sent performed this seruice, he was shot in the head with a Musquet, whereof he died soone after. At the time of this seruice one Monsieur de Boa Cap∣taine of a Companie of Light horse, was slaine with a small shot. My Lord (well weighing the slow successe of this en∣terprise) thought it best to deferre the seruice vpon the Spurre, vntill the darknes of the night following: His Lordships purpose was to assault with some thirtie shot and Pikes well armed (if the height of the breach would haue béen taken) whereof little doubt was made. The leading of these men was committed to Lieute∣nant Guest: it was further resolued, that Captaine Hen∣der with other thirtie shot and Pikes should lodge him∣selfe vnder the great Baricado on the right hand of the Gate; and to assay by all meanes he could to worke him∣selfe
further vnder the very foundation thereof. Iuly.In the darknes of the night my Lord Generall cau∣sed two with firelocke péeces and two Pikes to discouer the breach, who made their way without any great dif∣ficultie: Lieutenant Guest followed with two Pikes only, and sixe Musquetiers, who winding to the height of the breach (besides many sore blowes with stones) re∣ceiued two shot vpon his armour, whereof one was a ve∣ry daungerous wound, and so retired from the place which was so flankered, as it could not well be kept. Sunday the 11. day of Iuly 1591. Master Danyel de∣sirous to see out of the height of a Tower, receiued a shot in the shoulder with a Harquebuz: And in the same place one Master Pawlet was shot in the head, whereof he died presently. Vpon an assured intelligence that Duke Mercoeur with his whose force was come to Pleny Ingot with a resolution to raise our siege; my Lord Generall at the instance of the Prince (most of our French hauing at that time forsaken vs) thought good to dislodge and to méete the Enemie. We dislodged, and that night the Armie came to Queymer, where we continued vntill the last of Iuly present. 26Monday fourtnight following my Lord Generall sent letters to the Lords of the Councell by Master Browning. Tuesday the 27. Monsieur de la Verdune came to the Prince with 220. horse, and 700. foote: The Marques de Villeures did accompany him. 30Friday the Armie dislodged and lay that night at Bre∣hake. August.Sunday the first of August, the Prince Dombeez, my Lord Generall,1 Monsieur de la Verdune, and the princi∣pall Commanders amongst the French being followed with twelue hundred shot, whereof foure hundred were English (twentie being taken out of euery Companie) and all the Cauallerie did march from the armie at Bre∣hake
towards the Enemie encamped by Ingon.August. The in∣tention was to haue cut off thrée Cornets of the Ene∣mies horse which lay at a little Village about a mile and a halfe off from the strength of the Armie. But (vpo an aduertisement taken) it was found that they dislod∣ged themselues that morning, and had drawne them∣selues to another Village, not fiue hundred paces from their Armie: We comming to the first place and missing the Enemie, sought them in the second, from whence likewise (vpon their alarme giuen by their Sentinels) they had withdrawne themselues to the armie. Yet in this second place some small resistance was made by French shot: which being soone ouerthrowne, and some 25. of the Enemies horse taken (which in a hastie feare they left behinde) Monsieur Tremblay seeing some thrée or foure score of the enemies horse begin to make a head and proffer to passe a Riuer, determined to charge the first that would attempt the same. In which charge, be∣ing least of all the rest (foure only excepted) that charge with him, his horse stumbling and so falling with him, he was taken prisoner, after a sleight hurt receiued in his face with the shot of a Pistoll. Tuesday our Armie dislodged to Kerso. Thursday to Monconter.3. Saturday from thence to S. Brieux.5. 7. Sunday my Lord Generall dispatched letters into England by Peter Browne the Poste.8. Saturday we remoued to Ville Rabel.21. To this place place came Master Barker with my Lords horses out of the Low Countries. At this place considerations were drawne by the Prince and his Councell, which implied a necessitie for the marching of the Armie in the high parts of Britany, whereunto my Lord Generall in writing answered his opinion. Tuesday the 24. of August dicto,24. the Armie came to Collinee.
The 26. of Au∣gust.Thursday the Armie dislodged, and because the Prince was certainly enformed that Mounsier de Mercouer came to Benne, it was certainly resolued that the Armie should that day march to S. Meyn: but through the vnredines of all things apperteyning to the Cannon, and distance of place, that course was altered, and for that night we lodged at Medrimak a reasonable faire village in the mid way be∣tweene Collinee and S. Meyn. Here the Prince Dom∣beez vnderstood that Mounsier de Mercoeur had in all se∣crecie dislodged that night before from Diuant and was come to Pleumalan, with a resolution to preuent vs of our lodging at S. Meyn: Pleumalan is two leagues from Diuant, and foure from S. Meyn; from Medrimak to S. Meyn but three leagues. Whereupon it was concluded, that Mounsier de la Verdune accompanied with 80. Cu∣rasses, 300. Harquebuz, a Cheuall, and 400. English should dislodge about midnight: and assay (if by a speedie march towards S. Meyn they could) before the enimie should inuest the towne with those forces. 27.Friday we dislodged verie timelie, and (in our march) were certified that S. Meyn was inuested with those for∣ces, sent the night before with Mounsier de la Verdune: and that it was not heard that the enimie had anie such in∣tention as before. 31.Tuesday the thirty one, and last of August we dislodged to Yfendit. Here Mounsier de la Verdune left the Prince. The second of September.Thursday the second of September anno dict. the Ar∣mie remoued to Breal. 3.Friday the third, from thence to Moyal. Saturday from Moyal to Chasteauieron. Sonday my Lord Generall was inuited by the inhabi∣tants of Rheyas, to visite their Citie. Thursday we dislodged to Chasteau burg. 11.Saturday from thence to S. Hulbin. At this place lay the Armie when the Castle of Chasti∣leon was taken in by assault.
Friday my Lord Generall sent letters into England by Captaine Maxie.24▪ Tuesday we remoued to Feynes.28. Thursday the seauenth of October anno dict. we dis∣lodged to Bauongie Simples.The seauenth of October. Fridaie from thence to S. Ouen.15▪ Sonday from S. Ouen to Ferie. Monday we remoued to Bauongie. Monday from Bauongie to S. Hillarie. Monday the eight of Nouember dict. we dislodged to Tilyel. Thursday the eleuenth day we dislodged from Tilyel to Fugeralles. Wednesday to the Castell of Dorec. This fort seemed of such strength vnto the Prince Dom∣beez, and some of his Counsell (as Mounsier la Verdune) that they thought it not meet to be vndertaken without spe∣ciall meanes, such as we wanted: hauing neyther munition nor any other thing fit for seruice, sauing two or three smal iron peeces for batterie. Our men (such as were reserued from the extremitie of the then late sicknesse amongst vs) being verie weake and feeble, hauing wanted of long time before both clothes and money: yet it pleased God that by the most politicke and circumspect direction of my Lord Generall, the enimy was drawen to abandon the same this present night, to the great freeing of those parts there a∣bouts: and Captaine Latham was put in as Gouernour of the same. The same Sonday at night my Lord Generall sent Mounsier Carmarak with letters to the Lords of the Counsell. Friday the Armie dislodged to Pyboray. Monday from thence to Ernye. Thursday the second of December anno dict. the Ar∣mie dislodged from Erny to Gorrone.The second of December. From this place my Lord sent letters into England by Captaine Richard Wingfield, Captaine Moreton, and
Captaine Dennis, who had licence to repaire thither. 19Sunday our Armie dislodged to Ambrizer, where my Lord Generall kept his Christmas. 28.Tuesday we dislodged from thence to S. Georges. 29.Wednesday, and so from S. Georges to S. Germyns. Ianuary.Saturday the eight day of Ianuarie anno dicto the Armie remoued to S. Iohn sur le Meyne.8. Sonday from thence to Baconiere. 9.Monday from Baconiere to Bourne en le Forest. 10. 11.Thursday the Lord Generall road to Viterie, where the Princes of Condy and Dombeez (by commandement from the king) met together for the determining of some present seruice against the league, which was concluded: and in fine, Sir Henry Norice (at the request of the Prince Dombeez) was sent ouer with letters to the Lords of the Councell, to my Lord his father, and my Ladie his mo∣ther, and others his friends in England: and withall to know her Maiesties resolution, whether for the reenfor∣cing of the troupes in Britanie, or for the disposing of them elswhere. 28.Monday Sir Henrie Norice departed from Laual, to imbarque himselfe at Cane. Februarie. 1.Monday the first of Februarie anno dicto, at night M. Carmerek returned with letters to my Lord Generall: wherein his Lordship had licence to come ouer. 18Thursday the Lord Generall departed from Goron (where the Campe at that time lay) for England: lea∣uing Captaine Anthonie Wingfield Sergeant Maior sufficientlie authorised till his returne. Sunday the Lord Generall came to Cane, where for want of sufficient tyde he was driuen to stay vntill the last of this moneth.21. March. 1.Monday the first day of March anno dict. his Lordship finding a Barque of M. Champerneyes, hee imbarqued himselfe in the same, whom Colonell Sherly, and Cap∣taine Lo with others also accompanying, they had a verie good gale blowing full Southwest, which continued vntill
three of the clocke the next morning: after which time we were very much becalmed, vntill ten of the clocke. When hauing a reasonable faire winde at west southwest, we re∣couered the Iles of Wight: where wee had very much foule weather. So yt his Lordships horses being in a smal Fleebote, some doubt was here of the safetie of them: which afterwards (God be thanked) obtained safelie the harbour: we being within the point, there anchored, and the next morning his Lordship landed at Portes-mouth. Here endeth the Iournall of the seruice in Fraunce against the Leaguers. Anno. 1591.
THE MEMORABLE SERVICE OF THE NOBLE Generall Sir Iohn Norice Knight, per∣formed Anno Dom. 1594. at Brest in Britaine. THe first of September our worthie Generall Sir Iohn Norice, landing with new forces out of England at Penpole, receiued letters presently from Marshall D'Aumond and Sir Thomas Baskeruil, who commanded in his absence the English troupes, being then before the Castle of Morlayx, in what termes they stood expecting euery day to be fought withall by the enemie Duke Mercoeur, who was aduanced for the same purpose within thrée leagues of them, and did but onely attend the comming of Monsieur Boisdolphin, with some French horse to ioyne with them: but this their tempo∣rizings in the end cost them the Castle, for immediatly the very next day after the Generals landing with great expedition, to wit, the second of September he put him∣selfe vpon the way to Morlayx, and vpon the fift of the same moneth ariued there, being fourtéene leagues di∣stant. His comming was generally ioyed at by all the Bri∣tons, but especially by the inhabitants of Morlayx, whose good or ill estate depended on his comming: for both the Castle (a cruell neighbour) held against them, and the Duke Mercoeur was at hand to rescue the defendants, who in assurance of reliefe from him acquitted them∣selues
manfully, namely the Gouernour himselfe Mon∣sieur Rochempoul, the Count Magnion, and Monsieur Rostin, with diuers other gallants. But the Generall so amated the Enemie, that the Duke Mercoeur not onely stayed from marching néerer vnto vs, but the tenth of the same retired with all his forces both French & Spa∣nish, assuring himselfe that he could expect of Sir Iohn Norice nothing but blowes. They of the Castle ac∣quainted therewith, within two daies after the Dukes retreit yéelded vp the Castle. So that only his presence without the hazard of any of her Maiesties subiects, both enforced the Duke to retire, and the Castle to yeeld. This Castle thus rendred, we staied there ten daies, in respect that the Marshall wanted money for the satis∣fying of his people: whereof at the last he was fourni∣shed by those of the towne of Morlayx. Then Mounsieur de Lyscot, a wonderfull braue man, and the Baron of Molac were sent before with some Harquebuziers, to the end they might blocke vp the Fort of Croyzon by Brest, and preserue the quarters about, who were fur∣ther assisted with foure hundred men out of our ships by Sir Martin Fourbysher who commaunded the English shippings. And presently the armie dislodged to a place called Iuez, thence to a Village called La Fou, next to Chastrau-lin, the next day to Lacornan a village thrée leagues from Quinper-Corentin which was held hy the Enemie. The same night the Marshall with foure hundred French, and Sir Iohn Norice with as many English marched to Quinper-Corantin, and on a sudden surpri∣sed the suburbs, and possessed them with smal resistance. The towne was willing to yéeld, but that the Garrison would not suffer them. But Sir Iohn Norice, whose minde was still to doe some exploit against the Spani∣ards at the Fort of Coryzon, leauing this towne inue∣sted by the Marshall and thrée of our English Regi∣ments, commaunded by his brother Sir Henry Norice
our Lieutenant Generall,October. himselfe only with his owne Regiment, and his owne companie of horse, marching towards the Fort, and lodged that night at Croyzon. And the next day sate downe before the Fort. Thrée daies were spent in vnshipping & bringing vp the Artillerie,2.3.4. which were fourtéene péeces (whereof the Marshall furnished but two Culuerings) and in making of approches, which was greatly hindred by the want of Gabions, Pioners, and other prouisions for the making of platformes, which we hoped by promise to haue had in a readines sent vs from the Gouernour of Brest: but our Generall could procure almost nothing from thence but with many difficulties by reason of the weather. 5.The fift of this moneth we had newes that the Mar∣shall and Sir Henry Norice had Quimper yéelded vnto them. The sixt of this moneth the Enemie made a sallie out vpon our trenches,6. but were very brauely beaten home againe with the losse of seuen or eight of their men: but yet this their losse was very vnfortunately answered by the death of Captaine Anthonie Wingfield our Ser∣geant Maior generall,Sir Anthonie Wingfield slaine with a Cannon. being shot with a Cannon out of the Fort, as he stood by the Gabions with his Rapier drawne, the which with the shot was beaten through his bowels. This man with great reputation had long time serued her Maiestie both in the Low Countries, Portugall, and Fraunce: and at his last going into Bri∣taine, so disposed of his estate as if he were neuer to re∣turne; and the same day, or the day before his death, tooke such order for his debts, as if he had a presage of his end. 7.8.9.10.11.The next day the Marshall D'Aumond and Sir Hen∣rie Norice with our English Regiments, came to vs from Quimper, and were quartered at Croyzon & there∣abouts. After whose comming foure daies were spent in mounting of the Artillerie, planting of our Ordenance, and making of platformes for them to play.
On the 12. day the Enemie made a sallie vpon the French trenches: who hauing not the leisure to arme themselues, lost betwéene thirtie and fortie men, and as many hurt: and from thence they aduanced themselues towards our trenches, where wee lost in their defence ten or twelue men: but we did put them againe in pos∣session of their trenches. Hauing now all things readie for the batterie, I will as well as I can describe vnto you the Fort. You shall vnderstand that more then two parts of the Fort was defended by the water, the rest was made so excéeding strong, as either by arte or charge could be done. On the South front thereof on each corner were two exceeding strong Bastions; that on the West side was seuentéene paces in the front, that on the East side tenne paces: the Curtaine betwéene both was 37. foote thicke at the top; and within these they had made a very large intrenchment, and the Bastions were excéeding well flanked from the Rocke by the water side, planting both on the flankers and bastion some great Ordenance. We lay entrenched within thrée or foure paces of their Counterscarp: the Frenchmen on the East side, and wée on the West side, the batterie lay in the midst betweene the trenches. These things thus prouidently ordered by the Marshall and our Generall; on the 23. our Artille∣rie began to play, and continued some seuen hundred Cannonodos, but did so little harme by reason of the strength of the place, as scarse any shew of a breach ap∣peared, onely wee did beate away their parrapete and some of their flankers: whereupon some hundred men commaunded by Captaine Lyster, were sent to view and see if they could hold the Counterscarp. Then many of our braue men and gallants thirsting after honour, desi∣rous to doe somewhat further, hauing possessed them∣selues of the Enemies Counterscarp, which onely they were commaunded to attempt, vndertooke the breach,
which they performed so well, as that notwithstanding the vnsatiablenes of the place, and the great resistance the eni∣mie made. Yet the most part of them attained to the verie top thereof, which they held for a while, but were after∣wards repulsed. This enterprise was with wonderfull great resolution and valour seconded by S. Thomas Bas∣keruil, who likewise got so farre as the point of the breach. There were lost in this attempt manie braue men, namelie, Slaine in the assault. Captaine Barker. Captaine Prudder. Captaine Iackson, Sergeant Maior of Ostend, who had no charge there. Haynes. Ensigne to sir Henry Norice. Corporall Essex. M. Throgmorton, and some 16. or 18. souldiers▪ Hurt in the assault. Captaine Audley. Captaine Bartley. Captaine Couch. Captaine Goodwins Lieutenant. Captaine Williams Lieutenant. Captaine Bucks Lieutenant, & other priuate men. Burned with Powder. Sir Thomas Knowles. Captaine Ashendon.
Captaine Bishop. Lieutenant Larkeley. Captaine Lopeley. Maister Waineman, and diuers others. You are to vnderstand that this attempt was onelie made by the Englishmen on the bastion of the west side, for the Frenchmen neuer attempted any thing against their Bastion, aleaging that it was not Assaultable. The Marshall and our Generall seeing the little effect that our Artillerie wrought,24 deuised to make a mine on one of the bulwarks, namelie on the East bastion towards the French trenches in perfecting thereof some 17. or 18. dayes were spent. But on the 30. being an exceeding wet morning where∣by our powder and match were not fit for seruice, the eni∣mie againe found thereby oppertunitie to fall out vpon the French trenches, and killed so betweene twenty and thirty of them at the least, among whom was Mounsier Lyscot, a verie braue gentleman one of the Marshals of the Campe, who was abandoned by the French and their trenches wholie possessed by the enimie, but our English men did presentlie repossesse them of their trenches, and killed some of the Spaniards. Our nation lost an excee∣ding great friend of this Mounsier Lyscot, he exceedingly loued our Generall, as if he had bin his owne father, and generallie fauoured all English men, and gaue vs the re∣putation to be verie braue souldiers. By the seauenth of Nouember our mine was reasona∣ble well perfected,Nouember. 7. and a determination held againe to be∣gin the batterie, with a resolution that so soone as the myne should be blowne vp which was made towards the bulwarke by the French trenches, that the Frenchmen should assaile that part, and the Englishmen their Bastion, and that others with scaling ladders should make at∣tempts in euerie corner, so that the defendants should be
on euery part assailed. But the Marshall being that daie sicke, sent in the morning for our Generall, and shewed him his letters from the Gouernour of Rennes, and from di∣uers others, by which he was advertised that Iohn Don Ioan de la Auquilar Generall of the Spaniards, was marching towards Croyzon with all his Spanish forces to rescue the fort, & was alreadie aduaunced to La-cornan a village within fiue leagues of vs, and therefore aduised our General to dislodge to Croyzon, thinking it not fit to hazard any men, hauing so strong an enimie at hand ready to ioyne battell with them. But Sir Iohn Norice hauing his courage nothing daunted with the approch of the ene∣mies, his heart seruing him both to win the fort by assault, and to encounter his enemie in the field: shewing what a dishonour and disreputation it were to abandon the siege, and also what little cause the enemie should haue to ad∣uance himselfe farther if the fort were gotten, his com∣ming being onelie to resue it. He so much importuned the Marshall, that he gaue him wholie the ordering of that dayes seruice. Immediatlie our Generall gaue order to the Cannoniers for the batterie, and caused the Artillerie to play. Euerie man was assigned his charge, some to the assault, other with scalados to attempt to enter, and by 12. of the clocke he caused fire to be set to the mine: which albe∣it did not so much as was looked for, yet it made the ac∣cesse so easie vnto the French, as that a man might haue ridden vpon horse backe: and our men, namely Captaine Latham, Captaine Smith, and Captaine Iohn Norice, with diuers other gallant gentlemen gaue vp on the other bulwarke, and continued the assault without losing one pace of the height vntill halfe an houre past foure, and in the end first entered the same, and seased vp on three En∣signes that were there, and put euerie man they found in the fort (sauing one alferez) to the sword: some of the Spa∣niards leapt from the rocke to the water, but our Marri∣ners with their smal boats met with them and slew them: some three or foure others being taken escaped with their
liues, no man was found, Au sang Froyd. Sir Thomas Baskeruil serued this day with great va∣lour and industrie, to the admiration of all men. Our sea∣men and Marriners this day acquited themselues won∣derfull brauelie, and were exceeding forward in all at∣tempts, as may well appeare by that valiant Knight Sir Martin Fourbisher, who in the assault receiuing a hurt, is thereof now dead. The chiefest of the French men, namelie such gentle∣men as seruing on horseback, putting themselues that day on foote, did exceeding gllantlie, namelie. Mounsier Rou∣mege, Vn Maistre du Camp, a man of great courage, and who most intirelie loued our Generall, was slaine vpon the rampart, and his Ensigne by him: who if they had bin well seconded, vndoubtedly they had caried it first, and had got the reputation of the first entrie. As for the rest I hold them nothing worthie of commendations in this action. Slaine in the assault. Captaine Edge once Captaine of our Generals Gaurd. Lieutenant Flud. Captaine Smiths Lieutenant. Ensigne to Captaine Brett. Eight Gentlemen of our Generals own company. Manie other Gentlemen, and betweene twenty or thirty priuate men. Hurt in the assault. Sir Thomas Baskeruil. Sir Martin Fourbisher, who is now dead. Captaine Iohn Norice. Captaine Brett. Captaine Smith.
The victorie being thus gotten by the great vertue and admirable industrie of our Generall, the fort being ap∣pointed to be raised,1. we dislodged the next day to Croyzon to ioyne with the rest of our troupes, to attend there what the enimie durst doe, who within two dayes after, found reason to retire themselues fiue leagues further from vs. Thus haue I finished I assure you truelie, although not largelie: all that was most remarcable in this dayes seruice. It may be I giue not namelie to euerie man the ho∣nour he deserued, but therein I excuse my selfe with my shortnes in writing, & also my selfe being herein an Actor, my eye was not at leasure to note euerie mans desert. There was found in the fort 29. barrels of powder, some match, and verie few small shot: and of meate, bisket, wine and beefe reasonable good store. I must a little commend the defendants, for an enimie deserueth his iust praise, es∣peciallie the chiefe Commaunder. He neuer in all these at∣tempts shewed himselfe daunted, he made sundrie sallies, but most vpon the French, to his great aduantage and re∣putation. He lost before this last dayes seruice 60. men, some at his sallies, some with our Cannon, and some at our first attempt vpon the breach, also this very last day our Cannon playing incessantlie vpon the maine courtaine, betweene the two bastions slew fiftie of his men. This last assault continued almost fiue houres without intermissi∣on, they neuer quailed vntill he was slaine, which was a small time before the entrie, and then the greater part be∣ing slaine, the rest ouer tired and hurt, were forced by our Gallants to retire, and so there were slaine of Spaniards in this fort almost 400. I note another signe of his great resolution, for if he found anie willing onely to speake of yeelding, he would cause him to be bound to a stake or post, and exposed him to the breach, leauing his armes at liber∣tie to fight for his defence. I hope no man will dislike if I commend the valour of the enimie which was conquered, for the greater is the honour of them that were the Con∣querours.
This their vaine resolution might well haue serued their turnes, if they had not dealt with our Gene∣rall who was as resolute as they, and therein ouermacht them. For the next day, Don Ioan de l'Aquilar sending a trumpet for the redeeming of prisoners, our Generall sent him answere that their ransomes were payed, and that hee was now as readie and at leasure to fight with him. This victory achiued, he sent the three Spanish Ensignes into England, and presented them to her Maiestie, who as a most sacred and gratious Prince, most highlie estee∣med, and louinglie accepted them. God of his infinite mercy send her daylie so to triumph ouer her eni∣mies, and that it will please him to protect our Generall for her greater seruices. FINIS. Here endeth the memorable seruice of S. Iohn Norice knight, at Brest in Britaine. 1594.
THE MEMORABLE SERVICE OF THE NOBLE Generall Sir Iohn Norice Knight, in Ireland (after his returne from Brest) 1595. with his death there, and bu∣riall here in England 1597. THis noble Knight and renowmed Generall of her Maiesties forces in Britaine (immediatly after the said seruice done by him at the Fort of Brest in that Prouince) a∣riuing in England in the moneth of March Anno 1595. after he had stayed at London a moneth or thereabouts,March. 1595. Generall No∣rice departeth for Ireland. was thence by her Maiestie commaunded ouer into Ireland: and with him to embarke his forces appointed directly ouer thither vnder the conduct of his brother Sir Henrie Norice Knight; there to haue his Commission drawne, as Generall of her Maiesties for∣ces in that kingdome. After his landing at Waterford (which was about the fift or sixt of May Anno dict.) he dispatched letters to Sir William Russel Knight,May. 5. Lord Deputie of Ireland, signifying his landing at Waterford aforesaid, and with∣all crauing leaue for the ease of his bodie, that he might stay in his gouernment of Munster for some short time: which as it seemed was granted him,He landeth at Waterford. in regard that he staied there about thrée wéekes, and then remooued thence to Dublin, to the said Lord Deputie there resi∣dent.
Immediatly after the same stay there,Iulie. his Commission was drawne, his counsell vsed, and hee required to ac∣companie the said Lord Deputie into the field,Sir William Russel Lord Deputie. together with his owne Companie of horse and foote. The place appointed for the Rendezuous of the Armie was by Dundalk a towne bordering on Vlster, from whence the said Lord Deputie, Sir Iohn Norice, and others of the Councell with the Armie, marched altogether vnto Armah, where they found a ruined Church or Abbey. But afterwards by the aduice of the Lord Deputie and his Councell, that place was thought fit for a Garrison, in regard that it bordered vpon the entrance of Hugh O∣nele the Erle of Tyron that Archrebels countrey, and was situate within two or thrée miles of the Blackwater in the countrey of Tyrone, where her Maiestie had here∣tofore a Fort. So this place was forth with made defen∣cible, and there were left in Garrison thrée or foure of the Companies which came out of Britaine. Now after the fortifying and victualling of that Gar∣rison, and other necessaries fit for the holding of it, the Deputie, with Sir Iohn Norice and the rest of the Ar∣mie, marched to Monohan, another warde bordering vpon the said Archrebels countrey, and held as then by Sir Iohn Dowdal an English Knight and his company. So after order taken for the victualling of that place, and other necessaries,The Lord De∣putie com∣ming forwards, Tyrone retur∣ned backe. the Armie marched backe towards the Newry in the Prouince of Vlster, where Sir Henrie Bagnal Knight (the Marshall) commaunded fiue Com∣panies which lay there continually in garrison. But the Archrebell Tyrone hearing of the Lord Deputies re∣turne backe, did purpose (as it was thought) to haue pos∣sessed himselfe of the pace before him, that lieth betwéene the Newry and Dundalk aforesaid, thereby to offend him in his passage. Word being brought to the Lord Depu∣tie hereof, and he knowing that the said Archrebell pur∣posed to passe within foure or fiue miles of the place where the Lorde Deputie encamped: the next night
thereupon there were Scoutes sent out, & word brought by them that they had descried the said Archrebels army. Whereupon order was giuen, that there should be cer∣taine horse and foote made readie, to attend the Lord De∣putie and Sir Iohn Norice, who went forwards with those men, vntill they came within sight of the Archre∣bels whole armie, being then reputed foure thousand strong of horse and foote. But whether the Lord Depu∣tie were ill guided, or whether the enemie in feare to saue himselfe made more haste then the English could follow, I know not, but for that time they escaped. But it seemed that feare serued to some good purpose: for af∣terwards in our passage through the place we were not at all intercepted, although the Enemie might haue done it with great aduantage. Now, after leauing some companies at the Newry and Calingford,1595. the English returned to Dundalke, where (after the establishing of that Garrison,August. and o∣thers in the English pale) the Lord Deputie, with Sir Iohn Norice and the rest of the Councell, went to Du∣blin. Shortly after their being there, it was concluded vpon, that Sir Iohn Norice then Generall should draw an armie into the field. The place for the companies to ioyne was appointed, and other preparations for the ar∣mie, as cariages, Pioners, victuals, &c. sparingly proui∣ded. Not fully so well prouided, as when the Lord De∣putie went himselfe, and therefore not so much expected to be performed by him, as by the Deputie) although the numbers of men were left vnto himselfe for to name: it was giuen out that the Generall should goe to victuall Armah, whatsoeuer was besides pretended: and indéede that charge was faithfully performed by him, and as much for the Queenes honour, as any thing that hath béen done since the Archrebell Tyrone first entred into his rebellion. September.For after that by a tedious trauell with the whole army to and fro about foure or fiue times from the New∣ry
to Armah (which the Generall was faine to doe in re∣gard he was but sparingly furnished of Cariages, be∣sides his armie which were but thirtéene hundred strong thereby much weakened) at this time did the said Tyrone take all the aduantage he could. And at the Ge∣nerals last returne from Armah, the Enemie sent thrée hundred of his best shot to lodge in a place, where our English armie should passe thorough, to méete the Ge∣nerall and intercept him in his passage. But it fell out that our men in their march had possessed themselues of that pace before the Enemie: which the Generall per∣ceiuing, and withall knowing himselfe followed in the arriere of our armie both with horse and foote of the ene∣mies, made a halt in the place where he perceiued them to follow, and so staied vntill two hundred of the archre∣bels horse came vp to charge him. But they (finding him as readie to ioyne as they) retired backe to the archre∣bell, who was readie with other horse to haue seconded them, if they had attempted any thing to any purpose. Hereupon Tyrone sent down of his foote 200. Scots and 300. shot to haue galled the Generals troupe of horse: but he (although vnarmed) made good that place where he first made a stand (which was with the losse of some of his best horse) vntill he had sent for thrée or foure wings of shot from the Colours; himselfe in this stand (which was in effect against Tyrones whole army) was shot in the arme, and in the bellie, his horse vnder him shot in thrée or foure places. His brother Sir Tho∣mas Norice shot thorow the thigh: Sir Richard Wing∣field Commander of the Generals horse had his arme broken with a shot (no other man hurt of any name) only of horse and foote about eightéene slaine, besides some twentie or thirtie hurt. This stand so honourably made by him was to good purpose, otherwise it could not be but that our whole armie had been ouerthrowne: but how Tyrone (vpon the slaughter of two hundred of his Scots, besides some of his best shot) was followed, he
liueth to make report of it, if he list: but I am sure (so botly) that in foure daies he could not heare of twentie of his men together in a companie, they had so dispersed themselues in the pursuite. October.After this seruice done by the Generall, within short time he came to Dublin: where after a moneth of sixe wéekes stay there he went downe to his gouernment of Munster. Tyrone oftentimes after this conflict, did send a fained shew of submission vnto the Lord Deputie, (namely whiles that the Generall was in Munster) and thereupon he was hearkened vnto,Nouember. and Commissioners were sent from the Lord Deputie to talke with him vp∣on some Articles: besides, Sir Henry Warren Knight was employed in that seruice, and had free accesse to Ty∣rone. The cause why Sir Iohn Norice the Generall re∣tired himselfe from those publike affaires, after his good seruice done, is knowne to many, and euery priuate man could speake of the crossings betweene the Deputie and him, whosoeuer was faultie: But the state (whiles they gouerned) stood in better termes, then it hath done since, howsoeuer it hath bin thought that the treating of peace did preiudice any good procéedings. At this time Munster was quiet and most part of Lem∣ster (except Feaugh Mack-Hughes countrie) kept in good termes: In Conacht, the miserie that they had indured be∣fore,Munster in good quiet. taught them to desire quietnes, onelie they would speake reprochfullie and bitterlie against Sir Richard Bingham their Gouernour. The townes vpon the bor∣ders of the North, and those of the English pale were de∣fended by garison, so that there was no great harme done to the English pale, but by the incursions of some of the Orrelyes, who were continuallie prayed and seased vpon by our garisons: all Vlster both at that time, and now con∣tinueth still rebellious, and this was the state of the coun∣trie at that time, when Sir Iohn Norice withdrew him∣selfe into Munster. After his being at Munster, the said Generall Norice
came to Dublin, where staying some two months, there came order out of England,1596. that he and Sir Ieffrey Fen∣ton should be ioyned in Commission to treat with Tyron vpon some Articles of peace.Aprill. There was (as I haue for∣merlie said) Commissioners appointed by the deputie to treat concerning the same businesse: but after the order came out of England that Commission ceased,Messengers appointed be∣tweene the Commissio∣ners and Ty∣rone. and the said Sir Iohn Norice, and Sir Ieffrey Fenton were au∣thorised in their places. Those that were appointed as messengers betweene the Commissioners & Tyrone were Sir Warram Sellenger, and Captaine William Warren, both of them sufficient men, and of Tyrones old acquain∣tance, and those who faithfullie proceeded according to their instructions. These men brought to that passe by the direction of the Commissioners, that he was to haue his pardon: and no question had he meant to be loyall, those sleight doubts that he made of his safetie would neuer haue made him vnmindfull of so high and merciful a grace and fauour, after his most vile and trecherous offence. It may be doubted because there was some priuate crossings betweene men of high place, that their crossings would haue hindered his hope of deseruing well hereafter: It was reported that he should say so much, surelie (which if he did) it was but to excuse his intended trecherie, as he hath often done since. Now during the Commissioners stay on the borders, Tyrone sent his owne submission in by the aforesaid two Agents: and besides sent into Dun∣dalk (for to make the better show of his fained submission) some of the chiefest men of Vlster. As namely, Mack Gwyer, Mack Mahun, the Orrelyes and others to deliuer their submissions to the Commissioners: so after the re∣ceiuing of them in,May. the Commissioners repaired to Du∣blin to the State, and so shortlie afterward from thence, they went towards Conacht, according to their Commis∣sion. Where they were to meet with Odonele, and others of his countrie, there to receiue them into submission, as they had those of Vlster.
Sir Iohn Norice being chiefe Commissioner with Sir Ieffrey Fenton, held notwithstanding his place as Gene∣rall of the Armie, and did carrie the same into Conacht, most part of which Armie, continued in the Prouince all the time of his being there: At his comming thither hee found all the countrie in rebellion, and in great miserie, yet most part of the best men in the countrie were readie to re∣ceiue her Maiesties gratious pardon, most of them did come in verie submissiuelie, and made offer to doe her Ma∣iestie good seruice. Sir Richard Bingham was growne somewhat grie∣uous amongst those of Conacht, and they would bitterlie complaine against him, alleaging that he was the cause of their reuolt: but that is their custome, and he must be a man of verie rare gouernment, that shall euerie way satisfie, or giue content to their rebellious affections. Vpon the countries complaint, Sir Richard Bingham was seque∣stred from the gouernment of that Prouince, & they were hearkened vnto in whatsoeuer they could alleadge against him: so gratious and iust is her Maiestie in euerie way, righting a nation,1596. which notwithstanding proue most dis∣loyall and rebellious. Nouember.Now during Sir Richard Binghams sequestration, Sir Iohn Norice had absolutelie the commaund of his said Prouince, and did (during his time) verie good ser∣uice: namelie, in bringing into her Maiesties obedience manie of the best gentlemen of the countrie, and continual∣lie praying, spoyling, and killing of the rest, who (being desperatelie obstinate) held themselues still in rebellion. This his good seruice so performed against those persons, was sometimes by the garisons, and sometimes by the Ar∣mie, as they marched through the countrie: insomuch, that at the Generals departure forth of the countrie, hee left it in good termes. So about December, hee was called from thence to Dublin, where (after some stay there) the State hauing notice, that the garison of Armah was like to be distressed
(if they were not presenlie releeued) the Generall was ap∣pointed to draw an Armie into the field, for the victualling of that place: but it should appeare he was authorised to treate with Tyrone, about the victualling of it. For the Armie being drawne together by Dundalk, and readie to march, there was such order taken, that he the said Tyrone should suffer it to be victualled by two or three Compa∣nies from the Newry: which was performed,Ianuarie. and so the Armie disposed into the garisons againe. It should seeme, that besides the victualling of that place, it was appointed that the said Tyrone should speake personallie with the Commissioners: for that after it was agreed, that he should suffer it to be victualled, he appoin∣ted a day to speake with the Commissioners, Sir George Bowser being then ioyned with the others in Commission. What their conference was when they met, I know not altogether: but the manner of their meeting was this. Tyrone hauing his Armie neere vnto the place ap∣pointed for the Parley, caused foure or fiue hundred of his shot, together with his best horse, to lie within a mile of the same his Armie, who were then encamped on the side of a hill nere Dundalk: there was sixe gentlemen of the Generals troupe of horse appointed to stand on the one side of the forde of a little riuer there, where the par∣lie was, and sixe others of Tyrones to stand on the further side with him in sight of the Commissioners: he seeing the Commissioners come downe from our Armie, began to come forward himselfe, not suffering any other to come with him, so saluting Sir Iohn Norice, told him he was glad to see him, being of his old acquaintance. Sir Iohn Norice likewise told him, that he would be glad to see him become a faithfull subiect: withal remembring him of the great fauours that her Maiestie had shewed him hereto∣fore, and that (yet) her Highnes was mercifullie enclined to haue him receiued into grace, if there were anie hope he would forsake his trecherous course, and become a faith∣full obedient subiect.
He answered with great protestations, that he was sorie for his offence, and that there was no Prince in the world, whom he did or would more honour and reue∣rence, then her Maiestie; neuer naming her Highnes, but with his hat off:Tyrones an∣swere. all which shewes of obedience in him, made many beléeue that he meant to become other∣wise, then since he hath proued himselfe. But those that haue liued long in that countrey amongst them, know by experience, that they are a people full of malecontent∣ment, inconstancie, rebellion and treason: desiring no o∣ther gouernment, but their owne rude barbarous and disordered kinde of life and manners, most horrible and odious to all that feare God, obey their Prince, and loue their Countrey. It was euer doubted by Sir Iohn Norice, and to be beleeued of euery one that know the Rebell Tyrone, that he neuer meant to be faithfull in his word: wherefore his trecherous delaies could not be imputed to any re∣misse course held by Sir Iohn Norice towards Tyrone. But there is no question,Sir Iohn No∣rices doubt of Tyrone. had Sir Iohn Norice liued, he would haue made it appeared vnto the world (as he hath done heretofore) that the zeale he did beare to doe her Maiestie and his Countrey seruice, was such, as that pri∣uate malice in crossing him shuld neuer haue had power, either to make him faile in the least point of his allea∣geance, or to burie any of his honourable intended en∣terprises. 1597.I haue heard him say my self, and so haue others which now liue in Ireland,Aprill. that if he could but hope, that the Rebel Tyrone would vnfainedly accept of her Maiesties grace and mercie towards him, and that he the said Sir Iohn Norice might haue béen the instrument to haue perswaded him to become a faithfull subiect, he would not haue cared what labour or paines he endured to be assured thereof. It was thought that the prosecuting of Feugh Mac Hugh was contrary to the Articles agreed vpon be∣tweene
the Commissioners and the Rebell Tyrone; and it should appeare that he disliked thereof. For after his pardon was sent him by Sir Edward Moore, and he in all things (to the shew of the world) readie to haue ac∣cepted thereof: on the sudden his pardon was brought backe, and he returned excéedingly discontented. After the time of this last treatie with Tyrone, which was in the latter end of Ianuary aforesaid, he remained vpon the borders of the North, still expecting direction how to procéed in those Northerne affaires, which continued from the moneth of Ianuary aforesaid 1596. vntill the moneth of May in the yéere 1597. following,1597. for the space of foure moneths.May. At which time he the said Generall Norice receiued aduertisement out of England, that the Lord Borowes should come ouer Deputie into Ireland: So vntil his comming the Generall kept himselfe vpon the borders of the North. It was thought at the Lord Borowes comming ouer, the old grudge would be renewed: but I think that mat∣ter was carried into England, before the Lord Borowes departed thence. For that after their méeting (contrarie to the expectation of many) Sir Iohn Norice caried him∣selfe very discréetly and respectiuely towards him: be∣sides that, he made knowne vnto him the state of the countrey at that present, together with his best counsell and aduice, for the reforming of the desperate estate that then the kingdome was left in. In so much as it was thought, before Sir Iohn Norice his going into his go∣uernment of Munster, that they were both good friends. But now vpon the Lord Borowes his receiuing of the Sword, Sir Iohn Norice was absolutely sequestred from all commaund, except that of the Prouince, and so sent downe into Munster, with an opinion to get leaue to passe into England: But that fell out contrary to his expectation. So he hast ouer three moneths, with a shew of his health, although inwardly he felt his owne griefe.Generall No∣rice concei∣ueth a griefe. And thus the cause of his conceiued griefe was the ha∣stening
of his death, and so iudged of by most men which knew the same. The manner of his death was answerable to his ho∣nourable life,The good Ge∣nerall Norice deceased in Ireland 1597. at his brothers house at May∣allo. and knowne to some of his seruants and followers, who now with great griefe must rew it. He died the third day of September 1597. at his Brother Sir Thomas Norices house in the towne of Mayallo in the Prouince of Munster within the kingdome of Ire∣land, at the 50. yéere of his age: hauing spent 26. of them (being the most flourishing time of his life) in her Maie∣sties seruice against her enemies, in the Netherlands, Spayne, Portugall, France, Britaine and Ireland, as parti∣cularly before and here finally is mentioned. The Honourable Lord Henry Norice Baron of Ry∣cot, father of the said Lord Generall, had fiue sons moe all Martiall men, vz. Master William his eldest sonne seruing in Ireland, and there deceased: Sir Edward his third sonne seruing lastly at Ostend, now liuing: Sir Henry Norice his fourth sonne, and Sir Thomas his fift sonne, both seruing lastly in Ireland, hurt and died there, but buried in England: and Master Maximilian his sixt and youngest sonne died in France. The honorable La∣die Margerie Mother to all these died at London 1599. The said honourable Lord Henry their father died at Rycot Anno 1601. Thus being intreated to set downe what I knew that passed vpon Sir Iohn Norices side, at his latter daies in Ireland; I haue (although not iournally) yet of my certaine knowledge truly and duly described all the notable occurrents that passed from his last comming out of Britaine, to the time of his death in Ireland, as be∣fore is said. All this seruice in Ireland was set down by Daniel Gyles, sometime Page, and after lately seruant to the said Generall Norice at his death, as aforesaid. FINIS.
