25966.5 34382642 12039
An excellent new Commedie, Intituled: The Conflict of Conscience. CONTAYNINGE, A most lamentable example, of the dole∣full desperation of a miserable world∣linge, termed, by the name of PHILOLOGVS, who forsooke the trueth of Gods Gospel, for feare of the losse of lyfe, & worldly goods. Compiled, by Nathaniell Woodes. Minister, in Norwich. ¶ The Actors names, deuided into six partes, most con∣uenient for such as be disposed, either to show this Comedie in priuate houses, or otherwise. Prologue.   Sathan.   Auarice.   Mathetes.   Tyrranye.   Suggestion.   Conscience. for one. Spirit. for one. Gisbertus. for one. Paphinitius.   Horror.   Nuntius.       Eusebius.       Hypocrisie.   Cardinal.       Theologus. for one. Cacon. for one. Philologus for one. AT LONDON Printed, by Richarde Bradocke dwelling in Aldermanburic, a little aboue the Conduict. Anno 1581.
The Prologue. VVHen whirling windes which blowe with blstng blast, Shall cease their course, and not the Ayre ooue. But still vnstirred it doth stand, it chaunceth at the last, To be infect, the trueth hereof euen day by day we prooue, For deepe within the Caues of earth, of force it doth behoe, Sith that no windes do come thereto, the Ayre out to beate, By standing stil the closed ayre, doth breede infections great. ¶ The streame or flood, which runneth vp and downe, Is far more sweete, then is the standing brooke. If long vnworne, you leaue a Cloake or Gowne, Moathes will it marre, vnlesse you thereto looke: Againe, if that vppon a shelfe, you place, or set a booke▪ And suffer it there still to stand, the wormes will soone it eate: A Knife likewise, in sheath layde vp, the rust will marre and freat. ¶ The good road horsse, if still at racke he stand, To resty ade will soone transformed be, If long vnld, you leaue a fertile lande, From strecke, and weede, no place wilbe left free: By these examples, and such like, approoue then well may wee, That idlenes more euills doth bring, into the minde of man, Then labour great in longer tyme, againe expell out can. ¶ Which thing our Author marking well, when weried was his minde, From reading graue and auncient workes, yet loth his time to loose, Bethought himselfe, to ease his heart, some recreance to fynde And as he mused in his minde, immediately arose, A straunge example done of late, which might as he suppose, Stirre vp their mindes to godlines, which shoulde it see or heare, And therefore humbly doth you pray, to geue attentiue care. ¶ The argument or ground wheron our Author chefely stayed, Is (sure) a Hystory straunge and true, to many men well knowne, Of one through loue of worldly wealth, and feare of death dismaide, Because he would his lyfe and goods, haue kept still as his owne, From state of grace wherein he stoode, was almost ouerthrowne: So that he had no power at all, in heart firme fayth to haue, Tyll at the last, God chaungd his mynde his mercies for to craue.
¶ And here, our Author, thought it meete, the true name to omit, And at this time▪ imagine him PHILOLOGVS to be, First, for because▪ a Comedie, will hardly him permit, The vices of one priuate man, to touch particulerly, Againe, nowe shall it stirre them more, who shall it heare or see, For if this worldling had ben namde, we wold straight deeme in minde, That all by him then spoken were, our selues we would not finde. ¶ But syth PHILOLOGVS is nought else, but one that loues to talke, And common of the worde of God, but hath no further care, According as it teacheth them, in Gods feare for to walke, If that we practise this in deede, PHILOLOGI we are, And so by his deserued fault, we may in time beware, Nowe, if as Author first it meant, you heare it with this gayne, In good behalfe he will esteeme, that he bestowed his payne. ¶ And for because we see by proofe, that men do soone forget, Those thinges for which to call them by, no name at all they knowe, Our Author for to helpe short wittes, did thinke it very meete, Some name for this his Comedy, in preface for to showe, Nowe names to natures must agree, as euery man do knowe, A fitter name he could in mynde, no where excogitate, Then, THE CONFLICT OF CONSCIENCE, the same to nominate. A cruell Conflict certainly, where Conscience takes the foyle, And is constrained by the flesh, to yelde to deadly sinne, Whereby the grace and loue of God, from him, his sinne doeth spoyle, Then (wretch accurst) small power hath, repentance to beginne, This Hystorie here, example showes, of one fast wrapt therein, As in discourse before your eyes, shall plainely prooued be, Yet (at the last) God him restoarde, euen of his mercie free. ¶ And though the Historie of it selfe, be too too, dolorus, And would constraine a man with teares of blood, his cheekes to wett, Yet to refresh the myndes of them that be the Auditors, Our Author intermixed hath, in places fitt and meete, Some honest mirth, yet alwaies ware, DECORVM, to exceede: But list, I heare the players prest, in presence foorth to come, I therefore cease, and take my leaue, my Message I haue done. Exit. FINIS.
The Conflict of Conscience. Acte first. Sceane 1. SATHAN. HIgh time it is for mée to stirre about, And doo my best, my kingdom to maintaine, For why? I sée of enemies a rought: Which all my lawes, and Statutes doo disdaine: Against my state, d fight and▪ striue amaine. Whome, in time if I doo not dissipate, I shall repent it, when it is to late. My mortall foe, the Carpenters poore sonne, Against my Children, the Pharises I meane, Vpbraiding them, did vse this comparison, As in the storie of his lyfe, may be séene, There was a man, which had a vinyard greene: Who letting it to husbandmen vnkinde, In steade of fruite, vnthankfulnesse did finde. So that his Seruantes, firstly they did beate, His Sonne lykewise, they afterward did kill, And héere vpon that man in furie great: Did souldiers send, these Husbandmen to spill, Their Towue to burne, he did them also will. But out alas, alas, for woe I crie, To vse the same, farre iuster cause haue I, For where the kingdome, of this worlde is myne, And his, on whom I will the same bestow, As Prince héereof, I did my selfe assigne: My darling deare, whose faithfull liue I know, Shall neuer faile from mée, but daylie flow: But who that is: perhaps some man may doubt. I will therfore in bréefe; purtraict and paint him out. The mortall man by natures rule is bound That Child to fauour, more then all the rest, Which to himselfe in face, is lykest found: So that he shall with all his goodes be blest: Euen so doo I estéeme and lyke him best, Which doeth most neare my dealyngs imitate,
And doth pursue Gods lawes, with deadly hate. As therefore I, when once in Angels state, I was, did thinke my selfe, with God as mate to bée, So doeth my sonne himselfe, now eleuate, Aboue mans nature, in rule and dignitie. So that in terris Deus sum, saith he: In earth I am a God, with sinnes for to dispence, And for rewardes, I will forgiue eche manet of offence. I saide to Eue, tush, tush, thou shalt not die, But rather shalt as God, know euerie thing: My sonne likewise, to maintaine Idolatrie, Saith tush what hurt can carued Idols bring? Dispise this law of God, the heauenly King: And set them in the Churche, for men thereon to looke, An Idoll doth much good, it is a laymans booke. Nemboth that Tyrant, fearing Gods hande, By mee was perswaded to builde vp high Babell: Whereby he presumed, Gods wrath to withstande: So hath my Boy, deuised very well, Many prety toyes, to kéepe mens soule from hell: Liue they neuer so euill héere, and wickedly, As Masses, trentalles, Pardons, and Scala coeli. I egged on Pharao of Egpt the King, The Israelites to kill, so soone as they were borne: My darling likewise, doeth the selfe same thing: And therefore cause Kinges, and Princes to be sworne, That with might and maine, they shal kéepe vs his horn. And shall destroy with fire, Are and sworde, Such as against him, shall speake but one worde. And euen as I was some what to slow, So that not withstanding, the Isralites did augment: So for lack of murthering Gods people doo grow, And dayly increase, at this time present: Which my sonne shall feele incontinent. Yet an other practise, this euill to withstand, He learned of , which now he takes in hand. For when as Moses, I might not destroy,
Because that he was of the Lord appointed, To bring the people from thraldome to ioy: I did not cease, whilst I had inuented, An other meanes to haue him preuented: By accompting himselfe the sonne of Pharao, To make him loth Egipt to forgoe. The same aduise I also attempted, Against the sonne of God, when he was incarnate, Hoping there by, to haue him relented: And for promotion sake, himselfe to prostrate, Before my féete when I did demonstrate, The whole worlde vnto him, and all the glory, As it is recorded in Matheus Historye. So hath the Pope, who is my darlyng deare, My eldest boy, in whom I doo delight: Least he should fall, which thing he greatly feare, Out of his Seat, of honor pompe and might, Hath got to him, on his behalfe to fight: Two Champions stout, of which the one is Auarice, The other is called Tyrrannicall practise. For as I saide, although I claime by right, The kingdome of this earthly world so rounde: And in my stead to rule with force and might, I haue assigned the Pope, whose match I no wher found, His hart with loue, to mée, so much abounde: Yet diuers men of late, of mallice most vnkinde, Do study to displace my son, some way warde meanes to find Wherfore I maruell much, what cause of let there is, That hetherto, they haue not their office put in vre, I will go sée, for why, I feare that somwhat is amis▪ If not, to raunge abroad, the worlde, I will them straight procure, But néedes they must, haue one to help, mens harts for to allure: Vnto their traine, who that should bée, I cannot yet espie, No méeter match I can finde out, then is Hypocrisie. Who can full well in time and place, dissemble eithers parte, No man shall easely perceiue, with which side he tooth beare. But when once fauour he hath got, and credit in mans hart:
He will not slack in mine , I do  nothing feare: But time doth runne, too fast away, for me to arie hre, For none will be enamoured, of my shape I do know, I will therfore, myne impes  out, from hell their shapes to show. Exit. Acte. fyrst. Sceane. 2: MATHETES. PHILOLOGVS. MY mynde doeth thirst deare friende Philologus, Of former talke to make a finall ende: And where before we n for to discus, The cause why God doth such afflins sende, Into his Church, you would some more time spende. In the same cause, that thereby you might learne, Betwixt the wrath and ioue of God, a right for to discerne. Philologus. With right good will, to your request rin I doo consent, As well because, as I perceiue,  take therein delight, As also for because, it is most chiefely pertinent, Vnto mine office, to instruct, and teache eche Christian wight, True godlynesse, and shew to them, the path that leadeth right, Vnto Gods kingdome, where we shall, inherite our saluation, Geuen vnto vs from God, by Christ our true propitiation. But that a better ordered course, her n we may obserue, And may directly to the first, apply that which insue, To speake that hath bene saide, before, I wel a time reserue: And so procéede, from whence we left, by course and order due, Vnto the ende: At first therfore, you did lament and rue, The miserie of these our daies, and great calamytie, Which those sustaine, who dare gansay, the Romish Hypocrisie. Mathetes. I haue iust cause, as hath eche Christian hart, To waile and weepe, to shed out teares of bloud: When as I call to minde, the torments and the smart, Which those haue borne, who honest be and good, For nought els, but because, their errors they withstood: Yet ioyed I much, to see how paciently, They boare the crose of Christ, with constancie.
Philologus. So many of vs, as into one bodye bée, Incorporate, wherof Christ is the liuely heade, As members of our bodies which wée sée: With ioyntes of loue together bee conioyned: And must néedes suffer, vnlesse that they be dead: Some part of griefe in mynde which other féele, In bodie though not so much by a great deale. Wherfore by this it is most apparent, That those two into one bodie are not vnyted, Of the which, the one doth suffer, the other doth forment: And in the woundes of his Brother is delighted: Now which is Christes bodie, may easely be decided: For the Lambe is deuonred of the Wolfe alway, Not the Wolfe of the Lambe as Chrisostom doth say. Agayne of vnrighteous Cayne murthered was Abell, By whom the Church of God was figured: Isaac lykewise was persecuted of Ismaell,? As in the Booke of Genesis is mencioned: Israell of Pharao was also terrifyed, Dauid the Sainct, was afflicted by his Sonne, And put from his kingdome I meane by Absolon. Elias the Thesbit, for feare of Iezabell, Did fly to Horeb, and hid him in a Caue: Micheas the Prophet, as the Story dooth tell, Did hardly his lyfe from Baalles Priests saue: Ieremy of that sawce tasted haue: So did Esay, Daniell, and the Children thrée, And thousandes more, which in stories we may sée. Mathetes. In the new Testament, we may also réede, That our Sauiour Christ, euen in his Infancy, Of Herod the King might stand in great dread: Who sought to destroy him, such was his insolency: Afterward of the Pharises, he did with constancy, Suffer shamefull death, his Apostles also, For testimonie of the trueth, did their crosses vnder go.
Philologus. Iames vnder Herod, was headed with the Sworde, The rest of the Apostles, did suffer much turmoyle: Good Paul was murthered by Nero his worde: Domitian deuised a Barrell full of Oyle, The body of Iohn the Euangelist to boile: The Pope at this instant sondrie tormentes procure, For such as by Gods holy word will indure. By these former stories, two thinges we may learne, And profytably recorde in our remembraunce: The fyrst is Gods Church from the Diuels to discerne: The second to marke, what manyfest resistaunce, The Trueth of God hath, and what incombraunce: It bringeth vpon them that will it professe, Wherfore, they must arme them selues, to suffer distresse. Mathetes. It is no new thing, I doo now perceiue, That Christes Church doo suffer tribulation, But that the same crosse I might better receiue: I request you to shew me for my consolation: What is the cause, by your estimation: That God doth suffer, his people be in thrall▪ Yet helpe them so soone as they to him call. Philologus. The chiefest thing, which might vs cause or moue, With constant mindes, Christes crosse for to sustaine: Is to conceiue of Heauen, a faithfull loue: Wherto we may not come, as Paul doth proue it plaine: Vnlesse with Christ we suffer, that with him we may raine: Againe sith that it is our heauenly Fathers will, By worldly woes our carnall lusts to kill. Moreouer, we do vse to loath that thing we alway haue, And doo delight the more in that which mostly we doe want, Affliction vrgeth vs also, more earnestly to craue: And when we once reléeued be, true faith in vs it plant, So that to call in eche distresse on God we will not faint:
For trouble bring forth pacience, from pacience dooth insue Experience, from experience Hope, of health the ankor true. Againe, oftimes, God doth prouide, affliction for our gaine, As Iob who after losse of goodes, had twice so much therefore: Sometime affliction is a meanes, to honor to attaine: As you may sée, if Iosephes lyfe, you set your eyes before: Continually it doth vs warne, from sinning any more: When as we sée the iudgements iust, which God our heauenly king, Vpon offenders héere in earth, for their offences bringe. Sometime God doth it vs to proue, if constant we will be. As he did vnto Abraham: somtime his whole intent, Is to declare his heauenly might, as in Iohn we may sée: When the Disciples did aske Christ, why God the blindnesse sent Vnto that man that was borne blinde? to whom incontinent, Christ saide: neither for Parentes sinnes, nor for his owne offence, Was he borne blinde, but that God might shew his magnificence. Mathetes. This is the summe of all your talke, if that I gesse a right, That God doth punnish his electt to kéepe their faith in vre, Or least that if continuall ease, and rest enioy they might: God to forget through hautinesse, fraile nature should procure: Or els by feeling punishment, our sinnes for to abiure: Or els to proue our constancy, or lastly that we may, Be instruments in whom his might, God may abroad display. Now must I néedes confesse, to you my former ignoraunce, Which knew no cause at all, why God should trouble his elect, But thought afflictions all, to be rewardes for our offence: And to procéede from wrathfull Iudge, did alway it susped: As doe the common sort of men, who will straightway direct And point their fingers at such men, as God doth chastice héere, Estéeming them by iust desert, their punishment to beare. Philologus. Such is the nature of mankind, himselfe to iustifye, And to condemne all other men, wheras we ought of right: Accuse our selues especiall, and God to magnfie: Who in his mercy doth vs spare, whereas he also might, Sith that we doo the selfe same things, with like plagues vs requight
Which thing our Sauiour Christ doth teach, as testifyeth Luke, The thirtéenth Chapter, where he dooth vaine glorious men rebuke: But for this time let this suffice, now lets homeward goe, And further talke in priuat place, if néede be, we will haue: Mathetes. With right good will, I will attend on you, your house vnto: Or els goe you with mée to mine, the longer iourney saue: For it is now high dinner time, my stomack meat doth craue: Philologus. I am soone bidden to my friende, come on let vs departe, Mathetes. Goe you before, and I will come behinde with all my harte. Acte second. Sceane fyrst. HYPOCRISIE. GOD spéede you all, that be of Gods beléefe, The mightie Iehouah protect you from ill: I beséeche the lyuing God, that he would giue, To ech of you present, a harty good will, With flesh to contende, your lust for to kyll: That by the aide of spyrituall assistance, You may subdue your carnall concupisence. God graunt you all for his mercyes sake, The lyght of his word to your hartes ioy: I humbly beséeche him a confusion to make Of erronious sectes, whiche might you annoy: Earnestly requiring eche one to imploye, His whole indeuour Gods word to maintaine, And from straunge doctrine your hartes to refraine. Graunt Lord I pray thée, such preachers to bée, In thy congregation, thy people to learne: As may for Conscience sake, and of méere sinceritie, Being able twixt Corne and Cockle to discerne. Apply their studie to replenish the Berne. That is thy Church, by their doctrines increase,
And make many heires of thine eternall peace. Amen▪ Amen. But soft let mée sée, who doth mée aspect, First sluggish Saturn of nature so colde: Being placed in Tauro, my beames doo reiect, And Luna in Cncro in sextile he behould: I will the effect héereafter vnfoulde. Now Iupiter the gentil▪ of temperature meane, Poore Mercury the turnte, hée forske cleane. Now murthering Mars retrogarde in Libra, With amiable tryne, apply to my beame, And splendant Sol the ruler of the day: After his Eclips to Iupiter will leane, The Goddesse of pleasure, Dame Venus I meane, To me her poore seruaunt seme friendly to be, So also doth Luna otherwise called Phebe. But now I speake mischeuously, I would say, in a mistery Wherfore to interpret it, I holde it best done, For heere be a good sort I beléeue in this company: That know not my meanyng, as this man for one, What? blush not at it, you are not alone: Héere is an other that know not my mynde, Nor hée in my wordes, great sauour can fynd. The Planet Mercurius, is neither whot nor colde, Neither good nor yet verie bad of his owne nature, But doth alter his qualytie, with them which doo holde: Any friendly aspect to him, euen so I assure: We Mercurialists I meane Hypocrits cannot long endure In one condicion, but doo alter our mynde, To theirs that talke with vs, thereby friendship to fynde. The litle Camelyon by Nature can chaunge Her selfe, to that colour, the which she beholde: Why should it then to any séeme straunge? That we d thus alter, why are we controulde? Sith onely the rule of nature we holde: We séeke to please all men, yet most doo vs hate, And we are rewarded for friendship debate. Saturnus is enuious, how then can hée leue?
Adulation or Hipocrisie to him most contrarie, The Iouists being good d looke high aboue: And doo not regard the rest of the companye: Now Mars being retrogard, foretelleth miserie: To tyrannicall practise, to happen eftsoone, As shalbe apparant before all be done. Which Tirannie with flatterie is easely pacifyed, Wheras Tom tell troth shall féele of his Sword, So that with such men is fully verifyed, That olde said saw, and common by word: Obsequium amicos, by flateries friends are prepared: But veritas ôdium parit, as commonly is séene, For speaking the trueth, many hated haue béene. By Sol vnderstand, Popish principalytie, With whom full highly I am entertained, But being eclipsed shall shew forth his qualytie: Then shall Hipocrisie be vtterly disdained: Whose wretched exile though greatly complayned: And wept for of many, shalbe without hope, That in such pompe shall euer be Pope. By Venns the riotus, by Luna the variable, Betwixt whom and Mercury no variance can fall, For they which in wordes be most vnstable: Would be thought faithfull, and the riotous liberall: So that Hipocrisie their doings cloake shall: But whist not a word, for yonder come some, step aside. While I know what they are, I will be dombe. Acte second. Sceane. 2. TIRANNY. AVARICE. PVt mée before for I wyll shift for one, push Auarice backwarde So long as strength remaineth in this Arme, And pluck vp thy hart thou faint harted mome, As long as I lyue, thou shalt take no harme: Such as controll vs, I will their tongues charme,
By Fire or sword or other like torment, So that euer they did it they shall it repent. Hast thou forgotten what sathan did saye, That the K. Hipocrisy our doings should hide, HYP. Ambo So that vnder his Cloake our partes we should playe, And of the rude people should neuer be spide, Or if the worst should happ or betide, That I by Tiranny should both you defend. Agaynst such as mischife to you should pretend. Auarice. Indéed such woords our Belsire did speake, HYP. tut Fa∣ther Iotsam. Which being remembred doth make my heart glad, But yet one thing my courage doth breake, And when I thinke of it, it makes me full sad, I meane the euil lucke which Hipocrisy had, When he was expelled out of this land For then with me the matter euill did stand. For I by him so shadowed was from light, HYP. a litle  to hide so great a lub∣ber. That almost no man could me out espye, But he being gon to euery mans sight, I was apparent ech man did descrye, My pilling and poling so that glad was I, From my nature to cease a thing most merueilous, And liue in secret the tyme was so daungerous. Tyranny. Tush Auarice thou fearest a thing that is vayne, HYP. he fear eth nothīg he thinketh the hangman is dead. HYP. he can play too parts the foole and the K. For by me alone both you shalbe stayed, And if thou marke well thou shalt perceiue playne, That if I Tyranny my parte had well played, And from killing of Heretikes my hand had not stayed, They had neuer growen to such a great rowt, Neither should haue bene able to haue banisht him out: But sero sapiunt Phriges, at length I will take héede, And with bloud enough this euill will preuent, HIP. a popish policye. For if I here of any that in word or in déed, Yea if it be possible to knowe their intent, If I can proue that in thought they it ment:
To impaire our estates, no prayer shall serue, HYP. Antichir∣stian charitie. But will paie them their hire, as eche one deserue. Auarice. The Fish once taken, and scaped from baight, Will euer heareafter, be ware of the hooke, Such as vse hunting will spie the Hare straight, Though other discerne her not, yet on her shall looke: Againe, the learned can read in a Booke, Though the vnskilfull eeing equall with them, Cannot discerne an F from an M. So those which haue tasted, the fruite that we beare And finde it so sower, will not vs implant: Tyrannye. Tush Auarice, I warrant thée thou néest not feare, Vtilitas facit esse Deos In the cleargy I know, no friends we shal want: Which for hope of gaine, the trueth will recant: And giue them selues wholy to set out Hypocrisie, Being egd on with Auarice, and defended by Tiranny. Auarice. Wel may the Clergie on our side holde, For they by vs no small gaine did reape, But all the temporaltie, I dare be boulde, To venture in wager of Golde a good heape, At our prefermentes will mourne waile and wéepe, Tyranny. Though indéede no iust cause of ioy they can finde, Yet for feare of my sword, they will alter their minde. HYP. This is sharp argu∣mentes. But I maruell much, where Hypocrisie is, Mée think it is long since, from vs he did goe, Auarice. I doubt that of his purpose he misse: And therefore hath hanged him selfe for woe. HYP. Praye for your selfe. How sayst thou Tyranny doest not thinke so In faith if I thought that he might bée spared, HYP. your kind hart shal st me a couple of rus∣shes. And we haue our purpose beshrew mée if I cared.
Tyranny. Saw you euer the lyke of this doubting doult? HYP. Not I the lyke of such a cut∣hrote Coult. It gréeues mée to heare how faint harted he is, A litle would cause me to kill thee, thou Ascoulte: See, see, for woe he is lyke for to pisse: To giue an attempt, what a fellow were this? But this is the good that commeth of Couetousnesse He liueth alway in feare to loose his riches. Againe, marke how he regardeth the death of his friend So he hath his purpose, he cares for no moe, A perfect patterne of a couetous mynd, Which neither estéemeth his friend nor his foe, But rather Auarice might I haue saides: Who if he were gone, my selfe could defende, Where thou by his absence wert soone at an eude. Acte second. Sceane. 3. HYPOCRISIS. TIRANNY. AVARICE. O Louing Father and mercifull God, We through our sinnes thy punishment deserue, And haue prouoked to beat with thy rod: We stubborne Children, which from thée doo swerue: We loathed thy worde, but now we shall sterue: For Hypocrisie is placed againe in this lande, And thy true Gospell as exile doth stande. This is thy iust iudgement for our offence, Who hauyng the light, in darknesse did straie, But now if thou wouldest of thy fatherly benuolence: Thy purposed iudgements in wrath for to stay: The part of the prodigall Sonne we would play: And with bitter teares before thée would fall, And in true repentaunce for mercy would call. In our prosperitie we woulde not regard, The wordes of the Preachers, who threatned the same, But flattering our selues, thought yu wouldest haue spared
Vs in thy mercy, and neuer vs blame: But so much prouoked thée, by blasphemynge thy name: Indeeds to deny, that in words we maye, That from thy Iustice thou couldst not restraine. So that Romish Pharao a Tirant most cruell, Hath brought vs againe into captiuytie, And instead of the pure  of thy Gospell: Hath poysoned our soules with iuelish Hypocrisie: Vnable to maintaine it, but by murthering Tiranny: Séeking rather the , then the health of the Shéepe, Which are appointed for him for to kéepe. Tyranny. Loe Auarice, harke what a T is héere, Against our holy Father this  to vse: HYP. he spe∣keth to you ra. I might haue harde more if I would him forbeare: But for gréefe my ea  to heare him abuse His tongue in this maner: wherfore no excuse, Shall purchase fauour but that with all speede, By Sword I will render, to him his due méede. Wherfore, thou ant, wh thou hast the, Pray to the Saintes, thy spokesmen to bée, That at Gods hand, from this  great : By their intercession, thou may be et frée: Auarice. Nay hearest thou  be  by : First cut of his head, and then let him pray, So shall he be sure, vs not to ray. Hypocrisie. O wicked Tyranny, thou  of the Deuill, Too ioyfyll tidinges to thee haue I brought, For now thou are , to prae all euill: Tiranny. Marry thou shalt not geue  thy seruice for nought: But for thy paines to please thée I thought. Hypocrisie. Thou art nothing so ready to doo any good, As thou art to she poore ents bloud.
Auarice. Nay Tyranny suffer this raskall to prae, HYP. on your face syr. Till some man come by, and then he is gone▪ Then wilt thou repent it, when it is to late▪ Dispatch him therfore, while we are alone▪ Hypocrisie. Well may the Couetous be lykened to a dro, Which of the Bées labours will spe and ast make▪ And yet to get hony, no labour will ake. The Coueitous lykewise from poore men erf, Their gaines to encrease, they onely doo séeke: And so they may haue it of them a great sorte: What meanes they vse for , they rare not  séeke: Yet will these mysers scarce once a wéeke: Haue one good meale, at their owne table. So by Auarice, to help them selues they are vnable. Auarice to a Fire may well compared ée, To the which the more you adde, he more still it crae▪ So lykewise the Couetous minde the doo sée: Though riches abound, doo wih still more to haue▪ And to be short, your reerences to saue: To a filthy Swyne, such mysers are comparable, Which while they be dead are nothing profyable. Auarice. Nay farewell Tyranny, I came hither too soone, I perceiue already, I am to well knowne: I were not best in their lawes for o come: Vnlesse I were willing to be cleane ouerthrowne: Tyranny. By the preaching of Gods word, at this mischife is grow n: Which if Hypocrisie might happely expell, All we in safetie and pleasure might dwell. Stay therefore, while from Hypocrisie we beare, Auarice. Dispatch then this Marchant, least our counsell he tell, Hypocrisie. I am content for Gods cause, this crosse for to beare.
Tyranny. It is best killyng him, now his mynde is set well. Hypocrisie. Your scoffing and mocking God séeth eche deal: Tyranny. Yea, doest thou persist, vs still thus to check, Thy speach I will hinder, by cutting of thy neck. Hypocrisie. Nay, holde thy hand Cadby, thou hast kild mée enough What neuer the sooner for a mery worde? I meant not good earnest, to your maship I vow: I dyd but iest, and spake but in boord: Therfore of friendship, put vp agayne thy sword: Tyranny. Nay caytiffe presume not, that thou shalt goe scotfrée, Therfore hold still and I will soone dispatch thée. Hypocrisie. What? I pray thée Tyranny know fyrst who I am, Ye purblinded fooles, doo your lyps blinde your eyes? Why, I was in place long before you came: But you could not sée the wood for the trées: But in faith father Auarice I will pay you your fées: For the great goodwill which you to mee beare, HYP. figh∣teth. And in time wyll requight it againe doo not feare. Auarice. Content your selfe, good master Hypocrisie. The wordes which I spake I spake vnaware. Tyranny. Holde thy hand Hypocrisie, I pray thee hartely: So lyke a mad man with thy friendes doo not fare. Hypocrisie. For nether of you both, a pin doo I care: Goe shake your eares both, like slaues as you bee, And looke not in your neede to be holpen of mee. Tyranny. What Master Hypocrisie, will you take snuffe so soone?
Marry then you had néeede to be kept very warme, Auarice. I sweare to your maistership, by the men in the Moone, That to your person I entended no harme: Hypocrisie. But that I am wearie, I would both your tongs charme See how to my face they do mée deride, I will not therfore in your companies abide. Auarice. Why master Hipocrisie, what would you that I doo? For my offence, of mercie I you praye. Hypocrisie. With thée I am at one, but of that Marchant to, I looke for some amendes, or els I will away: Tyrannye. The presumptuous fooles parte héerein thou doest play, What? of thy Master, dooest thou looke for obaysance, I will not once intreate thée, if thou wilt get thée hence. Hypocrisie. Nimia familiaritas parit contemptum, The olde prouerbe by mée is verefied, By too much famyliaritie contemned be some: Euen so at this present to mée it betide: For of long time Hypocrisie hath ruled as guide: While now of later daies, through Heretikes resistaunce I retained Tyranny to yéeld mée asistaunce. But through ouer much lenytie, he thinks himself check mate With mée his good patron, Master Hypocrisie. Tyranny. Lyst I pray thée Auarice, how this rascall can prate: And with mée Tyranny doth chalenge equalytie: Where hee of himselfe hath neither strength nor hability But thou to him riches, and I strength doo giue, So that I must be his master, though it both him gréeue. Auarice. Two Dogges oftentimes one bone would faine catch,
But yet the thirde doo both them deceiue, Euen so Hypocrisie for the preheminence dooth snatch: Which Tiranny gapes for, ye may, perceiue: But I must obtaine it, for of mée they retaine All kinde of riches, their states to mayntaine, To yeelde to mee therfore they must be both faine. Hypocrisie. Was Iudas Christes master, because he ba the purs Nay rather of all, he was least regarded, Haue not men of honor, Stewards to disburse: All such summes of mony, wherwith they be charged: Yet aboue their maister their honor is not enlarged: Euen so, thee Auarice, my Steward I account, To pay that whereto my charges amount. And to thee Tirranny, this one word I obiect, Whether was Ioab or Dauid the King? When Ioab was glad his ease to reiect: The Ammonyts in Rabah, to confusion to bring: When Dauid with Bethseba at home was sleeping: Was not Ioab his seruant, in warfare to fight, And so art thou mine, mine enimies to quight. Tiranny. Nay then at the hole god giue you good night: Shall Tiranny to Hypocrisie in any point yéelde? Hypoctisie. With this one word I will vanquish thée quight: That thou shalt be glad to giue mée the feelde: The ende to be preferred all learned men wild: Sith therfore Hypocrisie of Tiranny is ende, I must haue the preferment, for which I contende. Tiranny. I will make you both graunt that I am the chiefe, AVA. indede you say troth▪ Or els with my sword your sides I will pearce, Hypocrisie. That were sharp reasonyng indéede, with a mischiefe: Auarice. I wyll yéelde him my right if that hée be so fearce,
Hypocrysie. The nature of Hypocrites, héerein we rehearce: Which being conuinced by the text of Gods worde, The ende of their spwting is Fyre and Sword. But if you wil néeds be chiefe, God spéed wel ye plough I will be none that shall follow your traine, For if I should, I know well inough: That to fly the Countrie, we all should be faine, Then were my labour done but in vaine, You know not so much as I doo Tiranny, Therfore I aduise you be ruled by mee. Tiranny. Inter amicos omnia sunt communia they say, Among friendes there is reconed no properti▪ But what the one hath of his owne, thother, ma Haue the vse of the same,  his owne lybertie: Euen so among vs it is of a suretie: For what the one hath of his owne proper right, It is thine to vse by day or by night. Auarice. Indéede you say trueth▪ the ende is worth all, HYP. he hath learned lo∣ges▪ Such thinges as to get the ende are referred, And by this reason to you I proue shall: That I before Hypocrisie must be preferred: The conclusion of my reason is this inserred: Sith Hypocrisie was inuented to augment priuat gaue, I am the end of Hypocrisie, this is plaine. Hypocisie. Actum est de Amicitia, the bargen is dispatched, And we two in friendship, are vnited as one. Auarice. In the same knot, with you let mée also be matched▪ And of mony I warrant you, you shall want none: Hypocrisie. I agrée, what say you? shall he be one? Tyran. I iudge him needefull in our company to bee: HYP frien∣ship for ga And therfore, for my part, he is welcome to mee. Let vs now spéedely on our businesse attende,
And labour eche one to bring it about. Hypocrisie. That is already by mée brought to ende: So that of your preferment you néede not to doubt: And my comming hether was to finde you out: That at my elbow you might be in readinesse, To help if néede were in this waightie businesse. To tell you the Storie it were but to tedious, How the Pope and I together haue deuised, Firstly to inuegle the people relygious: For gréedinesse of gaine, who will be sooe prezed: And for feare least héereaster they should be dispised: Of their owne frée will, will maintaine Hypocrisie So that Auarice alone, shall conquere the Cleargie. Now of the chiefest of his carnall Cardinals, He doth appoint certaine, and giue them authoritie, To ride abrode in their pontificalles: To sée if with Auarice, they may winne the Layitie: If not, then to threaten them with open Tyranny: Whereby doubt not but many will forsake, The trueth of the Gospell, and our parties take. Tyranny. This deuice is praise worthy, how saist thou Auarice? Auarice. I lyke it well if it were put in bre, Yet litle gaine to mée, shall this whole practise: More then I had before time procure: Hypocrisie. The Legates are ready to ride I am sure: Wherfore we had néede to make no small delaye, They stay for my comming alone, I dare say, Howbeit the Layitie would greatly mislike, If they should know all our purpose and intent, Yea and perhaps some meanes they would séeke: Our forsaide businesse in time to preuent: Tyranny. Will you then be ruled by my arbiterment?
Least the people should sodenly dissolue franquyllytie, For the Legates defence, let hym vse me Tyranny. Hypocrisie. Herein your counsell is not muche vnwise, Saue that in one thing, we had néede to beware, Least you be knowen, we wyll you disguise, And some graue Apparell for you wyll prepare, But your name Tyranny, I feare all wyll marre: Let me alone, and I wyll inuent, A name to your nature, whiche shalbe conuenient: Zeale shall your name be, how lyke you by that? And therfore, in office, you must deale zealously: Tyranny. Let me alone, I wyll pay them home pat: Though they call me Zeale, they shall  me Tyrranny Hypocrisie. Loe, here is a Garment, come dresse you handsomly: I mary (quoth he) I lyke this very well: Now, to the Deuyls Grace, you may séeme to geue coūsell Now must I apply al my Inuention, That I may deuice Auarice to hide: Thy name shalbe called Carefull prouision And euery man for his Hohold may lawfully prouide, Thus shalt thou go cloaked, and neuer be spide: Auarice. Thy counsell Hipocrisie, I very well allow, And will recompence thée, if euer I know how. Tirranny. Now, on a boon voyage, let vs depart, For I well lothe any time to delaye, Hypocrisie. Nay, yet in signe of a mery hart, Let vs singe before we go awaye. Auarice. I am content, begyn I you pray, But to singe the Treble, we must néedes haue one.
Hypocrisie. If you say so, let it euen alone. Exeunt. Acte thyrde. Sceane. 1. PHILOLOGVS. TOO true (alas) too true I say, was our Diuination, The whiche Mathaetes did foresée, when last we were in place, For now (in deede) we féele the smart and horrible veration, Whiche Romysh power vnto vs did threaten and manace: Wherfore, great néede we haue, to call to God alway for grace: For féeble flesh is farre too weake, those paynes to vndergo: The whiche all they that feare the Lord, are now appointed too. The Legate from the Pope of Roome, is come into our Coastes, Who doth the Sainctes of God eche where, with Tiranny oppresse, And in the same most gloryously himselfe he vawnt and boast, The more one mourneth vnto him, he pittieth the lesse, Out of his cruell Tyranny, the Lorde of Heauen me blesse: For hitherto, in blessed state, my whole lyfe I haue spent: With health of body, wealth in Goddes, and minde alway content. Besides, of friendes, I haue great store, who do me firmely loue, A faithfull wife and children fayre, of wooddes and pasture store, And diuers other thinges, whiche I haue got for my behoofe, Whiche nowe to be depraued off, would grieue my hart full sore: And if I come once in their clawes, I shall get out no more. Vnlesse I wyll renounce my fayth, and so their minde fulfyll, Whiche if I do, without all doubt, my soule for ay I spyll. For sith I haue receiued once the first fruictes of my faith, And haue begon to ronne the course, that leadeth to saluation, If in the midst therof, I stay or cease, the Scripture sayth, It booteth not that I began with so good preparation, But rather, maketh muche the more, vnto my condempnation: For he alone shall haue the Palme, whiche to the ende doth ronne, And he which plucks his hand frō Plough, in Heauē shal neuer com. Those Labourers which hyred were in Vineard for to moyle, And had their Peny for their payne, they taried all whyle night,
For if they ceassed had, when Sunne their flesh with h did droyse, And had departed from their worke, they should haue lost by right, Their wages Peny: I like wise, shalbe depriued qaight Of that same Crowne, the whiche I haue in fayth longe looked for, But for this time, I wyll depart, I dare here say no more. Exit. Acte thyrde. Sceane. 2. HYPOCRISIE. HA, ha, ha, mary now the Game beginne, Hypocrisie throughout this Realwe is had in admiration, And by my meanes, both Auarice and Tirranny crept in, Who in short space, wyll make men tonne the way to desolation, What did I say? my tongue dyd tryp, I should say, consol ation. For now (forsooth) the Clergie must into my bosome créepe, Or els, they know not, by what meanes, them selues alyue to kéepe. On the other side, the Laietie, be they eyther riche or poore, If riche then Auarice strangle them, because they wyll  loose The worldly wealth▪ or els we haue one subtile practise more, That is, that sensuall Suggestion, their outwarde man shall pose, Who can full finely in eche cause, his minde to them disclose, But if that neither of these twayne, can to my trayne them wynde, Then, at his Cue (to play his parte, doth Tiranny begynne. As for the poore knaues, suche a one as this is, We do not esteeme hym, but make short adoo, If he, wyll not come on, we doo hym not mysse, But to the Pot, he is sure to goe: Tirranny deales with hym and no moe. But I meruayle, what doth hym from hence so longe stay? Sooner named, sooner cūme, as cōmon Prouerbes say. Sep aside. Acte. thyrde. Sceane. 3: TYRRANNY, AVARICE. HYPOCRYSIE. BY his woundes, I feare nott, but it is cocke sure now, H e hath  goodly grace in swearyng. Vnder the Legates Seale, in Office I am placed:
Therefore who so resist me I will make him to bow, HIP. he is gra¦celesse alredy. Who can make Tyranny now e disgraced? With a head of brasse I will not be out faced, But will execute mine office with extréeme crueltie, So that all men shall knowe me to be playne Tyranny. Auarice. Nay Master Zeale be ruled by me, To such as resist, such rigor you may show, Tyranny. Zeale nay, no Zeale, my name is Tyranny, Neither am I ashamed who doth my name knowe, HIP. he is Kit carelesse. For in my dealings the same I will showe, None dare reproue me of that I am sure, So long as Authority on my side endure, But to thy wordes a while I will list, Therefore in briefe saye on what you will. Auarice. I would haue ou show rigor to such as resiste. And such as be bstinate spare not to kill, But those that be willing your hestes to fulfill, If they offend and not of obstinacie, For money ecuse them though they vse villanie, HIP. hatke the practis of spiteful Sum∣ners. Thus shall you performe your office aright, For fauour or money to spare the offendent. Tyranny. So maye I also of mallice or spight, Or ranckor of myne punnish the innocent, But I wilbe ruled by thine arbitrament, And will fauour such as will my hand greaze, The de is a good fellow if one can him please, HIP. and you are one of his sonnes mee think by your head. But to sollow our busines great paynes we do take, On an hastie message we were fit to be sent. Hypocrisie. When I lye a dying I will you messengers make, You plye you so fast you are too to dilligent, Hoope how, Master Zeale whether are yée bent?
Auarice. Harke me thought one hallowed & called you by name. Tyranny. I would it were Hypocrisy. Aua. It is the very same, What Master Hyprcrisie for you I haue sought, This howre or two but could you not finde. Hypocrisie. That is no meruaile it is not for nought, For I am but litle and you two are blinde, Neither haue you eyes to sée with behinde, Yet may the learned note herein a mystery, That neither Tyran, nor Auar. can finde out Hypôcrisie. But what earnest busines haue you in charge, That with so great spéede must presently be finished. Tyranny. Mary sée here. Hip. what is it? Tyran. a commission large From my Lord Legate him selfe authorized, The effect whereof must presently be practised. Hypocrisie. What is the tenure I pray you let me know. Tyrannye. Auarice hath red it, not I, let him showe. Auarice. He hath firstly in charge to make inquisition, Whether Aulters be reedified whether chalice and booke, Vesments for Masse, sacraments and prosession, Be prepared againe: if not he must looke, And finde out such fellowes as these cannot brooke: And to my Lord Legate such Marchants present, That for their offence they may haue condign punishmēt. If any we take tardy Tyranny them threat, That for their neglygence he will them present, And I desirous some money to get, If ought they will giue me, their euill will preuent, Yea somtime, of purpose, such shifts we inuent. Hypocrisie. Peace, yonder coms one (me thinke) it is a préest,
By his gowne cap and tippet, made of a list. Acte. third, Sceane 4. CACONOS. HYP. TIRANNY. AVARICE. IN gude seth sir, this newis de gar me lope, Ay is as light as ay me wend, gif that yo wol me troth, Far new ayen within awer lond installed is the Pope, Whese Legat wt authoritie tharawawt awr cūtry goth, And charge befare him far te com, vs Préests end lemen bath, Far te spay awt gif that he mea, these new sprang Arataykes, Whilk de disturb awr hally Kirke, laik a sart of saysmataykes. Awr gilden Gods ar brought ayen intea awr Kirks ilk whare, That vnte tham awr Parishioner, ma affer thar gudewill, Far hally Masse in ilke place, new thea auters de prepare, Hally watter, Pax, Crosse, Banner, Censour and Candill, Cream, Crismatory, hally Bred, the rest omit ay will, Whilt hally Fathers did inuent e awd Antiquitie, Be new receued inte awr Kirks, with great solemnite. Bay these thaugh lemen bene apprest, the Clargy sall het gean, Far te awr Sents theis affer yifts all whilk we sall receyue, Awr hally Masse, thaw thea bay dere, thea de it but in vayne, Far thaw ther frends frea Purgatory, te help thea dea beleue, Yet af ther hope, gif nede rewhayre it wawd theam all deceue, Sea wawde awr Pilgrimage, Reliques, Trentals and Pardons, Whilk far awr geyn inte awr Kirk ar braught in far the nones. Far well a nere what war awr tenths & taythes that gro in fild, What gif we han of glebed lond ene plawwark bay the yeare, Awr affring deas de vara laytell ar nething te vs yeld, Awr Beadroll geanes, awr chrisom clethes de laytle mend awr fare Gif awt af this we pea far vale, we laytle mare can spare, Sawl Masses, Diriges, Monethmayndes and Buryinges, Alsownday, Kirkings, Baneasking and weddings. The Sacraments, gif we mowt sell, war better then thea all, Far gif the Iewes gaue thratty pence, te hang Chrayst on a trée, Gude christiā folk thrayse thratty pence wawd coūt a price but smal
Sea that te ete him with ther téeth delayuered he mawght be, New of this thing delayuerance, ne man can mak but we, Se that the market in this punt, we Préests sawd han at will, And with the money we sowd yet, awr pooches we sowd fill. Hypocrisie. I will goe and salowt him, good morrow sir Iohn, Cacon. Naw bay may Préest hade God giue ye ten far ene, Hypocrisie. Do you Master Parson in this Parish singe? Cacon. Yai sir that ay de, gif yowll giue me troothing, Tyranny. I haue a comission your house and Church to séeke, To search if you any seditious Bookes do kéepe. Cacon. Whe ay? well a neare ay swer bay the Sacrament, Ay had rather han a cup af nale then a Testament. Hypocrisie. How can you without it your office discharge? Cacon. It is the least thing ay car far bay may charge, Far se lang as thea han Images wharon te luke, What nede thea be distructed awt af a Buke. Hypocrisie. Tush that will nodisie them all well enowe, As well a dead Image as a dumb Idole I make God avowe, Cacon. Yai, ay my sen, bay experience thot con showe, Far in may Portace the tongue ay de nat knowe, Yet when ay see the great gilded letter, Ay ken it sea well, as nea man ken better: As far Example, on the day of Chrastes Natyuitie, Ay sée a Bab in a Manger, and two Beastes standing by The Seruice whilk to Newyeares day is assaygnd, Bay the Paicture of the Circumcision ay faynd. The Seruice, whilk on Twalfth day mun be don,
Ay séeke ay the marke of the thrée kynges of Colon. Bay the Deuill tentyng Chraist, ay faind whadragesima, Bay Chraist on the Crosse, ay serch out gude frayday: Pasch for his marke, hath the Resurrection, Ayenst Hally Thursday, is pented Chraistes Assention, Thus in mayn owne buke, ay is a gude Clarke, But gyf the Sents war gone, the Cat had eate my mark Se the sandry mairacles, whi ilk Sent haue done, Bay the Picttures on the walles sal appéere to them soone Bay the whilk thea ar lerned in euery distresse, What Sent thea mun prea te far succour doubtles: Sea that all Lepers te Syluester must prea, That he wawd frée tham, ther disease take away. Layk wais, thea that han the fallyng saicknes, Te be eased therfre, thea mn prea to St. Cornelis: In contagious aier, as in plague or pestilence, Te hally Sent Ruke, thea mun call far assistance. Fra parill of drawning, Sent Carp kéepe the Maryners Fra dayng in warfare, Sent George gard the Soldiers, Sent Iob heale the Poxe, the Agew, Sent Germayne, Far te ease the toothache, call te Sent Appollyne, Gif that a woman be barren and childles, Te helpe her herein, she must prea t Sent Nicolas. Far women in trauayle, call to Sent Magdalene Far lawlynes of minde, call te Sent Katheryne, Sent Loy saue your Horse, Sent Anthony your Swyne. Tyranny, What? this Parson, séemeth connyng to be, And as farre as I sée, in a good vniformytie: Yea, he is well red, in that golden Legend. Cacon. Bay may trooth, in readyng any other, ne taym do I spend Far that ay ken, bay geneal caūsell, is canonized And bay the hely Pope hymselfe is authorized: That Buke farther, is wholly permytted, Wharas, the Bayble in part is prohibited. And therfore, gif it be lawfull to vtter my conscience,
Before the new Testament ays giue it credence. Hypocrisie. I allow his Iudgemnet before Ambrose & Austin, And for Hypocrisie, a more conuenient Chapleyn, Auarice. It gréeueth me much that no fault we can spye, For now of some bribe disappoynted am I, Yet happily he may tell vs of some Heretykes. Tiranny. Is there M. Parson in your parish no Scismatikes? Cacon. Yai mara is ther a vara busy bodye, Whe will iest with me and call me fule and noddye, And sets his Lads te spowt latin ayenst me, But ay spose then with Deparfundis Clam aui, And oftentimes▪ he wil reson with me of the Sacarment, And say he can prooue bay the new Tastament, That Chraystss body is in Heauen placed, But ays not beleue him, ay woll not be awt faced, He says besayd that the Pope is Anticraist, Fugered of Iohn bay the seuen hedded beast, And all awre religion is but mons inuention, And with Gods ward is at vtter dissention, And a plaguy déel mare af sayk layk talke, That ay dar not far may nars bay his yate walke, But ay wawd he wer brunt that ay mawght be whaiet, Tiranny. He must. haue a cooler his tongue runnes at riat. Auarice. What is his name sir Iohn, canst thou tell vs? Cacon. Yai sir that ay ken he is léped Phailelegoos. Tyranny. Wilt thou go show his house where he dwell? Cacon. Yai or els ay wawd may sawl war in Hell, Te de him a plesure ay wawd gang a whole yeare,
Gif it war but te make him a Fadocke te beare. Tyranny. Go with vs Auarice and beare vs company. Auarice. Nay, if you go hence I will not here tary. Hypocrisie. Away sirs in your busines in a corner do not luke, That my Lord Legate when he coms may haue worke. Tyranny. Come on let vs go together sir Iohn. Cacon. Ay sall follow after, God boy you good Gentleman. Hypocrisie. Farewell, thrée false knaues, as betwéene this and London. Tyranny. What sayst thou? Hip. As honest men as ye thrée Kings of Colon. This geare goes round if that we had a fiddle: Exeunt Tyr. Auar. Cacon. Nay, I must sing too, heigh dery dery dery, I can do but laugh my hart is so merry, I wilbe minstrel my selfe heigh didle didle didle, But lay there a strawe I began to be wery: But harke I héere a tramplyng of féete, It is my Lord Legate I will him go méete. Acte fourth. Sceane. 1. CAR. HYPO. AVA. TYR▪ PHILO. GO to Master Zeale, bring forth that Heretike, Which doth thus disturb our religion Catholicke. Hypocrisie. Rowm for my Lords grate: what? no maner reuerence, But Cap on head Hodge, and that in a Lords presence. Cardinall. What? Master Hypocrisie I haue stayed for you long. Hypocrisie. You were best rowd in and play vs amonge.
Cardinall. Where haue you ben from me so long absent, I appoynted to haue ben here thrée howres ago, In my consistory to haue set in Iudgement, Of that wretched Scismatike that doth trouble vs so. Hypocrisie. What haue you caught but one and no moe? In fayth father Auarice, you haue plied your chaps well. Auarice. I must néeds confesse that I am payd for my trauell. Tyranny. Rowme for the prisoner, what? rowme on ech hand, Or I shall make some out of the way for to stand. Lo héere (my Lord) is that seditious Scismatike, That we haue layd waite for, an arrant Heretike. Cardinall. Sit downe Master Hypocrisie to yéeld me assistance. Hypocrisie. I thank your Lordship for your courteous beneuolence, I wilbe the Noddy, I should say the Notary, To wright before my Lord Legate which is Comissary. Cardinall. Ah sirra, be you he that doeth thus disturb, The whole estate of our fayth Catholike? Art thou so expert in Gods lawes and word, That no man may learne thée? thou arrant Heretike: But this is the nature of euery Scismatike: Be his errors neuer so false Doctrine, He will say, by Gods word, he dare it examine. Philologus. With humble submission to your authoritie, I pardon craue if ought  I saye, For being thus fet in perill and extreamitie, To me vnaquainted, my tongue soone trip maye, Wherefore excuse me, I do your Lordship praye, And I will answeare to euery demaund, According to my conscience, Goddes worde being my warrand.
Cardinall. To begin therfore orderly, how saist thou Philologus? Haue I authoritie to call the me before? Or to be short, I will obiect it thus: Whether hath the Pope which is Peters successor: Then all other Bishs preheminence more? If not, then it follow that neither he, Nor I which am his Legate, to accompts may call thee. Philologus. The question is perillous for me to determine, Chéefely when the party is Iudge in the cause, Yet if the wholl course of Scripture ye examine, And wilbe tryed by Gods holy lawes, Small help shall you finde to defend the same cause, But the contrary may be proued manifestly: As I in short wordes will proue to you breefely. The surest ground wheron your Pope doth stand: Is of Peters being at Roome a strong imagination, And the same Peter▪ you do vnderstand, Of all the Disciples had the gubernation, Surmising both without good approbation: Vnlesse you will by the name of Babylon, From whence Peter wrote is vnderstanded Roome: As indéed diuers of your writers haue affirmed, Reciting Ieromy, Austine, Primasius and Ambrose, Who by their seuerall writinges haue confirmed: That Rome is new Babylon I may it not glose, But it were better for you they were dumbe I suppose, For they labour to proue Roome by that acception: The whore of Babilon spoke of in the Reuelation, But graunt that Peter in Roome setled was, Yet that he was cheefe, it remayns you to proue: For in my Iudgement it is a playne case, That if any amongst them to rule it did behooue, He should be chéefe whom Christ most did loue: To whom he bequethed his mother most déere, To whom in reuelation Christ did also appéere.
I meane Iohn Euangelist (by birth) Coosin germaine, To our Sauiour Christ as storyes do vs tell, From whose succession if that you should clayme Superioritie, you should mend your cause well, For then of some likelyhood of truth it should smell, Where none so often as Peeter was reproued, Nor from stedfast fayth so often tymes remooued, But graunt all were true herein you do fayne, Marke one proper lesson of a Greeke Oratour: As a good childe of his fathers welth is inheritour, So of his fathers vertues he must be possessour, Now Peter folows Christ and al worldly goods forsakes But the Pope leaueth Christ, & himselfe to glory takes: And to be short Christ himselfe refused to be a Kinge, And the seruant aboue the Master may not be, Which being both true it is a strange thing, How the Pope can receiue this pompe and dignitie, And yet professe himselfe Christes seruant to be, Christ wilbe no King, the Pope wilbe more, The Pope is Christes Master not his seruant therefore. Cardinall. Ah thou arrant Heretike I will thée remember, I am glad I know so much as I doo, I haue wayed thy resons and haue found them so slender That I thinke them not worthy to be answeared: How say you Master Hipocrisy? HIP. I also thinke so, But let him go forwarde and vtter his conscience, And we will awhile longer here him with patience. Cardinall. Say on thou Heretike of the holy Sacrament, Of the body and bloud of Christ, what is thine opinion? Philologus. I haue not yet finished my former argument. Cardinall. Say on as I bid thée, thou art a stoute Minion: Philologus. I shall then gladly: it is a signe of vnion,
The which should remaine vs Christians among, That one should loue another all our life long: For as the bread is of many Cornells compounded, And the Wine from the Iuce of many Graps do discend, So we which into Christ our Rocke are ingrounded: As into one Temple, should cease to contend: Least by our contetion the Church we offend, This was not the least cause among many more, Which are now omitted that this Sacrament was geuen for, The chéefest cause why this Sacrament was ordained, Was the infirmitie of our outwarde man: Whereas Saluation to all men was proclaymed. That with true fayth apprehend the same can, By the death of Iesus Christ that immaculate Lambe, That the same might the rather of all men be beleued, To the word to ad a Sacramēt, it Christ nothing greue▪ And as we the sooner beléeue that thing true, For the tryall whereof more witnesses we finde, So by the meanes of the Sacrament many grue Beléeuing creatures, where before they were blynde, For our sences some sauour of our fayth now do finde, Because in the Sacrament there is this Analogy: That Christ féedes our soules as the bread doth our body Cardinall. Ah thou foul Heretike, is there bread in the Sacrament Where is Christes body then which he did vs giue? Philologus. I know to the faythfull receiuer it is there present: But yet the bread remaineth stil I stedfastly beléeue. Cardinall. To here these his errors it doth me greatly gréeue: But that we may shortly to some issue come, In what sence sayd Christ, Hoc est Corpus meum? Philologus. Euen in the same sence that he sayd before: Vos estis sall terrae, vos estis Lux mundi: Ego sum ostium: and a hundreth such more,
If tyme would permit to alleadge them seuerally, But that I may the simple sorte edifie, You aske me in what sence these wordes I verifye, Where Christ of the bread sayd: this is my body: For answere herein, I aske you this question, Were Christes disciples into salt transformed? When he sayd: ye are the salt of the earth euery one, Or when the light of the world he them affirmed? Or himselfe to be a dore when he confirmed, Or to be a Vine did his body then change? If not then, why now? this to me séemeth strange. Cardinall. Why doest thou doubt of Christ his omnipotencye? But what so he willeth doth so come to passe? Philologus. God kéepe me and all men from such a frencye, As to thinke any thing Christes power to surpasse, When his will to his power ioyned was, But where his will wanteth his power is vneffectuall: As Christ can be no lyer, God cannot be mortall: Set downe therefore some proofe of his will, That he would be made bread, and then I recant. Cardinall. This Cytif, myne eares with winde he doth fill: His wordes both trueth and reason doth want: Christes word is his will, this must thou néedes graunt. Philologus. He spake the word likewise, when he said: I am the dore, Was his body transformed into tymber therefere? Cardinall. Nay if thou béest obstinate I will say no more. Haue him hence to prison and kéepe him full sure: I will make him set by my friendship more store: But herest thou Zeale, go first and procure, Some kinde of new torment which he may not indure. Tiranny. I am here in redines to do your commaundement,
And will returne hither agayne incontinent. Hypocrisie. At thy returne, bryng hether Sensuall Suggestion. That if néede be, he may vs assist, Least that both I, and Carefull prouision, The zeale of Philologus, may not fully resist. But he in his obstinacie doth styll persist, To put him to death, would accuse vs of Tirranny: But if we could win him, he should do vs much honesty. Tyranny. I heare you, and wyll fulfill your wordes spedely. Hypocrysie. Exit Tyrran. Good Maister Philologus, I pittie your case, To sée you so foolysh, your selfe to vndoo: I durst yet promys to purchase you grace, If you would (at length) your errours forgoe: Therfore, I pray you, be not your owne foe. Philologus. Call you those Errours, whiche the Gospell defends, I know not then, whence true Drine descends. Cardinall. Nay, Mayster Hypocrisie, you spend tyme in vaine. To reason with him, he will not be remooued, Auarice. Had I so much to liue by as he hath certayne, I would not loose that which I so well loued. Cardinall. He stands in his reputation, he will not be reproued: And that is the cause that he is co obstinate? But I shall well enough thy corage abate. Philologus. I humbly beséeche you of Christian charitie, You séeke not of purpose my bloud for to spill: For if I haue displeased your authoritie, In reasonable causes redresse it I will, But in this respect I feare I should kill My soull for euer: if against my conscience
I should to the Popes lawes acknowledge Obedience. Hypocrysie. Ceace from those wordes, if your safetie you loue: As though no man had a soule more then you: Suche nips (perchance) my Lords patience wyll mooue: Then would you please him, if that you wist how: But, if you wyll be ruled, (by my honestie) I vow, I will do the best herein that I can: Because you séeme to be a good Gentleman. Auarice. Were it not better for you to lyue at ease? And spend that merely, whiche earst you haue got, Then by your owne ole, your selfe to disease? And bring you to trouble, whiche other men séeke not. Hypocrisie. In faith, Philologus, your zeale is too hote, Whiche wyll not be quenched, but with your hart blood, If I were so zealous, I would thinke my selfe wood. Cardinall. Tush, it wyll not be, he thinkes we do but iest, Wherfore, that some tryall of my minde, he may haue, That Carefull Prouision, should goe, I thinke best, Into the towne, and there, assistance craue, His House for to enter, and his Goods for me saue: Least, when his wife know, that they be confiscate, Into other mens keepyng, the same she doth dissipate. Hypocrisie. You speake very wisely, in my simple Iudgement, Therfore, you were best to sende him away. Cardinall. Go too, Carefull Prouision, depart incontinent, And fulfill the wordes, whiche I to you say, Auarice. Of pardon herein, I do your Lordshyp pray, You doubt not I trust, of my wyllyng minde, Whiche herein most redy, you alway shall finde. For who is more redy, by frawde to put loye,
Other mens goodes then I am eche where? But least some man at mée shoulde chaunce to faine, And kill mée at once I greatly doo feare, I had rather perswade him his folly to forbeare. Cardinall. Proue then if thou canst doo him any good, He shall not say that we séeke his bloud. Auarice. Ah maister Philologus, you sée your owne case, That both life and goodes are in my Lords will, Therefore you were best to sue for some grace, And be content his wordes to fulfi: If you neglect this, hence straight way I wyll, And all your goodes I will sure confiscate, Then will you repent, it when it is to late. Philologus. My case indéede I sée most miserable, As was Susanna betwixt two euyls placed, Either to consent to sinne most abhominable: Or els in the worldes sight to be vtterly disgraced: But as she her chastitie at that tune imbraced, So will I now spirituall whodom resist, And kéepe mee a true Virgin to my louing spouse Christ. Auarice. Wilt thou then neglect the prouision of thy houshold? Thou art therfore worse then an Infydell is. Philologus. That you abuse Gods word, to say I dare be bolde: And the saying of Paule you interpret aisse Cardinall. I neuer saw the like heretick that this is: Away Carefull Prouision, about your businesse, Auarice. Sith there is no remedie, I am héere in redinesse. Philologus. Exit Aa. I beséeche your Lordship euen from the hart roote, That you would vouchsafe for my contentation,
To approue vnto mée by Gods holy booke, Some one of the questions of our disputation: For I will heere you with hartes delectation: Because I would gladly▪ to your doctrine consent, If that I could so my conscience content. But my Conscience crieth out and bids me take hée To loue my lord God aboue all earthly gaine, Wherby all this while, I stande in great drea, That if I should Gods statutes disdaine, In wretched state then, I should remaine: Thus cryeth my Conscience, to mée continually, which if you can stay, I will yéelde to you gladly. Cardinall. I can say nomore, then I haue done already, Thou heardest that I called the heretick and foole: If thou wilt not consent to mée and that spéedily: With a new maister, thou shalt goe to schole, Hypocrisie. Thou hast no more wit, I sée then this stoole, Farre vnfit to dispute, or reason with my Lorde, He can subdue thée, with fire & sword, quight wt one word Tyranny. Come, ollow apàce, sensuall Suggestion, Or els I will leaue you to come all alone: Suggestion. You go in hast, you make expedition, Nay, if you runne so fast I wil none: This litle iournay, will make mée to grone: I vse not to trouble my selfe in this wise, And now to beginne, I doo not aduise: Tiranny. Haue not I plyed mée, which am come againe so soone, And yet haue finished such sundry businesse: I haue caused many pretie toyes to be done: So that now I haue eche thing in readinesse. Cardinall. What maister Zeale, you are praise worthy doubtlesse,
Art thoou prepared this gentleman to receiue? He will reste a Fagot, or els he me deceiue. Tyranny. In simple manner I will him entertaine, Yet must he take it all in good parte: And though his diet be small, he may not disdaine, Nor yet contemne the kindenes of my heart, For though I lacke instruments, to put him to smart, Yet shall he abide in a hellish blacke dungeon: As for blocks, stocks & irons, I warrant him want none. Hypocrisie. Well, farewel Philologus, you heare of your lodging, I would yet do you good, if that I wist howe. Cardinall. Let him go Hypocrisie, stand not all day dodging, You haue don to much for him, I make God avowe. Hypocrisie. Staye, for Suggestion doth come yonder nowe, Come on lasy Lubber, you make but small haste, Had you staied awhile lōger, your cōming had ben waste. Suggestion. You know of my selfe, I am not very quicke, Because that my body I do so much tender, For Sensuall Suggestion, will quickely be sicke If that his owne ease he should not remember: Thus one cause of my tariaunce to you I do render, Another I had, as I came by the waye: Which did me the longer from your company staye. Hypocrisie. What was that Suggestion, I praye thée to vs vtter, For I am with child, till that I do it heare. Suggestion. A certaine gentle woman, did murmur, and mutter, And for greefe of minde, her hayre she did teare: Shee will at last kill her selfe, I greatly do feare. Hypocrisie. What is the cause why this gréefe she did take?
Suggestion. Because her Husband her company did forsake: Her children also about her did stand, Sobbing, and sighing, and made lamentation: Knocking their brestes, and wringing their hand: Saying, they are brought to vtter dessolation, By the meanes of their fathers wilfull protestation, Whose goodes they saye, are already confiscate, Because he doth the Popes lawes violate, And indeed I sawe Auarice standing at the doore, And a company of Ruffians assisting him there. Philologus. Alas alas, this pincheth my heart full sore, Myne euills he doth declare, myne owne wo, I do heare, Wherefore from teares, I cannot forbeare. Hypocrisie. Ha ha, doth this touch you, Master Philologus, You neede not haue had it, being rulde by vs. Suggestion. Why? what is he, thus, Master Hypocrisie, That taketh such sorrow at the wordes which I spake. Hypocrisie. One that is taken, and conuinced of Heresie, And I feare me much, will burne at a stake, Yet to reclayme him, much paynes would I take, And haue don already, howbeit in vayne, I would craue thine assistance, were it not to thy payne, Suggestion. I will do the best herein that I can, Yet go thou with me, to helpe at a neede, With all my heart, God saue you, good gentleman, To sée your great sorrow, my heart doeth welnigh bleede: But what is the cause of your trouble and dréede? Disdaine not to me your secrets to tell: A wise man sometime, of a fool may take counsell. Philologus. Myne estate (alas) is now most lamentable,
For I am but deade, which euer side I take, Neither to determine heerein am I able, With good aduice mine election to make: The worse to refuse, and the best for to take, My Spirit couites theone, but alas since your presence, My flesh leades my spirit therfroe by violence. For at this time, I being in great extremitie, Either my Lord God in hart to reiect, Or els to be oppressed by the Legates authorytie: And in this world to be counted an abiect: My Landes, wife and Children also to neglect: This later part to take, my Spirit is in readinesse, But my Flesh doth subdue, my Spirit doubtlesse. Suggestion. Your estate perhaps, seemeth io you dangerous, The rather because you haue not bene vsed: To incurre before time, such troubles perilous: But to your power such euils haue refused, Howbeit of two euils, the least must be chused: Now which is the least euill, wee will shortlye examine, That which part to take, your selfe may determine. On ye right hand you say, you sée gods iust iudgment, His wrath and displeasure, on you for to fall, And in steede of the ioyes of Heauen, euer permanent, You see for your stipend, the tormentes infernall: Philologus. That is it indéede, which I feare most of all: For Christ said, feare not them, which the body can ānoy, But feare him, which the body and soule can destroy: Suggestion. Well, let that ley aside, awhile as it is, And on the other side make the lyke inquisition, If on the left side you fall, then shall you not misse, But to bring your body, to vtter perdition: For at mans hand, you know there is no remission: Beside your Children fatherlesse, your wife desolate, Your goodes and possessions, to other men consiscate.
Philologus. Saint Paul to the Romanes, hath this worthy sentence I accompt the afflictions of this world transitorie, Be they neuer so many, in full equiuolence: Cannot counteruaile those heauenly glorie: Which we shal haue through Christ his propitiatorie: I also accompt the rebukes of our Sauiour, Greater gaines to mée, then this house full of treasure. Suggestion. You haue spoken reasonably, but yet as they say, One Birde in the hande, is worth two in the bush, So you now inioying, these worldly ioyes may, Esteeme the other, as light as a rush: Thus may you scape this perrillous pushe: Philologus. Yea, but my saluation to mee is most certaine, Neither doubt I, that I shall suffer this in vaine. Suggestion. Is your death meritorious, then in Gods sight? That you are so sure, to attaine to saluation, Philologus. I doo not think so, but my faith is full pight: In the mercies of God, by Christs mediation: By whom I am sure of my preseruation. Suggestion. Then to the faithfull, no hurt can accrew, But what so he worketh, good end shall insue. Philologus. Our Sauiour Christ, did say to the tempter, When he did perswade him, from the Pinacle to fall, And saide, he might safely, that danger aduenture: Because that Gods Angels, from hurt him saue shall: See that thy Lord God, thou tempt not at all: So I, though perswaded, of my sinnes free remission, May not commit sin, vpon this presumption. Cardinall. What haue you not yet done, your foolysh tatteling?
With that frowarde heretick, I will then away, If you will tarie to heare all his prattelyng: He would surely keepe you most part of the day: It is now high dinner time my stomack doth say: And I will not lose one meale of my diet, Though thereon did hang an hundred mens quiet. Suggestion. By your Lordships pacience, one word with him more, And then if he will not, I geue him to Tyrrany. Hypocrisie. I neuer saw my Lord so pacient before, To suffe one to speake for himselfe so quietly, But you were not best to trust to his curtesie: It is euill waking of a Dog that doth sleepe, While you haue his friendship, you were best it to kéepe. Cardinall. I promise thee Philologus, by my vowed chastitie, If thou wilt be ruled by thy friendes that be héere, Thou shalt abound in wealth and prosperitie: And in the Countrie chiefe rule thou shalt beare, And a hundred pounds more thou shalt haue in the yéere: If thou will this curtesie refuse, Thou shalt die incontinent, the one of these chuse. Suggestion. Well sith it is no time, for vs to debate, In former maner what is in my minde: I will at once to thée straight demonstrate, Those worldly ioyes, which heere thou shalt finde: And for because thou art partly blinde, In this respect looke through this mirrour, And thou shalt behold an vnspeakeable pleasure. Philologus. Oh péerelesse pleasures, oh ioyes vnspeakable, Oh worldly wealth, oh pallaces gorgious, Oh faire Children, oh wife most amyable: Oh pleasant pastime, oh pompe so glorious, Oh delicate diet, oh lyfe lasciuious:
Oh dolourous death which would mée betray, And my felycitie from mée take away, I am fully resolued without further demeanour, In these delightes to take my whole solace, And what paine so euer hereby I incurre: Whether heauen or hell, whether Gods wrath or grace, This glasse of delight I will euer imbrace: But one thing most chiesly doth trouble mée héere, My Neighbors vnconstant will compt mée I feare. Hypocrisie. He that will séeke eche man to content. Shall prooue him selfe at last most vnwise, Your selfe to saue harmlesse think it sufficient: And waigh not the peoples clamorous outeries, Yet there mouthes to stop I can soone deuise: Say that the reading of the workes of S. Selfloue, And doctor Ambition did your errours remoue. And harke in myne eare delay no more time, The sooner the better in ende you will say, We haue now caught him as Birde is in line. Tyranny. Come on sirs haue yée done, I would faine away. Hypocrisie. Goe euen when you wll, we doo you not staie, Philologus hath drunk such a draught of Hypocrisie, That he minds not to die yet, he wil master this malady. Cardinall. Come on master Philologus, are you growne to a stay I am glad to heare that you become tractable. Philologus. If it please your Lordship, I say euen what you say And conesse your relygion, to be most allowable, Neither will I gainsay your customes lawdable: My ormer follyes I vtterly enownce, That my selfe was an Heretick I doo héere pronownce.
Cardinall. Nay Master Philologus, goe with mée to my Pallace And I shall set downe the forme of recantation, Which you shall reade on Sonday next, in open place: This done, you shall satisfie our expectation, And shall be set frée, from all molestation: Into the bosome of the Church, we will you take, And some high officer, therein will you make Philologus. I must first request your Lordships fauour, That I may goe home, my wife for to sée, And I will attend on you, within this howre. Cardinall. Nay I may not suffer, you alone to goe frée, Vnlesse one of these, your suretie wil bée: Suggestion. I sensuall Suggestion, for him will vndertake, Cardinall. Verie well take him to you, your prisoner I him make. Goe you maister Philologus and beare mée company, Or els I am sure no meate I should eate, And goe before Zeale, to sée ech thing ready: That when we once come, we stay not for meate: Hypocrisie. With small sute héereto, you shall mée intreate. Cardinall. Exit Tyr. Farewell Philologus, and make small delay, Perhaps of our dinners, for you I will staie, Exi Car. & Hyp Suggestion. Had not you bene a wise man, your selfe to haue lost, And brought your whole family to wretched estate, Where now of your blessednesse, your selfe you may bost: And of all the countrie, accompt your selfe fortunate, Philologus. Such was the wit of my foolish pate, But what doo we stay, so long in this place, I shall not be well, whilst I am with my Lordes grace.
Acte fourth. Sceane 4. SPIRIT. PHILO. SVGGES. PHilologus, Philologus, Philologus, I say, In time take héede, goe not to farre, looke well thy steps vnto, Let not Suggestion of thy flesh, thy Conscience thée betray, Who doth conduct thée in the path, that leadeth to all woe: Waigh well this warning giuen from God, before thou further goe: And sell not euerlasting ioyes, for pleasures temporall, From which thou soone shalt goe, or they from thée bereaued shall. Philologus. Alas, what voice is this I héere, so dolefully to sounde, Into mine eares, and warneth mée, in time yet to beware, Why haue not I the pleasant path, of worldly pleasures founde, To walk therein for my delight, no man shall me debarre. Suggestion. Looke in this Glasse Philologus, for nought els doo thou care, What doost thou see within the same? is not the Coast all cleare? Philologus. Naught els but pleasure, pompe, and wealth, héerein to mée appeare. Suggestion. Giue mée thy hande, I will be guide, and leade thée in the way, What doost thou shrink Philologus? where I dare goe before? Spirit. Yea, shrinke so still Philologus, no time turne back I say, In sensuall Suggestions steppes, see that thou tread no more: And though the frailtie of the flesh, hath made the fall full sore: And to denye with outward lyps, thy Lord and God most deare The same to stablish with consent, of Conscience, stand in feare: Thou art yet frée Philologus, all torments thou maist scape, Onely the pleasures of the world, thou shalt awhile forbeare, Renownce thy crime, and sue for grace, and do not captiuate Thy Conscience vnto mortall sinne, the yoke of Christ doo beare, Shut vp these wordes within thy brest, which sound so in thine eare: The outwarde man hath caused thee, this enterprise to take,
Beware least wickednesse of spirit, the same doo perfect make. Philologus. My hart doth tremble for distres, my conscience pricks mée sore And bid mee cease that course in time, which I would gladly runne The wrath of God it doth mée tell, doth stand my face before: Wherfore, I hold it best to cease that race I haue begun. Suggestion. These are but fancies certainly, for this way thou shalt shun All worldly woes: looke in thy Glasse and tell me what it show, Thou wilt not credit other men, before thy selfe I trow. Philologus. Oh gladsome Glasse, oh mirrour bright, oh cristall cleare as sun The ioyes cannot be vttered, which herein I beholde, Wherefore I will not thee forsake: what euill so euer come. Spirit. If néedes thou wilt thy selfe vndoo, say not, but thou arte tolde: Philologus. Hap, what hap wyll I will not loose these pleasures manyfolde Wherfore conduct mee once againe, heere take mée by the hande. Suggestion That sensuall Suggestion doth leade him vnderstand. Acte fourth. Sceane. 3. CONSCI. PHILO. SVGGES. ALas alas, thou wofull wight, what furie dooth thée moue? So willingly to cast thy selfe into consumyng fyre, What Circes hath bewitched thée, thy worldly wealth to loue More then the blessed state of Soule, this one thing I desyre: Waigh wel the cause with sincere hart, thy Cōscience thee require And sell not euerlasting ioyes, for pleasures temporall, Resist Suggestion of the flesh, who séekes thée for to spoile: From which thou soone shalt goe or they from thee b reaed shall: And take from thee which God elect, true euerlasting soyle.
Sée where confusion doth attend, to catch thée in his snare, Whose handes, if that thou goest on still, thou shalt no way eschew Philologus. What wight art thou? which for my health, doost take such ear∣nest care? Conscience. Thy crased Conscience, which forsée, the plagues & torments due, Which from iust Iudge, whom thou denyest shal by and by insue: Suggestion. Thou hast good triall of the faith, which I to thée doo beare, Commit thy safetie to my charge, there is no daunger néere. Conscience. Such is the blindnesse of the flesh, that it may not descrie, Or sée the perrils which the Soule, is ready to incurre: And much the lesse, our owne estates, we can our selues espie: Because Suggestion in our hartes such fancies often stirre: Wherby to worldly vanities, we cleaue as fast as burre: Estéeming them with heauenly ioyes, in goodnesse comparable, Yet be they mostly very prickes, to sinne abhomynable. For proofe we néede no further goe, then to this present man, Who by the blessing of the Lorde, of riches hauing store, When with his hart to fancy them, this worldlyng once began: And had this Glasse of vanyties espied, his eyes before, He God forsooke, whereas he ought haue loued him the more: And chooseth rather with his goodes, to be throwne downe to hell, Then by refusing of the same, with God in heauen to dwell. Suggestion. Nay harke Philologus, how thy conscience can teache, And would deteyne thée with glosinges vntrue: But hearest thou Conscience, thou maiest long inough preache, Eare wordes, from whence reason or trueth none ensue, Shall make Philologus to bid mée adue. What shall there no rich man dwell in Gods kingdome? where is then Abraham, Iob, and Dauid become? Conscience. I speake not largelye of all them, which haue this worldly wealth, For why, I know that riches are the creatures of the Lorde:
Which of themselues, are good ech one, as Salamon vs telleth, And are appoynted to do good withall, by Gods owne word, But when they let vs from the Lord, then ought they be abhord: Which caused Christ himselfe to say, that with much lesser payne, Should Camel passe through néedles ey, thē rich men Heauē obtayn, Hereby Rich men, Christ did not mean, ech one which welth enioy But those which fastned haue their loue vpon this worldly dust, Wherefore another cryes, and sayth, oh death, how great anoye Doest thou procure vnto that man, which in his gooddes doth trust? That thou doest this Philologus, thou néedes acknowledge must, Whereby ech one may easly sée, thou takest more delight, In Mundane ioyes, then thou estéemest to be with Angels bright. Philologus. This toucheth ye quicke, I féele ye wound, which if thou canst not cure, As mamed in limmes I must retyre, I can no further go. Suggestion. This is the gréef which Conscience takes against thée I am sure, Because thou vsest those delights, which Conscience may not do, And therefore he perswadeth thée, to leaue the same also: As did the Fore, which caught in snare, and scapt with losse of tayle, To cut off theirs, as burthenous, did all the rest counsayll. Conscience. In déede I cannot vse, those fond and foolish vanities In which the outward part of man doth take so great delight, No, neither would I, though to me were geuen that liberty, But rather would consume them all to nought, if that I might, For if I should delight therein, it were as good a syght, As if a man of perfect age, should ride vpon a sticke: Or playe with compters in the street, which pastime children lyke. But all my ioyes in Heauen remaynes, wheras I long to be, And so wouldest thou, if that on Christ thy fayth full fastned were, For that affection, was in Paull the apostle, we may sée, The first to the Philippians doth witnes herein beare, His words be these: oh would to God disolued that I were, And were with Christ, another place his mynde in those words tell, We are but straungers all from God, while in this world we dwell:
Now marke, how far from his request, dissenting is thy mynde, He wisht for death, but more then hell, thou doest the same detest. Suggestion. The cause why Paul did loth his lyfe, may easely be assignde: Because the Iewes in euerie place, did séeke him to molest, But those which in this world, obtaine securitie and rest: Do take delight to liue therein, yea nature doth indue, Ech lyuing creature with a feare, least death should them accrue. Yea the same Paul at Antioche, dissembled to be dead, While they were gone who sought his lyfe, with stones for to destroy Elias for to saue his lyfe, to Horeb likwise fled, So did king Dauid flee, when Saul did séeke him to annoy: Yea Christ himselfe, whom in our deedes, to follow we may ioy, Did secreatly conuaigh himselfe, from Iewes so full of hate. When they thought from the top of hil, him to precipitate. Wherefore, it is no sinne at all, a man for to defende, And keepe himselfe from death, so long as nature giues him leaue. Conscience. The same whom you recited haue, conceiued a further end: Then to them selues to liue alone, as ech man may perceiue, For when that Paul had run his course, he did at last receiue: with hartes consent, the smal death, which was him put vnto, So when Christ had perfourmed his work, he did death vndergoe: And would to god, thou wouldest do yt, which these men were contēt, For they dispised worldly pomp, their flesh they did subdue, And brought it vnder, that to spirit, it mostly did consent: Whereby they séeking God to please, did bid the world adue: Wife, Children, and possessions forsaking, for they knew That euerlasting treasures were, appointed them at last, The which they thisting, did from them, al worldly pleasures cast. But thou O wretch doest life prolong, not that thou wouldst gods name As dutie binds vs all to doo, most chiefly gloryfy, But rather by thy liuing still, wilt Gods renowne defame, And more and more dishonor him, this is thy drift I spy. Philologus. I meane to liue in worldly ioyes, I can it not denye.
Conscience. What are those ioyes, which thou doost meane, but pleasures straing frō god? By vsing of the which, thou shalt prouoke his heauy rod: Suggestion. Tush knowest thou what Philologus, be wise thy selse vnto, And listen not to these fond wordes which Conscience to thée tell, For thy defence I wyll alleadge one worthy lesson moe: Vnto the which I am right sure, he cannot answere well: When Dauid by vaine trust in men of warre, from God sore fell, And was appointed of thrée plagues, the easiest for to chuse, He saide Gods mercy easier is to get, then mans as I suppose. Againe he sayeth among the Psalmes, it better is to trust In God, then that our confidence we setle should in man, Wherfore, to this which I now say of force consent thou must: That when two euils before vs plaste, no way avoide we can: Into the hand of God to fal by choyce is lawfull than, Because that God is mercyfull, when man no mercy show, Thus haue I pleaded in this cause, sufficiently I trow. Conscience. How can you say, you trust in God, when as you him forsake, And of the wicked Mammon heere, doo make your fained frende, No, no, these wordes which you recite against you mostly make: For thus he thinks in his destresse, God cannot mée defende, And therfore by Suggestion fraile, to mans helpe he hath leande. Marke who say trueth of him or mée▪ and doo him best beléeue. Philologus. I lyke thy wordes, but that to lose these ioyes it woulde mée gréeue. Conscience. And where Suggestion, telleth thée, that God in mercies flow, Yet is he iust sinnes to correct, and true in that he speake, Wherfore he sayeth, who so my name, before men shall not know, I shall not know him, when as Iudge I shall sit in my seate▪ This if you call to minde, it wil your proude presumption breake, Againe he sayeth, who so his lyfe or goodes, will séeke to saue, Shal loose them all: but who for Christ wil lose them, gaine shall haue Suggestion. What did not Peter Christ deny, yet mercy did obtaine.
Where if he had not, of the Iewes, he should haue tasted death: Philologus. Euen so shall I in tract of time, with bitter teares complaine. Suggestion. Yea time inough, though thou defferst, vntill thy latest breath. Conscience. So saieth Suggestion vnto thée, but Conscience it denyeth, And in the ende what so I say, for trueth thou shalt espye, And that most false, which Conscience shal in secreat hart deny. Philologus. Ah wretched man, what shall I doo? which doo so playnly sée, My flesh and Spirit to contende, and that in no small thing, But as concernyng the euent, of extreame miserie▪ Which either studie to auoyde, or els vpon mée bring, And which of them I should best trust, it is a doubtfull thing. My Conscience speaketh truth mée think, butyet because I feare, By his aduice to suffer death, I doo his wordes forbeare. And therfore pacyfy thy selfe, and doo not so torment, Thy selfe, in vaine I must séeke some meanes for to eschew, These griping gréefes, which vnto mée, I sée now imminent. And therfore will no longer stay, but bid thée now adue. Conscience. Oh stay I say Philologus, or els thou wilt it rue. Philologus. It is lost labour that thou doest, I will be at a point, And to inioye these worldly ioyes, I ieoparde will a iont. Exit Phil. & Sug. Conscience. Oh cursed creature O fraile flesh, O meat for wormes, O dust, O blather puffed full of winde, O vainer then these all, What cause hast thou in thine owne wit? to haue so great a trust: Which of thy selfe canst not espie, the euils which on thée fall, The blindnesse of the outward man, Philologus shew shall At his returne, vnlesse I can at last, make him relent, For why the Lord him to correct, in furious wrath is bent. Exit Consciencia.
Acte. fyfth. Sceane. 3: HYPOCRISIE. SVch chopping cheare, as we haue made, the like hath not bin séene And who so pleasant with my Lorde, as is Philologus, His recantation, he hath made, and is dispatched cleane, Of all the griefes which vnto him, did séeme so dangerous: Which thing you know, was brought to passe especially by vs, So that Hypocrisie hath done that, which Sathan did intende, That men or worldly wealth, should cease the Gospell to defende: What shall become of foolish Goose, I meane Philologus: In actuall maner to your eyes, shall represented bée: For though as now, he seemes to be, in state most glorious, He shall not long continue so, eche one of you shall sée. But néedes I must be packing hence, my fellowes stay for mée, Shake handes before we do depart, you shall sée mée no more: And though Hypocrisie goe away, of hypocrits héere is good store. Exit Hyp. Acte fyfth. Sceane 4. PHILO. GISBERT. PAPHI. COme on my Children deare to mée, and let vs talk a while, Of worldly goodes, which I haue got and of my pleasant state, Which fortune hath installed mée, who on mee chéerely smyle. So that into the top of whéele, she doth mée eleuate: I haue escaped all mishaps, of which my Conscience did prate, And where before I ruled was, as is the common orte, Now as a Iudge within this Land, I beare a Rulers port. Gisbertus. Indéede, good father, we haue cause, to praise your grauitie, Who did both saue your selfe from woe, and vs from begging state, Where if you had perseuered still, as we did feare greatly: Your goods from vs, your Children should, to Legate bene confiscate Our glorious pompes, then, should we haue bene glad for to abate.
Paphinitius. But now, not onely that you had for vs, but also haue Such offices, whereby more gaines, you yeare by yeare shall saue: Philologus. I was at point, once, very neare, to haue bene quite forlorne, Had not Suggestion of the flesh, from folly mee reclaymed, And set this Glasse of worldly ioyes, my sight and eyes beforne: The sight wherof did cause all thinges, of mée to be disdained, I thought I had felycitie, when it I had obtained: And to say trueth, I doo not care, what to my soule betide, So long as this prosperitie, and wealth by mée abide. But let vs homewarde goe againe, some pastime there to make, My whole delight in sport and games, of pleasure I repose: Horror. Nay stay thy iournay héere awhile, I doo thée prisoner take, I shall abate thy pleasures soone, yea, to soone. thou wilt suppose, Philologus. What is thy name? whence commest thou? wherfore to me disclose? Horror. My name is calde Confusion and horror of the mynde, And to correct impenitents, of God I am assignde. And for because thon dost dispise, Gods mercy and his grace, And wouldst no admonytion take, by them that did thée warne, Neither when Conscience counsailed thée, thou wouldst his wordes imbrace who would haue had thée vnto god, obedience tru to learne: Nor couldst betwéene Suggestions craft, & Conscience truth discerne Beholde therfore, thou shalt of mée an other lesson heare, Which wil thou, nil thou, wt torment of Conscience, thou shalt beare And where thou hast extinguished, the holy Spirit of God, And made him wery with thy sinnes, which dayly thou hast done, He will no lenger in thy soule, and spirit make abode: But with the Graces, which he gaue to thée, now is he gone, So that to Godwarde, by Christes death, reioysing thou hast none, The peace of Conscience faded is, in stead whereof, I brlng The Spirit of Sathan, blasphemy, confusion and cursing. The Glasie likewise of vanyties, which is thine onely ioy
I will transforme into the Glasse of deadly desperation, By looking in the which, thou shalt conceiue a great annoy: Thus haue I caught thée in thy pride, and brought thée to damnatiō: So that thou art a patterne true, of Gods iust indignation: Whereby eche man may warned be, the like sinnes to eschew, Least the same torments they incurre, which in thée they shall view. Philologus. O painfull paine of déepe disdaine, oh griping gréefe of hell, Oh horror huge, oh soule supprest, and slaine with desperation, Oh heape of sinnes, the sum wherof, no man can number well: Oh death, oh furious flames of hell, my iust recompensation, Oh wretched wight, oh creature curst, oh childe of condempnation. Oh angrie God, and mercilesse, most fearefull to beholde, Oh Christ thou art no Lambe to mée, but Lion fearce and boulde. Gisbertus. Alas deare Father, what doth moue and cause you to lament? Philologus. My sinnes (alas) which in this Glasse, appeare innumerable, For which I shall no pardon get, for God is fully bent: In furie for to punish me, with paines intollerable: Neither to call to him for grace, or pardon am I able, My sinne is vnto death, I féele Christes death doth me no good, Neither for my behoofe, did Christ shed his most precious bloud. Paphinitius. Alas deare Father (alas I say) what sodaine chaunge is this? Philologus. I am condemned into hell, these torments to sustaine. Gisbartus. Oh say not so my Father deare, Gods mercy mighty is, Philologus. The sentence of the righteous Iudge, cannot be cald againe, Who hath already iudged mée to euerlasting payne: Oh that my bodie buried were, that it at rest might bée, Though soule were put in Iudas place, or Caines extremitie. Gisbertus. Oh Brother hast you to the Towne and tel Theologus, What sodaine plague and punishment, my Father hath befell,
Paphinitius. I run in hast, and will request him for to come with vs. Gisbertus. Oh Father, rest your selfe in God, and all thing shalbe well, Philologus. Ah dredfull name, which when I héere, to sigh it mée compell: God is against mée I perceiue, he is none of my God, Vnlesse in this, that he will beat, and plague mée with his rod. And though his mercy doth surpasse, the sinnes of all the worlde, Yet shall it not once profit me, or pardon mine offence, I am refused vtterly, I quite from God am whorld: My name within the Booke of lyfe, had neuer residence, Christ prayed not, Christ suffered not, my sinnes to recompence: But only for the Lordes elect, of which sort I am none, I éele his iustice towardes mée, his mercy all is gone: And to be short, within short space, my finall end shall bée, Then shall my soule incurre the paines, of vtter desolation, And I shall be a president, most horrible to sée: To Gods elect, that they may sée, the price of abiuration. Gisbertus. To héere my Fathers dolefull plaints, it bringeth preturbation, Vnto my soule, but yonder comes, that good Theologus: Oh welcome sir, and welcome you good master Eusebius. Acte. fyfth. Sceane. 2: THEO. PHI. EVSE. GIS. PAPHI. GOd saue you good Philologus, how doo you by Gods grace, Philologus. You welcome are, but I (alas) vile wretch, am héere euill found Eusebius. What is the chiefest cause (tell vs) of this your dolorus case? Philologus. Oh would my soule were sunke in hell▪ so body were in grounde That angrie God, now hath his will, who sought mee to confounde.
Theologus. Oh say not so Philologus, for God is gracious, And to forgiue the penitent his mercy is plentious. Do you not know that all the earth with mercy doth abound, And though the sinnes of all the world vppon one man were layde, If he one only sparke of grace or mercy once had found, His wickednes could not him harme: wherefore be not dismayde, Christes death alone for all your sinnes, a perfect raunsome payde: God doth not couet sinners death, but rather that he may By liuing still, bewaill his sinnes, and so them put awaye. Consider Peeter who thrée tymes his Maister did denye: Yea, with an oath, and that although Christ did him warning giue, With whome before tyme he had lyued so long familiarly, Of whome so many benefits of loue he did receiue, Yet when once Peeter his owne fault, did at the last perceiue, And did bewaile his former cryme, with alt and bitter teares, Christ by and by did pardon him, the Gospell witnes beares. The theefe lykewise, and murtherer, which neuer had don good, But had in mischeefe spent his dayes, yea, during all his lyfe, With lattest breth when he his sinnes and wickednes with stoode, And with iniquityes of flesh, his spirit was at strife, Thorow that one motion of his heart, and power of true beliefe, He was receiued into grace, and all his sinnes defaced, Christ saying, soone in Paradice with me thou shalt be placed. The hand of God is not abridged, but still he is of myght, To pardon them that call to him vnfainedly for grace, Againe, it is Gods propertye, to pardon sinners quight: Pray therefore with thy heart to God, here in this open place, And from the very roote of heart bewaile to him thy case: And I assure thée, God will, on thée his mercy show, Through Iesus Christ, who is with him our aduocate you knowe. Philologus. I haue no fayth, the wordes you speake my hart doth not beléeue, I must confesse that I for sinne, am iustly throwne to hell. Eusebius. His monstrous incredulitye, my very heart doth gréeue, Ah dere Philologus, I haue knowne by face and visage well,
A sort of men, which haue bene vext, with Diuels and spirits fell, In farre worse state then you are yet, brought into desperation. Yet in the ende haue bene reclaimde, by godly exhortation. Such are the mercies of the Lorde, he will throw downe to hell: And yet call backe againe from thence, as holy Dauid wrightes. What? should then let your trust in God? I pray you to vs tel, Sith to forgiue, and doo vs god, it chiefely him delightes. What would not you, that of your sins, he should you cleane acquite? How can he once denie to you, one thing you doo request? Which hath already geuen to you, his best beloued Christ. Lift vp your hart in hope therefore, awhile be of good cheare, And make accesse, vnto his seate of grace, by earnest prayer, And God will surely you reléeue with grace, stand not in feare: Philologus. I doo beléeue, that out from God, proceede these comfortes faire, So doo the Diuels, yet of their health, they alway doe dispaire. They are not written vnto mée, for I woulde faine attaine, The mercy, and the loue of God, but he doth me disdaine. How would you haue that man to lyue, which hath no mouth to eate No more can I lyue in my soule, which haue no faith at all: And where you say, that Peter did, of Christ soone pardon get, who in the sele same sinne, with mée, from God did greatly fall, why? I cannot, obtaine the same, to you I open shall: God had respect to him alwaies, and did mée firmly leue, But I alas, am reprobate, God doth my soule reproue. Moreouer, I will say with tongue, what so you wyll require, My harte I eele with blasphemy, and cursing is repleate. Theologus. Then pray with vs, as Christ vs taught, we do you all desire. Philologus. To pray with lips, vnto your God, you shall mée scene intreate, My spirit, to Sathan is in thrall, I can it not thence get: Eusebius. God shall renue your spirit againe, pray onely as you can, And to assist you in the same, we pray ech Christian man. Philologus. O God which dwellest in the Heauens, and art our father deare.
Thy holy name throwghout the world be ener sainctified, The kingdome of thy word and spirit, vppon vs rule might beare, Thy will in earth, as by thy faincts in heauen be ratified, Our dayly bread, we thee beseech, O Lord for vs prouide, Our sinnes remit (Lord vnto vs) as we ech man forgiue, Let not tentation vs assayle, in all euill vs releeue. Amen. Theologus. The Lord be praysed, who hath at length thy spirit mollified, These are not tokens vnto vs of your reprobation, You morne with teares, and sue for grace, wherfore be certified, That God in mercy giueth care, vnto your supplication, Wherfore dispayre not thou at all of thy soules preseruation, And say not with a desperat heart, that God against thée is, He will no doubt, these paynes once past, receiue you into blisse. Philologus. No, no, my friends, you only heare and sée the outward part, Which though you thinke they haue don wel, it booteth not at all, My lyppes haue spoke the wordes in déede, but yet I féele my heart, With cursing is replenished, with rancor, spight, and gall, Neither do I your Lord and God, in hart my father call, But rather seeke his holy name for to blaspheame and cursse, My state therfore doth not amend, but ware still worse and worse, I am secluded cleane from grace, my heart is hardened quight, Wherefore you do your labour loose, and spend your breth in vayne. Eusebius. Oh say not so Philologus, but let your heart be pight, Vppon the mercyes of the Lord, and I you assertayne, Remission of your former sinnes, you shall at last obtayne: God hath it sayde (who cannot lye) at whatsoeuer time A sinner shall from heart repent, I will remitt his cryme. Philologus. You cannot say so much to me, as herein I do knowe, That by the mercyes of the Lord, all sinnes are don awaye, And vnto them that haue true fayth, aboundantly it flowe, But whence do this true fayth procéede to vs, I do you pray, It is the only gift of God, from him it comes alwaye, I would therefore he would vouchsafe, one sparke of fayth to plant,
within my breast, then of his grace, I know I should not want. But it as easely may be done, as you may with one spoone, At once take vp the water cleane, which in the seas abide: And at one draught, then drink it vp, this shall ye doe as soone, As to my brest of true beléefe, one sparkle shall betide: Tush, you which are in prosperous state, & my paines haue not tried Doe think it but an easy thing, a sinner to repent Him of his sinnes, and by true faith, damnation to preuent. The healthfull néede not Phisicks art, and ye which are all haile, Can giue good counsell to the sick, their sicknesse to eschew: But here alas, confusion, and hell, doth mée assaile, And that all grace, from me is reft, I finde it to be true. My hart is steele, so that no faith, can from the same insue. I can conceiue no hope at all, of pardon or of grace, But out alas, Confusion is alway before my face. And certainly, euen at his time, I doo most playnly sée, The deuils to be about me rounde, which make great preparation, And kéepe a stirre, here in this place, which only is for mee. Neither doe I conceiue, these thinges, by vaine imagination, But euen as truly, as mine eyes, beholde your shape and fashion. Wherefore, desired Death dispatch, my body bring to rest, Though that my soule, in furious flames of fire, be supprest. Theologus. Your minde corrupted dooth present, to you, this fale illusion, But turne awhile, vnto the spirit of trueth, in your distresse, And it shall cast out from your eies, all horror and confusion: And of this your affliction, it will you soone redresse. Eusebius. We haue good hope Philologus, of your saluation doubtlesse. Philologus. What your hope is concerning mée, I vtterly contempne, My Conscience, which for thousands stand, as guiltie mée condemne. Eusebius. When did this horror first you take, what think you is the cause? Philologus. Euen shortly, after I did make, mine open abiuration, For that I did prefer my goods, before Gods holy lawes.
Therefore in wrath he did me sende, this horrible veration, And hath me wounded in the soule, with gréeuous tribulation: That I may be a president, in whom all men may view, Those torments, which to them, that wil forsake the Lord, are due. Theologus. Yet let me bouldly aske one thing of you, without offence, What was your former faith in Christ, which you before did holde? For it is saide of holy Paule, in these same wordes in sence: It cannot be that vtterly, in faith he should bee colde, Who so he be, which perfectly, true faith in hart once holde: Wherfore rehearce in short discourse, the sum of your beléefe, In these pointes chiefly, which for health of soule, are thought most chéefe. Philologus. I did beleeue in hart, that Christ was 'that true sacrifice. Which dyd appease the fathers wrath, and that by him alone We were made iust and sanctified: I dyd beleeue lykewise, That without him, heauen to attaine, sufficient meanes were none. But to reknowledge this againe, alas, all grace was gone: I neuer loued him againe, with right and sincere harte, Neither was thankfull for the same, as was ech goodmans part. But rather tooke the faith of Christ, for lybertie to sinne, And did abuse his graces great, to further carnall lust, what wickednesse I did commit, I cared not a pinne: For that, that Christ discharged had any ransome, I dyd trust: wherfore the Lord doth now correct, the same with torments iust. My sonnes, my sonnes, I speake to you, my counsell ponder well, And practise that in déedes, which I in wordes shall to you tell. I speake not this, that I would ought, the Gospell derogate, which is most true in euery part, I must it néedes confesse, But this I say, that of vaine faith alone, you should not prate: But also by your holy lyfe, you should your faith expresse, Beléeue me syres, for by good proofe, these thinges I doo expresse: Peruse the wrighting of S. Iames, and first of Peters too, which all Gods people, holynesse of lyfe exhort vnto. By sundrie reasons, as for firste, because we strangers are, Againe, sinne from the flesh procéede, but we are of the spirit, The third, because the flesh alway, against the spirit doo warre,
The fourth, yt we may stop the mouthes of such as would backbight, The fifth, that other by our lyues, to God reduce we might: Againe, they sing a pleasant song, which▪ sing in déede and word, But where euill life insue good words, there is a foule discorde: But I alas, most wretched wight, whereas I did presume, That I had got a perfect faith, did holy life disdaine: And though I did to other preach, good lyfe I did consume: My lyfe in wickednesse and sinne, in sport and pleasures vaine, No, neither did I once contende, from them flesh to refraine, Beholde therfore, the iudgements iust, of God doth mée annoy, Not for amendement of my lyfe, but mée for to destroy. Eusebius. We doo not altogether like of this your exhortation, whereas you warne vs not to trust, so much vnto our faith, But that good workes we should prepare, vnto our preseruation, There are two kindes of righteousnesse, as Paul to Romanes faith: The one dependeth of good workes, the other hangs of faith: The former which the world allowes, good counts it least of twaine, As by good proofe, it shall to you, in words be proued playne. For Socrates and Cato both, did purchase great renowne, And Aristides surnamed Iust, this righteousnesse fulfilled, Wherfore he was as iustest man, erpelde his natiue towne, Yet are their soules with Infydels, in hell for euer spilled, Because they sought not righteousnes, that way that God thē willed The other righteousnes coms from faithe, which God regards alone, And makes vs seeme immaculate, before his heauenly throne. Wherfore, there is no cause you should, sende vs to outwarde act, As to the ancor or refuge, of our preseruation. Theologus. The meaning of Philologus, is not héere so exact, As doo his wordes make it to seeme, by your allegation, He doth not meane betwéene good works, and faith to make relation As though workes were equiuolent, saluation to attaine. As is true faith, but what he ment, I will set downe more playne, He did exhort the yongmen heere, by him for to beware, Least as he did, so they abuse, Gods gospell pure, And without good aduice, vsurp of faith the gift so rare:
Whereby they think, what so they doo, thē selues from torments frée, And by this proud presumption, Gods anger should procure: And where they boast and vaunt, thē selues, good faithfull men to bée, Yet in their lyues, they doo deny their faith in ech degrée: Wherfore he saith, as Peter saide, see that you doo make knowne, Your owne election by your workes: againe, S. Iames doth say, Shew mée thy faith, and by my works, my faith shall thée be shown. And wherupon his owne offence, he dooth to them bewray, Wheras he did vainegloryously, vpon a dead faith stay: Which for the inwarde righteousnesse, he alway did suspect, And héereupon all godlynes of lyfe, he did neglect. Philologus. That was the meaning of my wordes, how euer I them spake, The truth (alas) vile wretch, my soule and Conscience too true féele Theologus. What? do you not Philologus, with vs no comfort take, When all these thinges, so godlyly, to you I doo reueale, Especially, sith that your selfe, in them are séene so well: Some hope vnto vs of your health, and safetie yet is left, we do not think that all Gods grace, from you is wholly reft. Philologus. Alas, what comfort can betide, vnto a damned wretch? what so I héere, sée, féele, tast, speake, is turned all to woe. Eusebius. Ah deare Philologus, think not, yt ought can Gods grace outreache, Consider Dauid which did sinne in lust, and murther too: Yet was he pardoned of his sinnes, and so shalt thou also. Phil. King Dauid alwaies, was elect, but I am reprobate, And therefore I can finde small ease, by waighing his estate. He also prayed vnto God, which I shall neuer doe, His prayer was that God would not, his spirit take away: But it is gone from mée long since, and shall be giuen no moe. But what became of Cayne, of Cam, of Saul, I do you pray? Of Iudas, and Barehu, these must my Conscience slay. Of Iulyan Apostata, with other of that crue, The same torments must I abide, which these men did insue: Theologus. Alas my friend, take in good part, the chastment of ye Lorde
Who doth correct you in this world, that in the lyfe to come, He might you saue, for of the like, the Scripture teares re Philologus. That is not Gods intent with mée though it be so with some, who after bodies punishment, haue into fauour come: But I (alas) in spirit and soule, these greenous torments beare, God hath condemded my Coscience, to perpetuall greife and feare. I would most gladly chuse to lyue, a thousand, thousande yeare. In all the torments and the griefe that damned soules sustaine, So that at length I might haue ease, it would me greatly cheare. But I alas, shall in this lyfe, in torments still remaine, while Gods iust anger, vpon mee, shall be reuealed plaine: And I example made to all, of Gods iust indionation, Oh that my body were at rest, and soule in condemnation. Eusebius. I pray you answer me herein, where you by déepe dispaire, Say, you are worse here in this lyfe, then if you were in hell, And for because to haue death come, you alway make your prayer, As though your foule and body both in torments great did dwell: If that a man should giue to you a sword, I pray you tell, would you destroy your selfe there with? as doe the desperate, which hange or kill, or into flouds, themselues precipitate. Philologus. Giue me a sworde, then shall you know, what is in mine intent. Eusebius. Not so my friend, I onely aske, what héerein were your will? Philologus. I cannot, neither will I tell, wherto I would be bent. Theologus. These wordes doe nothing edifye, but rather fancies fill, which we would gladly if we could, indeuour for to kill. wherefore, I once againe request, together let vs pray: And so we will leaue you to God, and send you hene away. Philologus. I cannot pray, my spirit is dead, no faith in me remayne Theologus. Doe as you can, no more then might, we can ask at your hand.
Philologus. My prayers turned is to sinne, for God doth it disdaine, Eusebius. It is the falshood of the spirit, which doo your health withstande, That teach you this, wherfore in time, reiect his filthy bande. Theologus. Come knéele by mee, and let vs pray, the Lord of Heauen vnto: Philologus. With as good will as did the Diuell, out of the deaffe man goe. O God which dwellest in the heauens. &c. Tush sirs, you doo your labours loose, see where Belzabub doth come, And doth inuite mee to a feast, you therefore speake in vaine, ea if you aske ought more of me▪ in answer I will be dumbe, I will not wast my ong for naught, as soone shall one small grayne Of Musterdseede, fill all the world, as I true faith attaine. Theologus. We will no lenger stay you now, but let you hence depart. Eusebius. Yet will we pray continually, that God woulde you conuart. Theologus. Gisbertus and Paphinitius, conduct him to his pla▪ But see he haue good company, let him not be alone: Ambo. We shall so doo, God vs assist, with his most holy grace. Gisbertus. Come Father doo you not think good, that we from hence begone? Philologus. Let go my handes at lybertie, assistaunce I craue none: Oh that I had a sworde a while, I should soone eased bee. Ambo. Alas deare father, what do you? Euseb. His wil we may now sée Theologus. Exeunt Phi. Gis. Paph. O glorious God, how wonderfull, those iudgements are of thine Thou doost beholde the secret hart, naught doth thy eyes beguile, Oh what occasion is vs giuen, to feare thy might deuine, And from our haes to hate and lothe, iniquities so vile, Least for the saine, thou in thy wrath, doost grace from vs exile.
The outwarde man doeth thée not please, nor yet, the minde alone, But thou requirest both of vs, or else regardest none. Eusebius. Héere may the worldlinges haue a glasse, their states for to behold, And learne in time, for to escape, the iudgements of the Lorde, Whilste they by flattering of them selues, of faith both dead and colde Doo sell their soules to wickednes, of all good men abhorde: But godlynes doth not depend, in knowing of the worde: But in fullfilling of the same, as in this man we see, Who though he did to others preach, his lyfe did not agrée. Theologus. Againe Philologus witnesseth, which is the trueth of Christ, For that consenting to the Pope, he did the Lorde abture, Whereby he teacht the wauering fayth, on which side to persist: And those which haue the trueth of God, that still they may indure, The Tyraunts, which delight in bloode, he likewise doth assure, In whose affayres, they spende their time: but let vs home warde goe. Eusebius. I am content, that after meate, we maye resorte him to. Exiunt. Theo. & Euse. Acte sixe. Seane last. NVNTIVS. OH ioyfull newes, which I report, and bring into your eares, Philologus, that would haue hangde himselfe with coard, —Is nowe conuerted vnto God, with manie bitter teares, By godly councell he was woon, all prayse be to the Lorde, His errours all, he did renounce, his blasphemies he abhorde: And being conuerted, left his lyfe, exhorting foe and friend, That do professe the fayth of Christ, to be constant to the ende, Full thyrtie wéekes, in wofull wise, afflicted he had bene, All which long time, he tooke no foode, but forst against his will, Euen with a spoone to poure some broath, his téeth betwéene, And though they sought by force, this wise to féede him still, He alwayes stroue with all his might, the same on ground to spill, So that no sustenaunce he receiu'de, ne sléepe could he attayne, And nowe the Lord, in mercy great hath easde him of his payne. FINIS.
