4462 S112718 99847963 13033
❧ TVVO ❧ GODLY AND NO∣TABLE SERMONS PREACHED BY THE excellent and famous Clarke, master Iohn Caluyne, in the yere .1555. The one concer∣nynge Pacience in aduersitie: The other touchyng the most comfortable as∣suraunce of oure saluation in Chryste. Iesu. Translated out of Frenche into Englyshe.
To the Christen Reader. AMonge the mani∣folde, sounde, and moste holsome les∣sons, whiche are taughte vs in the heauenly schole of our Sauiour Iesus Chryst, there be none that the holy gost in more ernest wise requyreth vs to learne, or that more maketh for oure comforte here and in the worlde to come, then to haue quietnesse of mynde in aduersytie, and to be assured of eternal saluation in Christ Ie¦su. ForHeb. 12. (though all trouble for the present tyme be greuous) yet lyke as when we pacyently run the race that is set before vs, en∣duryng suche correction and cha∣stisement as our heauenly father leyeth vpon vs, he then causeth
the same to turne so much to our profyte, and to bringe vs so qui∣ete fruite of ryghtuousenes, that we thereby obteyne more of hys holynesse, and become vesselles more apt to serue the glory of his name, and to edifye his churche: Euen so, of all consolations and comfortes, this is most incompa¦rable,Ephe. 1. 2. Tim. 1 Mat. 25 that throughe the mooste graciouse purpose of the eternall God, oure euerlastynge saluati∣on is so certayne and sure, that it was determyned and decreed by hym in Chryst Iesu his eter∣nall sonne, before the foundation of the worlde was leyed. Touchynge these two poyn∣tes: namely, the quiet or pacient sufferynge of trouble in Christes cause. And the assuraunce of our eternall saluation in hym, thou
hast here (gentle reader) two no¦table, godly and comfortable ser∣mons, made by goddes faythful seruaunt, maister Iohn Caluine euen at such tyme as here in En∣glande, the sworde of tyrannye was full of bloudde, and the fyre burnynge hotte. By the whiche worthy sermons, we all be cau∣led vpon: partly to chose rather to suffre aduersitie with the peo∣ple of God,Heb. 11. then to enioy the ple∣sures of synne for a season: And partely in nothynge to reioyse so muche, as in that our names are wrytten in heauen.Luc. 10. As we be taughte by oure sayde soue∣raygne lorde and master Chryst Iesus, bles∣sed for euer ∴ Amen.
Sondaye the .v. of May. 1555. in the forenone. 2. Tim. 1 ¶ Be not therfore ashamed to testify our Lord, neither be ashamed of me which am bounde for his sake: but be parta∣ker of the afflyctions of the gospell, through the power of god, who saued vs, and cauled vs with an holye cau∣lyng, not accordyng to oure dedes, but accordynge to his owne purpose and grace, whiche grace was geuen to vs, throgh Christ Iesus before the world was: but is nowe declared. &c. ALthoughe that al∣myghty God hath in his sonne sufficient∣lyeIo. 17. 1. Co. 2. Ephe. 3. manyfested his glorye and maiestye throughe his spirite and gospel, wherethroughe he is of all the worlde to be honored and wor∣shypped, yet is mannes vnkinde∣nesse suche, that he nedeth conti∣nuall exhortation, to be nothing
shamed of that gospel. And why? for though god by his word cau∣leth all creatures to hym selfe, yetMat. 13. Mar. 4. Luke. 8. the more parte rebel, dispise and dispyte the doctrine wherby he wold be knowen and worship¦ped: Seynge then, men are soo proude, peruerse and frowarde,Ps. 74. as to eleuate theym selues a∣gaynst theyr creatour, let vs not withstanding take sure holde of this place of scrypture here de∣clared, that is,Luc. 9. that we be not ashamed of the gospel. And why? because it is the testimony of our god, whiche we as nyghe as in vs lyeth,1. Cor. 9. shoulde publyshe and declare, that al may be referred to this ende, that he be knowen and gloryfied as he is worthye. For when the gospel is not pre∣ched, it lyeth as it were buryed.
Wherefore he apoyntethAct. 10. wyt∣nes bearers, to testifye the same vnto vs. And therfore let vs ren¦der vnto hym this honoure, al∣thoughe the whole world went astraye,Phil. 3. 2. Ti. 2. that we abyde faste by this holsome doctryne: for S. Paule setteth here forthe hys owne parson, not for that he ca∣reth for our approbation, but to declare, thatMat. 10 1. Tes. 4 when we seperate oure selues from goddes seruan∣tes, it is a sufficient testymonie, that the maister is also forsaken and geuen ouer. Some parad∣uenture wyl thincke, that in for∣sakyng the mynister of the word of god beynge tormented, disqui∣eted and in distresse, he hath for∣saken but a mortall man:Heb. 10, 2 Tim. 4 but god is therwith also displeased, in as muche as the man whiche
so is troubled, bereth the marke of the gospell, for goddes cause there throughe is declared, as it were betrayed. Saynct Paule therfore consydering this: sayth notably to Tymothee,2. Ti. 1. be not a∣shamed of me. And to say the tru∣the, as I haue alredy declared, one myghte laughe Tymothe to scorne, and sende hym backe to his mayster, as the wycked can full well spye theyr aduauntage at suche tymes, when god hum∣bleth hys seruauntes, and suffe∣reth them to be vniustly tormen∣ted,2 Pa. 36 Psal. 35.78.79. for then they assaulte and hardely laie at them which haue maynteined theyr doctrine. Here by mayst thou see that Tymothe myghte be in doubte what to do, and therfore saith Sainct Paul vnto him, althoughe I be made
as it were1. Co. 4. an outcast in the face of the worlde, so as some laugh me to skorne, others deteste and hate me, yet be not thou therfore euer a whit the soner moued. For I am (sayth he)Ep. 3.4. Col. 4. the prysoner of Iesus Chryste, As who wolde saye, thoughe the whole worlde wolde laye to my charge all the vyllany that coulde be deuysed, yet do they it not for myne offen∣ces, for my cause is auouched in goddes presence, and trulye the cause is his, for I suffer not for myne offences, his truethe is al∣wayes on my syde, when I suf∣fer persecution, for thatPhil. 1. I haue maynteyned and doo maynteyne the worde of God. Care not for the iudgement of the world, for men are ledGene. 6. Psa. 94 with frowarde af∣fections. Let it suffyce the then,
that I be as it were an hostage for the sonne of god, who hono∣reth myne imprysonment, in such wyse, that thoughe the worlde thyncke it vyle and detestable,Ps. 116. 1. Pet. 1. yet before god and his aungels it is not a lyttel estemed and ho∣nored. Nowe then, let vs lerne hereby in noo wyse to defrawde Iesus Chryste of the testimonyeEphe. 6. which we ought of beare of him hauyng our mouthe shutte, when it shall be nedeful toPhil. 1. maynteine his honour and thactoritie of his gospel: but contrary wyse when we see our bretherne to be afflic∣ted for the name of god,Heb. 13. we be founde redy to be cowpled wyth them, and that we stande in de∣fence as much as in vs is, for the same cause,Phil. 1. tremblynge or fea∣rynge nothynge at all, for al the
stormes whiche myghte happen, thoughe the deuyll haue the bry∣dell at wyll, and thoughe thyn∣ges were neuer so far oute of or∣der.1. Co. 15. Colo. 1. Let vs always abyde sted fastly in our determynation, whē we must beare wytnes of the son of god, seyngeRom. 1. Phil. 2. he wyll be serued of vs in a matter of suche weight and worthinesse. But yet, let vs haue a speciall eye, whether they suffer for theyr fautes, or for the testimonie of goddes truethe, ha∣uynge a specyall regarde1. Co. 16. that we set not lyghte of any personne whom we shall perceaue for such a cause to be oppressed. ForIoh. 7. Phil. 1. we maye not rashely iudge in suche a case, least thiniurie therof touche god hym selfe: we must therfore make dylygente inquisition, to know the cause why men do suf∣fer.
If wee perceyue they haue walked in an vpright conscience, and neuertheles blamed, reuiled and tormented, and that for ser∣uynge of God, let that suffice the to blotte out all the obprobries of the worlde: for that is the rea∣son wherfore sayncte Paule ad∣deth:2. Tim. 1 be thou partaker of the af¦flyctions of the gospell: forEphe. 5. na∣turallye, it is geuen to euery one of vs to spare gladly hym selfe: And thoughe we confesse, & that without dissymulation,Phil. 1. that it is a syngular grace whiche God geueth when he wyl be serued of men for the mayntenaunce of his cause, yet is there noone whiche wolde not gladdely exempt hym selfe from persecution. Wee can well prayse *suche, as valiently offer them selues to the conflicte,
(as the martirs of Iesus Christ)Heb. 11. are worthy to be estemed & ho∣noured) yet in the meane whyle,Ephe. 5. there is none whiche wolde not gladly be farre of from the stry∣pes. And whye? because we re∣specte not this admonytion of s. Paule,Heb. 12. 2. Ti. 3. that is, that the gospell bryngeth afflyctions. Ihesus Chryste hauynge once suffered in his owne person,Act. 14. wyl nowe al∣so haue his doctryne coupled and ioyned to many miseries: He can when it shall please hym, cause the gospell to be receaued wyth∣oute contradiction, but what?Act. 1. Luc. 1. the holy scrypture must be fulfil¦led, whiche shall be declared a∣mongest the middest of hys enne∣mies. Men also must come vnto hymEccle. 2. vpon this condition, to suf∣fer many conflyctes, for as much
as the wicked when god cauleth them, auaunce them selues and rebell agaynste god,Mar. 10 2. Tim. 3 it is then vnpossible for vs to enioy the gos¦pel without persecution. Not for that the cooles are kyndeled and the faggottes alwayes set on fi∣er, but whether it be after one sorte or other, it muste come to passe, thatHeb. 12. we be exercised, we must nedes (I say) fyght vnder oure Lorde Iesus Chryst. Now then, he whiche wolde gette him selfe a farre of from the crosse of oure Lorde Iesus Chryste,2. Ti. 2. re∣nounceth he not his owne salua∣tion? where is the hope of lyfe, but in this sacryfyce of the sonne of god? for thus standeth the case that he wyll be like vnto vs, and we must be transformed into his symilitude. Seynge then that it
so is, let vs lerne to walke after that maner, seynge we are ther∣vnto cauled, as heretofore wee haue seene, that suche is the plea¦sure and wyll of God: we muste then without farther disputynge or contradyction,Mat. 11. bowe downe oure shoulders, and humble oure selues thervnto. Nowe lette vs farther see, what Saynct Paul here saythe: for he leadeth vs by degrees to the matter, in that he2. Tim. 1 wolde not haue vs to be asha∣med of our bretherne, when they be euyll spoken of, and rebuked of the worlde, but that we shulde be euer vnyted vnto theym: but howe maye that be? fyrste he de∣clareth, that the gospell can not be without persecution, as tofore is sayd: it pleaseth godMat. 10 that men be so deuyded: not but that God
cauleth al men outwardly to the vnitie of faythe,Luc. 14. and the doctrine of2. Cor. 5 the gospell is the message of reconsiliation. But yet note that the faythfullRom. 8. are drawen by the hower of hys holye spirite,Rom. 11 the vnfaythfull abyde in theyr hard∣nesse of harte, as hereafter it shal be more at length intreated of. For as the fyer is kynled, when thūder being ingēdred in the aire bryngeth forthe a greate hurly-burly, so is it when the gospel is preached. Nowe then if persecu∣tion followe the gospell, and Ie∣sus Chryst wolde that to beColo. 1. fy∣nished in his members which he suffered in his own person, ther∣by to be (as it were) dayly cruci∣fyed,Mat. 10 16. can it be lawfull for vs to withdrawe our selues from that state? Seinge then that in the
gospell consisteth all hope of sal∣uatiō, and thatColo. 1. theron we shuld stay our selues, let vs note what Saynct Paul sayth, who wyl∣leth vs toRom. 12 Heb. 6. stretche forthe oure hande towardes oure bretherne, when we see them oppressed, tro∣den vnder fete, spit at, and despi∣ted, &Heb. 10. that we shuld rather desire to be theyr companyons in suffe∣ringe all obprobries and vylla∣nies of the worlde,Heb. 11. then beynge honoured, had in reputation and credyte, to be alienated from thē which suffer for the cause which is common to eyther of vs. This haue we then to lerne out of this place of scrypture, nowe because on our behalfe we be weake, and thyncke we should be swalowed vp, as it were throughe persecu∣tions, as sone as we ar assaulted
by the rage of the enemies,Ps. 74. whi∣che we se to haue the swynge and power in the worlde. S. Paule addeth, thatHeb. 13. we shall not be de∣stitute of the aide succour & helpe of oure God, for when he sendeth vs to the conflycte, it is not to try our force and strength, but he ar∣meth vs immediatelye, & geueth vs an inuincible power to wyth∣stande, and therefore addeth S. Paule: Accordinge to the power of God, to take awaye all excu∣ses of dyscouragement. Euerye man (as I haue sayd) wold haue a colour and cloke to withdrawe hym selfe from persecutions, and saye. Oh, I wolde to god I had the grace to suffer for his names sake, I acknowledge it to be the greatteste benefyte that myghte happen to me, euery one (I saye)
wyll confesse this, but they wyll adde, we are weake, we shal sone be ouerthrowen, the tormentes wyll astonyshe vs, ye se the cru∣eltie and rage of thenemyes. Thus wyll euery one, after he hath confessed what an excellent thyng it is to suffer for the name of god, be neuerthelesse quit. But S. Paule plucketh from vs all suche excuses,1. Cor. 10 sayinge that god shall be ready to strengthen vs, for we may not respecte what is in our selues: For true it is that besydes the inuations of our en∣nemyes, there nedeth but oure owne shadowes to fraye vs: our owne conceyte were sufficient to put vs to flyghte. But after we haue acknowleged oure weake∣nesse, let vs come to the remedy: and when we beholde our owne
infyrmities, and what a difficul¦tie we haue to withstande our en¦nemyes,Psal. 50 let it be an occasion to induce vs to call vpon god with all humblenesse for ayde: and ac∣knowledge2. Cor. 3. no maner of habili∣tie in our selues, let vs humblye caule vpon hym to stretche forth his hande, to thende he fayle vs not when we be brought to thex∣tremytee. And so (beynge at rest) to acknowledge,2. Co. 11. that wee are more then feable, to thende that oure god prepare vs to thexamy∣nation and trial. For that is the true consideration of our weake∣nesse: yt is (saye I) that we ac∣knowlegynge oure infyrmities,Mar. 9. shoulde desyre god to helpe our weakenesse, accordynge to that he knoweth to be meteste for vs: for therevnto muste we haue s¦pecte.
If this doctrine were im∣prynted in oure hartes without farther reasonynge, wee shoulde be farre awaye better dysposed to suffer then we are. But alas? there are verye fewe whiche re∣membre this lesson: naye, it see∣meth that we wolde rather stop oure eares, and shutte oure eyes when we are spoken vnto therof, *we make wyse that we are de∣syrous, that god should strenthen vs: but in effecte we can not in∣duce oure selues to beholde this power, wherof S. Paule spea∣keth, presumynge that the mat∣ter toucheth vs not.2. Co. 12 But yet do∣the our lord testifie vnto vs, that his power shal be alwayes in vs and that we shal therof be posses∣sed. And therefore let not our  be occatiō to withdraw
vs from the crosse and persecuti∣ons, seyng that god1. Pet. 5. hath taken the care of vs, to supplye that whiche wanteth in vs, who al∣so promyseth to do it. Nowe S. Paule taketh not heere the po∣wer of god, to trifle withall, butPhil. 1. he testifyeth to al faythful peo∣ple, that it shall be redye and at hande when we desyre the same, so ferforth as we desyre to be ar∣med & warded therwith to fight when the sonne of god calleth vs to the conflycte,2. Cor. 9 farthermore in asmuche as men haue nede to be spurred forthe on all sydes. S. Paule addeth here oone note to make vs ashamed, if we be not feruently minded to glorifie Ie∣sus Chryste, yea to suffer perse∣cution when it shall be soo his pleasure to calle vs therunto, he
sayth, thatTit. 2.3. god hath saued vs, and hath cauled vs with an holy vocation, then if God throughe his infynyte goodnesse hathe sooPsa. 59. preuēted vs, is our ingratitude to be excused, if we on the other syde answere him not according∣ly? beholde the goodnesse of our God,Psa. 86 Osee. 13 whiche hath drawen vs out of the goulfe of hell, wherin we were loste and dampned,Tit. 2. he hath broughte vs the saluation, and hathe further cauled vs to make vs partakers therof. whē then god sheweth hym selfe thus lyberall, yf we on oure behalfe turne oure backes and wyll not vouchesafe to receaue the salua∣tion which he offereth,Rom. 2. were not that a poynte of malyce to farre out of square? Let vs then take hede, howe sayncte Paule goeth
aboute to accuse here, all such as haue not byn constante and cora∣gyouse to suffer all thassaultes, whiche for the gospelles cause were layde on mennes shulders. So dothe he without doubte go aboute toRom. 1. Act. 14. confyrme the hope of the faythfull, by openynge that whiche god hath alredy done for them: for when god hath shewed vs any euident token of his kind¦nesse, he dothe it to the ende2 Cor. 1. we should hope for the lyke an other tyme at his hande, vntyll he haue finished that which he hath begun. If then god hath2. Tim. 1 saued vs, and hath also cauled vs with an holye vocation, thyncke you that he wyll leaue vs in the mid¦dle of the waye? when he hatheAct. 14. opened vnto vs the saluation, that he hath geuen vs legges to
walke with, that he hath geuen vs his gospell, by the whych he leadeth vs vnto his kyngdome, that he openeth the gate vnto vs: when he hath thus wrought with vs, shal we thynke, that he wyll then leaue vs there, and so mocke vs, and cause his grace to be vnprofitable, frustrate & lost? No, no,1. Cor. 1. Phil. 1. let vs hope, that he wil brynge his worke to perfection. Therfore let vs go onHeb. 4.10. boldely: for seyng god hath displayed one parcell of his power and myght towardes vs, let vs not doubt, but he wyll contynue alwayes1. Co. 15. to geue vs the perfecte victory ouer sathan and al our ennemies so farre as we tary and abide vn¦tyll that Iesus ChrystCol. 1. who is oure headde and captayne, shewe hym selfe, thatHeb. 12. all power and
strength is geuen him of god his father,Mat. 28 Phil. 2. to comunicate of the same vnto vs. We see nowe then, the meanynge of Sayncte Paule. Wherefore after we haue conce∣ued what is the power of God, wherof we haue a lyttle before made mention, let vs immedy∣ately adde this declaration whi¦che hath ben made. Trewe it is god hath in effecte and by expery¦ence testyfyed vnto vs,1. Cor. 10 Heb. 13. that he wyll neuer fayle vs at our nede, and why? for he hath alredy sa∣ued vs. Let vs then so depend of hym (seynge we are in the way) that he wyll surely bryng vs to saluation.2. Tim. 1 He hath cauled vs with an holye vocation, that is to saye,Ioh 15. he hath chosen vs vnto hym selfe, he hath seuered vs frō the world, wherby he declareth
1. Cor. 11 that he wolde not haue vs caste awaye with the vnyuersall de∣struction of the worlde. For as muche then as oure lorde hathe thus withdrawen vs frome the wycked world,Isa. 40 62 wyl he not still hold vs vnder his mighty arme and conducte vs vntill the ende? This then is a sufficient confir∣mation of the power of god: whi∣che we shall styll fynde redye at hande to helpe vs,Hebr. 3. so farforthe as therein we put our confidence and truste, callynge to remem∣braunce how we haue alredy felt the same: But to make our pro∣fyte of this doctryne effectually: fyrste we muste vnderstand, that when god reueled his trueth vn∣to vs,Act. 15. it was an euydent testy∣monye, that weTit. 3. alredye apper∣teyned to his heauenlye inhery∣taunce,
that he wold avouche for his owne, and to be of his flocke. Nowe then, when we shall be hereof well perswaded, & in our selues well resolued, then nede we not doubte to walke on conti¦nually and go forward. ForPsa. 91. we shal be vnder his protection and defence: for seynge he is of suche strength to surmounte al our en∣nemyes,Ioh. 10. oure saluation can not but be in safe kepyng. Lette vs not then feare when we fele our infyrmitie, butpsal. 37 let vs stay our selues vpon god, who wyll pro∣uyde for vs, seynge he hathIosu. 1. Heb. 13. pro∣mised to assyste vs. This hadde nede to be well borne away. Let vs therfore applye oure studye, and see, that we take good hede to remember that whiche is here sayde, for he wyll not fayle vs.
Thus after many perswasions made for the strengthenynge of vs agaynste suche temptations, when we shal be at a full poynte thatPhil. 1. god wyl finyshe our salua∣tion as he hath begunne,2 Tim. 3. assys∣tynge vs in the myddle of perse∣cutions, in suche wyse that wee shall with constancie surmounte them, and tryumphe ouer our en∣nemyes, althoughe1. Cor. 4 2 Cor. 4 it seemeth to the worlde that we are troden vnder feete, yea and vtterly swo¦lowed vp, then must we come to this declaration which Saynct Paule addeth, towchynge oure saluation and holy vocatiō wher¦of we haue spoken. He saith thatTit. 3. it is not for our desertes, but ac¦cordynge to the purpose of God and his grace. Hereby wyll he better admonyshe vs, by decla∣rynge,
that oure ingratitude is so much the more to be condemp∣nedHeb. 6. in that that god hath opened the inestimable treasors of his goodnes toward vs, for he hath hadRom. 3. Epe. 2. no respecte to our worckes or dignite, when he called s to saluacion, it proceaded of hs fre grace. That was the cause wh he drewe vs to hym selfe. A therefore the lesse shalbe oure e¦cuse when we shall falsefye ou faithe, seynge that not onlye web. 9. haue byn purchased throug the bloude of oure Lorde Ie Christ his only begotten son,  that he also cared for our sal¦cion before the creation of t worlde.phe. 1. Let vs marke wel th howe S. Paul dothe here co¦dempne our ingratitude,ebr. 3. if w be found vnfaithful to our god,
stande not stoute to beare wyt∣nesse vnto his gospell, when he thervnto cauleth vs. ForTit. 3. wee be not saued accordynge to oure dedes (sayth he) but according to his owne purpose and grace. S. Paule addeth, that that was ge¦uen vsEphe. 1. before the worlde was, before the worlde had his course and begynnynge, but nowe hath it byn manyfested (sayth he) at the commyng of oure lord Iesus Christ. For when that greatTit. 2. sa∣uyoure appered, the grace which before was hid (yea not to be cō∣prehended by mans iudgement) was manifested and opened. And why? becauseHeb, 2. the sonne of god, settynge death at naught (saythe he) hath also brought an immor∣tal life. And we nede not to make long cyrcuytes to sinde the same,
Ephe. 3. for the gospell leadeth and con∣ducteth vs therunto. When ther¦fore god sendeth vs that message of saluation, we must receaue the inheritaunce promysed,Rom. 10. we nede not trotte far of for it, for god se∣keth vs out, by whose grace we open our hartes and geue passage to this testimony of the gospell & immortalite of the heuenly king¦dome to dwell in vs, althoughe we bePsa. 103. Iob. 17. poore and fraile vesselles yea thoughe there be but corrup∣tion and rottennesse in vs, yet ap¦prehende we out of hand this im∣mortalitie, and haue aRom. 8. suffyci∣ente testimonye acceptynge the grace whiche in the gospell is of∣fered vnto vs. Herein is compre∣hended the whole processe wher∣of saynct Paule speaketh. Now to vnderstand better that whiche
is here conteined, let vs note this worde Purpose to betoken the e∣uerlastyngeEphe. 1. Decree of god, not as thoughe the matters were to be caryed hyther and thyther: for when we speake of the councel of god,Rom. 9. we maye not alwayes dis∣pute, who hath soo induced hym we may not imagyne reasons, as to saye, for this cause hath god so determyned, or wherfore wolde he so do, but contrarye wyse god wold haue vsRom. 12. 1. Pet. 1. kepte vnder this modestie to thincke that his one∣ly wyll shoulde suffyce vs for rea¦son, when he sayth, god hath soo ordeyned. Althoughe the thynge seme strange vnto vs, or that we coulde perceyue therin no appa∣rante reason, yet muste we con∣clude, that his only wylRo. 9. Psa. 92. is iust, and not to be reproued. That (say
I) shulde beDeu. 4. al oure wysedome, to ratifie al that for good, which god ordereth and disposeth, with out sayenge whye or wherefore. Nowe for as muche as men haue always suche tyklynge spirites, and geue them selues ouer much lybertie to theyr curiosities: S. Paule to abate suche boldenesse, bryngeth vs backe2. Tim.  to the pur∣pose of god, into the whiche wee maye not enter so depelye, as to knowe who hath moued him, but also to note it as a weyghty mat∣ter, and thatPsa. 92. his wyll is iuste. Hereby then are we admonyshed that oure saluationEphe. 2. dependethe not for the respecte of oure mery∣tes, that god inquyred not what we were, nor whereof we were worthy, when he chose vs to him self. But he had his purpose, that
is to saye, he sought not without hym selfe the cause of oure salua∣tion, for soo this worde purpose signifieth Decree. Sainct Pau∣les mynde herein is euydent. but because that men accordynge to theyr arrogansie, can not temper them selues except they imagine alwayes some dygnytie or wor∣thynes to be proper to theym sel∣ues, and that theye well deserue that god shoulde seke after them. S. Paule specyally the better toRom. 3. exclude all that men can attry∣bute vnto them selues, sayth, pur¦pose and grace: which importeth as much as though he had sayde, purpose freely. It serueth then to abate al our workes, to the ende we be no more soo folyshe and ob∣stynate as to thyncke, that God hath chosen vs, for anye thynge
that was in vs. No no, for wee knoweEphe. 1. that god went not out of hym selfe when he chose vs to sal¦uation, for he saweRom. 5. there was but dampnation in vs, he then contented him self with his pure grace & infinite mercy. WhoPsa. 102. be∣holdynge oure myseries, woldePsal. 12. succour and helpe vs, although we were not worthy therof. And for more ample confyrmatiō her∣of. Sayncte Paule saythe that this grace was geuen vsEphe. 1. before all tymes. And herby se we, how men areEccle. 16. depriued of their senses when they wyl bost them selues, and stand in theyr owne conceyt, that they bee the cause of theyr owne saluation, & that they haue anticipated or preuented goddes goodnesse: Nowe then, doth not oure saluation depend of the eter∣nal
election?Ephe. 1. God chose vs before we were, what could we then do, were we then apt vesselles? were we then well disposed to come to God? we se then that oure salua∣tion beginneth not from the time we had knowledge and discreti∣on, sithens we were well dispo∣sed or mynded, oure saluation (I saye) beginneth not thens, but it is grounded vppon the eternall election of god whiche was be∣fore the world was made. What coulde we then do? Had we the meanes to promote our selues? coulde we moue god to caule vs to hym selfe? and to separate vs from the world? is there not thē in vs a greate blyndnesse,Rom. 10. Phil. 3. as to thyncke in our selues some wor∣thynesse, to exalte oure merytes to the obscuryng and darkening
of goddes grace, and that we can prepare our selues to haue accesse vnto him throughe our merites? wel then for what purpose hath sayncte Paule set here the electi∣on of god, sayeng, that the grace of god hath byn geuen vs before al tymes? but that ther through we are suffycientely admonysed, that they whiche thyncke to abo¦lyshe the doctryne of the election of god, do adnichylate (as much as in them is) the saluatiō of the worlde, and blot out by suche de¦uelishe suppostes and pillars, the vertue of the bloudde of our lord Iesus Chryste: to put all to con¦fusion,Gala. 1. to ouerthrow the gospel, yea, and vtterly to quenche and brynge out of memory the good∣nesse of god, the deuyll hath noo meter proppes then such as fight
agaynste predestination, whicheAct. 13. 1. Tess. 2. can not suffer in theyr deuelishe rage, that the same be spoken of, and that this message be publy∣shed as it ought. If we detest the papystes beynge most execrable, because they haue prophamed al the holy scrypture, because they haue peruerted and corrupted the trueth of the gospell and ser∣uyce of god, by infectynge al the worlde with superstition and ido¦latrye, thothers are muche more detestable whiche go about to set at naught the sprite of grace and election of god, and wold by cro∣ked & peruerse wayesHe. 10.29 1. Tes. 2. indeuour to stoppe the mouthes of such as wold clerely and openly publishe this doctrine, as the worthynes thereof requyreth. For wherin consystethe the saluation of the
faithfull,Rom. 11. but in the free electy∣on of god? should we not preache and declare, that god hathe cho∣sen hys, throughe his free mercy withoute respecte of any thynge that is? shall we not suffer thys mystery (hyghe though it be, in∣comprehensible thoughe it be) to be declared,2. Tim. 1 when as god wold haue it to be reueled? Truely it is an euydence, that we conspyre with sathan, to declare that Ie∣sus Christ hath suffered in vaine and that the passion which he suf¦fered profytethe the worlde no∣thinge, and that all wente to the deuyll and to destruction. This then is the fyrste poynte whiche wee haue herein to obserue and marke, that when we adnychy∣late the election of god, the gos∣pel can not be preached: for with∣oute
it, it is a bastarde gospell and a prophane: it is a doctryne of machomyte, there can be noo more churche nor chrystyanitie, what shall then be sayde?Luke. 12 when we shal belie the holy ghost whi∣che here speketh: when we go a∣boute to refuse this doctryne. And therfore on our behalfe lette vs determynePhil. 1. constantly to de∣fende it, for it is the grounde of our saluatiō. How can we builde and maynteyne the buyldynge, when the foundation shalbe ouer∣throwen? Sayncte Paule cau∣leth vs hereunto when he wil go about to shew bi what power we haue to fyghte, howe we shall as∣pyre to this inherytaunce which hath ben so1. Pet. 1. derely bought for vs howe we enter into the glorye of god,Luc. 14. howe we shall fynishe this
buyldynge. He sayth, my frendes you muste be founded vppon this grace whiche is not of to daye or yesterdaye, but before the creati∣on of the world. True it is, that at this presente god cauleth vs, butRom. 8. the electiō goth before: yea god elected vs beyng not moued thervnto throughe our desertes, afore we coulde haue layd before hym any thyng at al, for we owe him al, he hath drawen vszach. 5. from the goulfe of destruction where∣in we were drowned lyke poore desperate creatures. It is then good reason1 Pet. 9. that we submit our selues wholy vnto hym, accoun¦tyng our selfeRom. 3. al together boūd to his goodnesse, wherewith we shoulde be wholy rauyshed. In this wise speketh sainct Paule. And so let vs hold fast this foun∣dation
(as I haue sayde) excepte we wold that our saluatiō should runne into decaye and destructiō. And to conclude, let vs note also that this doctryne is more then profytable, when it is well ap∣plyed for oure vsage. They whi∣che wolde we shoulde speake no∣thyng at al of the election of god, wyl saye. Oh what, it is not ne∣cessary. But suche persons neuer tasted of the goodnesse of god, nor of the hope whiche we oughte to haue: lyttle knowe they what it is, not to goo to our lorde Iesus Chryste. For if wee knowe not, that we be saued for that it hathe pleased godEphe. 1. to choose vs before the creation of the worlde, howe shoulde we knowe that, whyche Sayncte Paule here rehersethe vnto vs, whiche is,Ephe. 2. that we be
dedicated to God,1. Pet. 2. for to be made apte and disposed to lyue and dye in his seruice? Howe can we ma∣gnifie his holye name? howe can we confesse that oure saluation proceadeth of hym alone? & that he is the begynnynge? and that we haue not assysted him therin? well we maye saye it with oure tongue, but it shalbe hypocritical¦ly spoken, excepte we be resolued vpō this doctrin, as it is here set forth and declared. Let vs lerne therfore that this doctrine of the election of god, and by the why∣che we be taughte that he hathe predestinated vs before the crea∣tion of the worlde, that this do∣ctryne (I saye)2. Tim. 3 ought to be prea¦ched boldely and playnely in des∣pite of all the world which wold withstand the same. And not on∣ly,
that, but we knowe that it is an article more then profytable: for without that, wee can not ef∣fectually apprehende the infinite goodnesse of oure god, vntyll we be brought so far: for a man shall but shadowe alwais the mercies of god, if we haue not this sure prynciple and grounde, that he chose vsEphe. 1. before we were borne, or could otherwyse preuent him. And whye? thoughe men wolde say, we haue ben redemed by the bloudde of our lord Iesus Christ and that we were vnworthye of his so gret mercy shewed vs, yet whoo is it (wyll they saye) that hath his parte and portion in su∣che redemption whiche god hath purchased in the person of his son but suche as wyl haue it, such as seeke after god, suche as doo sub∣iecte
them selues, suche as be not too stubburne, such as are of good inclynation and disposition, they whiche haue some good deuotiō? but when they shall meddle with the matter after such a sorte, and presume to be cauled vnto god & to his grace throughe any thyng procedynge of theym selues, or thyncke that they brought some gobet of their owne to part stake with god concernynge their sal∣uation,1. Co. 4. it weare as much as to obscure, yea to teare (as it were) in peces the grace of god, which is a sacrilege not to be born with and therfore haue I sayde, that the goodnesse of god shal neuer be knowen at the full as it oughte, vntyl suche tyme as the election be layde before vs,1 Pet. 1. testyfiynge that we are at this instante cau∣led,
Sonday the .v. of Maye. 1555. after dyner. 2. Tim. 1 ¶ But be partaker of the afflyctions of the gospel, through the power of god: who saued vs and cauled vs with an holy caulyng. Not accordynge to our dedes, but accordyng to his owne pur¦pose and grace: whiche grace was ge∣uen to vs throughe Chryst Iesus, be∣fore the worlde was. &c. WE haue declared this mornynge accordinge to the texte of Saynct Paule, that to knowe effectually goddes fre grace con∣cernynge our saluation, we must haue recourse to his eternal coū∣sayle, by the whiche he dyddeEphe. 1. chose vs before the creation of the worlde: For therein we be∣holde and see, thatRom. 11 Ephe. 2. he hadde no respecte to oure persons, or to a∣ny dignitie that was in vs, nor
to any merytes that wee coulde brynge hym. And why? because that yer we were born, we were wrytten vp in his Regester, and he had alredyeLuc. 10. Rom. 8. accepted vs for his chyldren. Therefore let vs lerne to attrybute the whole to his mercy, acknowledginge and testifienge, that on oure behalfe,1. Cor. 4. wee coulde not reioyce of anye thynge that was in vs, without derogation of the honour due vn¦to god. Trewe it is, that accor∣dynge to mannesGene. 6. wycked na∣ture, some will cauyll to darken the grace of god: sayenge, that thoughe god had chosen some be∣fore the creation of the world, he dyd it accordynge to that which he foresawe they shoulde dyffer from thothers. Neuertheles the scripture sheweth euidently, that
Mat. 25 god staieth not vntyll they can shewe them selues whether they be worthye or not, when he cho∣seth theym: But the sophisters think, they can obscure the grace of god: in saienge, that thought he regarded not the merites past yet rekeneth he vppon the meri∣tes that are to come. For (saye they) thoughe Iacob and Esau his brotherRom. 9. had doone no good nor euyll, yet god dyd chose the one, and reiected the other: So he foresawe (asHeb. 4. all thinges are presente vnto hym) that Esau wold be a wicked manne, a con∣temner of all: and that Iacob wolde be suche one, as with the tyme he declared hym selfe. In this wise do suche personnes lay theyr foundation: but these are vaine imaginations, for they all
together belie S. Paule,Eph 1.2 2. Tim. 1 who proueth that God gaue noo re∣warde to oure workes when he chose vs, in asmuch as that was decreed and done before the crea∣tion of the worlde. And thoughe the Auctoritie of S. Paul were not of force, yet is the matter soo euident, that they which thincke to escape throughe suche shyftes, shewe them selues very beastes, and as men to farre ouer sene (I saye) not onely in the vnderstan∣dinge of the scryptures, but also to be voyde of al reasō. For if we wold serche to finde out what is in man, what shal we find there?Gen. 6. Is not the whole masse of mā∣kynde accursed?Psa. 51. What brought we out of oure mothers wombe, but all iniquitie?Eccle. 2. We differ not at al then the one from the other
but that it pleased god to gather vnto hym selfeIoh. 15. those whom he wolde. And therefore vseth S. Paule that worde in an other place of scripture, when he saith, that1. Cor. 4 men haue not wherof to re¦ioyce, because none shalbe founde to excell his neyghboure, but in that wherin we are dyscerned of god. Seynge then it is the pro∣pre offyce of God to discerne vs from them whiche abyde in their condemnation. Let vs acknow∣ledge, that all shoulde haue byn loste,Rom. 5. ecepte the remedy hadde come vnto vs by an other mea∣nes. So then after we haue con¦fessed, thatEphe. 1. god chose vs before the worlde was made, it folow∣eth therof, that he then prepared vs to receaue his grace, whiche he powred into vs that whiche
was not there before: not that he onelyTit. 3. chose vs to be inhery∣tours of his kyngdome, but that also immediatly heRom. 8. marked vs, to thende we shoulde be iustifyed and gouerned by his holi spirite. This doctrine oughte to be so as∣sured and resolued vpon amonge Christians, that if any despyse it (as we se many at this presente daye goo aboute to quenche and extinguishe the trueth of god) we oughte to acknowledge them toAct. 7. repyne or repugne agaynste the holy ghost: yea to be as bulles and madde beastes, which wold vtterly set at naught all the ho∣ly scrypture. For in deede there hath bin more honestie in the pa∣pystes then in them. For the do∣ctryne of the papystes in this be∣halfe is better, holyer, and farre
awaye more conformable to the holye scrypture, then is that of these wycked wretches, whiche this day go about lyke barking dogges and hogges, that with theyr mussels wold wrote vp al (as we maye see) to ouerthrowe and turne vp syde downe the ele∣ction of god, whiche mennes im∣pietie to farre passeth measure. Wherfore come of it what wyll, let vs sticke hard to the doctrine here declared. For seynge God had chosen vsEphe. 1. before the world had his course, let vs attribute the cause of our saluation to hys free goodnesse. We ought to con∣fesse, thatEphe. 2. we ar not adopted by him accordinge to oure demery∣tes: for we hadde nothyng, nor coulde bringe any thyng at all of oure owne vnto him. We muste
therefore ascrybe theEbre. 5. cause and ofspringe of oure saluation to re∣mayne in hym alone, and theron to grounde oure selues, for other wise al that euer we shal builde, wyll runne to ruine. But yet we muste well note that which S. Paule here addethe: Fyrste the grace of Iesus Chryst with the eternall counsayle of god his fa∣ther. And then how he bryngeth vs to oure vocation: to the ende we myghte be assured of goddes goodnesse and good wylColo. 1. which had byn hyd from vs, excepte he had geuen vs a testimonie there∣of. For the fyrst poynte then S. Paule sayth, that the grace whi¦che dependeth of the onely pur∣pose of god and therein compry∣sed, is geuen vs in oure lord Ie∣sus Chryst. As though he wold
saye: For as muche asRom. 5. we de∣serue to be reiected and hated as mortall ennemies of god, it was of necessitie, thatIoh. 15. we shoulde be graffed as it wer in Iesus christ: to thende that god might recog∣nise and aduouche vs for his chil¦dren. For when god respecteth vs,Psal. 30 he can not but detest vs, for that he findeth vs ful of pouerte, full of synne, and as it were stuf∣fed vppe with all iniquitie. God who is the soueraygne Iustyce,Isa. 59. can not entre into any maner of league or appointment with vs, whiles he beholdeth our nature. Where as he then wold chose vs before the creation of the world, it was of necessitie,1. Ti. 2. that Iesus Christe shoulde be there betwene bothe: to thende we myght be e∣lected in his persone, for he was
the wel be loued sonne: and whē god coupleth vs vnto him,Ephe. 1. then are we acceptable in his syghte. Let vs lerne then to be fully cer∣tified of the election of god, ther∣of to make oure profyte, and dy∣rctly to come to Iesus Chryste: for he is the2. Co. 4. Colo. 1. true glasse, wher∣in we may beholde oure election. If Iesus Christe be take away, then remayneth God a iudge for synners, at whose handes we can not hope for fauour or good thing but rather wait for al vēgeance. His maiestie also wyl be alwais terrible vnto vsIoh. 15. without Iesus Chryst. If any talke vnto vs of his eternall purpose, we shall be so astonyed, as thoughe he were in full redinesse to cast vs downe into hell. But when we shall ac∣knowledge, thatIohn. 1. in Chryste re∣steth
all grace, then maye we as∣sure oure selues, that god hathe loued vs, although we were not worthye therof. Let this serue for one speciall poynte, touchyng that wherof S. Paul here spea∣keth. Secondarely that he here speaketh not symplye of the elec∣tion of god (for that could not suf¦ficientely resolue vs, but rather bryng vs into a greater perplex∣itie of mynde) But S. Paul ad∣deth the worde Vocation, by the which, god hath2 Cor. 2. 1. Pet. 1. manifested his counsayle, that before was vn∣knowne, and wherevnto we els coulde neuer aspyre. Howe shall we then knowe, that we are elec¦ted of god, to thende we myghte reioyse in hym, and glorye ouer the goodnesse whiche he hath re∣ueled vnto vs? Some speake
of the election of god at auentu∣res, leauyng the gospel, leauing all that god layeth before vs, to brynge vs vnto hym selfe: yea al the meanes which he hath ordei∣ned, and knoweth to be meete for vs to put in vre. But we may not so procede: For we must (2. Tim. 1 Rom. 8.accor∣dynge to S. Paules rule) cou∣ple the vocation with the eternal election. Nowe this worde (Vo∣cation) signifyeth as muche as a caullynge. Trewe it is that the worde is taken out of the latine: yet such as vnderstand no latine, ought to knowe what the worde importeth. Now then it is said, that we are cauled, which is the seconde worde. God then cauleth vs: But how? When it pleaseth hym1. Co. 2. to certifie vs of oure electi∣on, whiche otherwise we shoulde
neuer haue attayned vnto. For who euer entred into the councel of God?Isa. 40 Rom. 11. as the prophete Isaie & S. Paule also dothe say. But when it pleaseth god to commu∣nicate hym selfe fyrste of all vnto vs, then haue we that which sur∣mounteth all the reason of man. For we haue a good witnes bea∣rar and a faythefull: that is to saye,Rom. 8. 1. Cor. 11 the holy ghoste, which lif∣teth vs vp aboue the world, and leadeth vs into the marueylous secretes of god. wherfore we mai not without great delyberation speake of the election of god (as to saye, that we are predestyna∣ted) neither maye we (to be well assured of oure saluation) searche in the ayre, or at all aduentures, whether God accompteth vs of the numbre of hys or not. What
then?2 Co. 4. we must loke vnto the gos¦pell whiche is opened and set be∣fore vs: for there doth god mani¦feste hym selfe to be oure father, and that he hath2 Cor. 1. sealed vs, to leade vs to the inherytaunce of life. And this knoweledge is a seale of the holy ghost in our har¦tes, and a sure testimonye of oure saluation, so farre as we receaue hym by fayth. For the gospell is preached to many, which neuer∣thelesse are reprobates: nay god dothe vtter and declare, that he hath cursed them, that they haue no part nor portion in his kyng∣dome, because they do resyste the gospel, andRom. 2. refuse the grace that is offered vnto them. But when we receaue in obedyence of fayth the doctryne of god, and rest vpō his promises, accepting the offer
which he hath madeGala. 4 Ephe. 1. to hold vs for his chyldren, this (say I) is a trew2. Pet. 1 certificate of our electi∣on. yet haue we to note, that whē we knowe this oure saluation throughe this callynge, and that god hath illumynated vs in the faythe of his gospell, it is not to adnichylate the euerlastyng pre∣destination whiche wente before. For at this daye, a man shall see manye that wyll saye, who are they whom god hath chosen, sa∣uynge the faythfull? I graunte. But lyke beasts as they are they make an euill consequence: that is to saye, that faythe shoulde be the cause of our saluation, yea the fyrst cause. It is trewe in it self, if they caule it the meane. For the scrypture sayth,Act. 15. Ephe. 2. that we be saued throughe faythe: But we
must ascende higher. For if they attribute faythe to the free wyll of men, they wickedly blaspheme agaynst god, robbe god of his ho¦nour, & are in this behalfe worse then the papystes, as I haue al∣redye sayde. Wherfore we muste otherwyse talke of the matter,1. Pet. 4. so farre as the scrypture geueth vs leaue: that is to saye, when god geueth vs fayth, it lyeth not in oure power to receaue the gos¦pel, but as he disposeth it through his holy spyrite. For it suffyseth vs not to haue oure eares beaten at with the voyce of a man. It shall be but a sounde, whiche wil vanyshe awaye with the wynde,1. Cor. 2. excepte God worke inwardely, and speake vnto vs after a more secrete maner throughe his holy spiryte. Note then, that frome
thence procedeth the fayth. But who is the cause? Why is faythe geuen to one sooner then to an o∣ther?Act. 13. S. Luke hath declared, sayinge, that they whiche were ordeyned to saluation, beleued the sermon of Sayncte Paule. There were many hearers, and yet but some of them receued the promesse of saluation. But who were they? Suche as were or∣deyned to saluation, saith saincte Luke. What nedeth longer dis∣putation? And agayne Saynct Paule in the fyrst chapter to the EphesiansEphe. 1. treateth hereof so at lengthe, that the ennemyes of goddes predestination muste ne∣des be vtterly voide of sence, and that the deuyll hath torne theyr eyes in sondre, and be withoute vnderstandyng. Yea whollyGala. 3. be∣witched,
when they se not more in a matter so euydent. For S. Paule sayth, that god hath cau∣led vs, and hath made vs parta∣kars of greate treasures and in∣fynite rychesse opteyned for vs through oure lord Iesus Christ. But howe? According (saith he) to that that he dyd choose vs be∣fore the creation of the worlde. Sayncte Paule intreatinge of fayth, bryngeth vs backe to his prynciple, to leade vs hygher, to leade vs to the fyrste cause, and to the fountayne of oure saluati∣on. This is that fre grace, wher∣of we haue so often made mentiō. When then we say, that weRom. 8. are cauled to saluation, and assured thereof, in as muche as god hath geuen vs the faythe, there is yet a cause hygher to be consydered,
that is, the election eternal. And who so wyl not ascende thyther, derogateth from god his honour seing he can not discerne betwene man and man, otherwise then by theyr merytes and dysposition that he seith in them. Thus must we then knytte together the sen∣tences or wordes, which saincte Paule here reherseth, whiche is also to be seene throughoute the whole holy scrypture. Nowe then to make a bryefe cōclusion: let vs take hede what ordre we oughte to obserue in ser¦chyng out for our saluation. We may not begynne at this pointe, as to saye, are we elected or not? No, no,Rom. 11. For we shall neuer as∣cēde nor aproche so nere the coū∣saile of god, but that we shall bePro. 25. in daunger to be confounded an
hundreth thousande tymes, and to be vtterly depryued of all our senses. Howe shall we then pro∣ceade?Hebr. 2. Let vs geue eare to that whiche is spoken vnto vs in the gospell, howe that god hath ge∣uen vs the grace to receaue the promes whiche he offreth vs, knowynge that it standeth vs in as muche stede, as if he had ope∣ned his hearte and inrolled oure election in our consciences, Note therfore howe we muste be certi∣fyed,Rom. 8. that god hath adopted vs for his chyldren, and that1. Pet. 1. the inheritaunce of the kyngdome of heauen is vnfaynedly oures: in that (I saye) that wee be cauled in Iesus Chryste. Howe shal we knowe it? Howe shal we be stai∣ed vpon the doctryne whiche god layeth before our eyes? We must
immediately (for the better ma∣gnifyenge of the grace of God)Dan. 9. acknowledge, that wee canne brynge nothyng on our part, but so to abase vs, withoute chalen∣gynge so muche as one droppe of prayse towardes our selues, that wee acknowledge2. Tes. 2 god to haue cauled vs nowe to the gospel, ac∣cordyng to that he dydEphe. 1. chose vs before the creation of the world. Nowe trewe it is, that this elec∣tion of God is as it were cloose letters: yea to vs, for that it con¦sisteth in it selfe, and in his owne nature. But therin may we rede because that god geueth a testy∣mony vnto vs,Rom. 8. when he cauleth vs vnto hym selfe throughe the knowledge of the gospell, and throughe faythe. Then haue we therbyDeut. 17 a double or copie geuen
vs. For like as the Origynal or pryncipall Regester derogateth nothyng from the copie or instru∣mente whiche shall be redde, but is rather an approbation of the same: and none wyll searche out for the oryginall, when he hathe the copie autentique:2 Pet. 1. Euen soo muste we be assured of our electi∣on. For when god certifieth vs by his gospell,Rom. 8. that he accomp∣teth vs for his chyldrē, they are letters autentique, signedHebr. 9. with the bloudde of oure lorde Iesus Chryst, and2. Cor. 1. sealed with his ho∣ly spyrite. When we haue that, haue we not suffyciently where∣with to be contented? Now then as I haue sayde, so farre wide is the election of god from contra∣ryeng this poynte, that it rather ratifyeth and confyrmeth the te∣stimonie
whiche we haue in the gospell. Not that we haue neede to loke into the orygynall or re∣gester of god, as thoughe there were some doubte. We haue the instrumente which can not faile: what wolde we more?Rom. 9. Shall it not be ouer great rashnes who wyll demaund more? Who wyll ascendeRom. 10. vp aboue the clowdes, when we haue the worde in our mouthe and in oure hearteDeu. 30. as Moses saithe? Trewe it is, that if we thoughte the instrumente wer not taken out of the true Re¦gester & Orygynall, then might a man cal it in question or doubt. But when the thynge is playne and certayne, what wolde wee more? So fareth it with vs, that we nede no more to doubte, but thatLuc. 10. god hath inrolled vs in the
numbre of his elect and childrenEphe. 1. before the creatiō of the world.Colo. 1. But he kepte the matter secrete vnto hym selfe: Yet haue wee in the meane time letters patentes of oure saluation.2. Pet. 1. We haue an instrumēt sure inough as I haue declared alredye. But yet muste we alwaiesMat. 13. resorte to oure lord Iesus Chryste, when there is question of oure election. ForIo. 10.14. without hym (as I haue she∣wed) we can not approche neere vnto god. And agayne, when we shal speake of his decree, we shal be astonyed as coulpable of deth. But hauynge Iesus Chryste for oure guyde,Ro.. 5.8. we maye boldelye reioyce, knowyng howe that he hathHeb. 3. Ap. 4.5. dignitie and worthynesse inoughe in hym selfe, to make all his membres acceptable to god
his father. It suffiseth, that we beEphe. 4 graffed in his body, and vni∣ted vnto hym. Nowe se ye, howe we oughte to meditate this doc∣tryne, if we lyste to do therwith oure profyte, accordynge to that whiche is here declared vnto vs by sayncte Paule,2. Tim. 1 Who saythe, that this grace was geuen vs. And howe before al tymes saith he. We muste ascende aboue the course of nature, when we wyll go aboute to knowe howe we be saued, and for what cause, and whence it shuld procede. And far¦der we muste vnderstande, that god wold not leaue vs in suspēceMat. 11. Ioh. 17. nor yet wolde he hide his coun∣sayle frome vs, to brynge vs in doubte of oure saluation. But he hathEphe. 1. cauled vs to hym selfe: not onely by preaching of the gospel,
(for that had not ben suffyciente) but2. Cor. 1. he sealed in oure heartes the testymonie of his goodnesse and fatherly loue. So then whē we haue suche a certaynetie, let vs fyrste of allRom. 15. gloryfie god, for that he hath cauled vs throughe his free mercye. And farder wee muste staye oure selues vpon our lorde Iesus Chryste, acknowle∣gynge, that he deceaued vs not of oure expectation, when he cau¦sed to be publyshed, that heGala. 1. gaue hym selfe to vs, testyfienge also the same vnto vsRom. . by the holye ghoste. For fayth is to vs (as I haue alredye sayde) an infallible marke, that1. Ioh. 3. god rekeneth vs for his chyldren, beynge conducted thence to the eternall election. And wherfore? God hath cauled vs (saythe sayncte Paule in the
fyrste chapiter to the Ephesians)Ephe. 1. according to that he forechose vs He saythe not that god chose vs because we harde the gospel: but contrary wise he geueth faythe, whiche for this speciall cause is geuen vs, to declare, thatRom 5. God reserued vs to saue vs when we were loste and caste awaye in A∣dam. Farder we haue to note, that saincte Paule speaketh not here of others then the faythful. But some blocke heades ther be, whiche to blynde the eyes of the ignoraunte and such as they are, wyll here cauyll, that the grace of saluation was geuen vs, be∣cause god had ordeyned, that his sonne shuld be the redemer of mā∣kynde, and that the same was commen and indifferent vnto al. But saincte Paule hath so vtte∣red
his speche, that his doctryne can not with suche chyldishe glo∣ses be corrupted. For notably2. Tim. 1 Tit. 3. he sayde before, that god hath saued vs. Is that referred indifferent∣ly to al without exception?1. Ti. 4. No, no: he speketh but of the faythe∣full. Cauled he all the worlde? SomeMa. 22. Luc. 14. were cauled by the prea∣chyng, but yet they shewed them¦selues vnworthy of that saluati∣on whiche was offerid them and therfore wer reproued.Rom. 1. Others some god lefte in theyr increduli∣tie, who neuer hearde so muche as one worde of the gospel prea∣ched. So then sainct Paule doth specially adresse hym selfe to thē whom god had chosen and reser∣ued to hym selfe. And therfore let vs holde thys pryncyple, that the goodnesse of
god shall neuer be perfectely and worthelye honoured as it deser∣ueth, except we knowe thatAct 17. Gala. 1. god wolde vs not to abyde & remaine in the commen destruction of the worlde, wherein he hathe lefte them whiche were like vnto vs, and from whom we dyffered in nothynge,Ephe. 2. beynge of nature no better then they were: ButLuc. 12. such was his good wyl and pleasure. WherforeRom. 3 let all men stop their mouthes herat, and no man pre¦sume to attrybute any thynge to hym selfe: geuynge in the meane tyme god the prayse with open mouthe,Dani. 9. confessyng, that to him we owe all that concerneth oure saluation. This is the summe of all that whiche wee haue to re∣teyne and kepe in memory. But in the meane while, let vs note
well the other wordes whyche S. Paule vseth here. Trewe it is, that in effecte he vnderstan∣deth the same that we haue alre∣die declared, that the election of God shoulde not profyte vs nor come vnto vs, excepte we hadde knowne it, whiche by meanes of the gospell is made knowne vn∣to vs. For this causeMat. 11. wold god haue that manyfested vnto vs,Colo. 1. which he kept as it were secret to hym selfe before al times. But (for the better expressynge of his minde) he enterlaceth as it were by the way, to declare, thatTit. 2. this grace was now reueled vnto vs. And howe? In the apperyng of oure Lorde Iesus Chryste. He sheweth, that we shal be to farre vnkynde, vnlesse that herewith we can be contented and at reste.
When the sonne of GodEphe. 5. Gala, 1. geueth hym selfe vnto vs, what can we desyre more? Thoughe we could mounte vp aboue the clowdes, and coulde entre into the mooste depe secretes of god, what shall be the ende thereof? Is it not to knowe, that we are his chyldrē and heyres? That nowe is suffi∣cientlye manifested and declared in Chryste Iesu, for it is sayde, thatIoh. 1. all they whiche beleue in hym, shall enioye this priuilege, to be made the chyldren of God. Wee maye not therefore declyne (the least thing that can be) from Iesus Chryste, if we wyll be ful certifyed of our election. Trewe it is, that saynct Paule hath al∣ready declared, that we were ne∣uer beloued nor chosē of god,Ephe. 1. Colo, 1. ex∣cept in the person of Iesus christ
his onely sonne. But he now ma∣keth a more ample declaration, when he sayth, that Iesus christ after he appered, hathe1. Ioh. 1. opened vnto vs the life which otherwise shuld haue ben vnknowne to vs. He hath presented vs the grace of god,Ephe. 2. from the which we were otherwise farre of. He hath made vs so familiar with god, that we knowe what is his euerlastyng counsayle, withoutEccle. 3. Rom. 12. serchyng a∣boue oure reache, that whiche is not laufull for vs to enquyre of. For when god wyll instructe vs by his owne propre mouthe, we maye not presume to wade so far as they whiche walke not vnder obedience: For it is a presumpti∣on to seke to know more thē god wyll permytte. But1. Pe. when we walke soberly and with reuerēce
vnder the obedience of our God, geuinge audyence & receaue that whiche he vttereth in holy scrip∣ture, as I haue alredy sayd,Psal. 25. the waye shall be made meete for vs to wade throughe withall. Marke then saincte Paule whi∣che sayth, that the sonne of God,2. Tim. 1. by his apperance in the world, opened oure eyes, to the ende we shoulde knowe the graceMat. 25. prepa∣red for vs before the begynnyng of the worlde: As to be receaued for chyldren of God, to be made acceptable vnto hym, andEphe. 1. 2. Cor. 5. to be accompted as iuste, in such wise, that we nede not to doubte, the. Pet. 1. inheritaunce is made ready for vs in the kyngedome of heauen.. 11. . 2. Not that we haue it for any me¦rytes of ours, but for that Iesus Chryst had the right title, wher∣of
he hath made vs participante. And where as it is here spokē of the appering of Iesus Christ,1. Cor.  we must referre that to the gos∣pell, because sayncte Paule con∣cludeth herewith that throughe the gospell he broughte lyfe and immortalitie to light. For howe appered Iesus Chryst vnto vs? As he appereth euery daye. But yet saynct Paule wolde not dar∣ken those thynges that the scrip∣ture setteth forth for the assurāce of our saluation whiche is layde vppe in Iesus Christe. It is not sayde in one worde, that Iesus Chryste is oure sauyoure, that he was sente as the lieutenaunte of god his father. No? no? It is sayde, that he was sente as theRom. 3. Hebr. 9. mediatoure, which hath recon∣cyled vs by the sacryfyce of hys
deathe: He was sent vs,1. Pet. 1. as the lambe without spotte, to pourge and make satisfaction for al our dettes: He is oure pledge, to de∣lyuer vsRom. 5. from the condempna∣tion of deathe, wherin we were: He is1. Io. 2. our iustice, our aduocate, which maketh intercession in our name:Ioh. 14. whiche wyll brynge to passe, that oure prayers shall be hearde of god: which is the band of concorde betwene god and vs: which hath opteyned for vs, that whiche apperteyned not vnto vs by nature. For all these qualy∣ties must we attrybute to Iesus Chryste, if we wyll effectuallye knowe howe he appeared. For if we shoulde but symplye take the gospell, and not haue regarde to the substance therein conteyned: that were inoughe to ouerthrow
all, and in effect, we should make of Iesus Chryste but as it were a shadowe. For if we saye, that Iesus Chryste hath appeared to be oure sauiour, without menti∣on makynge of that whiche he suffered for our saluation, and de∣clare not howe we haue benRom. 5. re∣concyled into the fauoure of god his father throughe and by hys meanes: that weHeb. 9. haue ben clen∣sed from our filthynes and spots: that we haue ben redemedColo. 2. from the oblygation of euerlastynge death. If we haue not that with all, what auayleth it? If wee knowe notHeb. 7.9. that Iesus Chryste is oure aduocate, and that he ca∣ryeth our prayers whē we praie to god, to thende we shoulde not be repulsed, what shal become of vs? What trust were there to cal
vpon the name of god, whiche isPro. 18. the fortresse of saluation, as the scripture sayth? Let vs note wel then, that sayncte Paule saythe that Iesus Chryst hathHebr. 9. appea∣red, that he meaneth chiefly, that he hathe accomplyshed all thyn∣ges that were requisite for the redemption of mankinde. But by the waye he settethe forthe the1. Cor. 15. vertue of this bryghtnesse whi∣che hath appeared vnto vs in his resurrection: to thende we shulde be partakers of soo great a bene∣fite, and so to enioye the same. Nowe if the gospell were taken awaye, what coulde the bytter deathe whiche the sonne of God suffered, and his rysynge againe on the thyrde daye, auayle vs? All shulde be vnprofytable vnto vs.1. Co. 4.15 Ephe. 3. The gospell then puttethe
vs in possession of those rychesse, whiche Iesus Chryste hath op∣teyned and procured for vs. A∣gayne,Colo. 3. thoughe he be nowe ab∣sente in body, and is not here in this earth conuersaunt with vs, let vs thynke oure state therfore neuer a whit the worse. ForMat. 28 he hath not so withdrawne him self that we shoulde seeke hym, and not fynde hym. For the Sonne whiche shyneth, doth not so clere¦ly gyue lyghte to the worlde, asIo. 14. Iesus Chryste doth manyfestly shewe hym selfe to theym whiche haue the eyes of fayth to beholde him, when the gospel is preched. And that is the reason wherfore saynct Paule (besides this word appearynge) saythe, that Iesus hath brought to lyght that lyfe, yea the lyfe euerlastyng. But to
the ende we may fynde in the ve∣ry wordes of sayncte Paule, all that I haue sayde, let vs marke well and followe that whiche is conteyned in this place of scryp∣ture. He saythe, that the sonne of god hathHeb. 2. destroyed deathe: but howe destroyed he it? If he had not offered the euerlastyng sacri∣fice for theRom. 5. appeasynge of godds wrathe: If he had not descendedEph. 4. downe to the loweste place, to drawe vs out from thence: If he had not takenGala. 3. our curse vpō him for the dyschargynge of vs, and had not taken awayAct. 15. the burthen vnder the whiche we beganne to syncke. What had it byn? Shuld deathe haue ben destroyed? No: death had had the dominion ouer vs, deathe had raygned immedi∣ately ouer vs. And truely if eue∣ry
one of vs wold enter into him selfe, we shal fynde, thatEbre. 2. we are of nature the slaues of Sathan, who is the prince of deth. Thus had we ben shut vp in this myse∣rable bondage, excepteOse. 13. that god had destroyed the deuil, syn, and deathe. And that is doone: But howe? In that that through the bloud of our lorde Iesus Chryst,Colo. 2. he hath blotted out all our spot∣tes. Nowe thoughe we be poore synners, and in daunger of the iudgemente of god, yet canRom. 8. not synne hurte vs: because the sting where the poison lay, is so thrust away,1. Cor. 15. that it can not pricke vs, for nowe hath Chryst the vycto∣rye: for he suffered not in vayne, the sheddynge of his bloudde fell not on the earthe, nor at all ad∣uentures: but it hath ben a laua∣tory
wherwith we haue ben spri∣keled by the holy ghost, as sainct Peter hath declared.1. Pet. 1. Soo then we see well, that sayncte Paule intreatyng of the gospell, wher∣in Iesus Chryste hath appeared, and dayly dothe appeare vnto vs putteth not in forgetfulnesse hys deathe and passion, nor any thing elles apperteynyng to the salua∣tion of mankynde. We must ther∣fore note these two thynges: that is, that in the personne of Iesus ChrysteRom. 8. we haue (all the sorte of vs) that which we can desire. We haue a ful & an assured truste of the goodnesse of god, and of the loue whiche he bare vnto vs: And howe? Se we not, how ourIsa. 59. synnes haue separated vs from god, and that they are the cause of continual warre and enmitie?
ButRom 3 we haue the attonemente in oure lorde Iesus Chryste: forHeb. 9. he hath shed his bloud to washe vs from all oure fylthynesse. He hath offered a sacryfyce, by the whiche God is at one wyth vs:Psa. 68. He hathe payed al oure dettes: To be shorte, he hathGala. 3. adnychy∣lated the curse, to the ende wee shoulde be blessed of god. And far¦ther, he hathHeb. 2. vanquysed death, and triumphed ouer her, to the ende we might be deliuered from the tyranny whiche was in rea∣dynesse, wholly to swalowe vs vp: he hath strength to surmoūt all. By this then we see all the thinges which apperteine to our saluation, to haue benColo. 2. accompli∣shed in oure Iesus Chryste, and that there throughe we enter in∣to the possession of al his goodes.
Let vs note, that dayely he ap∣peareth vnto vs through his gos¦pel. Trewe it is, thatPhil. 2. he dwel∣leth in his heauenly glorye: we shall not se him here in this earth visiblye, butMat. 28 yet wyll he not be farre of from vs, neyther neede we make longe compases to seke hym. Lette vs open the eyes of faythe, and we shall se hym ma∣nyfestynge hym selfe vnto vs. Thus haue we learned out of the texte of saynct Paule, al that which I haue touched. And ther∣fore let vs lerne, not to seperate that whiche the holy ghost hath conioyned. Furthermore let vs note, that sayncte Paule here by the waye of comparyson, wolde amplifie the grace whiche God hath shewed to the world sithens the commynge of our lord Iesus
Chryst. As though he wold say, thatLuke. 10 the aunciente fathers had not this aduantage, for that Ie∣sus Chryste appeared not vnto theym as vnto vs. Trewe it is,1. Co. 10. they had the same fayth, and the inherytance of heauen was com∣men to them as vnto vs, in that god reueled vnto them his grace, as wel as vnto vs, but not ī such measure. ForHeb. 11. they sawe Chryst afarre of, and as it were in a sha∣dowe, as sayncte Paule saythe, vnder the fygures of the lawe. There was the vaile of the tem∣ple, which was so stretched forth that2. Cor. 3. the Iewes coulde not ap∣proche to the materyall saynctu∣arye. But now that the vaile of the temple is broken, we maye approche to the maiestie of oure god We come vnto heauen with
full pryuylege, and then immedi∣ately we haue the lyuely ymage of god, wherein dwelleth all the perfection of glorye. To be short:Colo. 2. we haue the body, where as the fathers had but the shadowe one∣ly, as sayncte Paule speaketh to the Colossians. Nowe then wee are therby warned, that if the fa∣thers of olde had suche constan∣cie and inuyncible zeale, toHeb. 11. en∣dure and abyde in the afflyctions of the sonne of god, beynge as yet not reueled to the worlde as at this daye, shall we not be of to fainte a courage, if we be not in∣flamed with a more feruēt zeale? The aunciente fathers dyd fully resolue them selues, to beare the afflyctions of Iesus Chryst, as it is sayde in the eleuenth chapyter to the Hebrewes. For it is not
sayde, that Moises bare the re∣buke of Abraham his father, but of Iesus Chryst. Note then that the auncient fathers, althoughe1. Co. 10. they lyued vnder the darke sha∣dowes of the lawe, yet presented they them selues vnto god in sa∣cryfice, toHeb. 11. endure with much pa¦cience the afflyctions of Christe. But nowe1. Co. 15 that Chryste is ry∣sen agayne from the deadde, and hath made open this life vnto vs what shall be sayd of vs, if we be so delycate, that we can not beare the afflyctions of the gospel? Are we not worthy to be rased out of the Regester of god, and not to be auowed of hym. And therfore let vs loke vnto it: forHeb. 12. we ought to be soo encouraged with suche constancie of faythe, as to endure for the name of Iesus Chryste,
what so euer pleaseth god to laye vpon vs, seyng that lyfe is made manyfeste before oure eyes, and that we haue aLuk. 10. better and more familiar knowledge therof, then had the auncyente fathers. Wher¦of the Apostle in his Epystle to the Hebrues speakethe,Heb. 11. where we reade that the auncyente fa∣thers neuer shronke, but had su∣che a marueilous constācie, that the hearyng therof were inough to astonyshe vs. For wee knowe howe they were tormented by ti∣rantes and ennemyes of the tru∣the, and yet constantely suffered the same. The state of the church is at this present daie no harder, nor more troblesome, thē it was than. And seynge it so is, shal we make it more strange, to followe after Chryste Iesus, who hathe
shewed vs the waye? But to the ende we be not to fearefull nor o∣uer cold, let vs marke wel howe2. Tim. 1 he saythe, that Iesus Chryste hath made manyfest the life and immortalytie throughe the gos∣pell, for that that as often as the grace of god is preched vnto vs, it is as much as if the kyngdom of heauen were opened vnto vs, as if god stretched forth his hād and certyfyed vs, that the life is at hande, and that he wyl parti∣cipate vnto vs of his heauenly in herytaunce. For that is spoken vnto vs, to the ende that vntyll we haue sene Iesus Chryste lyf∣tynge vs vp with hym, and brin∣gyng vs vnto a lyfe certayne, we shoulde contente our selues with this present lyfe. We wold glad∣ly remayne here in this worlde,
Hebr. 9. but by force must we be drawen hence. But when we shal behold the lyfe whiche our lorde Iesus Chryst hath opteyned for vs, wePhil. 3. shall sette but lyttle by all that myghte reteyne vs here, consy∣deryng we haue to ascende vp to heauen. Soo then let vs not be wyllyngely blynde, when Iesus Chryste setteth dayly before our eyes the lyfe and immortalytie, whiche we haue spoken of. But let vs note wel, that when sainct Paule speaketh of the lyfe, and addeth the worde immortalitie, that it betokeneth as muche, as if he sayde: We entre euen nowe into the kyngedome of god tho∣roughe faythe. For thoughe we be as1. Pet. 2 straungers here in thys earthe, and that it seemeth there is but deathe and maledyction in
vs, yet wyll the lyfe and grace, wherof we are made partakers throughe our lord Iesus Christ, brynge forthe his fruyte in hys conuenient tyme: that is to say, when he shall beMat. 25 sent agayne of god his Father, to shewe vs the effect of such thinges as are day∣ly preached vnto vs, and which haue ben accomplished in his per¦son, when he was clothed wyth oure nature. Nowe to ende, lette vspsal. 95 pro∣strate oure selues before the face of our good God, acknowlegyng our faultes, desyryng him that it wolde please hym, so to cause vsMat. 5. feele our pouerties, that we ne∣uer be so presumptuouse, asDan. 9. to attrybute any glorye vnto oure selues: but that weGen. 18. acknowe∣ledge oure selues, to be stinking
and detestable in oure nature be∣fore hym, to the ende we maye searche the whole cause of our sal¦uation in his purpose and in that counsayle whiche hath ben reue∣led, through theColo. 1. knoweledge of the grace by hym opteined, when he cauled vs to his gospell: And that also he wolde vouchesafe to graunt vs this benefite, that we maye adresse oure selues to oure lorde Iesus Chryst, and wholly to stay and reste our selues vpon hym and the redemption whiche he purchased for vs: to the ende we maye be auowed for the chil∣drē of god, to be made partakers of the inherytaunce of lyfe, after we haue foughte in this worlde. And for as muche as it pleaseth hym, that we should be assaulted of Sathan and of so many enne∣mies,
as wel domestical as stran¦gers,1. Co. 10. Eph. 6. That he wolde geue vs power to withstand their assaul∣tes: so as we be neuer left of him vntyll we haue ended our course. And that we be come to that rest, vnto the whiche we are day¦lye conducted. And that this Grace be not onely shewed vnto vs, but to all people and nations of the earthe. &c.
❧ Imprynted at London by VVyllyam Séres dvvel∣ling at the vvest ende of Paules churche at the sygne of the hedgehogge. Cum priuilegio ad impri∣mendum solum.
