P2212 12430856 61946
The true Copie OF A SPEECH Delivered by the Honorable VVilliam Perpoynt second Son to the right Honorable the Earle of Kingstone, against Sr ROBERT BERKLEY Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, in maintenance of their accusation of high Treason, and other great misdemeanors. At a Conference of both Houses in the Painted Chamber, July 6. 1641. LONDON, Printed for Henrie Hood. 1641.
MY LORDS, I Am commanded to present to your Lordships these Arti∣cles, with which the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons house of Par∣liament, in their own name, and in the name of all the Commons of England, im∣peach Sir Robert Barkley, Knight, one of the Justices of his Majesties Court of Kings bench in mainte∣nance of their accusation of high Treason, and o∣ther great misdemeanours. The Articles they de∣sire may be read. The Articles were read by Mr. Newport. The high Treason is in the first Article, in his en∣deavours to subvert the fundamentall Laws of this Realm, and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyranni∣call government, which have been lately adjudged Treason, in the cause of the Earle of Strafford. The other Articles prove the first. By his opini∣ons, Certificates, Judgements, by his denials of the benefits of our Laws, which have been read to your Lordships. No fundamentall Law to the Subject is left, our goods, our lands, our bodies, the peace of a good conscience are by him given up to Arbitrary, Tyrannicall Government. Nothing hath been omitted to make a Judge know the Laws, to make him just, or fear him from
being evil; We have Innes of Court for that pecu∣liar study, Judges from thence onely chosen; fel∣dome any but what have been twenty years there; Honours and revenues are given to Judges, encou∣ragements to do well; this Judge had these; Judges are sworn according to Law to serve the King, and his people, according to Law to counsell the King, and for not so doing, to be at his will for body, lands and goods; this Judge took that oath; the Laws the Judges study, impose the greatest punishments on unjust Judges, shew that these punishments have been inflicted; more could not be done to per∣swade or fear a Judge. His offences shew in him great ambition, yet he was most timorous of displeasing the great in power he did not onely forbear doing what he was sworn to do, but was most active against our Lawes, & in opposing and punishing any that did maintein them. To have only received Bribes (though they blind the eyes, and though the desire to get money en∣creaseth with age) that hainous crime in a Judge had been, in comparison with his offences, a tolerable vice; for from such a Judge justice is also to be had for money. Ambition is violent, and ruines, whilst Covetousnesse is making a bargain. The words of his opinions and judgement are for the Kings power. It is pleasing to the nature of man that others should obey his will; and well fra∣med dispositions of Princes may easily be perswa∣ded their power is unlimited, when they are also put in mind, that therefore they have more cause to do well, and for doing well are more renowned; For the most oppressive designes (which we have suffer∣ed
under) the pretences to his Majestie have ever been the good of his Subjects; His is the sin, that is to judge by the Lawes, and knows the Lawes are to the contrary, yet puts and confirms such thoughts in his Prince. He that incites another to Arbitrary Govern∣ment, when his self-ends are thereby compassed, hates him for taking that power he perswaded him unto. The writs, those monsters of necessitie to provide Ships to prevent imminent danger that could not stay forty daies for the calling of a Parliament, were therefore to goe out in September to have Ships rea∣dy in March. This hath been adjudged by your Lordships to bee destructive to the fundamentall lawes of this Realm and to the subiect right of pro∣perty and liberty &c. that I shall say but this concer∣ning them, that this Judge published them to bee in∣separable flowers of the Crown. And that wee have lived to see for five yeares together imminent dan∣ger, and thus to bee prevented. This Judge did advise to such a government as fu∣ture Kings here might exercise the highest Tyran∣nies, and the Subjects want the benefit of restraints known to the most slavish Easterne nations where if their Prince doth unjustly, he hath hatred for it, and the dangers that follow that. This Judge will have that hatred to goe to our good lawes. No such bondage as when lawes of freedom are misinterpre∣ted by Judges to make men slaves. What can be considered of in a Judge of Law to give his opinion and advise to his Prince how the lawes the mutuall covenants of Kings and Subjects
are to be broken but that his intentions are to have his Prince doe ill by making his evill servants to study, and to be pleased with their wicked designes: because they see means to put them in execution, by making them to perswade their Prince, because in imminent danger, his Subjects goods are at his will, that there is such danger when there is not: and they onely have some by-end of their own. A Judge to deliver his opinion, that if the King should intend to give up his people to be destroyed by forreign forces, for the safety of the people in that imminent danger once by the Law might take away the King; there could be no greater offence. This Judge will have our Law to be what to him seems reason; the reason limited to him to judge of is what the common Law saith is so, what a Sta∣tute hath so enacted. For him to judge this or that is Law, else a mischief shall follow, is at best for him, but this because the Law in such a thing is im∣perfect, therefore he will make a Law to supply it; or because that the Law written in such particulars is against his reason, therefore his reasons to be Laws; then must follow, as often as a Judges reason changes, or Judges change, our Laws change also. Our liberties are in our Laws, where a Subject may reade or hear read, this is his, this he may do, and be safe, and that thus the Judge ought to give judgement, he is free. The excessive growth of Courts of reason, conscience, came from great and cunning persons, and though not the most sodain, yet the most dangerous, and sure wayes to eat out our Laws, our liberties. Unlimited power must be in some to make and
repeal Laws to fit the dispositions of times and per∣sons, Nature placeth this in common consent only, and where all cannot conveniently meet, instructeth them to give their consents to some they know or believe so well of as to be bound to what they agree on. His Majestie, your Lordships and the Com∣mons are thus met in Parliament, and so long as we are often reduced to this main foundation, our King and we shall prosper. This Judge will not allow us our knowledge or any reason, he will have our minds, our souls slaves. A grand Jury-man gave his fellows true informati∣on, they present an innovation in the Church, are threatned & reviled for it; he that told this truth is charged (I shall use this Judges own words) to sin in that, & that he made others forswear themselvs; this Judge sent him to the common goal, where he is laid in irons, and all this, because he and they durst meddle with Church-matters. He is forced to tear the Presentment in pieces in open Court; our Laws provide for the peace of our consciences, many Acts of Parliament are for it, and the trust by those Acts set to Juries; this Judge well knew all this; your Lordships have heard what he did to the Jury at Hartford; He would have us know no more Divi∣nity then to obey what the Great of the Clergy di∣rected, no more Law then what he said was so. Judges in former times, (but onely such as were examples of punishment, as of injustice in cases of great and publike concernment) forbare procee∣dings till the next Parliament. This necessitated the calling of Parliaments; this Judge had as many such causes before him, as ever any had, yet he never
desired the resolution of Parliament in any one, for the wayes he went, the necessitie was never to have a Parliament, he would pull up that root of our safe∣ties and liberties, which whilst we enioy, the malice or injustice of all other Courts and persons can never ruine, and when neere to ruin (as most neere of late) this onely sure remedy will helpe us, nothing can ruine a Parliament, but it selfe. The evills which we have suffred under, they were committed by the Iudges, or by them ought to have been and might have bene prevented. This Judge assisted in causing the miseries we suf∣fred in the Starchamber and at the councell table, he denied the known rights which he ought to have granted us to stop our grievances in the Ecclesiasti∣call Courts, he was the causer of our sufferings in other Courts. The best lovers of their Laws and liberties, the most honest suffer most by an unjust Judge, they most oppose his vices; dishonest persons find such a Judge to fit their purposes, the Judge finds them for his, the bond of iniquity confederates them. He that will do no wrong, will suffer none which he can help: the man that knows himself born free, will do his utmost to live so, and to leave freedome to his posterity, were he in slavery, when by out∣ward gesture thought to be most delighted, were his mind then known, there would be found vexa∣tion, and his busie thoughts imployed to redeem himself and his posterity from thraldome. But to say, could this Judge intend to make himself and his own posterity Slaves? What he did was through errour of judgement onely; No my Lords, what
his aimes and endeavours were is apparent. To consider man in the generall, we shall find in every age he will be a slave to some few, that many may be slaves to him, he looks to himself onely; this he would doe or forbear doing to be great, to be rich, had he children or kindred or had none. This high∣ly unjust Judge by continuing sinnes, mainteined his actions to preserve himself, he knows to be found guilty in one of his offences, the penaltie of the Law for it, therefore covers the offences committed with inventing and acting other. For a Judge to be unjust, more hurts the publique then any other, he is not suspected: What a Judge doth is looked on as a thing that ought to be done. The most pernitions great man that by cunning hath got to himself the heart and tongue of his Prince, his ill acts have dyed with him, if not taken up by others, and then they walke in darkenesse, No man will justifie what he doth by saying such a favorite did it, but the unjust Judgments of this Judge were given in the noone day, were done in the face of the whole Kingdome in the hearing of such as might carry the newes to all parts of the Realme, and was therefore done. His unjust Judgements were our re∣cords. We have seen wicked great men most crafti∣ly politique, they hated our Laws, yet not meeting with active Judges moulded to their purposes, they and their acts have dyed, the Realm flourished, but of late others lesse politique meeting with most un∣just Judges, every way as ill as they could wish them to be, then did the Kingdome faint under the load of its misery, did long struggle; now its rising I assure my self, your Lordships will assist to take of the burden.
If the designes of some would not have such a man to be at liberty, a warrant from some Lords of the Councell would soon have laid him in prison, and given no cause; had he moved this Judge to be discharged or bailed, he could have obtained nei∣ther, if their wayes would not have endured that man to live, a Judge reviling the prisoner, and his Councell that moved for his discharge or baile, joyned with the hate of some great man, might soon have moved a Gaoler for unwholsome rooms and lodging, and ill diet for his prisoner, and they may soon take life away. Offenders in prisons are looked after to be safe onely such are brought in by power against Law, are abused. Had a great man desired the estates of others, the breach of a Proclamation might readily have been charged against them in the Starchamber: but they, it may be could have answered and cleared them∣selves, and proved their answers by testimonies, had they been eferred to this Judge, he would have expunged the one, suppressed the other. Then fol∣lowed Fines to the value of their estates, or more, then imprisonments of course till they paid such Fines; your Lordships have heard what this Judge did to the Sope-boylers. The Country-man followed the plough, and his thinking he was assured of his right of Propertie and libertie, gave him abilitie to doe it. He beleeved his neighbour, his landlord, his King, could not take his goods from him without his consent. He knew the usuall paiments by law, and in extraordinary causes thought to have that care to choose such for
his Knights of his shire, or for his Burgesses, as might be mindfull of the cause of paiment, and of his estate. This man hath heard the opinions and judge∣ment of this Judge, hath seen his goods taken from him without his, or his knights of the Shire, or Bur∣gesses consent or advise. These have made him, his wife, and children to joyne in teares to wish they had never been borne, they have made them think on many wayes to keepe sase that estate which was yet left them, have made them desire to sell all their goods, and hide the money, but then he remembers this Judge, how that he shall be carryed to prison, and remain there if he pay not what please others to assesse him. Then they thinke idle persons (the droanes and moths of the Common wealth) to be a wise people, who to be unworthy to live, they for∣merly conceited. They expect and can think of no∣thing, but to be Beggars. Where publike and enormous offences have been committed, eminent and notorious punish∣ments must be, such will make your Lordships pro∣ceedings highly esteemed, else there will be so many offenders, as none without danger can be pu∣nished. This Judge, subverting our Lawes, tooke away the hearts of many; he subscribed for the Kings power, but so as he put him on taking his Subjects goods, and of all other, such wayes be most dange∣rous; For we know, his Majestie is not the last that suffers, and is not the King worth many thousands. The place of this Judge was to have given and preserved to the King the hearts of his Subjects, the
due execution of the lawes had done this, and when such notice is taken of a Prince, none will conspire against him who cannot faine to themselves safety before or after any fact committed. Forraigne enemies will not invade his Kingdomes. Thus hath his Majestie now got our hearts, and will for ever have them. This Judge is to answer for what his Majestie, and for what we have suffred. I am by command of the House of Commons to desire of your Lordships that the proceedings against Sir Robert Berkley Knight, one of the Justices of his Majesties Court of Kings Bench may be put in as speedy a way of Triall, as the course of Parlia∣ment will allow. FINIS.
