14045.5 99900276 150643
I Smell a Rat. To the tune of, Vpon a Summer tide. OR, The Seminary Priest. I Traueld farre to finde where honesty abides, And found in England more then all the world besides; But where true vertue growes, vice quickly ruines that: A poore man must not speak, although he Smell a Rat. When Iustice hath her sight, shée's beautifull in show: But when she Masks her face, how vild she soone doth grow; I doe perceiue the cause, but dare not speake of that: Ile not offend the Lawes, but yet I Smell a Rat. When I sée welthy men, by worldly causes rise: I count them happy here, and truely worldly wise; But Folly oft makes leane, what Wit hath long kept fat: Who knowes how rich men fall? in troth I Smell a Rat. Some gathers in their rents, and hordes the coine with care: Stretching their credits great, for money or for ware: When such great men do breake, what is the cause of that? In troth I dare not speake, and yet I Smell a Rat. To see a Courtier kinde, is common euery hower, To Widdow, Wife, or Maide, or any in his power: The Husband's welcome to, but whats the cause of that? I doe not iustly know, but yet I smell a Rat. When luber marries wealth, how ioy full are the twaine, On both sides wealths increase comes in with ill got gaine: This wealth cōmands their minds, they liue like Dog and Cat; What should the occasion be? in faith I Smell a Rat. When rates of all things rise, within a plentious yeare: What should the occasion be, that euery thing's so deare; Some censure rich mens faults, and some say this and that: Let al say what they will, for faith I Smell a Rat. When Age doth marry Youth, how louingly they liue: The want of youthfull bloud, this tender Wife doth grieue: The old man iealous growes, occasion oft bids that: When wealth and beauty méete, in faith I Smell a Rat.
The second Part, To the same Tune. VVHerefore doth women paint or youngmen pruine their haire? It may be tis to make, this earthly carkase faire; Yet there are causes great, are ten times worse then that: Tis beauty tempes the eye, in faith I Smell a Rat. When Strumpets striue by Art, and fond inticing straines, To bring poore youth to spend both substance, strength, & vaines: What sicknes followes lust? what pouerty brings that? I haue no cause to know, but yet I Smell a Rat. When guls and gooscaps find, the vildnes of expence: How penitent their minde, will grow for that offence: But folly to such men, doth shew them what is what: I speake not all I know, but still I Smell a Rat. To sée a Whore fall sicke, why tis a common thing: A Hakney soone will tire, doth too much burthen bring: Beside, an inward griefe may be the cause of that, Let Surgions lend releefe: for faith I Smell a Rat. When Seigneur Roman T, did goe vpright and straight: He crumples in the hames, so great's his bodies waight: Nay stradles twice as wide, what is the cause of that? Theres something barres his stride in troth I Smell a Rat. Why growes your Bawds so big, when Panders proue so leane: When they were young they sweld and nere will fall againe: The Panders swift on foote, and so kéepes downe his fat, By bringing some vnto't: in troth I Smell a Rat. When Officers let slip to punish such as these: Pray where doth Iustice sit, or railes she when she please: It may be she is brib'd, and so kept blind by that: Else none of these could thriue, in troth I Smell a Rat. When sinne striues to surcease, and folly flies away: Where loue and lasting peace, will make a glorious day: When England harboures none, that beares the name of Whore, The Rat will run away, and I shall Smell no more. FINIS. Printed at London for Henry Gossen
