16763.5 99900285 150694
blazon of the Corporation of the City of London The Oath of euery Free man, of the Citie of London. YE shal sweare that ye shal be good and true to our Soueraigne Lord King Iames, & to the heires of our said Soueraigne Lord the King. Obeisant and obedient ye shal be to the Maior and Ministers of this City. The Franchises and customs thereof ye shall maintaine, & this Citie keepe harmeles in that which in you is Ye shall be contrybutory to all maner of char∣ges within the Cittie, as summons, watches, contributions taskes talleges, lot and scot, and to all other charges bearing your part as a Freeman ought to doe. Ye shal colour no forraines goods vnder or in your name, whereby the King or the Cittie might or may loose their customes or aduantages. Ye shall know no forraine to buy or sell any Marchandise with any other forraine within this Citty or franchise thereof, but ye shal warne the Chamberlaine thereof or some Minister of the Chamber. Ye shall implead or sue no free man out of this City, whiles ye may haue right and law within the same Citty. Ye shall take none apprentise, but if he be free borne (that is to say) no bond mans son, nor the child of any Alien, and for no lesse terme then for seuen years, without fraude or deceit, & within the first yeare ye shal cause him to be enrolled or els pay such fine as shal be resonably imposed vpon you for omitting the same. And after his termes end, within conuenient time (being required) ye shall make him free of the Cittie, if he haue well and truly serued you. Ye shall also keepe the Kings peace in your owne person, ye shall know no gatherings, conuenticles, or conspiracies, made against the Kinges peace, but ye shall warne the Maior thereof, or let it to your power Al these points and articles ye shal wel and truely keep, according to the lawes & customs of this City to your power. So God you help. God saue the King Imprinted at London by Iohn Windet, Printer to the Honorable Citie of London.
