A3267 E689_1 99865999 166444
Another great VICTORIE Obtained By Vice-Admiral PEN against the Hol∣landers, since the last great and terrible Engage∣ment between both Fleets; With the full Particulars thereof, adverti∣sed by Letters from the Generals at Sea, to the Parliament and Councel of State: Together with a List of the Names of the ships ta∣ken, and brought to Dover, laden with Bars of Silver, Cocheneal, Wines, Sugar, Salt, and Tobacco: The land∣ing of seven hundred prisoners; And the number of ships sunk, burnt, , and dispersed. Likewise, a Narrative of the great lossen the Parl. side. Whereunto is annexed, The Answer and Remonstrance of the Officers and Souldiers in Scotland, to the late Letter of the Lord Gen. Cromwel, and the Councel of Officers in England, for the chusing of a new Parliament, to remore the heavy burdens, and to set the oppessed free. BRought by the last Post, Sunday, Feb. 26. and published (ac∣cording to Order) to undeceive the People. London, Printed for G. HORTON.
Another great Victory obtained by the English against the Hollanders; adver∣tised by Letters to the honorable Coun∣cel of State. Right Honorable, SInce the last Engagement with the enemy, it hath pleased God to add further Trophies of success to that memorable Victory, wherein we sunk, fired, took, and dispiersed their great Arma∣do; Upon whose flight, Vice-Admiral Pen coming opportunely in with about 15 sail of fresh ships, embraced the pursuit, where at last he glean'd up 14 brave Prizes, which
had lately reapt their Harvest in France: they are now bound for the Isle of Wight, and others come in daily; amongst the rest, divers rich Prizes are already sent to Do∣ver; a List whereof followeth: A List of the Dutch ships brought into Dover; together with the number of prisoners. 1 The black Bush of Emby, laden with salt and vinegar, burden 22 tun. 2 The Golden Cock, a man of War, 36 Guns. 3 The Peacock of Ember laden with salt, 22 tun. 4 The Church of Amsterdam, laden with Wine, burden 300 tun. 5 The Abigal of Ember, laden with Wine and strongwater. 6 The Star, laden with Wine and Vine∣gar.
7 The Beaver, laden with Salt and Vine∣gar. 8 The Church of Gravendick, laden with Salt, Orenges and Lemons, burden 200 tun and upward, 7 Guns. 9 The George of Membeck, laden with salt, and Brand, burden 300 tun. 10 The black Raven of Membeck, laden with salt, burden 300 tun. 11 St. Peter of Hamburgh, burden 200 tun laden with Nants Wine. 12 The Antwerp, laden with tobacco and sugar, burden 80 tun, 4 guns. 13 Princess Amiletta, laden wit silver bars, burden 400 tun. 14 Lyon of Flushen, laden with silver bars, Cocheneal, and other rich commodities from St. Lucas. 15 About 700 prisoners landed. The loss on our side is greater then was expected, for we a ve lost many precious
Commanders; besides many wounded; who are brought to the Western Ports, some having lost their legs, and others their arms; an Object of great pity and compassion. We hear that Vantrump lies at anchor in Callis Roads; and that Dewitte is coming forth to joyn with him; but we have a gal∣lant party abroad to attend his motion, that dayly bring in more of them. The rest of Our fleet are equipping and making ready at Portsmout; and this Summer we doubt not (by Gods assistance) to be Masters of the seas. Southampton, Feb. 26. 1653. The particulars hereof being communicated to the Parliament; it was ordered that the Ministers do return thanks to Almighty God, in their severall Congregations throughout England and Wales for this great Victory against the Hollanders. And likewise ordered, that due provisions be made for the wives and children of those that have lost their lives in the service of this Common∣wealth against the enemy.
The Answer of the Officers of the Army in Scotland, to the lato Letter sent from the Lord Gen. Cromwel, and the Coun∣cel of the Army in England, concerning the chusing of a new Parliament. Dear and precious friends, YOurs of the 28 of Jan. came to our hands, and was with abundance of joy and gladness received by us, and we hope that it will in a great measure stirre up our hearts, and a waken us out of that dead and drowsie condi∣tion which along time we have lain in; and we do blesse the name of the Lord on your behalfes, who have put us in remembrance of these things: for surely we have been altogether deficient in our suitable returnes to the most High for these extraordinary mercies, and unexpected fa∣vours, which not onely our selves, but all the Lords peo∣ple in these Nations have been sharers in; And indeed we are very sensible how far we have neglected our duty each to others, in that we have not endeavoured the strength∣ning of our, hearts and hands each of other by renewing the remembrance of the great things of our God upon all occasions one to another, but have rather had our hearts and hands imployed in such things as will not at all ad∣vantage us at the appearing of our Lord; so that we must needs say, that we have every one of us sought his owne, but not others good; neither have we endeavoured in our several places the answering of that great design of God, which surely he will have brought about, which is to lose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free; then should the light have brake forth as the morning, and the righteousness shall go before, and the glory of the Lord shal be our reward, Isai. 28. These things being sensibly set upon our hearts, we
could not but acquaint you; and through grace we do & shall resolve, every one of us in our places, to make it our work to seek the face of the Lord, both together & apart: And we are not out of hopes but that the Lord will be found of us, and manifest himself in us, and by us. We are indeed at a great distance from the rest of our relations in the respective Regiments to whom we belong, here being in a corner of the countrey but a small part of Maj. Gen. Col. Lilburns, and Col. Morgans Regiments. However, we hope that you will have the like return from all the rest that belong to us, upon occasion; and we shall not (God willing) come in the least short of our duty toward them, in putting them in minde of their duty towards the Lord, and towards each other, that so they may not draw away their shoulders, but be up and doing every one in their place, in carrying forward the great Work of the most High, which surely he will have brought about. We shall not trouble you any further at present; onely to tell you, that we will not cease importuning at the Throne of grace for you, that the Lord will strengthen your hearts and hands in this great business, our hearts be∣ing with you, and our desires and affections towards you, we shall commend you to the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and remain Your affectionate friends, and Brethren, Montross, Feb. 16. 1652. FINIS.
