a3798 e1087_5 99859341 169375
THE Folly and Wisdom OF THE ANCIENTS: IN TVVO LETTERS Wonderfully Preserved for almost 2000 Years. Translated out of the Greek Copy, and Recommended to the Judicious, to Consider how far the Case there∣in Exprest, may concern our Present Times, either Prophetically or Parallel. BEING TWO LETTERS of ARTAXERXES that Great King, as they are Recorded by JOSEPHUS, in His 11th. Book, and 6th. Chap. LONDON, Printed for F. Smith, at the Sign of the prill 11Elephant and Castle, without Temple-Bar. 1661.
THE Folly & Wisdome OF THE ANCIENTS: The First Letter. Rex Magnus his Principes & Locorum Presides Ordinati sunt, Haec scribit. Cum multis imperassem Gentibus, & omni dominaret Orbis-terrae, Volui non temeritate potentiae elevatus, &c. The Great King Writeth these things, to the Princes and Govern∣ors that are under him, throughout the Nations. AFter that I became Lord over many Nations, and had Dominion over the whole World, not lifted up with Presumption of my Authority; but carrying my self alway with Equity and Mildness, I purposed to settle my Subjects continually in a Quiet Life; and making my Kingdom Peaceable, and Open for Passage, to the utmost Coasts; to renew Peace, which is desired of all men.
Now, when I asked my Counsellors how this might be brought to pass? A man that excelled in Wisdom among us, and was approved for his constant good Will and stedfast Fidelity,. and had the honour of the second Place in the Kingdome, Declared unto us, That in all Nations, throughout the World, there was scattered a certain Malicious People, that had Laws contrary to all Nations, and continually Despised the Commandments of Kings, so as the Uniting of our Kingdoms, honourably intended by us, cannot go for∣ward. Seeing then we understand, that this People alone, is continually in opposition unto all men; Differing in the strange manner of their Laws, and evil affected to our State, working all the mischief they can, that our Kingdom may not be firmly established: Therefore have we Commanded, That all they that are signified in writing unto you, shall All, with their Wives and Children, be utterly destroyed, by the Sword of their Enemies, without all Mercy and Pity, upon the Day of the Moneth  of this present Year; That they who of old, and new also, are malitious, may in one Day, with Violence, go into the Grave, and so ever hereafter, cause our Affairs to be well Setled, and with∣out trouble. .
Here followeth part of the Prayer unto God, in behalf of the People Designed for Slaughter. . O Lord, Lord, the King Almighty, for the whole World is in thy Power, and if thou hast appointed to save thy People, there is no man that can gainsay thee; For thou hast made Heaven and Earth, and all the Wondrous things under the Heaven. Thou art Lord of all things, and there is no man can resist thee which art the Lord. Thou knowest all things. And thou knowest, that it was neither in Contempt, nor Pride (referring to the first Occasion of the Cruel Decree) for I could have been content, with good will, for the Salvation of the People, to have kissed the Soles of his Feet.Him who stir∣red up the K. to wrath But I did this, that I might not prefer the Glory of man, above the Glo∣ry of God, neither will I Worship any but Thee, O God, neither will I do it in pride. And now, O Lord God and King, Spare thy People, for their Eyes are upon us, to bring us to naught, yea they desire to destroy the In∣heritance that hath been Thine from the beginning. Despise not the Portion Thou hast Delivered for Thine own Self. Hear my Prayer, and be Merciful unto Thine Inheritance. Turn our Sorrow into Joy, that we may Live, O Lord, and Praise Thy Name, and Destroy not the Mouthes of them that Praise Thee, O Lord.
Soone after, a Second Letter, in Opposition to the For∣mer Hasty Decree, thus followeth. —&c. The Great King unto the Princes and Governors (over his Dominions) unto all our faithful Subjects, Greeting. MAny, the more often they are honoured with the great Bounty of their Gracious Princes, the more Proud they are waxen, and endeavour to hurt, not our Subjects onely, but, not being able to bear a∣bundance, do take in hand, to practise also against those that do them good: And take not onely thankful∣ness away from among men, but also lifted up with the glorious words of lewd persons, that were never good, they think to escape the Justice of God, that seeth all things, and hateth evil. Oftentimes also, fair speech∣es of those that are put in trust to manage their friends Affairs, have caused many that are in Authority, to be. partakers of innocent blood, and hath enwrapped them in remediless Calamities; beguiling with the falshood and deceit of their lewd Disposition, the inno∣nency and goodness of Princes. Now ye may see this as we have Declared, not so much by ancient Histories, as ye may if ye search what hath been wickedly done of late, through the Pestilent behaviour of them that are unworthily placed in Authority. And we must take care for the time to come, that our Kingdom may be quiet and peaceable for all men,
both by changing our purposes, and always judging things that are evident, with more equal proceeding; for a man—being indeed a Stranger from our—Blood, and far distant from our Goodness, and as a Stranger re∣ceived of us, had so far forth obtained the Favour that we shew toward every Nation,— as that he was called our Father, and was continually Honoured of all men, as the next person unto the King. But he not bearing his great Dignity, went about to deprive us of our Kingdom and Life; having by manyfold and cunning Deceits, sought of us the Destruction, as well of—those who saved our Life, and continually procured our good—with the whole Nation of them: For by this meanes he thought, finding us destitute of Friends, to have translated our Kingdom to—others. But we find, that the People whom this wicked Wretch hath delivered to utter Destruction,. are no evil doers, but live by most Just Laws; And that they be Children of the Most High, and Most Mighty Living God, who hath ordered the Kingdom both to us and our Progenitors, in the most excellent manner. Wherefore ye shall do well, not to put in Execution the Letters, sent unto you by that—wicked man.—For he that was the Worker of these things, is Hanged up at the Gates, &c.—God who Ruleth all things, speedily rendring Vengeance unto him according to his Deserts. Therefore ye shall Publish the Copy of this Letter, in all Places, that those—Innocent People may— freely live after their own Laws: And ye shall ayd them against all that rise against them, and set upon them. For Al∣mighty God hath turned to Joy unto them, the Day wherein the chosen People should have Perished. FINIS.
