B1674C E438_4 99864212 116435
A TESTIMONY OF THE Ministers in the Province of Essex, TO THE Trueth of Iesus Christ, AND TO The Solemn League and Covenant; AS ALSO Against the Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times, and the Toleration of them. Sent up to the Ministers within the Province of London, Subscribers of the First TESTIMONY. May 3d. LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Tho. Ʋnderhill at the Bible in Woodstreet, M.DC.XLVIII.
TO OUR REVEREND AND deare Brethren in the Lord, and in his work, Ministers of the Gospel, in the Province of London, Subscribers to the late Te∣stimony to the Trueth of Iesus Christ; Grace, Mer∣cy, and Peace be multiplied. Reverend and Dear Brethren, 1.THE hearty zeal we owe to the glo∣ry of our gracious God, so mightily working for us, his unworthy Mini∣sters and People in this land, by stop∣ping that deluge of Popery, Supersti∣tion, and Prophaneness, ready of late yeares by a prevailing Faction to have overwhelmed us. 2. The Conscience of that Sacred Bond of our solemn League and Covenant, thereupon taken against Popery, Superstition, Heresie, Schisme, and Prophanenesse. 3. The sad observation of that unthankfull requitall made for such transcendent mercies, by so many more violent evills ever since, not only to break out into lawlesse liberty and licenti∣ousnesse, but to contend for the sufferance and exercise of ma∣ny dangerous things in matters of Doctrine and Worship. 4. The active vigilancy of Satans Emissaries for sowing the. Tares of pernicious Errors, detestable Heresies, and horrid Blasphemies. 5. The remembrance of that day of Humiliation enjoyned by
Authority of Parliament, and observed by us not long since, for suppressing the growth and spreading of those abominati∣ons so farre in this Land. 6. The feare of some dreadfull Iudgement, the rod of Gods anger against us an hypocriticall Nation, and a people of his wrath, in case Reformation answerable to our Covenant so∣lemnly sworne, and humiliation publikely professed, should not accordingly be endeavoured. 7. The desire of our soules not to be partakers of other mens sins, lest we partake with them also in their plagues. 8. The hope we have in the Lord, who hath put into the hearts of the honourable Houses of Parliament, to acknowledge, That never any of Gods servants, since the foundation of the world had more high and strong engagements, heartily, and sincerely, to endeavour the compleat establishment of purity and unity in the Church of God, That the same gracious God will also give them an heart to finish it. 9. The sence of our duty not onely as Christians earnestly to contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, but also as Ministers to beare witness to the trueth, and stand up for the con∣firmation thereof against all gainsayers. 10. The exemplary publike Testimony given by your selves (our faithfull Brethren) in your late Attestation to the Truth of Iesus Christ, and to our solemn League and Covenant, are (amongst divers considerations) no small inducements to us the Ministers of the Gospel in the County of Essex, to give you the right hand of fellowship, not only by preaching the truth against raigning Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these corrupt times; but by preserving and transmitting that Sacred Depositum, as much as in us lyeth unto all posterity. We therefore whose names are hereunto subscribed doe here∣by declare and testifie to your selves, and to all our Brethren, the Ministers and Members of this and all the Churches of Christ, 1. That the Confession of Faith, Directorie for Worship, and Humble Advice for Church Government, presented by the Re∣verend Assembly of Divines to the Honourable Parliament, are
(as we conceive) so agreeable to the Word, that we cannot but exceedingly blesse the Name of our God, for his presence with that Assembly; Professing our hearty concurrence therein, and cheerfull readinesse to submit thereto; resolving likewise to continue humble Suitors at the throne of Grace, That our gra∣cious God in his due time would stirre up the Parliament to e∣stablish the foresaid Confession of Faith, and Advice for Church-Government with their Civill Sanction, as they have already the Directory for Worship. 2. That we look upon our solemne League and Covenant as a most choice blessing from God to these Churches and King∣domes so happily united therein; Earnestly intreating the Lord to give us grace, that we and all his people may continue faith∣full therein; and not to charge upon us, but of his abundant mercy to pardon, wherein our selves, or the Kingdome have a∣ny way therefrom hitherto receded. 3. That however we judge it most agreeable to Christianity, That tender Consciences of Dissenting Brethren bee tenderly dealt withall, yet we dare not carry in our bosomes such steely Consciences, and rockie hearts, as not to mourne in our soules: That after those strong engagements, and such a solemn day of publike humiliation for suppressing those growing and spread∣ing Errors and Heresies, yet in stead thereof (under colour of Liberty of Conscience) the same still are boldly and publikely vented and maintained, as much, if not more, then ever before, to the great dishonour of the great and dreadfull name of Al∣mighty God, the subversion of his most holy Truth, the contempt of the publique Worship, Ordinances, and Ministerie of Iesus Christ, the perdition of unstable soules, the grief and scandall of friends to Religion, and the great reproach of our Church and Kingdome; the which however some may perhaps count wise∣dome to countenance and connive at, yet for our parts we do solemnlie and sincerelie professe as in the presence of Almigh∣tie God the Searcher and judge of all hearts, That from our soules we doe utterly detest and abhor, as all former cursed do∣ctrines of Popery, Arminianisme, and Socianisme: So likewise all
the damnable Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies of these present evill times, whether of Anti-Scripturists, Familists, Antinomians, Anti-Trinitarians, Arrians, Anabaptists, or whatsoever is found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness. In all humility beseeching the God of all grace, to direct, stablish, strengthen, settle, and still to preserve us and all his faithfull people, from being led away with the Error of the wicked, to fall from our own stedfastnesse; from our hearts fervently praying that the Lord Iesus may not have a con∣troversie with this Church and Kingdome for suffering a∣ny thing which his soul abhors; withall ever desirous to blesse his holy Name, for your pious forwardnesse in faith∣full witness-bearing to the Truth of Christ, and perswading our selves, that this your zeal will provoke others to the like Attestation, We commend you to God, and the word of his grace, and remaine, Yoor unfained loving Brethren and fellow-Labourers in the work of the Lord. John Bedle, Minister of Bareston. William Sandford, Minister of Rooding alba. Iohn Smith Minister of Dunmow magna. Francis Hill Minister of Rooding alta. Henry Bates Minister of Mashbery. Samuel Noel Minister of Canfield parva. Francis Bridge Minister of Much Canfeild. Martin Alderson Minister of Dunmow Parva. Samuel Newton Minister of Sanford Magna.
Isaac Pennington Minister of Sanford Parva. Iames Parkin Minister of Thacksted. Elisha Prat Minister of Lindsell. Anthony Nicholas Minister of Willingale Spain. Iohn Parkehurst Minister of Southshoobery. Nicolas Beard Minister of Rechford. Iohn Gibson Minister of Alsingdon. Thomas Peck Minister of Prittlewell. Iohn Argur Minister of Leigh. Abraham Caley Minister of Rayleigh. Samuel Purcas Minister of Sutn. Thomas Oresby Minister of Hackwell. Iosiah Church Minister of South-Church. Iohn Man Minister of Rawxeth. Iames Norrice Minister of Cannedon. Christoper Scot Minister of VVring magna. Isaiah Sutliff Minister of Rottendon. Nathaneel Ranew Minister of Felsted, Iohn Harrison Minister of VValtham parva. VVilliam Hales Pastor of Hallingbury magna. Iohn Yardley Minister of Sheering. Edward Spranger Pastor of Harlow. Ieremiah Dyke Pastor of Pnedon magna. Thomas Cramphorne Minister of Nettleswell. Henry VVilkinson Pastor of pping. Iohn Harper Pastor of Nasing. Thomas Denn Minister of Latton. Iohn VVilson Minister of Hallingbury parva. Iohn Borradale Minister of Steeple Bumpsted. Iohn Pannell Minister of Stanborn. Iohn Clark Minister of Tilbury.
Raph Hillis Minister of Redgwell. Peter Sainthill Minister of Ovington. Iohn Gent Minister of Birdbrook. Edmund Bruer Minister of Castle Hennigham. Robert Chadsley Minister of Yeldham parva. Robert Fisher Minister of Belcham St Paul. Zach. Fitch Minister of Twinsted. Iohn Chamberlin Minister of Bulme. Henry Ham Minister of Much Waltham. Atiel Rathband Minister of VVrittle. Israel Hewit Minister at Malden. Samuel Smith Minister of Fryaring. Iames Willet Minister of Chisset parva. Rowland Greenwood Minister of Whimbish. Iohn More Minister of Clavering. Hugh Glover Minister of Debden. William Prime Minister of Elmeden. Robert Abbot Minister of Stansted Mountfitchet. George Wilson Minister of Elsenham. Iohn Wells Minister of Elford magna. Humfry Maddison Minister of Wansted. Samuel Austin Minister of Rumford. Iohn Bowyer Minister of Dagnham. Philip Sanders Minister of Magdalen Laver. Iohn Lavender Minister of High Ongar. Iohn VVheatly Minister of Havering. Iohn Wood Minister of Abbis Reading. Gamaliel Carre Minister of Lambourne. Edmund Bruer Minister of Fifeild. Iohn Siday Minister of Belcham Roiding. Thomas King Minister of High Laver.
George Bound Minister of Kelvedon. Edward Benthall Minister of Stapleford Abbot. Thomas Horrock Minister of Stapleford Tawney. Walter Wells Minister of Theyden Mount. Edward Wiston Minister of Norton Mandevile. Iohn Willis Minister of Ingolston. Nathaneel Hewitson Minister of Woodham Mortimer. William Rogers Minister of Marget Ingo. Daniel Duckfeild Minister of Childerditch. Edward Ford Minister of Great Warley. Edward Green Minister of Shelley. ohn Wilson Preacher of the Gospel at Baddow Parva. eorge Smith Minister of the Gospel at Dedham. hn Hubbard Minister of the Gospel in Boxted. omas Lawson Minister of Doniland. ph osselin Minister of the Gospel in Earles-Colne. uel Rogers Minister of Much Tey. Nathaneel Bugg Minister of Much Horkesly. Iohn Fenar Minister of Langham. Iohn VVhite Minister of VVormingford. Timothy Rogers Pastor of Chappel. Richard Pulley Minister of Fordham. Gamaliel Carre Minister of Aldeham. Thomas Brackley Pastor of Colne Engayne. Samuel Bridge Minister of Great Burstad. VValter Tayler Minister of Hutton. Iames More Minister of Layendon. Francis Scott Minister of Fabben. Ionathan Hoyle Minister of Curringham. William How Minister of Dronton.
Samuel Smith Minister of Sanden. Christopher VVragge of Much Badow. Edward Cliffe Minister of East Hornedon. Richard Cardinal Minister of VVest Hornedon. Marmaduke Iames Minister of Ʋpminster. Daniel Lathum Minister of Stifford. Iohn Overed Minister of Topisfeild. Ieremy Benton Minister of Finchingfeild. Robert Harmer, Ministers in Colchester. Alexander Piggot Ministers in Colchester. Gabrel Wyersdale Minister of Lexden. Robert Tuller Minister of Iames in Colchester. Francis Onge Minister of the Gospel. Henry Steinmer Minister of Bradfeild Nathanael VVard Minister of Shenfeild. Iohn Powell Minister of the Gospel. Iohn Ferrity Minister of Theydon German. Nicolas Foskingham Minister of the Gospel. Nehemiah Dod Minister of Dodinghurst. Iames Torye Minister of East Hanningfeild. Tho. Lathum Minister of the Gospel. Edward Thomas Minister of Oaten Belcham. Thomas Deeresly Minister of VVakham St Paul. Iohn Sherman Rector of Bradwell juxtamare. Nehemiah Holmes Minister at Southminster. Anthony Samons Minister of Burnham. Nath. Hewitson Minister of VVoodham Mortimer. VVilliam Buckley Minister of Nayland. Edmund Sherman Minister at Bradwell.
In matters that have passed the Assembly of Divines, it is not fit for us that are members thereof to make any further Attestation; In all other branches of this Testimony we doe fully and cordially concurre with our Brerhren, Richard Cleyton Minister at Easton magna. Mathew Newcomen Minister of the Gospel at Dedham. FINIS.
