B3292 E433_5 99865354 161538
A BLOODY SLAUGHTER AT PEMBROOKE-CASTLE IN WALES WHERE Collonel POYER opposeth the Par∣liament, and hath killed and wounded 11 men, batters down the houses in the Town, and refuseth to submit to the Ordi∣nance of Parliament. WITH The Treaty of Collonel Flemming, and the Gentlemen of the County with him, The danger of Tinby Castle to revolt from the Parliament. AND A Declaration from the Chief Officers under Major Generall Laughorne, Subscribed by their owne Hands. March 21. 1647. Imprimatur Gil. Mabbot. Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, neere the Queens-head Tavern. 1648.
The Copy of a LETTER FROM PEMBROOKE: Concerning The Transactions in reducing of Pem∣brooke CASTLE. Sir, COllonell Fleming, received Letters and Orders from the Parliament and his Ex∣cellency, and upon receipt thereof, (after ad∣vice with his Officers) he sent a Drum, with the Ordinance of Parliament, and the sum∣mons; as the last to be sent to him, to deli∣ver up Pembrook Castle, within twelve houres, or he and all with him to be proclaimed Re∣bels and Traytors.
An answer was hourely expected by Col∣lonell Fleming, but came not within the time limitted. Yet at last the Drummer rturn∣ed not with Collonell Poers consent, to sur∣render, but with Propositions to this effect. 1. That 1000 li. might be paid unto him, which he saith she hath disbursed. 2. That the Officers and Souldiers he paid part of their Arrears, according to the proportion of o∣thers, and sufficient security for the rest. 3. That the Governour (and also the rest of the Officers and Souldiers have liberty to goe whi∣ther they will, with security. And so farre is Collonel Poyer from sur∣rendring of the Castle, that he hath discharg∣ed severall pieces of Ordinance upon the Towne, and battered severall houses, to the great prejudice of the Inhabitants. Hee also made shot by divers Ordnance, with small shot at the Souldiers, and hath wounded eleven, some of which is feared to be mortall. After this Collonell Fleming, (with the ad∣vice, and upon the desires of the Gentlemen
of the Country) treated with him, and pro∣mised to give him 200 li. in monies. And to have the same termes for himself, and the Of∣ficers and Souldiers with him, as other super∣numeries, that are, or have been disbanded else-where. Also that his Arrears should be Audited, and security given to him, for payment of what shall be upon account due to him. And it was also further offered unto him. That he should have the security of the Gen∣tlemen of the County, whom he hath much oppressed: that they would relinquish all suits and actions in law against him. But all these fair offers from Coll. Fleming, and the Gentlemen of the County could not, prevaile with him, but he put out his flagge of defiance, and will not yeeld. There is some fear of Tinby Castle to revolt from the Parliament. Captain Penn (according to the Order of the Committee of Safety) hath prepared as∣sistance for Col: Flemming, with Ammuniti∣on and other necessaries for the refusing of him. Pembrook March 15. 1647.
A DECLARATION IN Vindication of the Officers and Souldi∣ers under the Command of Ma∣jor Generall Laughorne, from di∣vers false reports, and slanderous a∣spersions cast upon them. FOR the clearing of our selves and the rest of the Commanders, Officers and Souldiers under the command of Major Ge∣nerall Laughorne, from such false reports and scandals as are raised upon us: And for the satisfying of the Publique, we have thought fit to declare that our intentions are reall to submit, and yeeld obedience to the Ordinance of Parliament, and his Excellen∣cies Orders thereupon for disbanding, and are resolved accordingly to disband at such time, and place as the Committees of the severall Counties shall thinke fit, and ap∣point, (so that the Forces be altogether) and on the delivering us our Debenters, and our
payment of the two Months pay compleate in the said Ordinance allowed: And notwith∣standing the scandalous reports bruted through the Counties that wee indeavoured to seize upon and imprison the persons of some of the Commissioners and Treasurers appointed for the service of disbanding. And that the Forces that are lately sent into the Garrison of Tinby are intended shall hold the said Garrison against the Parliament and his Excellency, And also that others of our for∣ces are intended to resigne Poyer in the castle of Pembrooke, we for manifestation of the truth doe further declare that it was never in our intentions to seize upon any one or more of the Commissioners or Treasurers, nor shal we ever presume to attempt it. Nei∣ther had we ever the least thought or inten∣tion to strengthen that Town of Tinby against the State, and his Excellency; But we doe engage our selves, that when and whereso∣ever the said Commissioners shall please to appoint a Randezvous for the disbanding the Forces together, That the Souldiers that are now in Tinby, shall likewise appeare be∣fore them to disband.
And for Collonell Poyer, we declare our selves innocent of his actions, as may appear by our former desires to his Excellency, for power to reduce him to the obedience of the Parliament. Pat: Cozen Will: Shuttleworth Rich. Powell Hugh Laughorne Ad. Beale Hen. Addys Phi. Bowen Wil. Marichurch. Carmarthen the 10. of March. 1947. FINIS,
