C1175B 99897268 136958
The CASE of the Waggoners and Carriers of Goods and Merchandizes, through the several Roads of England. Humbly submitted to the Honourable House of Commons assembled in Parliament. THAT in the Sessions of Parliament 1695, the said Carriers were heard (as to many Grievances and Oppressions imposed on them by several pretended Informers) before a Committee of this Honourable House, who were pleased 14th of March 1695, to make their Report. That it was their Opinion, the Petitioners had fully proved the Allegations of their said Petitions, and deserv'd Relief of the House. And also that the House be moved for leave to bring in a Bill for explaining the several Acts relating to the High-ways, and for preventing the Abuses arising thereby. To which the House agreed, committed John Littlehale, for oppressing the Petitioners, to Cu∣stody of the Sergeant at Arms, and a Bill was then drawn up, and past into a Law, Intituled, An Act for better amending and repairing the High ways, and Explanation of the Laws relating thereunto. By which, it was (amongst other things) Enacted, that all Carriers and Waggoners should be obliged to draw with double Shafts, and a Pole between their Wheel-Horses, &c. But it having been tried, it was found by experience to be impossible to pass the several narrow Roads of this Kingdom, and Gate-ways of Inns, and Passages of Streets, Where the Petitioners must Come to abide and lodge their said Waggons and Wares, with such double Shafts and Polls, for that they are not broad enough to contain the same. The said John Littlehale, and other Informers, have taken upon them to prosecute the Petitio∣ners for Forfeitures committed, by not driving pursuant to the said Act, which is impossible to be done. And some Justices of Peace have been so civil and encouraging to these Informers, to grant them Warrants for Distress of the said Carriers Horses, to levy the Penalties and Forfeitures incurred by their not complying with the said Impossibility. By which means, the said Carriers have suffer'd very much, and are not able to go on with their Callings, unless these Grievances are redrest. Some whereof are as follow. Particularly, That the 6th of March 1698, Seven Horses were seized from Mr. Basse,Leicester Leicester Carrier at Brown's Well in Finchly Parish, upon Warrants granted by Justice Munday of the Temple, and carried away by William Hull, Brother-in-Law to John Littlehale, viz. five Horses out of the wag∣gon, which were all that it was drawn with; one Horse from Mr. Basse's Man, which he rode on, and a Gelding which he led in his hand. And the said Hull, assisted by two Soldiers, demanded 10 l. of him, for non payment of which, they swore they would knock him off his Horse, and in a violent abusive manner forced all the said Horses from him, whereby he was necessitated to leave the said Waggon, loaden with Wares and Merchandizes, in the open Road, till he came to London, to get Money to clear them, or a Replevin. And afterwards when a Replevin was ob∣tained from the Sheriff of Middlesex, the said persons refused to obey it, and forcibly resisted the Officers, who came to execute it, and restore the said Horses. At the same time and place, the said Hull and his Agents, by Mr. Munday's Warrant,Nottingham. seized six Horses from Mr. Wilkinson's Waggon of Nottingham; demanded ten Pounds of his man, and gave him the like Language and Usage. The beginning of February 1698, the said Hull and his Agents seized two Horses, two Collars, and two pair of Traces from the said Wilkinson, Nottingham Carrier for four Pound, at Highgate, and the four Pound was paid to redeem them. And at the same time and place, the said Hull and his Agents seized two Horses,Derby. two Collars, and two pair of Traces, from Samuel Locker's Waggon, Carrier to Derby, for four Pound, and the four Pound was paid ro redeem them. About the 21th of February, the said Hull and his Agents seized two Horses in the Parish of Finchly for four Pound more from the said Locker, Derby Carrier.
