C1363B R176639 45578225 172170
A Catalogue of Plates, The Prints whereof are useful for Gentlemen, Artists, and Gentlewomen, and School-mistresses Works, Sold by ARTHUR TOOKER, Stationer at the Globe over against Salisbury House in the Strand, where you may have choice of Maps, and also Italian, German, and the Low Countrey Prints, Indian Ink, Abortive Skins, all sorts of Paintings, and all Stationary Wares. Plates of Arnold de Jode his Graving. An Almanack Border with Boys, and the Seasons of the Year, invented by Mr. Isaac Fuller. Ars Pictoria, being the best book extant in English for Drawing, collected by Mr. Alexander Browne. Four Stories of Ovid in several Plates, viz. 1. Phaeton, 2. Venus birth, 3. Ulysses and the Syrens, 4 Sisyphus. One Plate containing 7 of the Nobilities Heads. Plates of Mr. Gaywoods Etching, invented by Mr. Barlow and others. Two Badges or Choice of Signs for Bars and Rooms. Titian and his Mistress. A Cunnie-berry. Saint GEORGE. Madam Kirck. A Cats Head. A book 24 Leaves, of variety of Beasts, Birds, Flies, Fruits, and Flowers. A book 24 Leaves, of variety of beasts in their po∣stures and actions. A book 9 Leaves, of variety of birds in their se∣veral actions. A book 27 Leaves, of several Stories of the begin∣ning of the BIBLE. A book of Pearcies Foldage, 12 Leaves. A Prospect View of Lynn. A large Sea Fight. Several Plates Etched by Mr. Gaywood, Mr. Place, and Mr. Holler. A small Sea Storm. A book 5 Leaves, of Sea Havens. A book 6 Leaves, of Round Sea Havens. A book 6 Leaves, of Landskip. A Sea Haven. Rochester Castle. Hurst Castle. Cowes Castle. Several sorts of Plates by divers Authors. Eight Plates of the King and Queen, Duke and Dut∣chess of Monmouth, Engraven by Van Hove. Eighteen Heads of Drollery and Anticks. Three Plates, viz. 1. Christ taken from the Cross, 2. A Friar, 3. Saint Jerom. A Perpetual Almanack in a large border. Sixty Stories of variety of Landskip and Ovals with neat borders, and variety of Beasts, Birds, Hunt∣ing, Trees, Worms, Fruit, Flowers, Fishes, &c. Coloured fit for Cabinets, Dressing-boxes, Pow∣der-boxes, Baskets, Skreens, &c. Four Plates of Little boys. Saint George on Horseback. The Queen on Horseback. The Duke of Monmouth on Horseback. Actaeon. FINIS.
