C2236 669.f.7[37] 99870638 161019
His MAIESTIES Declaration to all His Loving Subiects in the County of CORNWALL, &c. CHARLES R. VVE are so highly sensible of the extraor∣dinary merit of Our County of Corn∣wall, of their zeale for the Defence of Our Person, and the just Rights of Our Crowne, (in a time when We could contribute so little to Our own defence, or to their Assistance; in a time when not onely no Reward appeared, but great and probable dan∣gers were threatned to Obedience and Loyalty,) of their great and eminent Courage and Patience in their indefatigable prosecution of their great Worke against so potent an Enemy, backt with so strong, rich and populous Ciries, and so plentiful∣ly furnished with Men, Armes, Money, Ammuniti∣on and Provision of all kinds; And of the won∣derfull successe with which it hath pleased Almigh∣ty God (though with the the losse of some emi∣nent persons, who shall never be forgotten by Vs) to reward their Loyalty and Patience by many strange Victories over their and Our enemies, in de∣spight of all humane probability, and all imagin∣able disadvantages; That as We cannot be forget∣full of so great deserts, so VVe cannot but desire to publish to all the world, and perpetuate to all Time anp Memory of these their merits, and of Our ac∣ceptance of the same. And to that end, VVe do hereby render Our Royall thanks to that Our County in the most publike and Lasting manner VVe can devise, commanding Copies hereof to be Printed and published, and one of them to be read in every Church and Chappell therein, and to bee kept for ever as a Record in the same, That as long as the History of these Times, and this Nation shall continue, the memory of how much that County hath merited from Vs and Our Crown, may be de∣rived with it to posterity. Given at Our Campe at SUDELEY Castle  the tenth of September. 1643. 15 Sept: 1643 The agreement of the Maior, Aldermen, and inhabitants of the Towne of TENBY. VVEE the Major, Aldermen, and inhabitants of Tenby, doe hereby humbly Declare, that wee will be alwayes obedient to the Kings Ma∣jesties Royall Commands, and will serve Him with our Lives and Fortunes, and assist Him against all Rebells, and Rebellions whatsoever, and will submit to His Majesties Authority, now placed in the Right Honourable Richard Earle of Carbery, Lord Lieutenant Generall of the Counties of Pembrock Car∣marthen, and Cardigan, the Towne and Countie of Haver∣fordwest, and the Townes of Pembrocke and Tenby, And withall will heartily Contribute to His Majesties Service, to the best of our abilities; And we doe farther declare and ingage our selves upon the faith of Loyall Subjects, that we will not receive into our Townes any Garrison, Force, or Per∣son whatsoever sent or to be sent thither from any who now are, or hereafter shall be, in Rebellion against His Majesty, under the name of the forces of King and Parliament, but will dutifully receive and imbrace all such armed Forces and Garrisons as our said Lord Lieutenant Generall shall thither send or Command for the safe guarding of the said Towne for the use & service of His Sacred Majesty. For assurance whereof we have hereunto fixed our Common Seale, and subscribed our names this thirtieth day of August. 1643. Thomas Wyatt Major. David Hammond. Fran. Long. Rice Prickard. John Rogers. Robert Browne. Richard Jewell. Walter Sherburne. David Palmer. Thomas Barret. Rice Barrow. Richard Wyatt. Griffeth Gibbon. Iohn Barrow. Iohn Sounder. Henry Gibbs. Lewis Bishop. David Stowell. Thomas Stephens. William Record. Iohn Stone. Iohn Poyer. Mich. Sutton. Iohn Henton. Silvanus Griffith. Iohn Hammond. Richard Williams. Nicholas Horsam. Iohn Thomas Phillip Davis. Rice Gitto, Bartho. King. Printed at OXFORD, by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Vniversity. 1643.
