C2377 E469_12 R205460 99864833 162367
His Majesties last PROPOSITIONS TO The Commissioners at the Treaty, to be communicated to His two Houses of Parliament assembled at Westminster; Declaring His Royal Assent to sign the Propositions, and to unite Himself with His two Houses, for the conclu∣ding of a safe and present Peace. And His Proclamation thereupon, Published by his Majesties special Command, and Dated from Newport 28. Octob. 1648. With the Votes of both Houses concerning the King; And the Proposals of the Lord Gen. Fairfax, touching the set∣ling of the Kingdom, and disbanding part of the Army. AGreed upon by His Excellency, and the Councell of War, and presented to the Parliaments Commissioners on Sa∣turday last, at the Treaty at St. Albanes between the Parlia∣ment and Army. crowned blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT C. R. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE LONDON, Printed for R. RISHTON, 1648.
JOYFULL NEVVES FOR ENGLAND FROM The Kings most Excellent Maiesty, and the Parliaments Commissioners for the Treaty; Declaring their unanimous Proceedings, and Agreement for PEACE. Right Honourable, HIs Maiesty hath made some further Concessions touching Episcopacy and Church-government, which are to be presented to the Commissio∣ners
on Munday next, purporting his earnest Desires for their present Condescensions, to his last Paper tou∣ching the Church, and that there may be no further de∣traction of time, promising upon His Royall Word to sign the rest of the Propositions, and to give satisfac∣tion to His two Houses in all things by them desi∣red. But the Commissioners proceed according to their Instructions, desiring His Majesty to give His Royall Assent for the confirming of the Presbyterian Govern∣ment, and the abolishing of Bishops and Episcopacy for the future. This motion causeth some scruple to arise from His Majesty, but after mature deliberation thereupon re∣turneth a satisfactory Answer to the Commissioners, in∣somuch that it is conceived, He will give His Royall Word for passing the said Bill, according to the time and manner prefixed by both Houses of Parliament: which causeth a dismall frown to proceed from the adverse party. And His Majestie being sensible of their present dis∣contents and murmurings, gave expresse Command, that proclamation should be made throughout the said Island, for the preventing of all Insurrections and com∣motions during the time of the Treaty, which was ac∣cordingly done. So that there is great hopes that all Obstacles will be removed, which may prove prejudiciall to this Treaty, or frustrate the endeavours and consultation of the great Councell assembled, who are even upon the close of a finall end and Agreement.
His Maiesty saith, that He hath some few things to propound to the Commissioners, which will give great satisfaction to His two Houses, and remove all jealou∣sies and fears whatsoever from amongst His liege peo∣ple of England; the said Proposals are to be debated at the Councell Table, so soon as his Maiesty hath recei∣ved the sense of His two Houses, to his last Concessions for abolishing of Episcopacy. We hear that there hath been a late Design com∣plotting by the Enemies of Religion, against the King and Kingdom, who had conspired to raise a great army throughout the Kingdom of England, by tendering an Oath of Secresie, a Party whereof to gather to a head in the West, and severall other parts of the Kingdome for the rescuing his Maiesty from the power of the Parliament, and to bring him to London by force, if they do not condiscend to his Desires, and to put most of them to the sword. But by the divine providence of the All-seeing Iehovah, their Plot is discovered, and by his omnipotency quite frustrated and prevented. Newport 29. Octob. 1648. The parliaments Votes concerning the King. REsolved &c. That that part of his Maiesties An∣swer concerning the taking of the Covenant is un∣satisfory. Resolved &c. That that part of His Answer concerning the taking away of Arch-bishops, &c. is unsa∣tisfactory. Resolved &c. That that part of his answer con∣cerning tolleration for the Queen, is unsatisfactory. Re∣solved &c. That a Committee be forthwith appointed to draw up the Covenant into such a form as may be proper for his Majesty to take it. Resolved &c. That that part concerning the sale of Bishops Lands is unsatisfactory.
The last Weeks Journall. ON Munday last about 9 of the clock in the mor∣ning his Majesty betook himself to study, and continued private in his Chamber till four in the Af∣ternoon. On Tuesday his Majesty had a conference with the Bishops and Clergy, in the privy chamber, where He propounded severall questions touching the Covenant and the Presbyterian Government, and desired to be sa∣tisfied in judgment in some particulars therein contai∣ned, touching the Church of England, which took up two hours dispute; and after severall disputations and arguments at the councell table, the Bishop of London made a learned Speech to his Majesty, cleering the scruples which his Maiesty stuck most at, and satisfy∣ing him in other points, in relation to the Discipline of the Church, which gave great ease and content to his Maiesty; so that it is hoped there is no obstacle or let remaining in his Royall Breast, which may hinder or eclipse the glorious splendor of our ensuing and bles∣sed peace. On Wednesday (being Fast Day) his Maiesty had no debate with his Counfell, but observed it with great wisdome and numility, the Bishop of London preach∣ing, who made an excellent and divine prayer, for a blessing upon the Treaty, and for peace and righteous∣nesse to flourish within his Maiesties Realmes and Dominions.
The Parliaments Comissioners obeserved the said day, and assembled together in the Church, where Mr. Marshall, and Mr. Vines preached, who made like∣wise two excellent prayers, Humbly beseeching the great Jehovah of Heaven, who is the pure Fountain of all peace and righteousnesse, to be present amongst them, and to crown their endeavours with blessings of peace, &c. On Thursday His Maiesty and his Councell met in the privy chamber, where they spent some time in de∣bate about the businesse of the Church, and sent a new message to the Parliaments Commissioners, intima∣ting, That he had made some further Enlargment of his present Concessions touching the treaty, in all things that may redownd to the peace and happinesse of his people, and therefore desired them to expedite the bu∣sinesse about the Church, protesting that he hath dis∣penc'd with his conscience as far as possible He can in honour. The Commissioners returned answer, that no means shall be left unattempted by them for the setling of a safe and well grounded peace, and as soon as they un∣derstand the sense of both Houses touching his Maie∣sties last answer to the Church, they shall with all rea∣dinesse communicate the same unto his Maiesty. Some differences hath hapned between a Royalist & a Parliame teer at Court, who upon words, challen∣ged the field, fought, and hath mortally wounded each other. Newport Octob. 28. 1648.
The proposals and Desires of his Excellency the Lord Ge∣nerall Fairfax. 1 That there may be allowance and provision made for 3000 Foot to be continued more then the former establishment. 2 That the Lieut. Generall, an Engineer, and some other Officers, with 20 Gunners, be added to the train. 3 That his Excellency will give command a∣gainst listing any new Recruits. 4 That the Army be∣ing paid off from the 15. of Jan. last, the Generall is willing that free quarter be deducted for, according to the Rules in the agreement for stating Arreares, but those entertained since Septemb. 23. which are now to be disbanded, may have their full pay. 15 That the Ar∣my shall be accordingly drawn into Towns, Cities, & Garrisons, and maintain themselves for a fortnight af∣ter they are paid, from the 15 of January. FINIS.
