C2727 E112_44 99871633 124045
PROPOSITIONS FROM The Kings most Excellent Majesty: Propounded by The Earle of Devon. The Earle of Newcastle. The E. of Northampton. The Earle of Lindsey. The Earle of Rivers. The Lord Moubray. The Lord Rich. The Lord Chapel. Accompanyed with 5000. Horse and Foot for their Guard. To the Lo: Brooks, and the Gentry and Commonalty as∣sembled at Warwick, on Thursday last, August 18. With the Lo: Brooks his Answer to the said Propositions. Also the Parliaments determination con∣cerning their Resolution, wherein they declare that they will (to the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes) assist all those that shall obey their just commands. Aug. 20. Ordered that this be printed and published. Joh. Browne, Cler. Parl. LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler. 1642.
PROPOSITIONS Propounded from the Kings most Excellent Ma∣jesty, to the Lord Brooks and the Gentry and Communalty or the County of WARWICK. THe Kings most excellent Majesty had set downe his Resolution, that on the 18. of August, being Thursday, He would goe in Person to Warwicke, but other affaires hindering him, or his intention al∣tering, he deferred it till a further time, onely there went up the Earle of Newcastle, with two Troops of Horse, the Earle of Northampton with a Regiment of Foot, and a Troope of Horse, the Earle of Lindsey with five Companies and two Troops of Horse, the Earle of Rivers with a Company of Lancashire-men, which are thought to be for the most part Papists the Lord Rich with a Regiment of Foot and two
hundred Horse, the Lord Mowbray with a Regi∣ment of Foot, and the Lord Chapell with a Troop of Horse. Thus they marcht from Nottingham, about eleven of the clock at night, toward War∣wick, with a great deale of privacie: Where being arrived, they found my Lord Brooks provided for to entertaine them; for he having given private intelligence to the Gentry and Commonalty of the County, there were assembled almost 7000. trained men and others, who suffered them not to come neere Warwicke by 2. Miles, but met them comming from Grove-Parke, from Mr. Dor∣mers, a great Papist; where it seemes the Lords had been to refresh themselves. The Lords seing my Lord Brooks so well pre∣pared, made a stand, and caused the Drum to beate a parly, which was answered by my Lord Brooks, and a Trumpet let  to de∣mand the Cause; who was met by a Trumpeter of the Kings partie; who gave information that they desired a conference with my Lord. Brooks, wish∣ing him to draw out a hundred Horse, and fifty Musketiers for his guard, and they would doe the like. Also that six men might be exchanged as Pledges for the security of either party. Which was agreed on, and speedily effected; which being done, in the middle way between both Forces, the Lord Brooks gave them a mee∣ting, where after a salutation, the Earle of New∣castle
and the Earle of Lindsey, propounded these following Propositions. 1. THat the Lord Brookes should immediately lay down his Arms and submit to his Majesties mercie, from whom he should receive a graci∣ous pardon. 2. That the Lo. Brooks should re∣signe the Castle of VVarwick into such hands as his Majesty should thinke fit. 3. That the Lord Brooks should disavow the Ordinance of the Militia, and endeavour the execution of the Commission of Array. 4. That the Lord Brooks should deliver the Magazine of that County into the hands of the Earle of North∣hampton.
5. That the Lord Brooks should immediately repaire to Nottingham, and appeale for his Majesties Pardon or upon neglect thereof, to undergo his Majesties severest censure. And that if he refused to performe these their honourable demands, they vowed to make him the Subject of their that dayes fury. These threats so farre incensed my Lord Brooks, that he was about to leave them without reply, but after a litle consideration he wheeld about, and boldly marcht up to them, speaking as fol∣lowes. My Lords, I much wonder that men of judge∣ment, in whose breasts true honour should re∣maine, should so much derogate from their Ance∣stors and noble Predecessors, as to seeke (for pri∣vate ends) the ruine of that Kingdom they should endeavour to support. Doth fond ambition, or your selfe-will'd pride so much bewitch you, that you cannot see the crown of all your actions? When the great Councel of the Parliament was first assembled, you then were Members; why did you not continue? Was it because your acti∣ons were so bad, you were ashamed to own them? Had you done evill in some petty kind, Submissi∣on
might have quitted you from that, and you have been still honoured, loved, and feared; but by these actions (which tend both to the ruine of King and Kingdome, and your selves too) you cannot make amends for former evils. As for these Propositions, take this in An∣swer: When that His Majesty, His posterity, and the peace of the Kingdome shall be secured from you that seeke the ruine of them all, I gladly shall lay downe my Armes and Power. As for the Castle, it was delivered to my trust by the High Court of Parliament, who reserve it for the Kings use; and dare boldly say will so imploy it, and not like you imploy it against the King. As for the Commission of Array, you know it is un∣lawfull, and like your actions, destructive both to the Laws and Religion of the Kingdome. For the Magazine of the County, it was delivered to him both by the Parliament, and the Countrey; and although he was not an Earle, yet he dares be a truer Subject to his King, and a faithfuller servant to his Countrey; and being so, he was resolved to keep it till Northampton could shew him greater authority for his delivery of the same. As touching His Majesties Pardon, as he was confi∣dent that he had not given any occasion of offence to His Majesty, so he needed not pardon; that being a duty belonging to offenders, such as themselves; and he ad∣vised them to sue out a pardon with speed, for feare
that their offences being once knowne, they prove im∣pardonable; for he doubted not but that in a short time His Majesty would finde who are his best friends. As for their fury, he bade them spit their venome; for he hoped that Northampton should be translated to Warwick, and stand centry upon Warwick-castle, to fright crowes, kites, and buzzards. Having thus spoken, they turned their horses, and rode up to their Troops: my Lord Books thinking that they had intended to have done something, but they very fairely wheeled about, and marched away, not once so much as taking their leave; which my Lord Brooks seeing, did the like, and marched with his men to Warwick: Where after many thanks he read part of the Resolution of the Lords and Commons to them, animating them on to the same Resolution. We the Lords and Commons doe declare, that this is the true cause for which we raise Armes, in the defence whereof we are resolved to live and die. Ordered that this by printed and published. Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. Do. Com.
