C2840 669.f.14[9] 99869798 162997
Munday 29th, January, 1648. A True Relation of the KINGS Speech to the Lady ELIZABETH, and the Duke of GLOUCESTER, the day before his Death. HIs Children being come to meet Him, He first gave His Blessing to the Lady ELIZABETH; And bad her remember to tell her Brother JAMES when ever shee should see him, That it was his Fathers last desire that he should no more look upon CHARLES as his Eldest Brother only, but be Obedient unto him, as his Soveraigne; And that they should love one another, and forgive their Fathers Enemies: Then said the KING to her, Sweet heart, you'l forget this; No, (said shee) J shall never forget it while J live; and powring forth abundance of Teares, promised Him to write downe the particulars. Then the KING taking the Duke of Gloucester upon His Knee, said, Sweet heart, now they will cut off thy Fathers head; (Upon which words the Child looked very stedfastly on Him.) Mark Child what J say, they will cut off my head, and perhaps make thee a King; But marke what J say, you must not be a King, so long as your Brother CHARLES and JAMES do live; For they will cut off your Brothers heads (when they can catch them) and cut off thy head too at the last. And there∣fore, I charge you, do not be made a King by them: At which the Child, sighing, said, J will be torn in peeces first: Which falling so unexpectedly, from one so young, it made the KING rejoyce ex∣ceedingly. Another Relation from the Lady ELIZABETHS own hand. WHat the KING said to Me the 29 of January, 1648. being the last time I had the happiness to see Him: He told me he was glad J was come, and although he had not time to say much yet somewhat he had to say to Me, which he had not to another, or leave in writing. Be∣cause he feared their Cruelty was such, as that they would not have permitted him to write to me. Hee wished me not to greeve and torment my selfe for him; for that would be a glorious death that he should dye; it being for the Laws, and Liberties of this Land, and for Maintaining the true Protestant Religion. He bid me read Bishop Andrew's Sermons, Hookers Ecclesiasticall Policie, and Bishop Lauds Book against Fisher, which would ground me against Popery. He told me he had forgiven all his Enemies, and hoped God would forgive them also; And commanded us, and all the rest of my Brothers and Sisters to forgive them: hee bid me tell my Mother, That his thoughts had never straied frm her, and that his Love should be the same to the last. Withall he commanded me and my brother to be obedient to Her. And bid me send his Blessing to the rest of my brothers and sisters, with commendation to all his Friends: So after he had given me his blessing, J tooke my leave. Further, he commanded us all to Forgive those People, but never to Trust them; for they had been most false to Him, and to those that gave them power, and he feared also to their own soules; And desi∣red me not to greeve for him, for he should dye a Martyr, And that hee doubted not but the Lord would settle his Throne upon his Son, and that we should be all happier, then we could have expected to have been, if he had lived; with many other things, which at present J cannot remember. Elizabeth. The KING said to the Duke of Gloucester that he would say nothing to him but what was for the good of his soul; he told him that he heard that the Army intended to make him King; but it was a thing not for him to take upon him, if he regarded the welfare of his Soule; for hee had two brothers before him; and therefore commanded Him upon his blessing; never to accept of it; unless it redounded lawfully upon him. And commanded him to feare the Lord, and he would provide for him. Copia vera. March 24 Printed in the Yeare, 1648.
