C3603 669.f.25[61] 99871113 163866
royal blazon or coat of arms C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT Charles R. RIght Trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. VVhereas Our Royal Father of Blessed Memory, did in the year 1632. Constitute and Establish a Society of Fi∣shers, and Declared that He was resolved by all good occasions favourably to assist, and graciously accept the forwardness of all those that should express their zeal to His Majesties Service in so general and publick an undertaking, It being then Re∣solved and Concluded by His Majesty, that it was very honorable and necessary for this Kingdom. Now that the true managing and most advantageous prosecution thereof, is by experi∣ence discovered by Philip late Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery and his Associates, who did cause sundry Fishing Vessels to be provided and built, which imployed many Families in making of Nets and other provisions (one Vessel imploying 20 Families in work) besides the breeding of Country Youths to be made serviceable Marriners in short time, as by the Book called The Royal Hering Buss Fishings pre∣sented unto Us doth plainly appear. And whereas We are informed that the Nation doth abound with great numbers of poor Families and Vagrants, who for want of imployment are like to perish, unless some speedy care be taken for their Relief: And that the several Wards and Suburbs of this Our City of London and Hamlets adjacent, are burthened with multitudes of poor people, not only which are born in the said places, but such as come out of sundry Countries to seek Relief: For Redress whereof, We do hereby recommend unto the care of You Our Lord Mayor of the said City, to advise with each Alderman, and cause his Ward-moote Inquest to give in a particular of all the poor Inhabitants within his Ward what their employment is, and how many are without employment, and present the same to the rest of the Inhabitants in his Ward with a Copy thereof, and excite them to a free subscription for Raising a stock to buy Hemp and Clapboards to make Hering Fishing-nets, and barrells for the fur∣nishing and fitting out of one Busse or Fishing Vessel to belong to the said Ward, which will give all the poor and Vagrants employment, The said Ward husbanding the same to their best advantage. The which VVe shall in like manner recommend to all the Counties, Cities and Towns within Our Domini∣ons, whereby to make it a National employment for the general good, and will give all fitting assi∣stance unto the Undertakers for their encouragement. That so when Provisions shall be made ready and Store-houses built in Commodious places about the River of Thames, (where breaches have been made) and the like, in the several Ports, Magazines may be fitted with Nets, Caske, Salt and all things in readiness, The Busses may all go forth to Our Island of Sheetland as their Rendezvous to keep together in their fishing according to certain orders prescribed in the aforesaid Book. And to take that priviledge of the Fishing grounds which belongs to us before all Nations whatsoever. And so we bid you heartily farewell. Given at Our Court at Whitehall this 23. day of July, in the Twelfth year of our Raign. By His Majesties Command. ED. NICHOLAS. To Our Right Trusty and well-beloved, the Lord Mayor of Our City of LONDON, to be Communicated to the Court of Aldermen. LONDON: Printed for Jane Bourne, at the sounth-entrance of the Royal Exchange.
