C3795 E726_6 R206780 99896895 135400
THE DEAD SPEAKING, OR, THE LIVING NAMES OF TWO DECEASED MINISTERS OF CHRIST (CONTEMPORARY, And eminently usefull in the West of England) Viz. Mr. Sam. Oliver, and Mr. Samuel Crook. Containing the Sermon at the Funeralls of the one Preached by John Chetwind, B. D. and two severall Speeches delive∣red at the Funeralls of them both by William Thomas, B. D. Joyned together at the desire, and for the use chiefly of those Chri∣stians who were often occasional partakers of their labours. Revel. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write, Bles∣sed are the dead which dy in the Lord, from henceforth, yea saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours and their works do follow them. Perfuncti obedientiae munere per adventum mortis, angelica eos immortalitas, & aeternitas sequetur beata. Augustine. LONDON, Printed by T. W. for John Place, and are to be Sold at his Shop at Furnivals Inn Gate in Holburn. 1653.
To the Honorable the Lady Jane Pile of Coling∣borne, in the County of Wilts, The Lady Cecylia Knollis of Reading in the County of Berks, and to the Worshipful John Hipssey of Emborough, and John Buchland of West-Harperay in the County of Somerset Esquires, and their Vertuous Consorts. Much and Worthy Honored, TO prefix much before so little, would be like the making of a wide Gate to a narrow house; To say nothing, may seem (at least in us to whom the care of those is commit∣ted whom your Christian love hath received) to savour of some ingratitude; and we are sure is unsuitable to our purpose in publishing these short, and suddenly con∣ceived Notes, which by the desires of others are drawn from us; wherein our intent is not onely to remember, and present as exemplary, the piety of those that are dead, but to tender therewith a just acknowlegement of the charitie of those that are living, and your selves in particular who have therein the principal part; yet may we not forget divers others (though we name them not) by whose ready supplies and concurrence, this work of love is more comfortably and fully carried on. We bless God both for you and them, well knowing how sad a thing that is, which (with due respect to others of a different judgment) we conceive to be the case and curse [a] of Edom (Jer. 49. 10, 11. Vide Vatabli an∣not. in loc. Item Oeco∣lampad. in loc. Ex cla∣de Superstes non erit qui te sau∣cium et ad∣huc spiran∣tem soletur ac dicat, Animo secu∣ro mihi li∣beros tuos relinque, E∣quidem me illis altorem & paren∣tem consti∣tuo. Sic Tremel. & Jun. in locum: Et calvin. in eundem sen∣sum licet sub diversa notione.) unto whom the Lord denounceth so great, so grievous, so general a
destruction and desolation, that there shall not be any left to say to the dying Fathers, and Husbands, Leave thy fatherless Children to my care; I will preserve them alive and nourish them, as Genes. 45. 5, 7, 11. and let thy Widowes trust in me, or, let them rest on me for taking care of them (as Prov. 31. 11.) This lies heavy on the tender hearts of expiring parents. Suitable hereunto are our Saviours words, who when he ment to say, He would not leave his Disciples comfortless, but send them a com∣forter, expresseth it thus, I will not leave you orphans (John. 14. 18.) importing, that to be left Orphans, and to be left comfortless, is all one. But God leaves not those that are his Orphans. The righteous are not for∣saken in themselves or their seed Psal. 37. 25. with God (by such Instruments as he thinks fit to raise) the fatherless find mercy Hos. 24. 3. & the Motherles, pity Psal. 27. 10. Isa. 49. 15.. What's a Father but his bowels? (Isa. 63. 16.) What's a Mother but her yernings? 1 King. 3. 16.) If God stir up those affecti∣ons to Orphans in surviving friends, that's all one as to Psal. 109. 12. Lament. 5. 3. form and create new Fathers and Mothers. These com∣passions, Divine providence might seeme to intend to draw forth in the present case, by taking away both the Parents at once; which, though a sad and unusual stroke in it self, yet is in this comfortable, that it hath made the grace of God in your selves and others the more conspicuous; for we are not willing to look upon your favourable support meerly as a Gift (that we may speak in the Apostles language, Phil. 4. 17.) but especially as a fruit, while the tree that gives shade and succour to others, springs and spreads forth it self from a root of grace in you: whence it is, that we shall the rather take unto our selves this boldnes, to beseech you to add unto a liberal and beneficial, the care of a religious and pious
education. We would not in any thing we have spoken, or shall hereafter speak, intimate any such reflexions on the deceased Parents, as to cause any to conceive they left their children altogether unprovided; They were not such strangers unto Scripture as not to know that children ought not to lay up for their Parents, but Parents for their children 2 Cor. 12. 14.. God bestowed a competent por∣tion upon them, which they so improv'd, as that they have provided that which is considerable for the subsi∣stence and disposal of those that they have left behind them; Howsoever therefore we thankfully acknowledge any assistance in this kind also, yet the chief benefit will be to supply the parents absence in their education. The feeding of children is one thing, and a lesse thing; The breeding is another, and a greater; and the chief thing in breeding (which the godly Parents most desired, and which we most humbly beg at your hands who are left and stand obliged to pursue their good affections and intendment) is, to bring them up in the nurture and admo∣nition of the Lord Ephes. 6. 4., which endeavours shall be fol∣lowed (God assisting) with our most earnest prayers for their good success. The righteous God, Heb. 6. 10. remember, in much mercie, Neh. 13. 22. all your labours of love which you have shewed to his Name in ministring to his Saints, and abundantly recompence them in all spiritual and outward blessings on you and yours, which shall still be the prayer of Your much obliged servants in Christ Jesus, WILLIAM THOMAS Pastor at Ubley. JOHN CHETWIND Pastor at Wells.
TO THE READER. GOOD READER, FUnerall discourses are of antient use, and no less pro∣fit; the death of friends is an occasional help, and needeth the most solemn way of improvement; that when affections are stirred up on an earthly occasion, they may be converted to a spiritual use; the experience of Chri∣stians in this kinde is a sufficient justification of the practice. Besides there is an whole vein of doctrine, concerning the frailty and mortality of man, the vanity of the creature, &c. which runneth throughout the Scripture, & would never be opened but upon these occasions: certainly we that are to preach , 2 Tim. 4. 2. in season, and out of season, that is (as I suppose) in our ordinary course, and when God giveth special occasion or a fair oportunity in his providence, may with safety enough to Conscience improve funerall meetings to spiri∣tuall edification and profit, there being usually at such meetings a great conflux of people, and their affections melted and soft∣ned by the present Providence. 'Tis true we read nothing in Scripture of Funerall Rites by way of Precept, and the Exam∣ples bind not, all Nations are left to their Own Rites and Cu∣stomes, provided they savour not of Idolatry or Superstition; But yet the generall allowance of improving every occasion, is warrant enough for a Sermon, and the Sermon a seasonable comment upon the Providence; for every one cannot read without spectacles, and understand the dispensation of God without an interpreter. Besides the Sermon, speeches and commemorative Orations want not their use, when the parties deceased are persons of known merit and usefulnes; for 'tis not fit that their graces should dye with them, and that vertue should be defrauded of its publick honour, because God 1 Sam. 2. 30. honoureth those that honour him, the Church hath been always carefull to preserve and enbalm their memory, and so is that promise made good, Prov. 10. 7. the me∣mory of the just shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. The Lord would have the just remembred with praise and honorable mention, whereas the name of the wicked rotteth together with their carkas. If the worthy Authours of the ensu∣ing Sermon and exhortation had only designed in divulging their labours, to continue the memory and example of those Saints and servants of God whose Funeralls gave an occasion to these dis∣courses, I suppose nothing had been done unworthy a Christian
aim; prayse and publick honour being a debt tat e owe to the righteous, yea  Nazian∣zen funebri Orat. pro fratre Cae∣sareo. a debt (saith Nazianzen) that of all debts is most just: and as the Ancient Church was wont to preserve the memory of the Saints in those famous Sir Henry Spilman in verbo Dypticha. Dyptichs, so might they seek to continue the memory of their graces in this publick record, that though being dead, they might yet speak. But they looked upon this as too private an aime for thy prof∣fit, the matter here discussed is of a more publick and generall concernement, and exceedingly usefull for these times, as 1. the laying to heart the death of Gods children, which hath ever been observed to be an intimation of approaching judgment, Isa. 57. 1. When we see a showre coming we make the more hast to gather in the fruit, so Gods gathering in his Saints is a presage of an Heb. 11. 4. ensuing storme: and as the death of any private Saint is to be taken notice of, as being a considerable losse to the communities and societies in which they are interested; so much more the death of Ministers and those that are called to publick office in the Church, because of the eminency of their station, and service. I confesse the world thinketh not so, all that is called Ministry is now counted a burden, this is the great scorne and affront that we put upon Christ, his largess and Royal donative which he be∣stowed on the Church in the day of his inauguration (when he ascended up on high he gave Pastors and teachers &c. Eph. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11.) is reckoned as one of the grievances of the Nation, which by interpretation is as much as if we did bid Christ take his gift to himself, we care not for it; certainly if ever tis high time to make men sensible of the benefit of a Ministry, and the loss of any that are qualified for so holy a work. 2. Another lesson which (in such transient reading as my pres∣sing occasions would allow) I have observed, is the surviving of the Word when Ministers are gone, a Sermon dyeth not with the breath in which 'tis uttered, if it live not in our practice, it li∣veth in the records of Heaven, and in the effect of providence; as the words of the former Prophets, when they were dead and rotten in the grave. This with many other usefull observations (for to name all were to forestall the work it self) wilt thou meet with in these discourses; which that they may be of great use and blessing to thy soule, as it is the aime of the reverend Authors, so it is the prayer of him who is, Thine to serve thee in all Christian offices, THOMAS MANTON. Newington, May 16. 1653.
IMMANVEL, A SERMON Preached the twelfth day of AU∣GUST. 1652. ZECH. 1. 5, 6. Your Fathers where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for ever? But my word, and my Statutes, which I comman∣ded my servants the Prophets, did they not take hold of your Fathers? HAd our conjoyned desires and prayers prevailed, Our Deceased Friend, and your Reverend Pa∣stor, who in a silent Sermon from his Coffin Preacheth to us the Lecture of our Mortality, should stil have been a living Voice, a burning and a shi∣ning Light. But since our gracious God hath put a period to
his life and labours, and by his work hath mani∣fested his will, as its our duty to subscribe unto it, so it will be our wisdom to improve it to our own Eccles. 7. 2. advantage; Following the Wisemans Counsel, so to go into this House of mourning, that by lay∣ing such providences to heart, we may be made better. Its the deplorable extremity of humane corrup∣tion, to draw evil out of Gods good; abusing thus his grace to wantoness, and his readiness to par∣don to a Liberty of sinning, as Spiders suck poy∣son from the sweetest flowers. Its the weakness of the flesh, to apprehend that as evil, which God calls good. Its the proper work and power of God, to bring good out of those evils that are done by us. Rhm. 8. 28. And its the excellency of Faith, to apprehend goodness in those dispensations which our sense tells us are evils done upon us. And this Faith doth, and Faith alone can do; because it remains firm amongst the violentest shakings, as gover∣ning it self, not according to the mutable, and variable instability of humane Occurrences, but according to the unchangeable foundations of Gods promises, like the Nodes of Compasses in the midst of tempests, that are directed not by the Wind but Heavens. The Bee (you know) hath an Innate quality, which other creatures want, to extract Hony out of (it may be) il-savouring Flowers; so gracious souls going into the Sanctuary, by the strength of Faith, will be able to say, though other men can∣not, what the Psalmist doth, Truly, God is good Psa. 73. 1.
to Israel, Notwithstanding, &c. Now as God is good, and so to be acknowledged in all his dea∣lings, even in this sad dispensation of his provi∣dence, whereby a deserving Pastor is removed from a desiring People, and both the careful, and indulgents Parents within the compass of one week, from many tender and needing Orphans, so ought we to indeavour the improving of it to our own spiritual good. And therefore know, that Funeral solemnities are not for the solace of the dead (they are beyond our prayers or helps, though not respects) but for the comfort and in∣struction of the living, who ought, as those who came where Asahel lay dead, to stand still and 2 Sam. 2. 23. consider, what God expects they should learn from the works of his hand, his deed having a voice to instruct us, as well as his word. To help you wherein, I shall crave your attentions to those doctrinal truths, which from the word read, shall be commended and improved unto you. In the managing of which, as I vary from my usual way of discourse, my Apology is this; As in Feasts, so in Sermons, we respect the Company, not our selves. Paul at Athens alters his stile. The words are part of Zechariahs Penitential Sermon, comprised in the six first verses of this Prophesy, in which according to the resolution of it by the Judicious Diodati) we have 1. The call to Repentance. v. 3. Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, Turn unto me saith the Lord of Hosts. 2. Arguments to enforce this exhortation, and they are drawn from
1. The good of so doing. v. 3. I will turn to you. 2. The evil of not repenting 1. Represented in the History of their Fa∣thers 1. Sin. v. 4. They did not. 2. Effects of sin. 1. Gods wrath. v. 2. The Lord hath been sore displeased, &c. 2. Their punishment. v. 6. Did they not take hold, &c. 2. History applyed. v. 4. Be not as your Fathers. Now the words of my text, Your Fathers where are they, &c. are inserted for the amplification and inforcement of the exhortation, and by way of prevention to remove two forceable obstru∣ctions that might weaken the strength of those Motives. The hindrances are, what the Prophet foresaw their corruptions would prompt them to say; 1. You tel us of our Fathers; What is that to us? They are dead. 2. You tell us of the former Prophets; What is that to us? They are dead too. to remove which, these words are by way of Concession, as if God should say, I grant you what you do object, your Fathers are dead, and the Prophets are dead, yet know, you have great reason to regard the present exhortations to repen∣tance, that are now made to you by my Prophets,
Haggai, and Zechariah, and others that are now sent; Because 1. The examples of my Justice on your Fa∣thers do stil live. Did it not take hold? yes it did, they have confessed it, and they returned and said, like as the Lord of Hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to our doing, so hath he dealt with us. ver. 6. 2. The word which I commanded my Prophets, though the Prophets be dead, yet their words stil live. Did they not take hold? v. 6. Thus have I given you that sense and depen∣dance of the words, which I conceive most genu∣ine and proper, and shall not spend time needlesly in relating others judgements. That being a good rule, for popular Preachers, which at my first entrance upon the work of the Ministry, I received from my sometimes Reve∣rend Friend Mr. Samuel Crook of famous memo∣ry, late Pastor of Woragton, now with God. In vulgar auditories to pitch upon that sense of Scrip∣ture which is most genuine, and not to distract hea∣rers by mentioning various readings and judge∣ments. That course rather savouring of ostentation, than tending to instruction. The words are plain and without difficulty; on∣ly take notice, that the Prophet by that question, Where are they? Intends thus much; they are dead; according to that of Job, Man giveth up the Ghost, and where is he? and by that phrase of Ta∣ken hold, or overtake, implies thus much, that Gods Job 14. 10. denounced judgements are as a prosecuting enemy,
that follows the pursute, and wil not cease, til o∣vertaking they lay hold on, and hold fast his e∣nemies. Now in my passage to the main thing intended from the words read, give me leave to mention, and I shall but mention, the doctrines of the Con∣text, or at least the most principal of them; which are these five that follow. Turning men to God is the Preachers main  employment; The former Prophets, Zechariahs, St. Pauls, whom God sent to open their eys and to Acts 26. 18, 20. turn them from darkness to light, and from the pow∣er of Satan unto God. This was, This is, Gods messengers imployment to perswade such, that have left Gods ways to follow their own, now to leave their own to follow Gods, to walk with their faces toward the Sun, that so they may have shi∣ning light, and comfortable heat, when as turning their backs to the Sun, what see they but a sha∣dow, the privation of light and heat? The bring∣ing back of lost Sheep to their Shepherd, of pro∣digal children to their Father, the beseeching sin∣ners to be reconciled, and by repentance to break off their sins, is the proper work of Christs Mi∣nisters. Present enjoyments of signal mercies, yea great  deliverances, are no ground of future security, without renewed and renewing repentance. They were now but newly come forth of captivity, and so had received a mighty deliverance, yet should they again break Gods Commandements, they know God would have been angry with them Ezra 9. 13, 14. til he had consumed them, so that there should be
The doctrine of Repentance is always neces∣sary  to be preached, but especially, then when mercies are enjoyed, and we are in a prosperous estate, In which the Heart is exceeding apt to for∣get God. Latet anguis in Herba, A deadly poy∣son is many times secretly conveyed under a plea∣sant relish: for as when men are most hot, they are then most subject to take dangerous colds; so when Christians enjoy all things outwardly well, (as David, when at peace) then are they in great∣est danger of spiritual miscarriages. The doctrine then of Repentance is always needful, it was the first doctrine preached by Christ, The disciples, John, fit for every Auditory, for all times. Other discourses may be profitable, but this is necessary. An impenitent obstinacy against, and under the  means of grace, is an aggravated impiety. Forefathers examples are no plea for impeni∣tency,  no privilege for impunity, and yet (as the Jewes) we are exceeding apt to plead them, when Jer. 44. 17 they are so far from countenancing that they ag∣gravate offences. Having thus mentioned the doctrines of the context, I now come to Consider the truths of the words Read, and they are two, the first I shall but touch, and the second Insist on as more sui∣table to the present occasion. Your fathers are dead, yet they were took Hold  on, and they confest it. Whence; Examples of God justice on foregoing people are  left recorded, and ought to be improved, as warnings to following generations.
As what was forewritten, so what was foredone, was for our learning; and thus the Apostle tels us Rom. 15. 4. that the Israelites were overthrown in the wilder∣ness, and these things were our examples to the 1 Cor. 10. 5, 6. intent, we should not lust after evil things as they also lusted. Hence God calls us to Remember the dayes of Deut. 32. 7. old, and to consider the years of many generations; and Christ wils his disciples to recall to mind what Luke 17. 32. was done long before, even to Remember Lots wife, who was turned into a Pillar of Salt, a visible and lasting Monument; whereas God might have blown her up as Salt-Peter, or sunk her down as Coral, he fixeth her as a Pillar, and calls to us to remember it, that we may fetch thence where∣withall to season our unsavory lives. Thus Anti∣dotes are made of poyson, and Treacle from Vi∣pers. The ground of which truth is, because God is alwaies the same. His past dealings are the disco∣very of his future; they who are alike in fault must expect to be alike in suffering. If Israels Princes Isa. 1. 9. 10. commit the sins of Sodom, as they shall have their names, so, without repentance, shall they have their sorrows. Learn then hence how to improve Histories recorded, not read them to satisfie curiositie, but to instruct and caution thee. Not as those who are well, that hear, or read the rules of Physicians, but as sick persons, that attend such discourses that they may make use of, and apply the receipts prescribed. Let us thus go to Shiloh, and consider what God did Jer. 7. 12.
dit to it for the wickedness of his people. Let us of England remember the seven Churches of Asia, the Nation of the Jews, who were as Gideon's Judg. 6. 37, 38. fleece, first wet with Heavenly dew, when all the rest of the world was dry, and now dry, when great part of the world besides is wet; for look, Exod. 10. 21, 23. as it was in Egypt, the Israelites had light when all the rest were dark; but at Christs death Ju∣dea Luke 25. 45. was in darkness, when all the rest was light: so had the Jews at first Gods oracles, and so, Christs proffers, when the Gentiles were stran∣gers; but now the Gentiles are ingrafted, and the Jews cut off: so may it be with us of England, who have long enjoyed the Sun-shine of the Gos∣pel, when other Nations and people have been without it, we may be for our unworthiness cast off, and others received; therefore let us so re∣member former examples, that we may stil apply them to our selves, and know what Christ is wil∣ling we should mind, that except we repent, we shall Luke 13. 3, 5. all likewise perish. Having thus given you a brief account of the first truth of the text, I now come to the conside∣ration of the main Doctrine, and that which is most pertinent to the occasion of our present meeting, and that grounded on these words, The Prophets, do they live for ever? But my words Text. and my Statutes, which I commanded my servants the Prophets, did they not take hold of your Fathers? Whence observe, Though Preachers dye, yet Sermons live. All flesh is grass, but the word of the Lord endu∣reth 1 Pet. 1. 24, 25. for ever.
Though Christs Embassadors are mortal men; yet their Embassage is an immortal errand, which will have its effect even after the death of the Mes∣senger. Ministers are earthen pitchers, that may, and must dissolve into dust; But the Gospel which they bring is water drawn from an everlasting Isa. 12. 3. Rev. 14. 6. Well, and of an everlasting nature, and so con∣tinues when the pitcher is broke. When the An∣gels were returned to Heaven, the Shepherds re∣membred Luke 2. 15. their words. For the first part of this Doctrine, That Preachers dye, you have a visible proof this day before you, and no wonder: For its appointed for all men, (and Ministers are but men) once to dye. For the second part of this Doctrine, that Ser∣mons live, it is, though not so visibly, yet as ful∣ly evidenced in the words of the Prophet Isaiah. For as the rain cometh down, and the Snow from Isa. 55. 10, 11. Heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; so shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereunto I sent it. And therefore, though at present obstinate sin∣ners regard not Gods messages or messengers, yet whether they wil hear, or whether they wil forbear, they shall one day know, that there hath Eze. 2. 4, 5 been a Prophet amongst them. The word Preachd by Gods faithful Ministers is an immortal and in∣corruptible 1 Pet. 1. 23 seed, that wil most assuredly bring forth some fruit, either for our good or evil.
1. For good; so this good Seed produceth in us the eternal being of immortal grace. Now as 1 Pet. 1. 23. natural Parents may dye, yet leave their chil∣dren living, much more spiritual Parents, who 1 Cor. 4. 15. beget Converts through the word of the Gos∣pel; who if they leave not spiritual children here below, yet wil certainly find them in Heaven; Grace once given being a Free-hold of inheritance that cannot be forfeited; For he that is born of God hath the seed of God re∣maining 1 Joh. 3. 9. in him, and cannot sin; and so by consequence cannot finally miscarry, God having in his Covenant ingaged, as never to Heb. 13. 5. leave us, so to write his Laws in our hearts, and put his fear before our eyes, that we shall Ier. 32. 40. never leave him. 2. For evil. Thus the text, Did not my words take hold? Hence Christ tells us, that the word which he had Preached to the Jews should judge them Iohn. 12. 48. Mat. 16. 19. at the last day, and that what his Apostles did bind on earth should be bound in Heaven. Thus the Doctrine lieth evident before you, and you are, I question not, fully convinced of the truth of this assertion, That Preachers dying, leave Sermons living and lasting, and which wil 2 Cor. 2. 16. have their effect, either of good, as a savour of life to life, or of evil, as a savour of death to death. Not that all which pious Preachers speak in Ser∣mons shall last so long; No, There may be much 1 Cor. 3. 12. Wood, Hay, Stubble, built on the foundation, which wil not endure the fire, but the foundation
rightly layed shall alwaies last; the proffers and tenders of Christs to Sinners shall have their ef∣fect, either in their conversion, or to their grea∣ter condemnation. Thus then, It is not the wis∣dom Joh. 3. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 17. of words, but the Word of wisdom that abides for ever. Having thus dispatched the doctrinal part of this truth, it remains that I improve it to you by application. In the managing of which, I shall joyn both the truth of the text, and the providence of this time, the sad occasion of our present meeting, and shall endeavour to make use of both, by acquainting you what they speak. 1. To this Congregation, to whom this De∣ceased Preacher was a faithful Pastor. 2. To us in the Ministry, the surviving dis∣pensers of Gospel mysteries. 3. To all in general. First, you that are related as a particular flock of Christ to him that's gone, and to him that speaks, Know, that this word, this work, speaks much to you. I shall divide my discourse into a twofold Chanel. 1. Respecting him that is gone. 2. Respecting the opportunities of grace that do or may remain amongst you. First then know, that this truth, that Preachers dye, but Gods word never dieth, and the death of this our Reverend Brother, hath much to say to us. I shall give it in six particulars, and I desire you would seriously lay them to heart, as they proceed
from a mind that doth seriously and earnestly desire your good in what is spoken. First own Gods goodness in enjoying of him so  long: for though sad providence hath more suddain∣ly than was expected taken him from us, yet may we not be unmindfull of Gods goodness in lending him so long, as a great mercy to this place and people, for whom (as Paul) he spent himself in the painfull exercise of his Ministerial gifts. He was a burning and a shining light, who did not wast out, but wear out; who did not smother out, but burn'd, yea flam'd out, who spent his Spirits that he might instrumen∣tally communicate Gods Spirit, and inliven yours, and they that know the passages of his sickness are very confident, that it was not the violence of the Wind that blew forth his Lamp, but the Oyl was spent, and the flame must cease. Let us then remember and own him for a mercy, who was so successively pain∣full, and usefull in his generation. Secondly, we have reason all of us, but especially  he that speaks, and you (late his charge) that are spo¦ken to, and all others that hear me this day, to lament our loss. I may justly take up Elisha's Lamentation, when he saw Elijah gone to Heaven before him. Ah 2 Kings 21. 12. my Father, my Father, the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof; and you have reason to say, Alas my Brother. Alas our Pastor. God expects that we should value our loss, and express it by our lamen∣ting for it. And the most of us, if not all have cause to repent of our sin, who have slighted the mer∣cy lent us; Who have slept in our day, and not wal∣ked answerably to this light. When Children wax wanton, and throw wholesome food to the Dogs, its
time to remove the Tables; if Ephesus wil not repent, Rev. 2. 5. and do her first works, Christ threatens to come quickly and remove her Candlestick. And whether our unthankfulness, and unfruitfulness, have not pro∣voked the Lord to deprive us of this his servants Mi∣nistry, I am afraid to deny, though I cannot deter∣mine. Let us (however) lament our loss, repent of our sin. Thirdly, are there any amongst us (I could wish  there were none, but I fear there are too many) to be found, the more sad their condition, that have not profited as they should have done by the labours of this servant of God? Let such lay the blame where its due; at their own doors. Consider the Parable of the Sower, That tells us, There were Mat. 13. four grounds on which Seed was cast, and but one fruitful. Where was the fault? Was it in the Seed, or Sower? No, they were the same, but the faults lay in the grounds themselves. So is it with the hea∣rers of the word, when a very few receive advan∣tage, and the greatest number remain unfruitful. Say not thou then, the Physick was weak, but thy di∣stemper was strong. Say not the meat was unwhole∣some▪ but know thy Stomach was foul. Now its a true Rule in Physick, Corrupta corpora quo magis nu∣tris, eo magis laedis, Impure Bodies, the more you nourish the more you harm. They who have bad eyes think the sky alwaies cloudy. The fault may be, and most times is, in our selves, when we are rea∣dy to lay it upon others. People may be unprofita∣ble under the most powerful Ministry, because of their own dulness and negligence. Do not then in this case, as that man, who complained of the rough∣ness
of the way, when he had a thorn in his foot, or that Woman Plutarch mentions, who being suddain∣ly struck blind, bid them open the Windows. Fourthly, Remember, I beseech you, the Doctrine  of the text, That though your Preacher be dead, yet his Sermons live, and wil live for ever. You shall know that he hath been a Prophet of the Lord a∣mongst you. It was the desire of his Soul on his sick Bed, that this Congregation would consider his death, and lay it to heart; That they who have not profi∣ted by his Sermons in his life, might now profit by his departure. For assure your selves, Gods word, by whomsoever spoken (as the Sword of Saul) wil 2 Sam. 1. 22. never return empty, any more than the rain doth, as that place formerly cited out of the Prophet Isaiah fully shews. So shall not the word of God spoken by any that are faithfull return empty, but prosper in the thing whereto God sends it. Blessed be God, that some of you know that Gods word by him hath taken hold of you for good. He hath not wanted the Seals of his Apostleship. And 1 Cor. 9. 2. (what ever vain men say to the contrary) conversion of Souls to God by the Ministry is an Apostolical ar∣gument of the rightfulness and lawfulness of the Ministerial call, and such a Seal, yea divers such Seals had our deceased friend. Some that were in Heaven before him, and others that are stil below, did and do acknowledge him their spiritual Father. And Friends, you of this City and Congregation shall know that his words wil take hold, if not to save you, which was his aim and desire, yet to judge you at the last day, which is your fault, and wil be your mi∣sery; for God wil certainly punish as the Congrega∣tion Hos. 7. 12.
hath heard. That the Gospel by him, or any o∣ther Preach'd prevails for good, is Gods grace, that it proves a savour of death to death, is our sin. Now never wonder that such diametrical opposite effects proceed from the same cause. You wil not, if you consider the reason to be, not in the Cause, but in the Subject; not in the word, but in the hearts of those who hear it. Christ who came to be the light of the world, came also for judgement into this Joh. 9. 39. world, that they which see not might see, and that they which see might be made blind. Christ who is a Corner stone to some, yet becomes a Rock of of∣fense 1 Pet. 2. 6, 7, 8. to others; that meat which strengthens healthy bodies, yet breeds diseases in corrupted Stomachs; and its observ'd by Naturalists, That the smel of a sweet Ointment comforteth the Dove, but killeth the Hornet; The same heat which softneth Wax, hard∣neth Clay; That Flower which yields Hony to the Bee, yields poyson to the Spider; That fire which re∣fines Gold, consumes the dross: So that Gospel by the mouths of Gods Servants, and by the mouth of this his servant, which hath been instrumental to save some, wil most assuredly at the last day condemn others. For this indeed is the judgement heightning sin, that light is come into the world, and men love dark∣ness rather than light. And accordingly it wil be more Joh. 3. 19. tolerable for Sodom and Gomorroh, for Tunnis and Algier, at the day of judgement, than for this Ci∣ty, for this Congregation, if the word of Gods grace be not savingly entertained. Woe unto thee Chora∣zin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, saith our Saviour, for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been Mat. 11. 21, 22. done in Tyre and Sidon, they had repented long agoe in Sackcloth and ashes.
Fiftly, Continue in, and hold fast, and still cleave  to those instructions which your late Pastor in the discharge of his Ministerial employment hath deli∣vered to you. His soul was, and my soul is, your Pledge that they are the truths of Jesus. We dare not be as some; who make merchandise of you with 2 Pet. 2. 3. feigned words. We tremble to be as many, who cor∣rupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. in the sight of God speak we in Christ. And therefore follow that Counsel given by Paul, As you have re∣ceived Col. 2. 6, 7. Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted and built up in him, and established in the Faith as yee have been taught. Be rooted, be fixed, be not as Reeds shaken with every Wind, (as Children) tossed to Eph. 4. 14. and fro, and carried about with every doctrine; No, but as Trees of righteousness, which stand fast in the place where God hath planted them. Be ye (as men) setled, and grounded in the truth. O how change∣able, and child-like are many wanton hearers, whom you may win with an apple, and lose with a Coun∣ter? Be not ambulantes in Consilio, scatterers of your Jer. 3. 13. wayes; who so take a taste of all courses, must needs do evil; who so give themselves a liberty to run af∣ter all pretended Teachers, must needs learn evil. Therefore good was that Counsel to the Hebrews, Be not carried about with divers and strange doctrines, Heb. 13. 9. for its a good thing that the heart be established with grace. Intimating thus much, that unsetled hearers have unestablished hearts. And worth our observa∣tion is that character of false doctrines given in the original word , We render it, various, divers; It signifieth properly, Varii Coloris, Parti-coloured doctrines, of several threads; which have no agree∣ment one with another.
And certainly were there nothing else, yet this were enough to convince the doctrines of many to be false, especially of such who casting dirt in the faces of Christs publike Ministers, arrogate the name of his Messengers to themselves, and say they are A∣postles, Rev. 2. 2. when they are not; Namely their inconsisten∣cy, variableness, and disagrement. And this may suf∣ficiently commend unto you the doctrines taught you by your deceased Pastor, by him that now speaks, and all other faithful Ministers, which have occasionally by their procurement spoken to you in the name of the Lord, viz. That there is no inter∣feering, no crossing, but a sweet Harmony and con∣sent. Truth is in all his parts alike, and such who are acted by the Spirit of truth, in those points which are materially and fundamentally necessary, (howsoever Phil. 3 16. they may differ in some circumstantials) speak the same things; Whereas false teachers, not only dif∣fer one from another, but also from themselves, sel∣dom keeping themselves in the same station either of place or doctrine, but are, as Jude calls them, wan∣dring Stars, that settle no where, but are alwaies in Jude. 13. uncertain motions. Solid Christians are fixed Stars, counterfeit professors are wandring Planets, now Planets, as Astrologers speak, according to their Conjunction vary their Influence; so is it with unstay'd professors, they are according to their conjunction, Let one man Preach this thing, they are of his mind, if another new-af∣fected Teacher Preach the contrary, they close with that. But I hope better things of you, for whom it was the prayer of your late Pastor, it is and shall be
the prayer of him that now speaks to you, what was St. Peters, 1 Eph. 5. c. 10. v. That the God of all grace would make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. Amen. Sixtly, Know beloved, you of this place, that God  expects from you a walking answerable unto the care pains and labour that he hath exercised towards you. Where God gives much, he expects much, Luke 12. 48. and certainly you have had much perswasion unto Christ, exhortation unto duty, conviction of sin, precept upon precept, line upon line, here a little and Isa 28. 10. there a little, as Israel of old had. Now what is Gods expectation, but that you should not shame your keeping, nor dishonour your keeper, but that you would manifest that you have been taught of God, and make your profiting to appear by your practise of, and continuance in, that which is good? That you would not be as Pharaohs lean kine stil ill Gen 41. 22. favoured after they had devoured the fat ones. That you should not be like other men, as others who have not had the same means of grace. Content not your selves with knowledge, or desires after it, but look that your practise be answerable to your knowledge. Knowledge is necessary, but its not sufficient; know∣ledge is not to be desired for it self only, but for practise, which is indeed the life of knowledge, and renders it a blessing. For sinful souls are as corrupt bodies, who have often great appetites, but small di∣gestion. Now meat not disgested, encumbers and breeds disquieting diseases; so knowledge not put in practise perverts the soul, and makes the profes∣sors of it, Satans more serviceable instruments. Let us then follow Christ in sincere obedience to plain
truths, rather than trouble our selves with curious knotty and difficult matters, that at best do but fil our brains with notions, and usually our hearts with pride, and rarely, if ever advance, Gods glory by us, or his grace in us. Its the practise of good, and continuance in it, that God expects, as you have received Christ Jesus, the Col. 2. 6. Lord, so walk in him, and that to the end. A Christi∣an hath stil his plus ultra, More to do. He that con∣tinueth to the end shall be saved; perseverance to the end, brings a Crown without end. Aarons Garments were Talares, down to the feet. And the Law forbad Tayl-less creatures to be of∣fer'd in Sacrifice. Let it be your care then not only to lay aside your sins for a time, as the Serpent his poyson, till he hath drank, but resolve to part with them for ever, do with them as Jacob did with his Idols, bury them under the Oak, and say as Ephraim Gen. 35. 4. of his Idols, What have I to do any more with them? Hos. 14. 8. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorifie your heavenly Father, Mat. 5. 16. and thereby let it appear that you have been with Jesus, and Christ hath been with you. These are the truths which your dead Pastor by my mouth speaks to you, and be ye prevailed withall, To own Gods goodness in your enjoying of him so long, to lament your loss, to blame your selves, if you have not pro∣fited by his labours as you ought; to remember, that Gods word never dyes, though Ministers do; to con∣tinue in what you have heard, and to walk answe∣rably to the truths you have been taught both by your late Pastor now dead, and by your surviving teacher that now speaks unto you. Wee dare not
bring to you that which is not cleer to us to be the mind of God. I am confident of it, that nothing in the course of his Ministry was delivered by my Re∣verend Fellow-labourer now deceased, but what he was assured of the truth of in his own conscience. He did not press any thing upon you, which God had not first setled on his own heart, that it was the truth of Christ. And let this suffice to be spoken to this Congregation, respecting their Pastor deceased. I now shall address my self unto you in respect of the opportunities of grace that do, or may remain a∣mongst you. And that shall be in this general exhor∣tation. Return to God by them; Lay hold upon them; Be careful to improve them; Make a good use of them. Your Fathers are dead, and the Prophets do they live for ever? But my word and my Statutes, which I com∣manded my servants the Prophets, did they not take hold of your Fathers? saith the Text. This Pro∣phet is dead, and he that speaks shall dye, But their words shall live for ever. While you have the light therefore walk in it. Its John 12. 35. your opportunity, improve it. He that gathereth in Summer, is a wise Son: but he that sleepeth in Harvest, Prov. 10. 5. is a Son that causeth shame. Two things there are which render men truly wise, First the knowledge of what is to be done, and Se∣condly the knowledge of the time when its to be done. Solomon tells us, There is a time for all things. Eccl. 3. And that every thing is beautiful done in its due sea∣son. It was a speech of Antigonus, being provoked to fight by Pyrrhus upon a disadvantage, Mea mi∣litia non magis armorum est quam temporum? My war
is managed by Times as well as by Arms. Accoun∣ting it his best military prudence, to take his oppor∣tunity of time, as well as to provide good Souldiers. Idlers in their youth, prove commonly beggars in their age. They that Sing in Summer shall mourn and weep Aestate Ce∣cineris Hie∣me jejuna∣ris. Fronte ca∣pillata est, &c. Heb. 3. 7, 8. Isa. 55. 6. John 12. 35. in Winter. Those five foolish Virgins witness this, who un∣providedly slept when the Bridegroom came, and therefore were shut out from the Wedding. Hence those exhortations, of Not hardning our hearts to day, while it is called to day; of seeking God while he may be found; of walking in the light while we have it. Im∣prove then present opportunities by an immediate returning unto God. Put not off repentance till here∣after. Think not that the practise of Repentance, as that Popish Prelate said of the doctrine of Justification by Faith only, that 'tis a good Supper Doctrine. No, but know that God calls thee to Remember him thy Crea∣tor Eccl. 12. 1. in the dayes of thy youth. Its true indeed, that, Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via. True repen∣tance is never too late. But yet in this case Sera nimis vita est crastina, vive Hodie. A resolved late repentance is usually prevented by an intervening death. We have a day of Mercy, if we neglect that, God hath a day of Justice, and he will not neglect that. Then Jesus Christ the now despised Lamb will ap∣pear as an unresistable Lion. Then they who now Pr. 1. L. stop their ears at Gods call, will find Gods stopt at theirs, and therefore, To day while it is called to day, Harden not your Hearts. Time past is gone, Time to Aestas non semper fu∣erit, compe∣nite nidos. come may find us gone. Provide then eternal hea∣venly
mansions, before these earthly tabernacles are dissolved. That I may perswade you to this care, I shall en∣force it on you by these two arguments. 1. Our eternal welfare depends on it. As men sow, so they reap, as the tree falls, so it lies. Non relinquitur Hostia pro peccatis mortuo in peccatis, nec descendit in inferos sanguis effusus super terram. It was a Poetical fiction, that what every man af∣fected in this life, with that he should be solaced in the Elisyan Fields. The moral is a certain truth. That look, what men are in this world, that shall they be hereafter; they shall not hereafter be numbred a∣mongst the Sons of Sion, who were here the slaves of Satan. For know, that spiritual Eunuches that bring forth no good works, Bastards that are not the seed of God, the Incestuous brood of Ammonites and Moabites that are born of worldly lusts, and con∣cupiscences, shall be more certainly excluded the Con∣gregation of the Saints in Heaven, than were the Corporal from the Congregation of Israel upon earth. Let us then provide our selves a remedy whilst Deut. 23. 3 there is time, and gain an interest in Christs righteous∣ness before we come to judgement, that so Christs tribunal may be to us as Mount Sion, not as Mount Sinai. That we having delighted our selves here in the Law of the Lord, may stand in the Congregation Psal. 1. 11 of the righteous, when others fly and fall. Delay not the doing of that which must be once done, or Cum mora non tuta est, totis incum∣bere remis Utile—Cras, Cras, & sic nihil sit. else thou art for ever undone. You see there is dan∣ger in delay; and its a good rule, A speedy endeavour is exceeding necessary where delay is full of danger. Let us not say as too many do, To morrow we will do, and so its not done at all.
2. Opportunities of grace are uncertain. The door may be shut, the light may be removed from us, or we may be removed from it; and therefore good is that Counsel of Solomon, All that thine hand shall Eccl. 9. 10. find to do, do it with all thy power, for there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou goest. Lay up then in store a good foundation against the time to come, that when thou 1 Tim. 6. 19. leavest all other holds, thou mayst lay hold on eternal life. The time of the Gospel is but a day, the time of our life is but a moment, whilst thou hast then the price in thine hand, get wisdom, and stand not as those therefore rebuked in the parable, all the day idle; I Mat. 20. 7. am sure, you cannot say, no man hath hired you. We should count that Prisoner exceeding foolish, that would refuse a pardon profered, and not look after it till the judge comes. And that traveller un∣wise, that having far to go will not set forth till the Sun be set. The Stork knoweth his time, and shall Jer. 8. 7. Gen. 27. not we? Jacob was but newly gone with the blessing, yet Esau came to late. They who neglected gathe∣ring Manna in the six dayes, in vain expected it the seventh. They who refuse the profers of grace in Exod. 16. 27. this life, may hereafter seek for entrance, but shall not be admitted. Improve then your time, your Mat. 7. 1. means, your present opportunities. I hope you are ready to ask this question, What shall we do? In answering this question my purpose is to shew you somewhat largely what God expects from you, that you may improve present opportunities of grace.
First, Hear from God as often as thou mayest by the voice of his servants, the faithful appointed Stew∣ards and dispensers of Gospel mysteries. I have been large upon this subject lately, yet give me leave now again to mind you, that its the great design that Satan now drives, the great sin, the great misery of this Land, to endeavour to overthrow the power, and vigour, and force of the Preaching of the Gos∣pel by the Ministry of men. What the iniquity of former times could not com∣pass by stopping the mouths of such Preachers as were good, that the subtilty of Satan hath indeavou∣red in our dayes, and hath too much prevailed in that indeavour, by opening the mouths of such as are bad, Who to cry up themselves, not only cry down o∣thers, but even the Ordinances of Christ themselves. And herein the Lord open our eyes, and the eyes of all this Land, and thine Christian Reader, to see and consider this Stratagem of Satan, who makes some, by seeming to cry up the purity, overthrow the pow∣er of Preaching. For I pray you observe. Satan doth not directly cry down all Preaching, he will not tell you (though he intend that in the end) that you must not hear at all. No: He knows full well that natural conscience (not seared) wil imme∣diatly deny that persuasion. Such down-right dea∣ling would be the way to discover himself, and there∣fore transforming himself into an Angel of Light, he besets in another method, blasting the publike 2 Cor, 14. 14, 15. Ministry of Jesus Christ with odious names, if not as Anti-Christian (the usuall term of such who speak against those who cannot speak for themselves) yet as less pure than others of another way, and so shut up the Kingdom of Heaven (which
according to Christs promise hath been given to our Mat. 21. 43. Nation, and hath (blessed be Gods holy name) both in former and later days brought forth its fruit with∣in the narrow compass of such and such societies. And thus Satan by force dividing between Paul, and Apollos, and Cephas, instilling that mischievous 1 Cor. 1. 12. poyson, of having the truth of Christ with respect of persons, and so by pretending to purer, doth at last James 2. 1. (which is his main drift) cause man to fall off from a consciencious respect unto any of Gods Ordinan∣ces. I appeal unto thee good Reader, and am con∣fident thine experience doth witness the truth of this discovery. Do not we daily see, that those who throw away their wonted respects to Christs stan∣ding Ministry, give themselves a liberty first to hear any, and then afterward to hear none? Ahab that could not away with one true Prophet that counseld him for his good, yet hears and follows four hun∣dred false ones, to his own ruin. Attend then I be∣seech 1 Kings. 22. 22. you with care and conscience unto Gods sent Messengers, by whose preaching it pleaseth him to save Rom. 10. 15. such as beleeve. Hear from him by them as often as you may, and if you say, Can any good come that way? I answer, Come and see. Look not on the meaness of the instruments, but who works by them, as Christ bid the Herodians on the penny, whose i∣mage it bore. For if God be the worker, he is able Luke 20. 24. by the smallest means to bring to pass the greatest ef∣fects. The sound of Rams-Horns commissionated Judges 6. by him, blows down the walls of Jericho; The shi∣vering Sand keeps in the billows of the Sea, which Brasen walls could not: So God being the wor∣ker, the foolishness of Preaching converts and saves. 1 Cor. 1. 1.
Neglect not then the spiritual opportunities that are put into your hands. Suffer not every slight and tri∣vial occasion to keep you from them. God tells us, that when and where a famine of the word is, people shall run from one end of the Land to another, and wan∣der Amo . 11. from Sea to Sea, and run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. But alass! under the plentiful means of grace we enjoy, how slight ex∣cuses keep us from them? As in Summer, its too hot, in Winter, its too cold; In Spring its sicly, and in Harvest they are too busie. The way is farr, or the weather is foul, or else say people, I like not the Prea∣cher, He is a dry fellow, He is a Presbyterian or an Independent, or this, or that. By these and such like simple and silly pretences Satan deludes the Souls of men, and keeps them from hearing, when they have the opportunity put into their hands. But let such remember, Thomas was but once absent, and that not Iohn 20. 24. willingly, and not knowing that Christ would then appear, and he was like to have lost the confirmation of the Article of the Resurrection; so may we be wanting, when that may be spoken, which we may never again be told of, perhaps that truth which might have done us eternal good. This is the first advice that I shall in answering the question fore∣mentioned leave with you. Neglect not so great sal∣vation. Heb. 2. 3. Secondly, Apply what's spoken to thy self, Let  the Preachers words take hold upon thee. We are naturally well pleased when Preachers words take hold on others, as Herod when John Preached a∣gainst the Pharisees, but we are loath they should come too close to our selves. When John came to
touch Herod about the matter of Herodias, and meets with his beloved sin, John Baptist shall lose his head. Let us then be less inquisitive concerning others, and apply what's spoken to our selves. Most men say as Peter of John, What shall this man do? but let us John 21. 21. 2 Sam. 7. 18. Mat. 19. 16. say as David, Lord who am I? or as that youngman in the Gospel, to Christ, not what shall others do, But Lord what shall I do? Be contented to be convinced of the evil of your  own ways. Suffer the word of Reproof. This is a harder matter than men are aware of, to be wil∣ling to be reproved. The most of hearers are like Thistles, you may stroak them upward without danger, but press them downward, and immediatly they offend. Preach Gospel-truths and no more, a wicked man likes it. A Carnal heart can be content to hear of Christ and of grace; The stony hearers Luke 8. 13. receive this word with joy: But once tell him, This way of wickedness is unlawful, this or that profitable sin must be left, this gain or pleasure parted with, Then, away with these fellows, These are they which trou∣ble the world, as those unbeleeving Jews spoke of the Apostles, They which have turned the whole world Acts 17. 6. upside down are come hither also. Its the property of a true beleever to be willing to be told of his faults, that he may amend them; And its the property of an Hypocrite, yea his discovery by which he may know himself, That he cannot endure to hear of his sins, because he is not minded to forsake them. Paul is accounted an enemy if he speak the truth, and that Gal. 4. 16. in the esteem of those who sometimes could have been content to pull out their own eyes to have done him good.
So Herod heard John Baptist gladly, till he told him him of Herodias. Thus are many so pleased with their sins, that they are angry with those that shew them they are sins, as that distracted man I have read of, Who imagined himself a King, in which distem∣per'd conceit he so pleased himself, That when he was cured, he was displeased with the Physician who restored him to his right mind; So is it with Hypo∣crites, who are so pleased in the ignorance or mistake of some profitable practicals, that they are offended with such, who by a discovery of the truth shall un∣deceive them. Be perswaded to accept of Reconciliation offer'd,  and that upon Gods own terms. He sends his Em∣bassadors on this errand to entreat you, and beseech 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. you to be reconciled. Have good thoughts then of God and Jesus Christ, for know what was flattering∣ly spoken of Julius Caesar, Nihil oblivisci solet nisi injurias, that he forgot nothing but injuries, is most true of God and Jesus Christ, who forget nothing but the sins of penitent supplicants. Having thus dispatched the Improvement of this truth and occasion, as they respect this City and Congregation, unto whom our Reverend friend was a faithful Pastor; I shall now proceed to speak those things which our dead Brother speaks to us, the sur∣viving dispensers of Gospel mysteries; briefly thus. Walk answerably to the immortality of our im∣ployment. Having our hearts and affections setled upon things of eternity. This Doctrine hath taught us that the Ministers imployment is about things that never dy. O How unsuitable a thing it is to have Hea∣ven in our mouths, and the world in our hearts? Let
us not live below the word we Preach. God teacheth by precept and example, so should Si vis me flre, do∣lendum est primum ipsi tibi. Preachers. If you would have another grieve for sin, you must first grieve your selves, and practise that you press others too; Its a good rule of an antient, Cavendum est ne admirandae virtutis mali sumus pa∣stores. Look to this, let our lives express our Prea∣ching, lest we hear that, Physician cure thy self. Luke 4. 23. Its a witty observation I have read, and I wish it were not as true as witty, Some Preachers are such in the Pulpit, that when they are there, its pitty they should ever come forth, and when they are out of the Pulpit, its pitty they should ever come in, —Pudet haec opprobria nobis Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse reselli. Ther's truth in this sad story. O what shame That such reproach and unrefuted blame Should stain the glory of so good a name! Let us labour then (Reverend Fathers, and Bre∣thren) to manifest our savouring of eternity by our actions as well as expressions, especially by our sit∣ting loose from, and undervaluing of earthly things. Let us look to this, Ne surgant indocti & rapiant coe∣lum, & nos cum nostris literis detrudimur in Bra∣thrum, Let not those who comparatively are mean in knowledge compass Heaven, and we our selves with all our learning prove cast aways. O let us now learn this lesson from this our Re∣verend deceased Fellow-Labourer. Of whom I do boldly affirm upon my own knowledge, that he was exceeding free from that, which is a sordid thing in
all Christians, but a most indelible blemish in the Lords dispensers, earthly-mindedness, For of him I may say, and say truly, what was spoke of Luther, Non curabat Aurum, He used, but not loved the world. I know we are all of us exceeding witty to find out arguments to justfie that course we have a mind unto, and a sad thing it is that covetousness which is Idolatry, should be accounted provident care and Col. 3. 5. good Husbandry. We are ready to say, as Ministers we Preach eter∣nals, but as men we look to temporals. I grant this, and therefore adde, That its not the having, but the loving, and the inordinate seeking after the world, that God condemns. Let us not then deceive our selves, for if God condemn the man for his earthly mindedness, what will become of the Minister with∣all his spirituals? Suitable to this is that story of an Arch-Bishop of Colen, who marching with his followers in a war∣like and stately equipage, was met by a Country∣man. The Countryman smiled, and being asked the cause of that incivility, answered, That he could not choose but smile, and did greatly wonder, that the Apostles who were themselves so mean and poor, should have such rich, stately and magnificent suc∣cessors. The Arch Bishop replyed, that he was a Duke as well as an Arch-Bishop, and as a Duke was now so attended on with that warlike Company. The Country man replyed, that he desired him to resolve this question, When my Lord the Duke for his pride shall be cast into Hell, what then will be∣come of my Lord the Arch-Bishop?
And indeed Brethren we have need to be warned, because the worlds profits and honours are the most powerful temptations, and therefore Satan made it his last assault against Christ, by shewing him (whom Mat. 4. 8. he hoped to have found like another man) the King∣doms of the world, and the glory thereof. Though Satan herein lost his labour, yet he prevails thereby too much with many, who with Balaam run greedi∣ly Jude 11. after the ways of iniquity, and as Judas, even sell their masters for pieces of silver, and with Demas, 2 Tim. 4. 10. forsake the Gospel to embrace the present world. O the glory of the world! How alluring? the deceivable∣ness of Riches! How prevailing? this makes men 1 Tim. 6. 5. kneel down to the devil without a Cushion, and think, That gain is godliness. The Labourer is wor∣thy Ibi fas ibi plurima mercis. Luke 10. 7. Psal. 35. 27. Salvian. of his Hire, and he that doth Gods work and trusts him for it, shall not want his wages. God is a good Master, who delights in the prosperity of his servants. An antient said of some (O that it might not be tru∣ly said of some of us that are here present) Uti volunt Deo, ut fruantur mundo. They use God, that they may enjoy the world. And I have read of a Fryer, that he would alwaies in a counter-feit humility dine upon a Net, till he had gaind the Popedome. Let not then I beseech you Brethren, our own preferment, credit, maintenance, or any outward ad∣vantage, be our proposed aim in our Ministerial em∣ployment. Let it not be said of any of us, La∣nam non agnos, Lac non vaccam, Vineam propter vinum, Populum ob praedam petunt. I will not, I need not English it, they who know no Latine are too apt to speak it (and O that it might be without cause.)
For should we so do, we should fetch our fire from our own Kitchins, which should be lighted at Gods Sanctuary, and thereby turn that, which otherwise would be lawful gain, into filthy lucre. No, know there is a more excellent gain, even souls. This Paul sought, witness that expression, I seek not yours, but you; and therefore Preachers should say as the King of Sodom did to Abraham, Da mihi animas, Caetera tolle tibi; Give me the souls, take thou the rest. Let us look up to our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, whose Embassadors, Servants, Messengers we pretend we are; and since we bear his name, and do his work, its fit we should desire to have his mind; he sought not his own, but our advantage, as Mer∣curie in Plautus being transformed into Sosia. Etenim vero quoniam formam cepi hujus in me, & statum, Decet & facta mor esque hujus habere me similes item. Walk we as Christ walked. Tread in his steps. 1 John 2. 6. Let us not do Gods will in our imployment for meat and drink; But let it be our meat and drink to do Gods will. O then Reverend Fathers and Bre∣thren, let the immortality of our imployment cause us to walk answerable to eternity. The woman that was clothed with the Sun, had the Moon under her feet, and they who are Gods Agents to trade for Hea∣ven, should scorn the Devils factory for the earth. For if in our hearts and practices we serve the world, and yet with our tongues Preach the word,
We may peradventure as Noahs Carpenters help to build the Ark, and yet be drowned our selves. I now come to the general improvement of this truth, to all of us here present. First, see the Excellency of the Ministerial im∣ployment. Its conversant about Eternal things. All other imployments are in and about finite and tem∣poral affairs. The work of Lawyers, Physicians, all other professions, is bounded within the limits of time; Only the Ministers work runs parallel with the lon∣gest line of eternity; The word of Christ Preached by them being not a finite message, but an everlasting Gospel. This consideration I would commend unto Rev. 14. 6. you, that you that are Hearers may be able to judge, and we that are Preachers may be able to bear those unworthy reproaches, the poysoned Arrows of en∣venomed tongues set on fire by Hell, that at this day James 3. 6. are darted against the pretious servants of God, the faithfull dispensers of his word. What though prophane Epicures, scoffing Is∣maels, mocking Mchols, furious, frantick, fiery Opi∣nionists, like Sampsons Foxes, though looking con∣trary ways, yet linked together by the tayls with fire∣brands, Judges 15. all joyn together to cast reproach and dirt in the face of Gods servants? Yet know, that the excel∣lency of our imployment, the eternity of our work, may support our spirits against all those disgraces, that the unrestrained wickedness, or wittiness of men unjustly lay upon us. Now as to these reproaches I shall trespass yet fur∣ther upon your patience while I shall mind you of 1. Some observations concerning them. 2. Rules to direct us in our carriage under them. 1. Observations.
1. Its no new thing. So persecuted they the Pro∣phets Mat. 5. 12. that were before. If the Jews call Christ Mat. 10. 25. Beelzebub, who came to destroy Satan; shall we now wonder if any call those Ministers Antichri∣stian, that have and alwaies do oppose Anti-Christ? If the Galatians who would at first have Gal. 4. 15, 16. pluckt out their eyes, yet afterwards esteem Paul their enemy; shall we now admire that some, who have been formerly forward favourers of faith∣ful Preachers, are now become profess'd revi∣lers? Whence comes this alteration? Not be∣cause Paul was changed; No, he spake still the Gal. 3. 1. same truth: But because the Galatians, bewitched by false teachers, were fallen from that truth they formerly pretended a love unto. 2. Its no sad thing as to those who are reproched, but rather a cause of joy; Rejoyce and be ex∣ceeding glad, saith our Saviour, for great is your Mat. 5. 12. reward. For certainly it is not any personal quar∣rel that men have with Ministers, that is the cause they dislike and vilifie them; No, but its because they Preach the truth; and therefore its the truth of God they hate, more than it is the Minister that Preached it. For, Propter quod unum∣quodque est tale, illud est magis tale. What cau∣ses the hatred is most hated. Christ saith, Woe be to him of whom every one speaks well; and we may adde, Woe be to him of Luke 6. 26 whom every one speaks ill; but to be spoken e∣vil Vituperari â malis esse laudari. of by those, who are themselves evil, is no dis∣grace. 3. Its no hurtful or dangerous thing, and so not much to be regarded, but to be pass'd by with a silent neglect.
The generous steed neglects contemptible bar∣kings. They hurt themselves most, by that which they think to disgrace others by. The stones they throw fall down upon their own heads. And how think you will Jesus Christ look upon them at the last day, who to disgrace his servants, a∣buse The name of Priest properly belongs to Christ, who sacri∣fised, and is as an Honour appropri∣ated to all Saints un∣der the new Te∣stament, and not to Ministers. Rev. 1. 6. his own Title, and by way of scorn call Ministers by that name, by which Christ is most comfortably to be known, viz. By the name of Priests? 4. Its not alwaies a sign that that is evill which is spoken against, For we read what was said of the Christian Religion, that Acts 28. 22. James 1. 26. this sect is every where spoken against: No, but its a ma∣nifest sign of evill in those that so do, and we may easily see the rancour and bitterness of mens minds, by the utterance of their tongues. A pimpled face discovers a distemper'd Liver; A stinking breath, corrupted lungs; A railing tongue makes manifest a wicked, rotten, envious, naughty heart; therefore St. James gives this character of an hypocritical professor, That he bridleth not his tongue, though he seem to be religious, but therein deceives his heart, and therein is his Religion vain; whence it is evident, That Rayling and Religion do not, cannot, dwell together. Where then is their Religion that make it their business to rail at, and revile the Lords Messengers? 2. Having thus acquainted you with these obser∣vations, I shall endeavour to make them useful to all, but especially to us Ministers, by perswading the pra∣ctice of these two Rules.
1. Indeavour to prevent all occasion from those that wait for it, that they may not have their mouths opened against us justly. There are a generation of men in this Nation, in this City, in this place (happily) that look for Ministers haltings. Let us then walk more circumspectly, and take care that we give no offence, either to 1 Cor. 10. 32. Acts 24. 16. the Jew or Gentile, or to the Church of God; to those that own us or disown us. As Paul did, so let us exercise our selves to keep alwaies a Con∣science void of offence, both towards God and to∣wards men, and then, Non offendunt obloquenti∣um verba, quem propria non inquinaverit con∣scientia, Reproches of revilers will never harm, where mens own consciences are not defiled. As much as its possible, Let us live peaceably with all men. But know, that Peace must not be bought with the loss of Truth. If men are our e∣nemies for truths sake, Valeant, Let them be so. That mans friendship is not worth the keeping, where the prostituting of Truth must be the price of it. 2. Answer not reviling with reviling, railing with railing. The Spirit of man lusts to revenge. James 4. 5. But let not us do to them as they have done to us. But let us bless where they curse, and herein shew our selves Christs Disciples. Ministers must Mat. 5. 44. expect when they Preach well to hear ill, and when they bring the Gospel of salvation, to be accounted the filth and off scouring of the world. 1 Cor. 4. 13. But whatever undeserved reproachings men cast upon us, Let us take them up as our Crown, and with Paul rejoyce in our very suffrings, in that we Col. 1. 24.
fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ for his bodies sake, which is the Church. And to ease our selves, Let us not as the men of the world do, vent our passions to men, but our case to God, and spread such revilings before the Lord, as Hezechiah did the railing Letter of Isa. 37. 14. Senacherib, with this prayer, which our Saviour taught us, Father forgive them, they know not what they do. The last use I shall make of this truth, That though  Preachers dye, yet Sermons live, is to perswade you, while you have time, and while you are call'd by the word, to let your hearts answer that call, that you may be taken hold on by Gods word for good. Labour for an interest in God by Christ, the enjoyment of whom will be your chiefest good. This is life eternal John 17. 3. to know thee the only true God, and whom thou hast sent Jesus Christ. God is the only summum bonum, chief good, He is optimum, the best, and so can suit, he is maximum bonum, the greatest, and can satisfy our desires. Be prevailed withall to study Jesus Christ more, and in him your own immortaliy, and labour after a cleerer knowledge of eternal Excellencies. For cer∣tainly had we Heaven more in our eyes, we should have it more in our hearts. I have read that the dis∣course of a Philosopher concerning the contempt of life, prevailed with the Milesian Virgins to destroy themselves, and of Cleombrotus, who reading Plato of immortality, threw himself headlong that he might enjoy it. And shall discourses of Heaven and im∣mortality work nothing upon us? O that we could
see Heaven as it is, then should we be willing to leave Earth. When Paul had been rapt up into Heaven, and had some taste of the inexpressible joys and de∣lights thereof, then was he willing to depart, and Phil. 1. 23. to be with Christ, which was best of all. Though Paul while here, was with Christ, and Christ was with him, between whom there was a spiritual union and Communion; Yet in compari∣son of what he expected in Heaven, he reckons him∣self while in the body, absent from the Lord. Here 2 Cor. 5. 6. we enjoy as it were the Crums of grace; Heaven is a full Table, Whereat though all shall not fare a∣like, yet every one shall have his full portion. As Exod. 16. 18. the gatherers of Manna, who had not all equal, yet had all sufficient. Our understanding here in comparison of what it will be, is no more than the eye of a Bat to an Eagle, the creeping of a Snayl to the flying of a Swallow. And so are our possessions and enjoyments. Here we have mixt, and at best short and fading pleasures, But when we awake at the resurrection we shall be sa∣tisfied Ps. 17. 15. with Gods Image, with whom is fulness of joy, Ps. 16. 11. and at whose right hand there are pleasures for ever∣more. The knowledge of this may lesson our grief for friends, who are by death parted from us. Such friends as dye in the Lord, they are no losers; They go to Rev. 1. 13 Josh 7. 25. Judges 2. 5. Rev. 21. 4. a blessed, to a better place; from the Vally of Achor and Bochim, from trouble and weeping, to fulness of joy, where all tears are wiped away, where is no more death, or sorrow, or crying, or pain. To this place of joy, this our Reverend Friend is gone be∣fore, who hath left us behind in the Camp, the place
of travail, and hath ascended the Capitol, the place of Triumph. He hath not lost, but gained by his re∣moval. Its observed, that by Gods appointment, when a Deut. 15. 13. Captive Israelite was Manumissed, the Master might not send him away empty, but was to furnish him with a supply of necessaries, and that liberally; thus doth God with the souls of his elect, when he frees them from the captivity of sin, by grace in their con∣version, he adorns them; So when he delivers them Ezech. 16. 7. out of the Prisons of their bodies by death, He makes their Spirits fully perfect. And therefore our grief for this our friend may be the less. Yet when we Heb. 12. 23. consider his Orphan family, we must needs grieve his death as their great loss, for whom yet, in out∣ward things, his provident care hath not been wan∣ting, He having left each of them so much, that they will not be beholden to their enemies, and yet so lit∣tle, that for their education and breeding up, they will need the respect and kindness of their friends. But this hath he left his children, better than all outward portions, the blessing of God, and his ingagement to be their Father. For though grace be personal, and corruption be Natural Parents communicate their Natures, God His grace; Circumcised Parents, beget uncircumci∣sed Children, and winnowed Corn brings forth Chaff; though when Poetae nascuntur non fiunt, Po∣ets are born so, not made, Christiani fiunt non nas∣cuntur, Christians are made and not born; Yet a great mercy it is to be the issue of a believing Pa∣rent. Many prayers made for them, Many promises
made to them; that though Father and Mother for∣sake Psal. 68. 5. them, yet God will not leave such friendless, but will take them up. Yea God is the God of the seed Acts 2. 39. of believers, as well as of themselves. To end all. This our deceased Brother was a wise dealer; whereas most men deal with the world, and Satan, for plea∣sures, whose end proves painful, and profits, that have no true advantage; Yet he was by God made wise to trade with and for God. He hath bought the truth and not sold it; He hath broke Christs bread, and it hath multiplyed in his hands; He hath cast out his Net, and it hath prospered, and souls by him have been turned to righteousness, and therein hath tra∣ded for himself, and gained full and lasting pleasures, durable and real profits, even Heaven it self, where he now enjoys the reward of Gods promise, and shines as a Star in the Firmament; and truly (I speak Dan. 12. 2. it without flattery or vanity) for the general course of his life, for the profitableness and success of his Prea∣ching, for the Comfort, Peace, and manifestation of Gods love and support, which he had in his sick Bed, and to his end, every one of us may say and pray Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque mori. O that our lives and ends might be such. I shall close this discourse with this Observation. A Gentleman took order before his death, that this Epitaph should be engraven on his Tomb, Here lyes the Friend of Sir Philip Sydney. If now it were e∣steemed so great an honour, to be, and be reputed the friend of an earthly man, How much greater Ho∣nour
have all believers, (This our deceased friend in particular) to be called, as Abraham was, the Friend of God? so that on the Tomb of this our Reverend Brother, whose Funeral we have now solemnized, may be truly Ingraven, Here lyeth the dutiful Servant, the faithful Minister, the choice friend of Jesus Christ. Soli Deo Gloria. FINIS.
AN EXHORTATION IMMEDIATLY FOLLOWING THE SERMON THAT Was Preached at the Funeral of Mr. SAMUEL OLIVER Pastor at WELLS. Written (upon request) with some little altera∣tion of, and additions, here and there, unto, what was at first hastily delivered. Wherein the thing intended is, in sum, this, to lay close to our hearts this truth, That affliction, and in special, the loss of Friends (more especially of Ministers) is not to be un∣dergone stoutly without sense; nor to be born frowardly with∣out patience; nor to be pass'd over lightly without profit. James. 5. 11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord. LONDON, Printed by T. W. for John Place, and are to be Sold at his Shop at Furnivals Inn-Gate in Holburn. 1653.
An Exhortation following the Ser∣mon that was Preached at the Funeral of Mr. Samuel Oliver Pastor at Wels, that, in a great Con∣gregation both of Ministers and people then met together, there might be a more profitable use made of the present occasion. THough you have been somewhat extraordinarily deteined already, out of a willingness to set on good instruction, upon so moving an occasion, yet suffer me to be a Suter unto you (Honoured, Reverend, and Beloved) for the re∣newing of your patience, while I adde a little more to what hath been already spoken, concerning our deceased Bro∣ther, who was for you of this place, a faithful Minister of Christ Col. 1. 7.; And that the rather, because it is very suitable, that he that was so abundant an Instructor, should have his Funeral solemnized with more abundant instruction; which though now it may seem very tedious, yet you may be pleased to remember, that when a dear Friend is to take a long Jour∣ney, all his Friends (thinking, that perhaps they shall never see him more) are willing to allot a longer time to take their leave of him; Our dear Friend is gone a long journey, to his long home Eccl. 12. 5., Let us crave pardon therefore, if we be longer in parting with him, and imparting to you what we desire should be profitable upon so observable a providence. But to come to that which I intend to say, (wherein I humbly desire, and desire to have desired, that divine assistance whereof there is so great need and use) that I may therein prescribe unto my self some bounds, I shall entreat you to read with me Job 1. 20, 21, 22. Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped; And said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. The Exhortation (in which I shall have respect all along unto these words) I branch out into three Rules. The first Rule. Seriously take to heart (I exhort you) every special hand of God. This the Scripture requires Eccl. 7. 14., and complains much of the contra∣ry Isa 5. 12. & 42. 25. Jer. 5. 3.. And this is (in the first place) presented unto us in Jobes exam∣ple, who arose, as being stirr'd and much mov'd by many most sad Messa∣sages,
and by the last (that brought him news of the loss of his children) most, and rent his mantle, or robe, as mournng Thamar dd hers 2 Sam. 13. 18, 19., and haved his head, that being another custom that mourners used in those Countries Jer. 7. 29., and fell down upon the ground, which is another sign of a grieved mind, taking greatly to heart Gods hand. 2 Sam. 2. 16, 17. Nor is Job to be blamed for making so much adoe; for it is said after this, In all this Job sinned not. v. 22. It is not a Sin, but a thing suitable to Gods servants, and their Rules, to be affected with affliction, that thereby all men may see they do not despise it. Prov. 3. 11. In special, we are to take to heart Gods hand in dying persons, and to be mov'd with sorrow in houses of mourning, where the Eccl. 7. 2, 3. heart, by be∣ing made sadder, is made better; More especially, the death of righteous persons, and men merciful (as their Father which is in Heaven is merci∣ful) is to lie close upon our Spirits; God lays it to mens charge, that they lay not this to their heart Isa. 57. 1., and that upon a specal reason, to wit, because the righteous are taken away from the evill to come, (as people catch up their children, when there is an eminent and imminent danger,) now they be very inconsiderate, who make nothing of that personal mor∣tality, which is a presage of publike misery. But most especially, the death of publike persons, and (to speak to the present purpose) of faithful Ministers, is to be lamented, and laid to heart. And that for these Reasons. 1. In regard of themselves. To shew our due estimation of them, (accor∣ding to the Rule Phil. 2. 29. 1 Thes. 5. 3., and that we looked upon them as persons, in whom we enjoyed a kind of blessedness when we had them Gal. 4. 5.; Now, How can we say, they are esteemed, who depart without being desired, as that wic∣ked King Jehoram did 2 Chro. 21. 20., or that they depart as persons desired, who depart without being lamented? See John 11. 35, 36. 2 Chron. 35. 25. 2. In regard of the Church. The same Church compassion, which prays that labourers may be sent out Mat. 9. 36, 37., mourns when they be call'd in, never to labour more. 3. Out of love to the Land, and the preservation of the State. It may seem to some an unpleasing Paradox, to say that the Church is the Guard of the Common-wealth; yet was it not without just cause, that the supreme power sometime said to a Prophet, O my Father, my Father, the charet of Israel, and the horsemen thereof 2 Kings 2. 12. 2 Kings 13. 14.; can any love the State, and not be heartily sorry that the Militia of the State, the Sacra Militia, the An∣gelical Army, or the Army of the Angels of the Churches, at the head of which God is Mat. 8. 20., should be, (especially more eminently, or more immaturely) diminished? their Arms (Beloved) (think it not fondness to speak as the Scripture speaks) as they are mighty through God; so they are mighty with God Hos. 12. 3. Gen. 20. 7., so mighty, that we may say (in a sober sense, and with humble hearts) that God cannot do what (according to his revealed will) he would do, because they will not let him alone to do it. Exod. 32. 20. 4. Out of Love to God himself. For what are Ministers appointed for,
but to bear up the Name of God before the Sons of men? And, should it not Acts 9. 15. much grieve us to see any of them lye in the dust, who are the appoin∣ted instruments to keep the name of God from lying in the dust? Hence it is that we thus moun. Indeed Priests (and sometime Pro∣phets) are forbidden to mourn, (upon special accounts) in the old Te∣stament; but in the new Testament we find Paul professing sorrow upon sorrow, if Epaphroditus, (that faithful, and life neglecting labourer for the work of Christ) had not been recovered from his sickness Phil. 2. 27, 30.. O that we could lay close to our hearts, the want of laying close to our hearts the sad-presaging death of Gods servants! what's become of the sweet Spirit of those Primitive Christians, who sorrowed most of all, (were extremely sorry for this) that Paul had said they should See his face no more? Acts 20. 38. And we are sure, that when once a Minister of Christ is returned to his dust, we shall see his face no more among the inhabitants of the world; either therefore those melting Christians were much mi∣staken when their sorrow was so great, or else we may blush, while ours is so little. To conclude this first Rule, wheresoever there is any house of mour∣ning, we shall do well to remember, that an advantage is put into our hands, for the bettering of our hearts. Eccl. 7. 3. As (therefore) Physicians and A∣natomists, adde to their art, by dissections, and prying into all the parts of dead persons; so let us labour to be gainers, to adde to our Spiritual stock, and the art of living and dying well, by taking to heart, distinctly pondering upon, and even anatomising, divine providences in the death of any, but of those that be faithful and fear God above many, much more, Nehem. 7. 2. The second Rule. Have reverent thoughts of every more heavy hand of God. For we may not be so taken up with our mourning for men, as to forget our worshipping of God. This also Job doth here preach unto us by his practice, who did not as they who curse their King and their God, and look upward (in that mood) Isa. 8. 21., but fell down upon the ground, and so fell-down as that he also worshipped. Which worshipping contains two things in it. 1. A submission to God; such as was in Aaron, when he held his peace, even when his two Sons were slain both at once Levit. 10. 3. Worshipping and wor∣ding, reverence and impatience are two opposite things. The third Cap∣tain that fell down upon his knees before Elijas, shewed by that gesture, that he meant not to fight 2 Kings 1. 13., but submitted, that he might have quarter. 2. A celebration of him; with his worshipping there is a saying v. 21. the close whereof is, Blessed be the name of the Lord. O, How the Devils ex∣pectation was cross'd in this blessing of God by an undone Job! That Accuser and Lyar pronounced confidently, that if God did touch him in all he had, he would curse him to his face Job. 10. 11., but his holiness out-lasts his Hedge, and his reverence of God survives the ruins of his State and Family; When Satan took away all that Job had, his meaning was not to make him (a Beggar that was to him as it was to Haman to lay hands
on Mordecai alone (e), the thing he aimed at was to make him a Blas∣phemer, Hester 3. 6. to curse God; but he deceived the Devil, and when all's gone, Behold he blesseth him altogether Num. 24. 11. Which commends unto us this instruction, in our greatest affliction, to wit, not only to carry our selves therein as Gods Subjects, and crea∣tures, and not speak against him, but as Gods Advocates, and plead for him. Ne∣hem. 9. 33. Q. But, How may that be done? A. By taking Jobes course in this place, that is, by gathering up Ar∣guments, wherewithall to do it. Here are two. 1. His native nakedness, or the condition of all men according to the Law of Nature, Naked came I out of my Mothers womb (without Sheep, or Oxen, or Camels, or House, or Children) and (when I die) naked shall I return thither; whither is that? Sure, Not into his Mothers womb again that first bare him, (we account it a great weakness in Nicodemus to ask that question; Can a man enter the second time into his Mothers womb? John 3. 4.) but thither, that is to the Grave. This is confirmed by the wise mans expression (Eccl. 5. 15.) As he came forth out of his Mothers womb, naked Vide Mer∣cerum & Bezam in loc. shall he return to go as he came. As he came naked out of his Mothers womb into the world, So shall he go naked out of the world into his Grave, And shall take nothing of his labour, which he may carry away in his hand. Unto this interpretation further strength will be added, if we consider that Jobes purpose is not to insist on the place whither he goes, when he Jun. & Trem. in loc. goes out of the world, but the manner how he goes out, to wit, naked, as he came in, For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. 1 Tim. 6. 7. It is observed also, that in this (whither). Job doth as it were point with the finger unto the earth on which he was now fallen, as the for∣mer Magna Pa∣rens terra est Ovid. Me∣tamor. Magna consolatio est in rerum amissione illa tempo∣ra ad me moriā redu∣cere quibus nos contigit res quas perdidimus non habuisse Greg. Moral in Job. Lib. 2. verse shews. However, Its agreed on by all that by (thither) he means the Earth or the Grave, and so we may thus resolve the words; Naked came I out of the womb of my earthly Mother, and naked shall I return into the womb of my Mother Earth. A great argument for patience, it being a great comfort (as one says) in the loss of all, to call to mind those times wherein we had nothing of that which we have now last. No man brought any thing into the world with him, when he was born, and if he have never so much here, and it all continue with him, yet he shall not take it away with him when he dyes; Then, the question to the richest man is, hose shall thse things be which thou hast provided? Luke 12. 20. for thine they shall not be; the provision is thine, the pos∣session, other mens, Our works follow us, Revel. 14. 13. Not our wealth. Our earthly estates had a begnning, and must have an end. Suppose they be taken away from us, before we be taken away from them, that breaks no square between God and his Children; There is more love between that blessed God, and his sincere Servants, than to differ about so small matters.
We shall do well to improve this argument, and to bethink our selves whether the ground of impatience, be not a fancy of a kind of eternity in our earthly enjoyments, while we are apt to think, we were. Heirs, and so had them when we came into the world, and our heis shall have them (and we in our Heirs) when we go out of the world. Herein if God cross us, and take what we do so much reckon upon from us and ours, then, we complain bitterly, and strive much with God, for want of studying well Jobes Sermon, and taking off from our hearts, the grief of our na∣kedness by providence, by the serious thought of our nakedness by nature both in our birth and at our death. 2. The second Argument is drawn from the propriety that God hath in our estates, and the persons also belonging to us, and thereupon the justice of his administration, while he disposeth as he pleaseth of them, expressed in these word, The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away. He doth not say; The Lord gave, and the Devill hath taken away, or the Chaldeans and Sobeans have taken away, though that were true enough, but t was not good enough for a Job to say, But the Lord gives and takes, whch tue doctrine brings in this good conclusion; therefore, I have no right to complain now all is gone; for, Is it not lawful for God to do what he will with his own? Mat. 20. 15. Sweet is the say∣ing of Gregory in his moals on this place. It might happily have been looked upon as a lamentable thing, if God had given, and the ene∣my had taken away, but when God takes away, every mans mouth is stop'd; for [sua recepit, non nostra abstulit] He hath not taken away ours, but taken again his own; we say (indeed) my bread, and my water, and my flesh 1 Sam. 25. 11., my House, and my Lands, my Son, my Daughter: but alas, we are but possessors and Stewards, God is the Lord and the owner. Its our wisdom and our righteousness to say every one of us, If God take away mine, (any of mine, all of mine) he takes away his own, for my own are his own. Blessed therefore be his Name; Magnified for ever be his ju∣stice, his Soveraignty. He doth no more than I deserve, if I consider my own Sin; He doth no more than he may justly do, if I look to his So∣veraignty. O that in all the disasters of providence, we could take Jobes way of patience; which is, not to seek out arguments to aggravate the affliction, but to justifie that God that afflicts. Q. But, am I bound to sit down and thank God, for that he hath undone me, and strip'd me of all my comforts? Ans. Its one thing to thank God for doing such a thing (as if it were a benefit to have it done) Another, to bless God when it is done (as pro∣fessing it a righteous thing in him to do it;) I am bound to bless God if he take all away, that is, to give him therein the honour of his justice and Soveraigny; but I am not to give thanks for affliction, that is, barely for the evil of affliction, (I may thank my self for that Jer. 2. 17. Hos. 13. 9., (yet I may and should thank God for the love from whence it ariseth, and for the good that God intendeth in it, and promiseth to work by it; yea I have reason to thank God, even for the grief and bitterness of affliction also
as it is a necessary and effectual furtherance of that spiritual good, which God in his Fatherly corrections aimeth at. So men thank the Physician and pay him too, not because his Physick was bitter, but because health is sweet; yea they think themselves be∣holding to him, for putting so much bitterness into the medicine as was necessary for a sound and through cure of the disease. The third Rule. Adde not Sin to affliction, nor discontent to disasters. Be not worse for Gods hand; let not affliction draw forth thy corruption (unless it be to expel it, as launcing & Tents bring out the corrupt matter of a festered Ulcer) but let it exercise and set a work thy grace; chiding ordinarily stirs up choler, but in prudent men it calls in patience, and makes their moderation the better known to all men; when all's hot about them, Peranti∣peristasni. they are the colder. Job (here) is that wise and well tempered man, who rents his mantle, shaves his head, and sorroweth much; but in all this Job sinned not. First, his Oxen and Asses were taken away, and his servants slain by the Sabaeans ver. 14. 15. Immediatly after that, he heard that the fire of God fallen from Heaven, had burn'd up his Sheep and his servants v. 16. Upon that comes the news that the Caldeans were fallen upon the Camels, and had carried them away and slain the servants ver. 17. And lastly, that the House was fallen upon his Children, while they were fea∣sting together, and that they were dead, ver. 18. 19. Yet in all this, in all these calamities Mer∣cer., in this whole busines Vata∣blus. Mercer., in al his demeanour and car∣riage in the midst and height of this manifold afflction, he sinned not (in heart) or charged God foolishly (in word) (as some distinguish it.) O, How much may God do to a good man, to a man grown in good∣ness, before he will gve him an ill word, or entertain an ill thought of him? Not to sin in all his carriage after all these calamities, this is a patience that Honours Heaven, and justifies Gods testimony of Job ver. 8. That makes Hell ashamed; for the Devil said he would curse God v. 11. That makes the world wonder, and still talk of the patience of Job Jam. 5. 11., and declares to all the solicitous servants of God, what a prevai∣ling thing the Grace of God is, for the mastering of all impetuous and rebellious affections, in the most irritating afflictions; I say it is so [bona si sua norint] if they be careful to improve their grace, and put it to its utmost strength. Now, that we may not adde sin, nor suffer our corrupt affections to mu∣tiny against God in the day of our trouble, and the anguish of our Soul, let us consider from the present Text, what sin, and our heart risings a∣gainst God in afflictions, are, to wit, a charging of God foolishly. Its, a charging, and a foolish charging. First, Its a charging of God; for with him we have to do in all conditi∣ons, Hee's the supreme; Men and Devi's work under him wickedly; but he works in and by them, holily and wisely. Nor doth God barely permit, but commit such and such things to such Instruments. 1 Kings 22. 20, 22, 23. The matter standeth not thus here, that the Devil moves for the
molesting of Job, and so God signs the Petition, and gives way [at the Devils sute] to the Devils design, and ther's an end of the business; but God, for holy ends, hath a purpose to afflict Job, and trie him to the ut∣termost, and the Devils motions and machinations, succeed and serve that purpose Job 23. 14. We ought to speak soberly of these things, but yet we may say truly, that when God hath a work to do, he accommo∣dates himself with, and makes use of, what instruments he pleaseth, and takes the doing of the thing to himself [2 Sam. 12. 12. I will do this] though the sin in the acting be the instruments onely; what these do in a sinfull, God doth in a penal, or probatory way, as here in Job. Now, shall we rise up and rage against God? 2 Kings 19. 27, 28. Yet, How prone are we, in greater troubles and pressures to say, Never any so troubled as I? We fret, we chaff; None abou us can please us; they that are neer us in relation, have little heart to come neer us. I beseech you consider what all this impatience amounts to, It is in true judgment, A drawing up of a charge against God; and, Is it fit (wee) should charge [Him?] Our neer friends die, wee may call them our Gourd Jona 4. 7, 8, 9., being a kind of guard to us against the heat and violence of worldly trou∣bles, these Gourds wither, and we are angry; Our soules are disquieted, and we never ask why, Psal. 42. 11. but [perhaps] make as if we did well to be angry to the death, for our Gourd is withered, and the Sun beats on our heads. But, what made that Gourd to wither? Sure, some worm or other; But who prepared that worm? Is it not God? and is it not he also that prepares that vehement East winde, so that the sun beats on our head, and we are ready to faint? Doth God indeed, do all this? and wilt thou condemn him that is most just? Job. 34. 17. Is He fit to be the object of our an∣ger? Ot hath Heaven cause to be angry with earth, but was earth ever justly angry with heaven? must we needs wound that Supreme and Al∣mighty power, that cannot pervert judgment Job 34. 12., through the sides of in∣struments and providences? How much better was David's reverent reso∣lution: I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou Lord didst it. Psal. 39. 9. I say, How much btter, and how much wiser? For, Secondly, This charging of God is a foolish thing, therefore Job said to his wife tempting him to do so, Thou speakest like one of the foolish women Job. 2. 10.. The folly in it is manifest. For, 1. The Charge is presumptuous; He goes very high that opens his mouth against heaven Psal. 73. 9.. Governors [they say] must be accountable; but it is be∣cause they be men; God is greater than man, and gives no account of any of his matters Job 33. 12, 13., He's far above all charges, and contestations. 2. Its Unrighteous; Its a charge that can never be made good, for God will not lay upon man more than is right, that he should enter into Judg∣ment with God. Job 34. 23. So, the folly of unrighteousnes is added to the folly of presumption. 3. There is added to both, the folly of Selfe-ruine, while we wrangle with God out of self-respects, such presumption, doubles, or trebles our affli∣ction; when Israel murmured after the destructon of Korah, there dyed for that repining foureteen thousand and seven hundred [Numb. 16. 41, 49.]
beside them that dyed about the matter of Korah, and this men get by their thwarting with God. Q. What's to be done then in the time of trouble, to prevent the ri∣sings of our hearts against heaven? A. Find them a contrary work. Instead of charging God foolishly, let us charge our selves wisely. 1 Sam. 22. 22. 2 Sam. 24. 10. 17. Say, I am the occasion, I am the cause, God is just in it, God will bring good out of it 2 Sam. 16. 10, 12.; say as that cruelly covetous, but at last penitent and well minded Mau∣ritius did, who when he was miserably tortured himself, by Phocas (chosen Emperour in his room) and five of his sons (together with his wife) were slain before his face, bore it with great patience, and often repea∣ted this saying, Just art thou Lord, and right is thy judgement Func. comment. in Chro∣nolog. l. 8.. But tho we should charge our selves wisely; Yet we may not overcharge our selves unwisely. Say not (as some) O, God loves not me; nor am I any of his. I have made a profession of religion, but had I had true goodnes, God would never have dealt so severely with me. All this is but chaffy stuff; a medly made up of discontentednes and dejectednes; Imitate ra∣ther the confidence and magnanimity of this Job, who would never be got to let go his righteousnes Job 27. 6.) and yeeld himself an hypocrite, notwithstand∣ing all his afflictions, and his friends hot and heavy disputes against him, from that fair and specious, but fallacious and false argument, Severely af∣flicted, therefore surely an Hypocrite. Bear not falss witness against thy self, nor add affliction to thine afflicted soul. Having spoken thus much in the generality, let me crave leave to des∣cend a little lower, and to desire you (with respect to the present occasion) to suffer the words of exhotation in these two particvlars. Charge not God foolishly; when provi∣dences be strangely sad either in—His ordinances, or His servants. 1. First, speak not wild words, nor intertain unworthy thoughts con∣cerning any ordinance on which the Name of God is set. To be plain, Charge not prayer foolishly, (and therein, God) though they dye by cou∣ples that are prayed for. Beloved, It is not unknown to you, that for your deceased Pastor that is now laid in his grave, and for his religious wife (dying a very little before hm) I say, For these two faithfull and usefull servants of God (in speci∣all for him), It is not unknown to you, that there was a time set apart for more solemn prayer; wherein God did seeme also to give in such assi∣stance as mght prophesy he would grant some deliverance 2 Chro. 12. 7., and say (at least, in regard of the one or the other), This sicknes is not unto death, John 11. 4. But it proves otherwise, and we seem to have lost our Friends and our Prayers both. No wonder if for this our hearts be fild with sorrow; but let us take heed (for all that) what we say; say any thing rather than this, that God is not the God that heareth prayer Psal. 65. 2., say any thing, say nothing rather than ths, that it is to no purpose to pray Mal. 3. 14., or that God saith to the house of Israel, Seek yee me in vain. Isa. 45. 19. Q. What shall we say then? A. 1 Say, that (your) sin is great who had the benefit of hs labours
(and made not a good use of that benefit) and that (our) sin is great who prayed for his life, and its just that these sins should hide Gods face from us that he will not heare Isa. 59. 2.. 2. Say, God is wise, He knows best what to do: we must not contend with him unless we will take upon us also to instruct him Job 38. 2. & 40. 2.; we do but darken Gods counsels, and shew our own foolishnes, when we goe about to measure his dealing and dispensations by our shallow capacities. 3. Say, This wise God is resolved on his way; Our prayers must not prevent his purposes, nor must we look to bring his decrees to our desires. He is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul desireth even that he doth; for he performeth the thing that he hath appointed for every person, and many such things are with him. Job 23. 13, 14. 4. We may mistake our Enlargments, and have great reason (many times,) to be humbled in the review of them; For that room we find in our hearts, may haply arise from nature and natural parts; from a better temper of body at that time, or from better creatures received, quickning our natural abilities; And, if by such assistances we be so rich n prayer that we want neither words nor matter, but yet pray too much in a way of human wisdom (seeming in some sort to contrive a way for God as best for him to walk in) and do not pray in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, with due respect to Gods glory, and wisedom and will; we can no more look to prevail (with) God, than they that preach after that man∣ner can look to prevail (for) him, 1 Cor. 2. 4. 5. If we do not mistake a Spiritful prayer for a Spiritual prayer, but our hearts be holily inlarged and powred forth before God, yet then, ano∣ther evil is apt to arise, and that is, a heart less humble after a prayer more high and heavenly; Many times we are dull and defective, and when wee travel in prayer, bring forth a leane deformed child, and then, it grieves us to look upon it; but when it is better with us, then, how apt are we to kiss the beautiful child, to make too much of our performances, and the Babes we have brought forth (tho not without the grace of God in us) and too litle of Jesus Christ, and the grace of God towards us; but God will not give his glory to another Isa. 48. 11. [no not to his own grace] but make us know that though we have good things [by] our prayers, yet not [for] them. 6. And God may grant, denying; as our Saviour was heard in what he feared Heb. 5. 7., though denyed in what he desired, The cup passed not from (him), yet was he heard in that he passed from (it), not only undergoing, but outgrowing and overcomming all his sufferings Act. 2. 24.. So here, The things intended in prayer, and the arguments used in prayer for the life of your deceased Pastor, were Gods glo∣ry, the good of the Souls of this Congregation, the education of his great and little Family [great, because so many, and little, be∣cause so many of them so young] Now, If God will glorifie his Name otherwise (as we are sure he will John 12. 28.) If God will provide well for the Congregation otherwise [as we hope he will, Numb. 27. 16, 17.] If God will raise assistance and subsistence for the Children left behind in
another way (as we are persuaded 2 King. 4. 1, 7., and begin to find he will) then are our Ʋnheard prayers Heard, and that the best way; our dear deceased Friends having their will in their much desired happiness; God having his will in their present death; and we having our will and desire, though they be dead. Now whereas in the last of these, that is, provision for so many mother∣less, and now fatherless children, there seemed to be the least hope, yet God hath so wrought on the hearts of worthy and well affected persons, that help is freely offered already for the education and disposal of the most of them, which Christian love, and most imitable charity (in these dayes wherein the condition of the families of many Ministers is so hard and hazardous) puts me in mind of the sweet words of our Saviour (wherein I conceive such a comfort to be comprehended) He that leaves all for Christ, shall receive an hundred fold, now in this time, houses and brethren and sisters and mothers, Mark 10. 30. and fathers too, for that's express'd v. 29. If the Apostles left fathers, mothers, houses, &c. they had an hundred for one here; for every good Christians house was their house (an hundred houses for one) every old disciple was a father to them, every Christian matron, a mother. What our Saviour thus speaks of the persecution, we see verified in the dissolution of his servants; They that had but one father and mother while their parents lived, have now many when they are gone, and by that means, the benefit both of maintenance and educa∣tion. Think well of prayer therefore while God works so well for those that are prayed for, though by what hand he pleaseth. I shall conclude this with that savoury and comfortable saying of Ber∣nard De consid. ad Eugen um lib. 5. Melus est Deum non invenisse quam non quaesivisse.. Solus est Deus qui nunquam frustra quaeri potest, nec cum inveniri non potest. Its onely God (saith he) that is never sought in vain, no not then when he can∣not be found. Let thy experience, O Eugenius, (for to him he writes) teach thee this, or, if it do not, believe him that hath tried it, I do not say, my self, but that holy man of God that saith, The Lord is good (he doth not say, to the soul that findes him, but) to the soul that seeks him, Lament. 3. 25. Secondly, Think well, not only of every Ordinance of God, but of every child of God; Charge not God foolishly in his servants (who are his Mal. 3. 17. and in whom he is charged, Nehem. 4. 5 Psal. 74. 22.) no, though God strike them heavily, and double his stroke; let none open their mouth and say, Here are two gone, the heads of the family, father and mother both, and that within a week together, and that leaving such a charge behind them; shew me any that you call a profane family, Where∣in God hath made such a spoil? Unto whom it may suffice to say, If God bring such evill on families that call upon his Name; shall they, who (too like the cursed families of Heathens that call not upon his Name Jer. 10. 25.) have no course nor care of Religion in their families; I say, shall they be unpunished? they shall not be un∣punished Jer. 25. 29., God will surely meet with them one way or other, one day or other. Meanwhile, was it not a mercy that they died together unto whom
it would have been so grievous to have lived asunder? yea, that instead of living asunder here, they live together in Heaven? Nor can we wonder at such providences, if we do but look upon this Job (with whom we have now to do) who (not by a fever or any ordinary sicknes, but) by an extra∣ordinary hand of God, and stroke of heaven, lost at once all the children he had, even seven sons, and three daughters, having nothing but a wife left him Job 1. 2., that was a temptation Job 2. 9., and affliction to him. Job 19. 17. Nor must Job for this be the worse thought of, for men are not to be judg'd of by their condition but their cariage, And what Job's cariage was we all know; Now, though I intend not any comparison with him that re∣ceiv'd so high a testimony from heaven, and that confirmed by the oppo∣sitions and conquests of hell, yet if any shall list to make an unpartiall enquiry into these two persons that made such hast one after another, it will, I doubt not, be found that they were such as did truly fear God, as were careful of their duties in their places, very helpful to others according o their abilities of State and gifts, and who dwelt one with another a∣cording to knowledge, and as heires together of the grace of life whereof they are now possess'd. But, this being the day of his interring (whom God thought fit to take away last) it calls upon me to speak of him somewhat more particularly; of whom (notwithstanding) I should not speak further, were it not that the observation of what was good in him, may be good for us. I shall there∣fore with what brevity I can present his example to you and to my self, in these five things following. 1. He was a Sound Orthodox Minister; And even that alone is very va∣luable in these truth-deserting-times. The Devill is a disputing Devill, as we see by Michael the Archangel his opponent Jude v. 9.. Now in setled times (wherein the doctrine of Religion is better guarded by government,) he disputes against holiness, against the holy observation of the Lords day, and the necessity of a strict walking with God, by all the arguments that profane men can pick up for that purpose; But in times more unsetled, especially wherein Reformation is sought (but not yet found) he uses the wits of men to undermine & oppose the Truth of God; but this our brother had learn'd the form of sound words himself, and taught them others, Tit. 1. 9. It belongs to us Ministers to minde this, for what are unsound Teachers? They are (to speak as the Scripture speaks) The Witches of the Church: O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, saith the Apostle Gal. 3. 1.? And who were those Witches but the false Apostles by whom they were removed from the truth of the Gospel Gal. 1. 6, 7.? If he that should uncharm the sorce∣ries of others [as Luther speaks on that place] be a witch himself, how dangerous is that Witchcraft? Matth. 6. 23. And it much concerns you that are Hearers in this place to consider whe∣ther you have received, and heard, and held fast; Are not divers, in divers places (Some in this) turn'd aside from the truth? Yea some of whom there was some reason to say, Will yee also go away Joh. 6. 67? O remember, Nothing is more odious than unsound and rotten hearers under sound and right Mi∣nisters.
2. He was a painful and faithful Minister, as all might see by his ready labours in Lectures abroad, and his constant imployment in his own place. A Minister may be Orthodox, and yet idle; not unskilful and yet unfaith∣ful, but we, that are the Lords Watchmen, and the Shepheards of his sheep, must know, that it concerns us to look about and labour for the good of souls, even as it concerns us to love Jesus Christ; He spake but Scripture Greg. de cura Pa∣storali Pec. 1. c. 5. that said [Quisquis virtutibus pollens, &c.] He that being able is averse from feeding the flock of God, is thereby convinc'd that he loves not the chief Shep∣herd, for it was he that said to Peter, Lovest thou me? then, feed my Sheep. John 21. 16, 17. Whats a man able and appointed to teach, and yet careless and speech∣less, but [if we speak in the language of Scripture] a dumb Dog? Isa. 56. 10. that should bark to drive away any thing harmful to the sheep, but cannot bark Isa. 56. 10. because he wll not, and is silent because asleep. The blood of Souls shall be required at the hands of such Shepherds, Ezek. 3. 18. Meanwhile, do you [my beloved] you of this place, bethink your selves well in what state you stand, no condition being more dangerous than that of unwarned men, that is, of men that wil not take warning under a Warning-giving Minister. In this case, the faithfull Pastor hath deli∣vered his soule, but the hearer that would not be warned shall perish in his sin. Exek. 3. 19, 21. 3. He was a plain Preacher, that did not trouble his hearers with subtil and obscure notions, with dark and uncouth expressions, such as these proud and wanton times have produc'd, and these Manna-lothng tmes have made much of. Of such Calvin makes great complaint, We see [saith he] even of those that professe the Gospel, some that had rather be accounted subtil than sincere, and sublime than solid, when all their acutenes is meer childishnes, onely it pleases them well to be thought acute men, and by unskilful men they are applauded on that account. calv. in 2 Cor. 4. 2. For [as he saith elswhere] those speculations that hold forth a subtilty of wit, the world hath ever preferd before solid doctrine, and ever will. Calv. in Gal. 4. 22. Pauls speech and his preaching 1 Cor. 2. 4. was not such; nor will any man be such who loves the saving, better than the pleasing of his hearers. So far was that pious as well as profound Augustin from this humur, as that he layes it down for a Rule [Plerun{que} consuetudo Vulgaris utisior est significandis rebus quam integritas literata] Such expressions as are popular and customary, are better, for the most part, to make things known, than those that (if we look to learning) are more compleat, whereupon, (citing that place Psal. 139. 15. My substance, or (as he reads it) My bone is not hd from thee) he protesseth he had rather speak babarously [and say, non est absconditum à te ossum meum Suppo∣sing the Reader did not under∣stand whe∣ther it were Os ossis or Os oris. quam ut ideò esset minus apertum quia magis Latinum est] than that there should be more Latin and less light. Aug. de doctrina Christiana, lib. 3. Well were it if all Ministers [especially whom God hath placed among meaner people] were of that good mans mind, having the care he had to declare sufficency, and the conscience that he had to resolve upon perspi∣cuity;
for what's an obscure, and (by his people) unintelligible Pastor, but an unkind father, that when the child askes bread, gives him a stone, a hard thing, which he knowes not what to make of, nor how to get nou∣rishment from. Luk 11. 11. As for those that have Teachers who come down to the capacity of their Hearers (which hath been and is your mercy here) Let them consider, that if this work not upon them for the increase of knowledge and goodnes, it will one day witness against them, and be a great aggravation of their sin, that their Prophets have not onely preached often, and multiplied visions, but preach'd plainly, and used similitudes Hos. 12. 10., helping dimme eyes to the clearest light. Give me leave to say Beloved, Better for you have had a Minister that would have spoken Latin, Greek, or Hebrew to you, than one so willing to deale plainly with you, if you be not gainers, if God be not a gainer by that plainesse. 4. He was a Powerfull Preacher, and one that sweetly insinuated him∣self into the hearts of hearets, his doctrine dropping as the small rain on the tender herbs Deut. 32. 2.. He was one that spake to the heart of Jerusalem Isa. 40. 2., an heart-affecting preacher, There lay his work and heart. And whats a Preacher that delivers good things in a general way, but keeps off from the heart and conscience, but like such Physicians as give Catholique Pils that purge the belly, but never light on the particular pec∣cant humour that most infests and endangers the body. It concerns us Ministers to consider the diseases and the constituti∣ons of our charges, and accordingly apply our remedies, not shooting at Rovers but full-But against sin; and in matter of comfort dispensing the grace of God that is given him with all faithfulnes and fitnes to them-ward over whom God hath set him Ephes. 3. .. And for you that are hearers, Take account of your selves how you profit by two sorts of Ministers, 1. Such as mightily convince your understand∣ings, 2. Such as work on your affections and make your hearts to burne within you (b). Woe be to that man that keeps his errours under a sound and convincing Ministry; or his lusts and sins under an heart-striking and conscience-searching Minister. If God close with thy conscience, and thou stand out, God, and Minister, and Conscience and all shall witness against thee at the last day. 5. Lastly, He was a Pious Minister, one whose life was suitable to his labours, and practice to his preaching. Its a good life that puts life into a Ministers preaching; Els, a good Preacher and a bad Liver, is like a boy that writes a faire copy, and blots it out with his slieve. People are to be fed with milk, but if Ministers, af∣ter they have given a good meal, throw it all down with their foot, How shall poore hearers (whose eye s not so much upon the work as the walk of the Minister) be nourished with it? Nor doth a good conversation give strength to our doctrine, when it is delivered onely, but even to the deliverer it self also. It is said, Christ began both to do and teach, Act. 1. 1. Hierom gives this reason of the order, [Eru∣bescit
enim quamvis praeclara doctrina quam propria reprehendit conscientia. Hie∣ron. ad princip. Virg.] Doing goes first, for, The check of a bad conscience makes the best Sermon blush; But (as another sayes) Nec conscientia loquentem praepedit, cum vita linguam antecedit [Greg. mor. in Job l. 6. c. 24.]. A Ministers conscience will not check him, nor make his words stick in his teeth, when his life goes before his tongue, that is, when he preacheth that to others which men know before hand he hath practised himself. Such a Pastor hath no need to feare, but his people (I speak to you of this Congregation) have so much the more need to feare, when a Minister is both a burning and a shining Lamp; burning by his doctrine, and shi∣ning by his life and example. Remember that these join'd together, will either doe much good, or much hurt: Think sadly of it whoever thou art that livest under a Minister (or Ministers) in whom both these are; either they will be Loadstones to draw thee, or Milstones to drown thee. I have now done, adding this onely in the conclusion, whatsoever in our deceased Brother savoured of human infirmities (for he had no doubt, his failings as well as other men) let that be buried with him: But as for those good things which you saw in him, and knew to be in him, and now have heard of him, let them live in us. The God of the spirits of all flesh, that hath taken him to receive his re∣ward, settle here, a faithful, a fit, a fruitful man of God to succeed him in his work, Amen.
ANOTHER EXHORTATION DELIVERED JAN. 3. 1649. At the interring of that singular servant of God, Mr. SAMUEL CROOK LATE PASTOR AT WRINGTON IN SOMERSETSHIRE, By a neighbour Minister, much in his company, and very much assisted by his Ministry. LONDON, Printed by T. W. for John Place, and are to be Sold at his Shop at Furnivals Inn-Gate in Holburn. 1653.
The Letter of a worthy and Reverend Friend to the Author, relating to the ensuing exhortation. SIR, I Have perused your Exhortation at Mr. Crook's Funerall, and finde it grave and seasonable: 'tis pity these Memorials should be lost & condemn'd to an obscure privacy, both for their own worth, and his sake who was the occasion of them. If my vote can do any thing with you, I should desire you to publish this exhortation with your Funerall Notes concerning Mr. Oliver, that both of them being burning and shining Lights in the same County and voysinage, and in their places and dwellings not far asunder, may live toge∣ther in the same papers. Certainly, Gods Worthies de∣serve some publique Monument to continue their me∣mory and example, not onely for the imitation of the good, but that others by this solemn Testimony may know that once the Prophets and holy men of God have been amongst them. Wee learne from the Apostle, that dead Saints may yet speak, Heb. 11. 4. that is, preach by their example, but then, there must be some to continue the memory of that example, or els, how should it speak ought of instruction to future Ages? therefore the Apostle ob∣serveth of Abel in that place, , he ob∣tained witness that he was righteous. Which I referre
to the publick witness and testimony of the Word, where his usuall title and stile is righteous Abel; and he had before said of all the Patriarchs vers. 2. , they obtained a good report, to wit, in the Church by the Scriptures: Now, since the Canon of faith was closed up, there is no reason the memorie of the Saints should be lost, and therefore God hath in eve∣ry Age stirred up some that can handle the pen of the Writer, by some publique record to consigne their ex∣ample to the use of the Church: though I confess too many have been forgotten that were otherwise famous in their generations for want of care in this kind; Illachrymabili perierunt nocte, Carent quia vate sacro. I add no more, but that I am Your loving Brother, and fellow-labourer in the work of the Gospel, THOMAS MANTON.
To the well-affected Reader, but more especially, To my loving and respected Friends and Neigh∣bours, the Inhabitants of the Parish of Wrington in Somersetshire Grace, and Peace. ITs easy to foresee that a necessity lyes upon me to make some apologie for the celebrating of the Funerals of Mi∣nisters with such (something more than ordinary) so∣lemnity, Wherein my defence is this, 1. That though the reason be not to magnifie the persons of Ministers, who ought ever to decrease in their fame and name, so that Christ may encrease Joh. 3. 30., yet never was there more need to speak for the Ministry than now, and to do right to the persons of Ministers with respect to the reputation of their calling. The Rule of the word is, Hold such in reputation Phil. 2. 29., but looking to the course of the World, we know that as concern∣ing this calling it is every where spoken against Act. 28. 22.. Some ne∣cessity therefore there is to wipe away unjust and untrue asper∣sions by a true relation of their worth who have had their share in that contempt which in these ordinance-despising-dayes the Ministers of Christ do every where lie under. 2. It hath ever been the custome of the Church of God in fu∣neral Orations, to recite, and afterward to write, the story of the lives of eminent and wel-deserving men, especially of Mini∣sters, and that upon great reason, as 1. To serve the will of God, whose mind it is that the memory of the just should be blessed and be kept from rotting; And 2. To present such as patterns to others, recommending therein the Apostles Rule, Be folowers
together of me, and mark them which walk so as yee have us for an ensample Phil. 3. 17.. And— 3. (Which we may look upon as the highest thing) In this, Jesus Christ himself hath gone before us, who was pleased to leave to all the world this testimony of his faithfull Forerunner, That he was a burning and a shining light Joh. 5. 35.; That he was a Prophet and more than a Prophet Mat. 11. 9.. If Christ thought sit to beare up their names that beare up his Act. 9. 15., I hope we shall not offend by walking in our Saviour's way. 4. But besides all this, while I write to you the Inhabitants of the Town of Wrington, I must needs let you know that a principal reason of the first framing and present publishing of the ensuing exhortation, was, and is, to assist you in a profitable and perpetual remembrance of him that for so long time was your faithful Pastor, and made it his work to guide you to true blessednes, for which purpose he wrote his excellent and most approved Catechism, That you might be grounded in Religi∣on, and followed it with continual preaching for your better pro∣ficiency, and confirmed it by his Religious life, and perfected all by his holy and humble death; you (therefore) must be my Apology for publishing these unpolished lines, wherein my purpose is not to set forth the full story of Mr. Crook's life, (that's written already by an exacter pen, and printed by it self In a little book calld, The Life and Death of Mr. Samu∣el Crook, by W. G.;) but my meaning is, a little more to insist upon, and to draw down to particular use what is there wound up in a more general way; yet with some difference; for, the former things are of common concernment, and for the use of all men, especially of Ministers, unto whom it cannot but be profitable seriously to contemplate, and to propose unto themselves, so imitable a patterne; But the later part is more especially directed to your use, who were the daily Hearers of his sound doctrine, and observers of his suitable conversation, and who are to be in special manner ac∣countable for both. Think that He that hath been divers years dead, yet speaks, and that in the Apostles language Act. 20. 31., Re∣member that by the space of fourty seven years, I ceased not to warne every one of you with teares. And let these applica∣tions
to your consciences, which (when I had resolv'd to have laid them aside) Providence hath (by reiterated requests) a length produced, be an effectual meanes to rub up your memo∣ries, and continually to assist and arme you against that fruit-hindring forgetfulness which is apt to seize even upon better people after their quickning Pastors decease; that so though you could not always have him Ma. 26. 11., yet you may after his decease have those things alwayes in remembrance that you heard from him 2 Pet. 1. 15.. This will be an help to that which I would yet fur∣ther exhort you to (as that which much concerns you) I mean, your profiting by your present Pastor, whom God hath in much mercy sent to you to confirme you by his diligent and dexterous preaching, and answerable living, in that word and way which you have formerly heard and seene from and in his pretious Predecessor. The benefit of all will redound to your selves, and be best seene in the day of Christ, when (they both) and all other Instructers that have truly desired and sought your spiritual good (amongst whom reckon him if you please that now writes unto you) shall rejoyce that they have not run in vaine: nei∣ther laboured in vain Phil. 2. 16.; which that it may be your security, comfort, and honour at that great day, shall be the prayer of Your truly welwishing Neighbour and servant in Christ Jesus. W. T.
AN EXHORTATION DELIVERED AT THE INTERRING OF Mr. SAMUEL CROOK, Late Pastor of Wrington in Sommersetshire. YOu have heard (honoured and beloved) so many good and grateful words already concerning this faithful servant of God In the story of the life and death of Mr. Samuel Crook., printed An. 1641. you shall find them pag. 42. &c. now interred, that I shall need to say the less; yet something give me leave to add at the Funeral of so great an Instructer, and in so great a convention, for our fur∣ther instruction, wherein that I intend is, the edification of the living, though (for that reason) I shall be enforced to speak divers things that will tend to the commendation of the dead; but what concerns him I shall endeavour to contract, and enlarge in that which may be use∣ful to others. In this our dear and reverend Brother and Father, all generally was good (I speak not without consideration and acknowledgement of human infirmity) and many things excellent, but four things exceeding rare and re∣markable. 1. First, that being of so excellent and acute parts and wit, he should yet preach so plainly, popularly and profitably, and that from the begin∣ning
of his Ministry, when such abilities commonly fall either into obscu∣rity or vanity. In former times the Church was troubled with learned obscurity; much learning in many pulpits, but little light; strong lines, but weak Sermons; In these later times, the Church is troubled againe with unlearned curio∣sity, appearing in new and affected words, uncouth and far-fetched no∣tions, witty and versatile passages and dictates, like the Oracles of Hea∣thens . that may be taken several wayes, but which way they should be taken who can say? By this means it comes to pass that it is hard for ordi∣nary people to know the meaning of the words, and when that's done, as hard to find the truth and soundness of the matter; Those old Sermons, stuft and puft up with human wisedom and Authors, were (much) for ostentation and admiration; These now a dayes for recreation and their better content that have itching eares, but nei∣ther for edification, unto which obscurity is a great enemy, and in a Preacher inconsistent with the Rule of Scrip∣ture, 1 Cor. 2. 4. as it is in an Orator with the rules of art In caeteris artibus id maximè excellit quod longissimè sit ab imperitorum intelligentia sen∣su{que} disjunctum; in dicendo autem vitium vel maximum est à vulgari genere Oratio∣nis, at{que} à consuetudine com∣munis sensus abhorrere. Tul. l. 1. de Orat.. Happy they that can speak as Paul did, as a Father, in the evidence and demonstra∣tion of the Spirit of God; and not as the Corinthian Teachers that were instructors, pedagogs, not Fathers 1 Cor. 4. 2., using the intising words of mans wisdom to gain disciples unto themselves, when their duty was, in a way of plain and powerful preaching, to win souls to Jesus Christ. These Instructors and Schoolmasters had many Scholars therefore, but it was Paul that had the children, and was the happy in∣strument of regeneration and salvation. Our deceased Brother was such a Father, plain and yet full of power in Gods House, unto which I add, profitable also in his own House and other mens; And that I observe in him— 2. Secondly, That being in so much company, yet he was very free from any unworthy words, from empty and impertinent discourses. Many light things seem to weigh well enough in the ballances of Society, but his words in society would hold weight in the ballance of the Sanctuary. Not that he was ever speaking religiously, (yet often he spake of things religious and of them very observably) but still he spake usefully; he had (together with his piety) too much worth and sufficiency to indure in himself tongue-vanity, So that what he spake was, though not still good for every thing, yet good for something. O our idle words! How many houres spent in cōpany? & in those houres how much spoken? and yet when all comes to be summed up, we may pro∣nounce sadly of our words as Solomon did of the world, Vanity of Vanities, all's Vanity. But this our deceased pattern was willing (divers times) rather to speak nothing, than nothing to purpose.
And his words were the better tempered, because his heart and inner man was so little distempered. For I cannot but speak this in him, 3. Thirdly, That on all occasions and in all occurrences, (some where∣of must needs give distast, bring in affliction, provoke to perturbation) yet he was ever observed to walk and beare up with much calmnes, and (ex∣cepting the publique troubles of the Church of God in Germany and at home, which did indeed sadden and wound his heart) with much cheerful∣nes of Spirit. None further off from Stoicks than he in their denying affections, none more neere them than he in composing them; what they would nullifie, he did rectifie. O that it could be said, Hee and Wee! but how are our Faculties di∣sturbed, our Societies sowred, yea prayers and holy exercises pudled with our imperious and impetuous passions? As our Saviour sometime said, This did not Abraham: So may we truly say, It was not thus with our deceased Brother, whose Example therefore I am willing to present, not so much to adde to his honour whereof there is no ned, but (whereof there is so great need) to our patience. Had it not been for this, I mean, that we have great need of the help of such an example, I should (in this and in other things) have suppresd that com∣mendation of him now he is dead, that was intolerable to him when he was alive: I have told you of his patience, onely in one thing (I confess) hee was impatient, I mean, in hearing those things that seemed to set him up, and dd (indeed) advance him, above other men; which leads me to that that I would observe— 4. Fourthly, to wt his rare humility—well were it if we could speak of our faults as he did when men spake of his vertues, that is, with weeping; for when any mentioned his perfections, it did but make him mind and mourn under the sense of his imperfections. My self visiting him in his last sicknes, and telling him of some that acknowledged themselves to be con∣verted by his Ministry, he replyed with much relenting, O that God should make me an instrument of so great a work. I have desired to spend and be spent and to doe what good I could, but with weaknes, infir∣mity, &c. And at the same time he declared that when others spake highly of Wrington, (for Christans formerly did cry up sound men as now they do usound) I never rejoyced in it (said he) for I thought such would not be of any long standing. O that we could think so meanly of our selves with our sow things, with our nothings, as he did with his great things; and be so humble, with our two Talents as he was with his ten! Having spoken thus much of him, (but for our use), Let us now reflect upon our selves, and consider what a mercy we have enjoyed in enjoying him so long in these parts. A mercy to us Ministers; for that saying of one in the University which he was wont to mention, that Pastors in the Countrey did dolare Lapides,
University-Preachers did dolare Artifices, was very true of him (in the latter part of it) though a Countrey-Preacher. Know (Beloved) that all the Congregations hereabout, that have received good by our Ministry, have reason to bless God for Wrington-Ministry and him that was the guiding Pastor here. Our Congregations have received much more good from us by the help that we received from him. If his Ministry were a mercy to us and to our people round about, It was (sure) a mercy to you of this place to whom his labours were peculiarly di∣rected, and it is to God that you are bound for it; For though the noble Patron were carefull to send and settle a faithfull Pastor, yet how came one faithfull above many, to his hand? and who is it but God that thrusts forth labourers into his Vineyard? Set your hearts (I beseech you) to what your Saviour sayes Luk 4. 25., I tell you of a truth, there were many Widows in Israel in the dayes of Elijah, yet unto none of them was Elijah sent but unto the Widow of Sarepta: So were there many affmished places and Parishes in the first dayes of this decea∣sed servant of God, yet unto none was he sent but to you; The more need have you to examin whether you have gotten by this meanes 1 King. 17. 15. a barrell of meale that will not wast, and a cruise of oil (I mean that Spiritual and Soul-supporting-sustenance) that will not fail, and that will keep you from failing and perishing. But the same Saviour speaks to you the second time Luk 4. 27., and sayes, Ma∣ny Lepers were in Israel in the time of Elizeus the Prophet, and none of them was cleansed saving Naaman the Syrian. How many Leprous soules in our Israel, yea Leprous Parishes? yet we may say (upon great reason) To none was such an Elisha sent but to you. Now therefore examin; Is your Leproste cleansed? or, are Abana and Pharpar better to you than that Jordan, to which you have been directed? You are rich, worldly-wise, well thought of, &c. but are you not Lepers? 2 King. 5. 1. If I should speak more particularly to this Congregation, and those be∣longing to it, I would speak a word, 1. To those that did not hear this ever-speaking Pastor. 2. To those that did. 1. First, to those that did not hear him.] That did not hear him (may some say) were there any whose Understanding was so low, whose piety was so little, whose love was so cold, whose hearts, were so hard, as not to hear such a Teacher? You know (Beloved) whether there were not some such here, and wee all know that there be many such otherwhere; Unto whom I wish all good, they being heretofore (divers of them) hopefull Christians, and not altogether hopeless now, as being men led and got away by tentation (for so in chari∣ty we are willing to think) rather than go away out of their own dis∣position; Yet a word I have to say to them, and thats this Gal. 5. , 8., Ye did run well; who did hinder you? Doth any persuade you to leave the Ministry that teacheth the truth of God? This persuasion cometh not from him that calleth you, but from them that trouble you, and sour you and se∣duce you, for A little Leven leveneth the whole lump: Consult your own for∣mer
judgment; where the blessednes you spake of Gal. 4 15.? Once you thought your selves blessed in that Ministry which now you are ready to curse and blaspheme, and then you had not such tentations to byass your judgment s now you have: Then you spake good words of the good Word of God in the mouth of his Ministers, and you spake them (I think) out of the experience of that goodnes that the Ministry wrought in you, and the com∣fort it brought unto you. How comes it to pass that your judgment that was so well grounded, is so soon changed Gal. 3. 1.? consult your future good, Can you understand Scripture without a guide Act. 8. 31.? be stable in truth and goodnes without a Nail Eccle. 11.? make speed in the wayes of godliness without a Goad? (which Nailes are fastned, and Goads used by the ma∣sters of the Assemblies)—If you say you can, where's your humility? If you say you cannot, where's your wisdom? If you speak of all, and say, wee are no Ministers, (as divers of you doe, not because you have reason to say so, but because you have need;) Then where's your truth? For, are not those the Ministers that God hath made Instruments to bring you (if you be brought) & to bring many others that are brought unto Jesus Christ? If any shall demand, may not they that are not right Ministers be instru∣ments of conversion? I answer, If they may be so possibly; yet they are not so ordinarily. Is it probable that God would ever so honour a false and Antichristian Ministry, as when it plants and waters, to come in himself, and give so great and general success to it as he hath done in England? Have any of you, have many of you, received true goodnes from us? (I mean from us, as workers with God and with whom God hath wrought) then, me thinks, you should grant, that if we be not Apostles to others, if we be not Ministers to others, yet (sure) we are so to you; Remember the Apostles reasoning, either Christ is in you, or you be reprobates, & if Christ be in you, and you be not reprobates, then I trust we are not reprobates 2 Cor. 13. 5, 6.—If you be not reprobate Christians, we are not reprobate Ministers;—If the Apostle knew how to argue, you will not know how to answer. Let me intreat you (therefore) by all the tokens of Christian kindnes that have heretofore passed between us, yea, by all the bonds of Christia∣nity wherein we have been heretofore United, to take so much care of your selves and soules as a little to reason the case with your own con∣sciences; Seriously and sadly bespeaking your selves in these or the like words, What if it shall prove at last that the Ministers of England (of whom we have been the Hearers, but are now the slighters) be the faithfull Ministers of God? what if it be found so at the day of Judgment? what if the Lord Jesus Christ shall say, Such and such a one was a burning and a shining lamp Joh. 5. 35., and ye were willing for a season to rejoyce in his light, and then ye run away, shook him of, and said he had no light in him—If Jesus Christ sy thus (O Christians) at that day (and its a thousand to one he will say so) what will you say then? He tell you what you will say then (whatsoever you say now) to wit, just nothing Mat. 22. 11.; for what men have no reason to say now, They will have no face to say at the day of Judgment. And because you will have nothing to say then, Give me leave to tell you what to say now;-O that God would give you hearts to say, This
deceased and most sinfully-deserted-Pastor shall be the last faithful Mini∣ster that ere I will refuse to honour and esteem very highly for his works sake 1 Thess. 513., or refrain to hear; It is enough, and a great deal too much that I have despised the Ministry so long, and quarreled with the light till it be removed, but now I have done with this Undoing sin 2 Chro. 36. 15, 16, 17., I abhor my self for it, and all Ministry-contempt shall be buried in this grave, never to rise again, but to be exchang'd for reverent thoughts of every holy man of God for time to come.— Suffer me to add one word more, and to advise you (that your diseases may be cured, and that you may be set right in the sight of God) to re∣member what you have received and heard, and hold fast Rev 3. 3. and repent. Return to, and continue in, the things ye have learnd, knowing of whom ye have learned them 2 Tim. 3. 14. Object. Why? wee have not learned them of the Apostle Paul. Answ. That's true (we do with all humility acknowledge a great difference and distance) but know (though) of whom you have learned them; And here, though I shall seeme to speak fondly, yet while that I say is said at these Funerals, and reflects principally upon this deceased & ever-reverenced Pastor, I shall take the liberty to speak freely, and again wish you seriously to consider of whom you have learned that which you have formerly received-Not of ignorant men that knew not what they said; Nor of vaine men that car'd not what they said; Nor of Unfaithful men that would say any thing for their own advantage and advancement: but from men that have spent much that they might be able, and have spent themselves when they were able to do all the good they could to your souls. These things are spoken that you may hold fast what you have, or at least what you have had, not to lift up our selves, Tho we knew nothing by our selves, yet we are not thereby justified 1 Cor. 4. 4., but so much we hope may be said truly of us as to make your contempt inexcusable; leave (there∣fore) that which cannot be justified, and in the fear of God Resume that reverence of Gods Ordinances whereby they may be intertained for your healing and reducing first, for your walking wisely in a perfect way Psal. 101. 2. af∣ter, and your comming to a happy journeys end at last.—Now 2. Secondly, For you of this congregation that were his constant Hearers, I have onely three words to say. 1. First, examin your present temper, and compare it with what hath been formerly, and see whether God have not somwhat against you for loss of your first love Revel. 2. 4.. Though a Minister do not lose his first Hearers, yet his Hearers may lose their first love, especially, if it be not rightly laid; Enquire (therefore) whether it were the parts of the Preacher or the pow∣er of his preaching that hath affected your hearts. It was that of which He spake often, that a Minister of parts is unto people, as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice and can play well on an Instrument Ezek. 33. 32.. The splendor of a Messenger (when he is in his full strength) takes many, but happy they that be taken with the divinity 1 Cor. 14. 25. of his Message, and with the God that is in the Sermon; very like is their love to increase, since the longer a good Minister lives, the more of God lives in him and
proceeds from him, especially in publique and pulpit service; and he growes more and more to be of John Baptists mind, that is, to carry the matter so in the course of his Ministry, that God may increase, though he decrease Joh. 3 30.. As this our deceased Brother did much relish that Scripture (when at a time it was, upon occasion, recited to him) so did he much imitate that pattern. Search therefore whether your love hath increased with a God-increasing Ministry. By this you may know the sincerity of your love, for they that receive the Word into a good and honest heart, [b] Luk 8. 15. bring forth fruit with patience; the heat of their love being above that heat of the Sun and of persecution that makes the stony ground to wi∣ther Mat. 13. 6. 21.. Beloved Brethren, These are the dayes wherein the love of ma∣ny to the Ministry is waxen cold. I do not say happy We, but happy Ye, if your love be hot. 2. Secondly, Examin what your state is, and how far the Lord Jesus hath prevailed with you by such a Ministry so long continued amongst you. It was your faithfull Pastors mind and motto, to spend and be spent, and that 2 Cor. 12. 15. gladly, for he was still observ'd to be sad and mourning when (by infirmity or his lecture restraint) he could not be spending. Now why was this? what did he aim at in this? sure, he sought not Vours, but You 2 Cor. 12. 14.. And here, I shall gladly approve you of this Congregation for one thing; and crave leave to move a question to you about another. 1. This I must needs say is to be commended in you, that your Pa∣stor had Yours, your Tithes, his Dues; for though Tithes be now an in∣gratefull word, yet observe, it is at the same time when the name of a Mi∣nister is an ingratefull word also, and when the spirit of Julian the Apo∣stat is up again, on whom this brand lies, that he first invented the taking away of Tithes, that thereby he might not onely overthrow the Presbyters (which other persecuting Emperours did) but the Presbytery and Ministry it self, to wit, by withdrawing that which should support it. Not that we stand so much upon Tithes, as to urge absolutely their Divine right, yet we think it lawfull to take them, and lawfull for others to pay them, yea (while an other maintenance is established) a very unlawfull thing to detaine them, yea, moreover that there is never like to be found in this Nation any other way of maintenance equal in all points unto them for the fulfilling of Gods mind concerning his Ministers maintenance; but that which now we stand upon is, a competent maintenance, which they that with-hold mouzell the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn 1 Cor. 9. 9., fall into that crying sin of keeping back the hire of the labourers Jam. 5. 4., yea, they take a very effectuall course that the Lord of the Harvest may have no labourers at all; Not because Ministers preach for a maintenance, but because they are not able to preach, and support themselves in their cal∣ling, and their Families, without it. Nor doe we speak of these things out of distrust; we say as Mordecai, maintenance for Gods faithfull Ministers will come from another place Hest. 4. 14., but what comfort can they have that with-hold it, either for themselves, or their Fathers houses? Mean-while this may be your comfor of this place, that you have been just and loving
this way. A Minister ought to be a lover of hospitality 1 Tim. . 2., and so was (as all men know) the Mnister of this place; Beloved, I may say, you made him able to be so by doing him right in the matter of maintenance; I do not say, you made him willing, for he was most willing of himself, but you made him able, and found him willing. This I have spoken for your just commendation and others imitation. Now— 2. Let me move unto you a question, and the question is this; He had Yours, but Had he You? can you say truly, My Minister had mine, and he had Me? for he that is worthy the name of a Minister seeks not sheaves, but Souls: O Remember, the Corinthians first gave their own selves unto the Lord, and unto us (saith the Apostle) unto the Lord Ministers also by the will of God 2 Cor. . 5., but mark, that's the method, first their own selves; In the observing of which Method your sincere Paster, who was for you a faithfull Minister of Jesus Christ, is an eminent pattern, who first spent himself for you, and then his estate amongst you. Inquire (therefore) whether you be able to say he hath espoused you to one Husband, that he might present you a chast Virgin to Jesus Christ 2 Cor. 11. 2.? Is the match between Christ and you made? Though he that marry a couple dye, yet, if they be well married alls well; their comfort continues. Happy you if your Pa∣stor married you to Jesus Christ, for though he be dead, yet Jesus Christ and you do, and shall for ever live together. If any shall say, Another may marry me to Christ, though he have not; I answer, I will not deny that, yet all have not the same spirituall art, to manage the motion of mariage between Christ and a Christian soul, and to persuade the match. And I add further, Its very much if they that have conemned the motion for so many yeers past, have any heart to it for time to come. But be∣cause my purpose is onely to oove all men to repent, and I would not leave any in a dispairing condion, therefore, I shall wish you, 3. Thirdly and lastly, to ink upon your duty for time to come. Let that sad note and voice of your Saviour sound in your eares,—And thou Capernaum which hast been exalted to heaven Mat. 11. 23., &c. I tremble to add the rest; but do you that are in Capurnaums case lay it to heart and re∣pent. O think, what? Hath the dew of grace by this Ministry wet so ma∣ne places and persons round about, and Is my soul a dry and withered soul, and my heart a hard and still-stony heart, who have liv'd so long Gutta ca∣vat lapi∣dem, &c. under the droppings of Gods Ordinances here? O let my Pastor being dead yet speak, and let the blessed Spirit of God bring to my remembrance some of those moving and soul-melting words of his that may yet work for my conversion and salvation! And for you that find your selves to have received good by this Ministry, keep it; yea, do not only keep your stock but increase it; what you receiv'd from him while he liv'd, strive to improve (while you live) to the best use, imita∣ting the Disciples who remembred our Saviours words when they had lost his presence John . 22., and by that means strengthened their faith. In special, Remember his Catechism (wherein he will still live) study well that ex∣cellent Guide. It speaks every where a rare sufficiency in him; let there be (by that help) a suitable proficiency in you.
To Conclude, Dust we are, and unto dust we shall returne Psal. 90. 3., and be∣tween dust and dust is the season to do our souls good; God help us to take it; and because of the Uncertainy of that return, to make hast to take it. Teach us, O Lord so to number our dayes as to apply our hearts to wis∣dom Psal. 90. 12., even that wisdom, to be able to open immediatly Luk 12. 36. being (as far as may be) watchfull to do nothing which we would not be willing to be found doing, dying. I shall add no more but what hath been already spoken, (for, How can we say less, and what can we say more?) My Father, my Father, the charet of Israel and the Horsemen thereof 2 King. 13. 14.—O let this dear servant of God live in us, that we may (one day) live with him, and put on that crown which he hath, in part received, and which is in full, prepared for all that love the appearing of Jesus Christ 2 Tim. 4. 8.. FINIS. ERRATA. PAge 5. line 20. for Woragton read Wrington, pag. 8. l. 14. for Corall read Corah, page 9. line first for dit read did, page 30. line 6. for simus pastores read sumus pictores, page 32. margent for Ibi read Ubi, for mercis read merces.
