C409 45097599 171209
A Friends advice, In an excellent Ditty, Concerning the variable Changes in this life. To pleasant new Tune, WHat if a day, or a moneth, or a year crown thy delights, With a thousand wisht contentings? Cannot the chance of a night, or an hour cross thy delights with as many sad tormentings? Fortune in her fairest birth are but blossoms dying, Wanton pleasures doting mirth, are but shadows flying; All our joyes are but toys. idle thoughts deceiving, None hath power of an hour, in our lives bereaving. What if a smile, or a beck, or a look, féed thy fond thoughts with many a swéet conceiving? May not that smile, or that beck, or that look tell thée as well they are but vain deceiving? Why should Beauty be so proud, in things of no surmounting? All her wealth is but a shrowd of a rich accounting; Then in this, repose no bliss, which is so vain and idle, Beauties Flowers, have thir hours▪ Time doth hold  B What if the World with allures of her wealth raise thy degrée to a place of high advancing? May not the World by a check of that wealth put thée again to a low despised changing? Whilst the Sun of wealth doth shine, thou shalt have friends plenty, But come want then they repine, not one abides of twenty; Wealth and Friends, holds and ends, all your fortunes rise and fall, Vp and down, rise and frown, certain is no state at all. What if a grief, or a strain, or a fit, pinch thée with pain, or the féeling pangs of sickness? Doth not that gripe, or that strain, or that fit shew thée the form of thy own true perfect likeness? Health is but a glimpse of joy, subject to all changes. Mirth is but a silly toy with mishap estranges, Tell me then silly Man, why art thou so weak of wit, As to be in jeopardy when thou mayest in quiet sit▪ The second part to the same Tune▪ THen if all this, have declar'd thine amiss take it from me as a gentle friendly warning; If thou refuse, and good counsel abuse thou mayst hereafter, dearly buy thy learning; All is hazard that we have, there is nothing biding, Days of pleasure are like streams, through fair Meddows gliding, Wealth or wo, Time doth go, there is no returning, Secret Fates, guides our States, both in mirth and mourning, Man's but a blast, or a smoak, or a cloud that in a thought or a moment he is dispersed: Life's but a span, or a tale, or a word, that in a trice, on suddain is rehearsed, Hopes are changed, & thy thoughts are crost Will nor skill prevaileth Though we laugh and live at ease, change of thoughts assaileth, Though a while, Fortune smile, and her comforts frowneth, Yet at length, fails her strength and in fine she frowneth. Thus are the joys of a year in an hour, and of a moneth, in a moment quite expired; But in the night, with the word of a noyse, crost in the day of an ease our hearts desired; Fairest Blossoms soonest fade, withered, foul and rotten, And through greatest joyes, quickly are forgotten: Seek not then (mortal men) earthly fleeting pleasure, But with pain, strive to gain Heavenly lasting Treasure. Earth to the World▪ as Man to the Earth, hath but a point, and a point is soon defaced, Flesh to the Soul, as Flower to the Sun, that in a storm or a Tempest is disgraced; Fortune may the body please which is only carnal, But it will the Soul disease, that is still immortal, Earthly joys, are but toys, to the Souls election, Worldly grace, doth deface, Mans Divine perfection. Fleshly delight to the Earth that is fleshly may be the cause of a thousand swéet contentings; But the defaults of a fleshly desire brings to the Soul many thousand sad tormentings; Be not proud presumptuous man, sith thou art a point so base, Of the least and lowest Element, which hath least and lowest place, Mark thy Fate, and thy State, which is only Earth and Dust, And as Grass, which alass shortly surely perish must. Let not the hopes of an Earthly desire barr thee the joys, of an earnest contentation, Nor let not thy eye on the world be so fixt to hinder thy heart▪ from unfeigned recantation; Be not backward in that course that may bring thy Soul delight, Although another war may seem farre more pleasant to thy sight; Do not go, if he says do, that knows the secrets of thy mind, Follow this, thou shalt not miss, an endless happiness to find. London, Printed by E. C. for F. Coles. . Vere. and J. Wright.
