C4221 E432_10 99864692 161526
A DECLARATION Of the Kirk of SCOTLAND PRESENTED To the Parliament of that Kingdom on Munday the 5 of March, 1647. And of a Rising there. ALSO The Marchings of some Regiaments of the Scots Army against the Malignants that goe out of ENGLAND thither. The Names of severall Lords made in Scotland. AND Divers Votes, and Orders of that Parliament. CERTIFIED In a Letter from Mr. ROSSE, Dated at Edenburgh, March 7. 1647. March 15. 1647. Imprimatur Gil. Mabbot. Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, neere the Queens-head Tavern. 1646.
The Copy of a LETTER FROM Mr. VVILLIAM ROSSE, Concerning The Affaires of SCOTLAND: Dated at Edenburgh, March 7. 1647. Right Honourable, THe Convention of the Estates of Scot∣land were very busie on Tuesday the 29 of Feb. 1647. in preparing of their transacti∣ons to be in a readiness to present to the Par∣liament, at their sitting down on Thursday following: There came then an Alarm into Scotland, (supported on the pillars of Malig∣nants, especially English) that the English Ar∣my was marching to invade Scotland, which put the Inhabitants of this kingdome into a
great fear. The Commissioners of the Kirk were then very serious for dispatch of their Declaration to be in readinesse to be presen∣ted to the Parliament. Wednesday, the 1 of March instant, great preparations was making for the Parlia∣ments siting downe the next day. The Ci∣ty very full, Malignants not so much coun∣tenanced as they hoped, so that many are gone from Edenburgh. Thursday March the 2 The Parliament sat down at their usuall place of Assembling, where, after their passing over of the usuall ceremonies for such a meeting: There were many set Speeches made by divers of the Lords and others, concerning their presi∣dent, which is a place as the Speaker is in England, divers were nominated, but it was cheefly disputed about four Lords (viz) The Lord Chancellour Loudoune, the Earle Ca∣stles, the Lord Balmerino, and the Lord Bur∣ley, and many stood for each of them, but being put to the question, it was resolved by the major part, That the Lord Chancel∣lour Loudoune should be Lord President Many new Lords are made here in Scot∣land,
without musing of the businesse, and they doe sit in Parliament, Sir William Coker∣ham is made a Lord, and so is Sir John San∣derson, and Sir John Hamilton of Burlington and others, who are received as Peeres by the Parliament. And the Lord Lowre is crea∣ted Earle of Athe, And it is said that some o∣thers are shortly to be made. Friday the 3 of March, The members of the Parliament being called according to the rule for the Counties and Burroughes, and the severall Commissioners debated, it ap∣peared that (by reason of the great divisions in the severall Shires) there hath been great stirres in chusing of the Members, Insomuch that (in many pla∣ces) they had chosen double the number of Commis∣sioners for the Parliament, one party by the Malig∣nants, and another by the well-affected party, the de∣bates about which businesse took up much time. Saturday March 4 Also was spent about the debates and resolutions concerning the Counties and Burrows many of which are to chuse againe, by reason of false elections, in which not onely marquesse Hambleton on the one side, but others on the other side, have bin ve∣ry active, so that the people have much prejudiced from making free Elections. The Earle of Nottingham and the other Commissioners, presented papers to the Lord President to be communicated to the Parlia∣ment, to take their former papers into consideration.
Mr. Marshall this last Lords day, March 5. preached at Mr. Galaspies Church, and had a very great audience, his Sermon was very sea∣sonable, and we all hope it will doe good, the good Ministers here do daily presse the main∣tainance of the conjunction between the two kingdomes, as the interest of all honest men bindes them to doe, and indeed they speak plainly, and as men that are sensible of their present condition. The English Commis∣sioners daily and hourely wait, to see what conclusion they shall receive from the Scots Parliament, that they may not frustrate the expectation of the English Parliament, nor betray the trust committed to them. And I know they will doe their utmost, that they may be able to beget a right understanding here, of things. One thing is to be lamented, that some honest men seem not willing to be right informed, as yet. On that day the Provost of Edenburgh, re∣ceived information that some English in companies came in, and entred the borders of Scotland, about Carlile side: And that they were come up as farre as Hagewick, and Sete∣rick, which is within 25 or 26 miles of this place.
Yesterday being Munday the 6 of March, the Parliament being sate, were advertised of a great number of English Cavaliers, (and malignants of Scotland, joyning with them underhand) were come into the frontier Counties of Scotland. In which Captain Hall, Captain Wogan, and others, are said to be chief; They are increased to between two and three hundred horse, with some foot, and report that thousands more are comming, whereupon the Scots are making ready for their defence, and some Regiaments are to march towards the borders, to prevent the dangers of Malignants, whose designes the Parliament here, I hope, will be sensible of. Here is some talk here, as if some of judge∣ment should think that this Parliament will not sit here many weeks. But they sit at pre∣sent very close, and rise not till it was very late last night. On the Lords day night last, there came above 70 Horsemen with a small number of Foote, to Carlile and with ladders scaled the wals, entred the Castle, broke open the Goal, and released the Mosse Troopers, and other prisoners, wounded the Gaoler and all mar∣ched together into Scotland.
It is feared that there will be an Army raised to come in, for the malignants giveth it out already, that if the Parliament will not give way for raising of an Army, they will raise one of their own cost. The Church hath finished the Declaration, concerning which they have moved the Parliament for peace, yet the Malignants are powerfull with the Cavaliers par∣ty, and there is many English men ly ng in and about the borders. Those that passed by Carlile, gave out themselves for Sir Thomas Fairfaxes men, untill they were past, and then they declared that they were for the King. Here is much veying by some for a war with En∣gland, but I hope will not prevaile. The Parlia∣ment of Englands last Declaration did do much good here, amongst some honest-minded men, though some others are not yet convinced: and it was thought all this week, all would doe well. This last night came in a packet with Declarations, which will be delivered to morrow to the Parlia∣ment, This night we heare will come in the Earle of Stamford. Mr. Stapleton is not yet come. I hope by the next, to send you better news, which is all at present, but that I am Your Lordships humble servant, WILL. ROSSE. Edenburgh the 7. March 1647. FINIS,
