C4335 669.f.11[71] 99869401 162721
The Cities thankes to Southwarke, for giving the Army entrance. We thanke you more then we will say, But tis the cleane contrary way. VVE thanke you Neighbours for your love For sending for the Army, Which cannot prejudiciall proove, Alas, they'l never harme ye. Nor to the City will they doe But what is good and faire, They will help all the Suburbes too, When frogs flie in the ayre. You clownes and fooles that nothing know But are made for the slaughter, By you ou feares doe dayly grow Weel fit you for theereafter. Did ever men before like you, Send for their bane unto them And court their presence, whom they knew Would but at best undoe them? And give possession of their workes To those whose undertakings Shew they will force men like the Turkes To serve Gods of their makings. You knaves and dolts that &c. May those that on the Thames doe plow And unto our side ferry Breake Oares and armes as they doe row And each man split his Wherry. May the huge Porpoise swallow them, And neer, like Ionas, shore them, And may their sinnes still follow them, And dead, no man deplore them. You skabs and varlets nothing &c. Dee think the Army will regard Men that are so perfidious, And not at length give you reward That shall be home and hideous? They wisely doe the treason love, But yet the traytors hate, And may you them to mercy move When it shall be too late. You lumpish Elves that &c. Did we make you our trustees, to Doe as you thought fitting, And did we give our lives to you Unto our selves unwitting? If not, how durst you be so bold Our foes for to invite And with them treatie for to hold, Ere we thought requisite? Ye trayterous guls &c. May boystrous Thames swell high with rage And cause an inundation, Which nothing but your lives may swage, Let Boreas take his station Upon your houses, and with them Into the River sweep you, Where slaves to Neptunes Diadem May he for ever keepe you. Ye cravens that doe &c. And what now have you galnd, since that You did that sordid action, You may expect we know not what In way of satisfaction? But shall we tell you what it is That we for thanks intend you? We know you for our foes in this, And let the Divell mend you. Ye sordid coxcombes who naught know &c. Alas, you wanted those would swill And drinke your hogsheads dry, That made you have so good a will To send for the Army. They payd you ready money then, But theyl doe so no more, We owe you, and time will be when We will wipe off our score. You scoundrels that doe &c. Now to conclude we give you thankes For that your kinde intention, And those many other prankes Which now we will not mention. And we assure you when time serves, We amply will requite you, Even as it at our hands deserves, But so as it shall spite you. And so ye Rogues that nothing know, But are made for the slaughter, We shall to you your owne play show▪ And fit you fort heereafter. FINIS.
