D974 E463_2 50805838 162211
THE DEMANDS Of Lieutenant-Generall CRUMWELL TO The Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, assembled at Eden∣burgh, concerning Generall Monro, and his Forces, and their surrendring of the English Garrisons. With his Resolution touching the said Army, and all those who shal assist them, in case these Demands be not granted. ALSO, The proceedings of Generall Monro and his Army in relation to an engagement, and their marching towards Stainmore neer Northumberland, with the Train of Artillery, and a great blow given to his Majesties Enemies. LIKEWISE, The Declaration, Resolution, and Protestation, of the Counties of York-shire, Northumberland, and the Bishoprick of Dur∣ham, concerning the two Armies of England and Scotland. Imprinted at London, for G. Horton, and are to be sold at the Royall Exchange in Cornwall, 1648. Sept ye 12
C R central circle flanked by the English lion on the left and the Scottish unicorn on the right and containing the initials of King Charles, all of these figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by an angel on the left and right THE DEMANDS Of Lieuenant-Generall CRVMVVELL TO The Committee of Estates of the Kingdom of Scot∣land, concerning Generall Munro, and his Forces, with his Resolution thereupon, in case of an unsatisfactory Answer. Endeared Sir, THe unanimous Spirits of the King and King∣dome growes numerous and succesfull they leave no waye unattempted, for the recove∣ry or this languishing Nation to a flourishing conid∣tion, their evill actions proves & manifestation to their future intentions, and their affectionate carriage to the
country Inhabitants, demonstrates their reality in a∣bundantly, who by great and vast numbers, resorts to them daily, shrowding themselves under the wings of their protection, joyntly and unanimously adventuring lives and fortunes against the enemies of Religon, King, and Kingdom; and to that end have entred into an En∣gagement and Protestation, to assist the Lieuten Ge∣nerall, or the Forces under his command, to the last man, not doubting but that the great Jehovah will goe along with them, and give his mighty assistance in this great Work, which so much tendeth, to the glory of God, and the advancement of his People; and that the same God which crown'd them with the late glori∣ous Victory, will still be present in the midst of their Army, and with his All seeing Eye and Providence discover and prevent the rage of their enemies; that so He who is the Giver of all Victories, and the Cap∣tain Generall of all Armies, may honour his servants and souldiers with a finall day of tryumph, making them instruments, to sheath the bloudy Sword, and compose all unhappy differences between the people of this Nation. The Country people rise generally, arming them∣selves with great resolution, and have declared their unanimous affections to the Lieutenant Generall to live and die with him. His excellent deportment towards them, unites their hearts in generall; by which means, he hath attemp∣ted may difficulties, and is now got as far as Barwick upon Tweed, being resolved to charge Monro in the Rear, and to retard his retreat into Scotland, if a satis∣factory answer be not given to these ensuing Demands
which he hath now proposed in a Letter to the Estates of the kingdom of Scotland assembled at Edenburgh, viz. 1. That they recall Major Generall Monro, and the Forces under his immediate command out of this King∣dome, and that for the future they shall make no further invasion or inroad within the Bowels thereof. 2. That they forthwith surrender the Garrisons of Berwick, Carlisle, and all other English Garrisons wha∣soever, to the obedience and protection of the Parliament of England. 3. And lastly, That in case these Proposals be not as∣senced to, he is resolved to prosecute his design against them as Rebels and Traytors to this Kingdome, and that all those who do adhere to, or assist them in this Engage∣ment must expect the same mercy. We do not hear of any Answer as yet returned, but Monro declines an engagement, and will not fight, our Horse divers times provokes him to it, who not long since upon their march) disputed a piece of ground with the enemy recover'd the same, and put them to a very disorderly retreat. On Munday last both Bodies were within 8 miles of each other, our horse faced them, expecting an en∣gagement, but Monro wheeled off with his Army, and drew towards Stainmore with his Artillery, so that they are now 20. miles distant, the Lieutenant General attends their motion, and keepes betwixt Tweed and them. Colonell Fenwick with some additionall Forces is designed for the blocking up of Berwick. Durham 7. Septemb. 1648.
Another Letter from the North, communinicating the present proceedings of the Scottish Army, to the Citizens of London, and all other parts adjacent. SIR, The proceedings of the Scots and Irish ap∣peares more visible and inhumane then formerly, their actions are tyranicall, their wayes most insuffe∣rable and executeth nothing but bloud thirstinesse and cruelty, tending only to utter ruine and desolation: they have burned downe, divers stately buildings in these parts, executed some of my Lord Whartons Te∣nants, and threatens others, which causeth the Coun∣try to rise and joyn with Lieu. Gen. Crumwell, inso∣much that there will be a sudden engagement. The L. Generall hath declared himself very galiantly to the Country people, touching the preservation of their lives and estates from the Scots, which takes excee∣dingly amongst the Inhabitants The Committee of e∣states have given out orders for raising of more for∣ces to assist Monro. We hear that Gen. Munro with his Army is march∣ed on this side Appleby, preparing for an ingagement, his forces consisting of about 8000. and it is reported that 5000. more are joyned with him from Scotland. Our Intelligence saith that he is resolved to fight Lie. Gen. Crumwel, and the rest of the English Forces, resolving rather to die, then yeeld ground, unlesse up∣on advantage. Our forces desires to Ingage, but could not passe by the way of Cumberland for want of provision, that County and Westmerland being exhausted, besides the wet weather and mountainous wayes makes cariages
and Artillery unpassable had there been provi; in hose respects we passed by Skipton upon Craven,  so by the East Coast, where we shall have better op∣portunity to meet our enemy, who we are informed is past at Steinmore in the Bishoprick of Durkard, where is plenty of provision and Antil covenanters, who bid them weclome to as much benefit, as Colche∣ster got by entertaining the Royall party. Upon Satterday last Munroes Army randezvouzed at Borough neer Stainmore in the Bishoprick, who mu∣stered neer upon 8000. horse and foot, English, Scots and Irish, well armed and resolute. At which Randevouz we hear, that Munro decla∣red himself at the head of each Regiment, intimating His resolution to live and die with them, and to fight it out to the last man. Then he called a generall councell of all his Officers where it was agreed, That the Scots and Irish s;hould be commanded back to erigh, a the English into the Bi∣shoprick, and that within two dayes they march up to the Randezvours at Hexam Moor in Northumberland, which accordingly they did, where was a great appearance, Sir Philip Musgrave joyning with them with a strong par∣ty of horse: the train of Artillery likewise came up, as also 20 piece of Ordnance: and its generally reported here that 5000. more are comming out of Scotland, which if true, they will make a very considerable Ar∣my. Divers English resorts from these parts to Mun∣ro, who are by their great Landlords incouraged, and promised to sit rent-free for the future. We march slowly, because we wait the coming of Col. Gen. Lambert with 4 Regiments whom we expect
daily. Sir Wil. Huddleston (a papist) hath raised a con∣siderable party for the King, and besieged Cockermouth the Lancashire forces are gone to suppresse him. Col. Fenwicks horse and some Dragoons went neere Barwick, relieved the Holy Island, storm'd Fenham Ca∣stle neer te Isle, in which was a Scots Garrison, took divers prisoners, put the rest to the sword: they sum∣moned Hagerston Garison, but the Scots sallying out of Berwick forced them to retreat. The Inhabitants in Northumberland have pint them∣selves into a posture of defence, and upon the 6. of this instant made proclamation at Morpeth, declaring their resolution to live and die with Lieutenant Generall Cromwell, and to assist him with all that is near & dear unto them, for the vanquishing of the perfidious Scot, who have and are now entring into the Confines of this kingdom, who by their barbarous and inhumane actions, have apparently declared their great aversness both to Religion, King, and Kingdom. Newcastle 8. Septemb. 1648. FINIS.
