E2020A R175205 45097717 171312
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS & COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, FOR The Raising of Moneys to be im∣ployed towards the maintenance of Forces within this Kingdom, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight. AND For the speedy transporting of and paying the Forces for carrying on the War of Ireland. 7 Julii, 1647. ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Husband do forthwith print Six thousand of the Ordinance for raising Moneys for maintenance of the Army under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Ho∣norable House of Commons. 1647.
Die Mercurii, 23 Junii, 1647. AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, For the raising of Moneys to be imployed to∣wards the maintenance of Forces within this Kingdom, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight. And for the speedy transporting of and paying the Forces for the carrying on the WAR of IRELAND. THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assem∣bled, for the due paying of such Forces under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight (as the great and many Dangers and Distem∣pers do require to be kept up within this King∣dom for the present) in such maner as the Subjects in this Kingdom may be no more impoverished by Free-quarter as formerly; But that all Offi∣cers
and Soldiers may justly and duly pay and discharge their Quarters for the future, whereunto they are hereby straightly charged and required: And for the effectual and more vigo∣rous carrying on the War of IRELAND, which Kingdom is in most imminent Danger to be for ever cut off from this Crown, and the Protestant Religion intirely rooted out of that Kingdom, by the countenance and assistance which those barbarous and bloody Rebels do daily receive, Do Order and Or∣dain, and be it therefore Ordered and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, and by Autho∣rity of the same, That the several sums of Money hereafter mentioned, shall be Monethly (according to the ordinary com∣putation) taxed, collected, leavied, and paid, for the purposes aforesaid, from the Five and twentieth day of MARCH▪ One thousand six hundred forty seven, until the Five and twen∣tieth day of MARCH, One thousand six hundred forty eight in such maner and form as hereafter is expressed: VIZ. VPon the county of Bedford, the monethly sum of Six hun∣dred seventy three pounds thirteen shillings and eleven pence three farthings. Upon the county of Berks, the monethly sum of Six hundred eighty three pounds fifteen shillings and nine pence. Upon the county of Buckingham, the monethly sum of Eight hundred fifteen pounds and eight shillings. Upon the county of Cambridge, the monethly sum of One thousand four hundred sixty two pounds sixteen shillings six pence farthing.
Upon the Isle of Ely, the monethly sum of Four hundred ninety pounds eighteen shillings and a half peny. Upon the county of Chester, the monethly sum of Three hundred forty five pounds four shillings and eleven pence farthing. Upon the city and county of Chester, the monethly sum of Thirty nine pounds thirteen shillings and eleven pence. Upon the county of Cornwal, the monethly sum of One thou∣sand two hundred twenty eight pounds five shillings and six pence farthing. Upon the county of Cumberland, the monethly sum of Seventy seven pounds one peny and three farthings. Upon the county of Derby, the monethly sum of Three hun∣dred forty two pounds nine shillings and four pence. Upon the county of Devon, the monethly sum of Three thou∣sand five hundred twenty seven pounds six shillings and three half pence. Upon the city and county of Exon, the monethly sum of One hundred twenty seven pounds nine shillings and two pence farthing. Upon the county of Dorset, the monethly sum of Nine hun∣dred thirty five pounds ten shillings and ten pence three farthings. Upon the town and county of Pool, the monethly sum of Nine pounds sixteen shillings and seven pence half peny. Upon the county of Durham, the monethly sum of One hun∣dred fifty nine pounds and two shillings. Upon the county of York, the monethly sum of Two thousand one hundred eleven pounds seven shillings and eight pence three farthings. Upon the city and county of York, the monethly sum of One hundred forty nine pounds eleven shillings and five pence half peny.
Upon the town of Kingston upon Hull, the monethly sum of Fifty pounds eighteen shillings and nine pence. Upon the county of Essex, the monethly sum of Four thousand five hundred forty seven pounds nine shillings and five pence. Upon the county of Glocester, the monethly sum of One thousand two hundred twelve pounds three shillings and six pence three farthings. Upon the city and county of Glocester, the monethly sum of One hundred thirty four pounds thirteen shillings and nine pence. Upon the county of Hereford, the monethly sum of Eight hun∣dred sixty eight pounds two shillings and three pence. Upon the county of Hertford, the monethly sum of One thou∣sand six hundred thirty eight pounds fifteen shillings and five pence three farthings. Upon the county of Huntington, the monethly sum of Six hundry eighty seven pounds three shillings and five pence three farthings. Upon the county of Kent, with the city and county of Can∣terbury, and the Cinque-Ports within the county of Kent, the monethly sum of Four thousand seven hundred sixty three pounds one shilling and a peny. Upon the county of Lancaster, the monethly sum of Five hun∣dred twenty nine pounds three shillings and two pence. Upon the county of Leicester, the monethly sum of Four hundred sixty seven pounds nine shillings and ten pence half peny. Upon the county of Lincoln, the monethly sum of One thou∣sand five hundred seventy three pounds eight shillings and three half pence. Upon the city and county of Lincoln, the monethly sum of
Sixy four pounds twelve shillings and nine pence half peny. Upon the city of London, the monethly sum of Three thou∣sand nine hundred seven pounds nineteen shillings and two pence three farthings. Upon the county of Middlesex, city and Liberty of Westmin∣ster, the monethly sum of One thousand five hundred twenty one pounds seventeen shillings and nine pence. Upon the county of Monmouth, the monethly sum of One hundred ninety two pounds nineteen shillings and a peny. Upon the county of Northampton, the monethly sum of Five hundred ninety one pounds eleven shillings and eleven pence farthing. Upon the county of Notingham, the monethly sum of Three hundred fifty three pounds nineteen shillings and three pence. Upon the town and county of Notingham, the monethly sum of Eleven pounds fourteen shillings and six pence three far∣things. Upon the county of Norfolk, the monethly sum of Four thousand seven hundred sixty three pounds one shilling and a peny. Upon the city and county of Norwich, the monethly sum of Two hundred forty six pounds eleven shillings and five pence three farthings. Upon the county of Northumberland, the monethly sum of One hundred pounds sixteen shillings and ten pence three farthings. Upon the town of Newcastle, the monethly sum of Twenty nine pounds and seventeen shillings. Upon the county of Oxon, the monethly sum of Seven hundred seventy nine pounds thirteen shillings and eleven pence three farthings.
Upon the county of Rutland, the monethly sum of One hun∣dred twenty eight pounds one shilling and a farthing. Upon the county of Salop, the monethly sum of Five hundred fifty three pounds nineteen shillings and nine pence three far∣things. Upon the county of Stafford, the monethly sum of Four hun∣dred fifty four pounds fifteen shillings and four pence three farthings. Upon the town of Litchfield, the monethly sum of Ten pounds fourteen shillings and eight pence. Upon the county of Somerset, the monethly sum of Two thou∣sand and fifty pounds, eleven shillings and five pence. Upon the city and county of Bristol, the monethly sum of One hundred and twelve pounds twelve shillings and ten pence half peny. Upon the county of Southampton, the monethly sum of One thousand five hundred and fourteen pounds four shillings and five pence farthing. Upon the town and county of Southampton, the monethly sum of Sixty two pounds eight shillings and eight pence far∣thing. Upon the Isle of Wight, Two hundred and eight pounds two shillings and six pence farthing. Upon the county of Suffolk, the monethly sum of Four thousand seven hundred sixty three pounds one shilling and a peny. Upon the county of Surrey, with the Borough of Southwark, the monethly sum of One thousand three hundred forty seven pounds and eight shillings. Upon the county of Sussex, and the Ports within the county of Sussex, the monethly sum of Two thousand six hundred forty six
pounds two shillings and nine pence three farthings. Upon the county of Warwick, the monethly sum of Six hun∣dred twenty one pounds three shillings and six pence farthing. Upon the city and county of Coventry, the monethly sum of Seventy nine pounds and nineteen shillings. Upon the county of Worcester, the monethly sum of Seven hundred and four pounds eighteen shillings and a half peny. Upon the city and county of Worcester, the monethly sum of Forty three pounds five shillings and six pence three farthings. Upon the county of Wilts, the monethly sum of One thou∣sand four hundred twenty one pounds eighteen shillings and nine pence farthing. Upon the county of Westmerland, the monethly sum of Sixty six pounds nine shillings and two pence half peny. Upon the Isle of Anglesey, the monethly sum of Fifty pounds seventeen shillings and ten pence. Upon the county of Brecknock, the monethly sum of One hundred and three pounds six shillings and eleven pence. Upon the county of Cardigan, the monethly sum of One hun∣dred twenty two pounds nine shillings and ten pence three farthings. Upon the county of Carmarthen, the monethly sum of One hundred pounds fifteen shillings and six pence. Upon the county of Carnarvan, the monethly sum of Forty two pounds six shillings and five pence three farthings. Upon the county of Denbigh, the monethly sum of Fifty four pounds six shillings and ten pence half peny. Upon the county of Flint, the monethly sum of Thirty three pounds six shillings and four pence half peny. Upon the county of Glamorgan, the monethly sum of One
hundred thirty one pounds fifteen shillings and ten pence. Upon the county of Merioneth, the monethly sum of Thirty one pounds eleven shillings and six pence. Upon the county of Montgomery, the monethly sum of One hundred twenty three pounds two shillings and eight pence farthing. Upon the county of Pembroke, the monethly sum of One hun∣dred and sixteen pounds four shillings and seven pence farthing. Upon the county of Radnor, the monethly sum of Seventy three pounds two shillings and seven pence half peny. Upon the town of Haverford-west, the monethly sum of Ten pounds two shillings and six pence three farthings. And that the said several sums of money may be duly taxed, levied and paid as is hereafter directed; Be it farther Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the persons hereafter named shall be Commissioners for the several Cities, Counties and Places herein mentioned, to put this Ordinance in execution in the said several and respective Counties, Cities and Places for which they are hereby respectively appointed Commissioners; viz. For the Coun∣ty of Bedford. SIr Beauchamp St. John Knight, Sir John Burgoyn Baronet, Sir Thomas Alston Knight and Baronet, Sir Oliver Luke Knight, Sir Samuel Luke, Sir John Rolt, Sir Roger Burgoine, Sir William Boteler, and Sir John Thomson, Knights, Thomas Rolt, Thomas Sad∣ler, James Beverley, Lewis Monox, Edward O shorn, Robert Staugh∣ton, Samuel Brown, Onstow Winch, John Harvey, and Edward Cater Esqs Clement Armiger Esq; Humphrey Monox, Wil∣liam Duncomb, John Vaux; Humphrey Fish, John Neal, and Thomas Dacres, Esquires. For the Town of Bedford. The Major of the Town of Bedford for the time being, Samuel Brown Recorder there, Francis Banister Doctor in Phy∣sick, Robert Hawes, Thomas Haws, Thomas Paradine, and Mr. Dacres.
For the Coun∣ty of Berks. William Lenthal Esq; Speaker of the House of Commons, and Master of the Rolls, Sir Francis Knollis Knight, Sir Fran∣cis Pile Baronet, Sir Robert Pye Knight Senior, Sir Benjamin Rud∣yard Knight, Henry Martin, Edmond Dunch, Richard White∣head, Peregrine Hobby, Tanfield Vachel, John Lenthal, Will. Ball, Cornelius Holland, John Buckley, John Packer, Robert Packer, Da∣niel Blagrave, George Purefoy, Samuel Dunch, Roger Knight, Humphrey Dolman, William Barker, William Hide, Will. Trum∣bal, Thomas Fetteplace, John Southby, Thomas Morris, and Sa∣muel Wightwick Esqs For the Coun∣ty of Bucking∣ham. Thomas Lord Viscount Wenman, Sir Peter Temple Knight and Baronet, Richard Winwood, Bulstrode Whitlock Esquires, Sir William Andrews, Sir Richard Piggot, and Sir William Cob, Knights, Francis Drake Esq; Isaac Pennington Alderman of London, George Fleetwood Esq; Sir Richard Ingoldsby Knight, Anthony Ratcliff, Thomas Lane, John Dormer, Richard Serjeant, Edmond West, Thomas Bulstrade, Simon Main, Henry Beck, An∣thony Carpenter, Thomas Scot, Christopher Egleton, Thomas Aires, Thomas Lygo, John Lane, William Russel, William Theed of Craston, William Wheeler of Redding Court, and John Doily, Esquires, Sir Gilbert Gerrard Baronet, Christopher Hen, Thomas Wyan, Richard Baldwin and John Barringer Gent. Richard Brown Esq; Sir Gregory Norton Baronet, Valentine Walton, Thomas Shilbourn, George Baldwin and William Short Esquires, Cornelius Holland Esq; Thomas Terrel, Richard Greenvile, Es∣quires, Sir Richard Napier Knight, John Deverel, Thomas Theed Gent. Henry Andrews, John Eccleston Esquires. For the Coun∣ty of Cam∣bridge. Sir Dudley North Knight of the Bath, Sir John Maynard Knight of the Bath, Sir Miles Sandis, Sir James Reynolds, Knights, Oliver Cromwel, James Reynolds, Francis Russel, Robert Reynolds, Thomas Symonds, Thomas Ducket, Robert Castle, John Crane, Michael Dalton, Killiphet Russell, Talbot Pepis, William Lemman, Dudley Pope, Thomas Bendish, Esquires, Robert Clerk, John Welbore, Edward Clench, Edward Leeds, James Thomson, William James, John Chevery, John Raven Mr. Reynolds of Triploe, Dr. Sawyer, John
Robson Gent. Philip Story, Dr. Richard Stone, John Roper, John Parker. For the Vni∣versity and Town of Cambridge. The Major for the time being, John Lowry Alderman, Sa∣muel Spalding, Alderman French, Alderman Robson, Talbot Pepys, Richard Foxton, Richard Temes, Esquires, James Blackley, Alderman Temes, Edward Almond, Henry Lucas. Isle of Ely. Sir Miles Sands, Sir Edward Patherich, Oliver Cromwel, George Clapthorn, John Hubbert, and William March Esquires, Richard Stone Doctor of physick, Thomas Castle, Tristrum Dia∣mond, George Farwel, and William Fisher Esquires, For the Coun∣ty of Chester. Sir George Booth Knight and Baronet, Sir William Brereton, Thomas Stanley, Henry Brook, John Bradshaw, Robert Ducken∣field, Henry Vernon, John Crew, Thomas Morbury, George Booth, Henry Birkhead, Henry Green, William Towchet, Roger Wilbra∣ham, Peter Warberton and William Davies, Esquires, John Wet∣nal Gent. George Warburton Esq; Philip Manwaring Esq; Hen∣ry Delves Esq; Robert Venables and William Massey, Esquires, Robert Greg, and James Louden Gent. For the City of Chestr. The Major for the time being, John Ratcliff Esq; Recorder, John Aldersay, Peter Leigh, William Edwards, Merchants, Richard Leicester, Alderman Calven, Calven Bruen, Samuel Buck, Robert Greg, Merchants, and Mr. Robert Wright, Alderman, Christopher Blease, Robert Whitby, Edward Bradshaw, Owen Hughes, Richard Bradshaw, John Whittle, William Crompton, and John Johnson Aldermen, and John Wyn Citizen. For the Coun∣ty of Cornwal. Francis Buller, Richard Erysey, Thomas Arundel, Francis G∣dolphin of Trevenger, Anthony Nicol, Sir Samuel Rolls Knight, Robert Scawen Esq; John Elliot, John St. Aubin, John Trefusis, John Moil, Hugh Boscawen, George Kekewich, John Trefusis junior, Thomas Gewen, Richard Chiverton, Christopher Worthival, Anthony Rowse, Nicholas Waddam, Henry Wills, Robert Bennet, Richard Carter, Edward Elliot, John Martin, Richard Penwar∣ren, William Ceely, Robert Martin and John Cary of Penwarden, Esquires, Leonard Trecy Esq; Robert Roll, Nicholas Trefusis,
Edward Herle, Francis Wills, John Vivian, Francis Buller of Tregarick, Peter Jenking, John Penrose, John Thomas, James Parker, William Glyn, Edmond Prideaux of Badstow, Francis Courtney, Richard Lovis, John Nicol, Roger Porter, John Jugo, Nicholas Seache, Thomas Waddon, James Eresey, John Penrose. For the Coun∣ty of Cumber∣land. Sir Wilford Lawson Knight, William Lawson, William Briscoe, Thomas Lamplough, Richard Barwis, John Barwis Senior, Esquires, William Armyn, and Richard Tolson, E∣squires; John Skelton of Armathwaite, Thomas Curwen of Sellapark Esq; Miles Halton, Thomas Barwis, Michael Studholm, John Hudson, John Stoddard, Richard Ʋriel Gent. Thomas Croiston, Thomas Crostwhait Merchants, Henry Tolson Colonel Cholmley Esquires, and Ambrose Nicholson Esq; For the Coun∣ty of Darby.M Sir George Grisley, and Sir John Curson Knights and Baronets, Sir John Gell, Sir Edward Cook, and Sir Fran∣cis Burder, Baronets, Sir Edward Leich, Sir John Cook, and Sir Samuel Sleigh, Knights, Ralph Clark, Christopher Horton, William Wolly, Nicholas Leak, Esquires, Rowland Moremood, John Munday, Randolph Ashenhurst, Henry Wig∣fal, John Wigley, and Robert Eure, Esquires, Thomas San∣ders, George Pool, Edward Large, William Savil, and Ed∣ward Charlto Gent. and Francis Revel Esq; Darby. The Major for the time being, Robert Wilmot, James Abney, Esquires, Thomas Gell Esq; Recorder; Nathaniel Hallows, Luke Whitington, and Robert Meller Aldermen, Mr. Ed∣ward Peg, Gervas Bennet, Nicholas Wilmot, Esqs and Francis Revel Gent. For the Coun∣ty of Devon. Sir Samuel Role Knight, Sir John Bampfield Ba∣ronet, Sir Richard Strode, Sir Edmund Fowel, Ed∣mund Fowel Esq; Josias Caldmady, Sir Henry Rosewel, and Sir John Young, Knights, Walter Young, Edmund Pride∣aux, Iohn Maynard, Iohn Harris of Hain, Francis Rouse, Iohn Waddon, Iohn Rolles, William Frie, Philip
Crooker, Robert Savery, Elias Grimes, Arthur Ʋpton, Richard Gilbert, Iohn Mullock of Axmouth, Thomas Crew, Charls Vaugham, Iohn Beare, Henry Pollexfin, Iohn Kelly of Kelly Esq; Philip Skippon Esq; Major Ge∣neral, The Major of Plymouth for the time being, Iohn Barton of Silverton, Iohn Champneys, Thomas Boon, Philip Harris, Ioseph Huntkine, Iohn Marshal, Philip Francis, Thomas Ceely, Richard Evans, Timothy Alsop, Iustinian Peard, Christopher Ceely, Sampson Heal Esq; Sir Gregory Norton Baronet, Sir Francis Drake Baronet, Iohn Drake of Ash Esq; William Bastard Esq; Christopher Sa∣very Esq; Sir Iohn Pool Baronet, Christopher Wood Esq; Robert Duke of Otterton Esq; William Fowel Esq; Thomas Drake of Wiscomb Esq; Matthew Hele Esq; Peter Bevis, Robert Roll Esqs; Iohn Doddrig Esq; Richard Wood Esq; Edmond Davis, Iohn Drake, Iohn Elford, Iohn Tuckfield Esqs; Sir Nicholas Mar∣tin Knight, Sir Iohn Northcot Baronet, Lewis Grimes, Hugh Fortescue, and Iohn Fortescue Esquires, The Major of Dartmouth for the time being, Hugh Trevilian Esq; Peter Specot, William Morris, Esquires, Iohn Foun∣tain Esq; Iohn Bury, Iohn Quick, Esquires, Edmund Parker Edmund Anscot, Iohn Wallacobe, and Nicholas Prideaux, Nicholas Roop, Iohn Vaughan, and Iohn Carew Esquires, the Major of Phymouth. For the City and County of Exon. The Major for the time being, Walter White Major, Ed∣mund Prideaux Esq; Recorder, Simon Snow Esq; Iohn Hackwel, Adam Bennet, Richard Saunders, Christopher Clark, Iames Gould, Richard Crossing, Iohn Lavering, Richard Evans, Samuel Clark, Nicholas Brocin Gent. For the Coun∣ty of Dorset. Charls Lord Cranborn, Denzil Hols Esq; Sir Walter Erle Knight, Iohn Brown, Edond Prideaux, Thomas Erle, Thomas Moor, Iohn Trenchard, Dean Bond, Tho∣mas Grove, Roger Hill, Giles Green, Richard Rose, E∣squires; Sir Thomas Trenchard Knight, Iohn Bond Doctor
of the Civil Law, John Fitz-james junior, Francis Chet∣tle, Thomas Crompton, Elias Bond, William Hussey, Bar∣tholomew Hall, Thomas Ceely, Henry Henley, and John Hill, Esquires, and Richard Bury Gent. William Sydenham sen. William Sydenham jun. John Whiteway, William Derby, George Thornhill, John Bingham Esq; Sir Anthony Ashley-Cooper Baronet, Richard Bingham Esq; Richard Bradret, John Foy Esq; Christopher Erle, John Squib Esqs Wal∣ter Foy Esq; Robert Boler Esq; Jo: Arthur Esq; Lewis Williams Esq; John Arnold Gent. For the Town and County of Pool. The Major for the time being, John Bingham Esq; George Scut Senior, Auran Durel, Haviland Healy, Wil∣liam Scut, and John Melmouth Gentlemen, Henry Har∣ding, George Scut Junior. For the Coun∣ty of Durham. Sir Henry Vane Senior Knight, Sir Henry Vane Junior, Sir Richard Bellasis Knight, Sir George Vane, John Black∣stone, Charls Vane, Richard Lilbourn, Henry Warmouth, George Lilbourn, Robert Hutton, Thomas Shadfurth, Christopher Falthorp, Clement Falthorp, Francis Wren, Equires, Sir William Selby, Thomas Mitford Esq; The Major of Durham for the time being, Christopher Foul∣thorp, Thomas Bows, Clement Foulthorp, Timothy Whit∣tingham, Thomas Shadfurth, George Grey, Gentlemen. For the East-Riding of the County of York. Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Sir Francis Bointon Baronet, Sir William Constable Baronet, Sir Richard Darley Knight, Vice-com. Sir William Strick∣land Knight and Baronet, Sir Philip Stapleton, Knight, Sir William Allenson Knight, Sir William Saint Quain∣ton Baronet, Francis Thorp, John Anlaby, Richard Dar∣ley, John Allured, John Nelthorp, James Nelthorp, The Major of Beverly for the time being, Joseph Mickle∣thwait, Robert Legard, Christopher Ridley, John Stil∣lington, Richard Robinson, and Walter Strickland, Esquires, Charls Bows Esq; For the North Riding. Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight,
Sir John Danvers, Sir Francis Bointon Baronet, Sir Wil∣liam Strickland Baronet, Sir Richard Darley Knight, Sir John Bourchier Knight, Sir William Allenson Knight, Sir Henry Cholmley Knight, Sir Thomas Norcliff, Sir Henry Franklin Knights, John Wastel, Henry Darley, Brian Stapleton, Luke Robinson, Thomas Hoil, Walter Strickland, Francis Lassels, Thomas Challenor, James Chal∣lenor, William Aiscough, George Trotter, George Mar∣wood, Ralph Reymeir, John Waters, Esquires, George Ewre, Esq; Henry Franklin Esq; The Bayliffs of Scarborough for the time being, and the Aldermen of Richmond. For the west Riding. Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Sir Thomas Maleverer Baronet, Sir Philip Stapleton Knight, Sir William Lister Knight, Sir Charls Egerton, Knight, Sir Henry Cholmley, Henry Arthington, William White, Thomas Stockdale, Esquires, Sir Edward Rhodes, Sir John Savile, and Sir Robert Barwick, Knights, Charls Fairfax, John Farer, Thomas St. Nicholas, Thomas Dickin∣son, William Armitage, John Claiton, Alexander Johnson, Esquires, and Sampson Cooper Alderman of Rippon. For the City of York. The Lord Major for the time being, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Sir William Allenson Knight, Sir Thomas Widdrington Knight and Recorder, Sir Robert Barwick Knight, Thomas Hoil, Henry Thomson, John Geldard, Stephen Watson, Thomas Dickinson, Robert Horner, and Leonard Thomson, Aldermen. For the Town and County of kingston up∣on Hull. The Major for the time being, Sir Henry Vane Junior, Peregrine Pelham, Esq; John Barnard, Lancelot Roper, Thomas Rakes, John Rogers and Richard Wood, Gentlemen, Nicholas Denman, William Pople, John Chambers, Joseph, Blades, Aldermen. For the Coun∣ty of Essex. Sir John Barrington Knight and Baronet, Sir Harbottle Grimston Knight and Baronet, Sir William Hicks, Sir William Masham, Sir Richard Everard, Baronets, Sir Martin Lumley Knight and Baronet, Sir Thomas Cheek,
Sir Henry Mildmay of Wanstead, Sir William Roe, Sir Hen∣ry Holroft, Sir Thomas Honywood, Sir William Martin, Sir Robert Kempe Knights, Harbottle Grimston, James Camble, William Masham, John Sair, Timothy Middleton, Henry Mildmay of Graces, Edward Birk head, William Ʋmphrevile, Oliver Raymond, Anthony Luther, Deane Tindall, Robert Barrington, Robert Smith, Sampson Sheffeld, Thomas Cooke, Carey Mildmay, Richard Harlackenden, Robert Wiseman of Mayland, John Eldred, John Joslin, Robert Bourne, John Meed, John Eden, Thomas Clapton, Arthur Barnardiston, Isaac Allen of Haseley, William Gouldingham, William Atwood, John Atwod, Peter Whitcombe, John Brooke, John Harvey, Henry Wiseman, Henry Barrington, Robert Young, Francis Stonehard, George Walton, John Watkins, John Langley, Ioachim Matthewes Esquires, Richard Wiseman, John Langley of Colchester, Thomas Cooke, John Sorrell, William Turner of Wimbich, Robert Vesay, Jeremy Ailett, Willi∣am Collard, Robert Crane, Doctor Read of Beauchanger, Robert Calthrop, Thomas Adams of Thackstead, Richard Hawkin of Harwich, John Aliston, William Harlackenden, John Thorogood of Walden, Isaac Wincoll, Thomas Talcott, Samuel Plume, John Shaw the younger, Francis Willi∣amson of Walden, Francis Nicholson, John Feimige, Robert Talcott, Thomas Allyett, Robert Maidstone Gentlemen, John Brewster Gentleman, Samuel Fryborne Esquire, Colo∣nell Thomas Ayloffe. Colchester. The Major of Colchester for the time being, Har∣bottle Grimstone Esquire Recorder, John Ioselin Deputy Re∣corder. Henry Barrington, John Langley, Robert Buck∣stone, Ralph Harrison, Thomas Wade, Mr. Cox and Willaim Cook, Aldermen. For the County of Gloucester. Sir Giles Overbury Knight, James Fiennis Esquire, Nathaniell Stephens Esquire, Sir John Horton Knight, Ed∣ward Stephens, Sir Richard Onflow Knight, Sir William Hicks Baronet, John Stephens, Thomas Stephens Esquires, Richard Stephens Esquire, Sir John Seymour Knight, Edward
Popham, John Lenthall Esquires, Walter Kirle, Anthony Clif∣ford Esquires, William Leigh, Silvanus Wood, Thomas Hodges, Samuel Codrington, Thomas Pury, William Browne, William Try, Thomas Walter, Robert Holdsworth, William Sheppard, Matthew Herbert Esquires, John Codrington Esq; John Fettiplace, Thomas Eastcourt Esquires, Steven Fowler Gentleman, Matthew Huntley, William Stafford and Philip Langley Senior, John Sarkvill, Anthony Kinscott, Thomas Walter of Hartfield and Richard Aldworth Esquires. For the Ci∣ty of Glou∣cester, & the County of the City. The Major for the time being, William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons, and Recorder of the said City, John Lenthall, Thomas Pury, John Brewster, Thomas Hill, William Singleton, Dennis Wise, Nicholas Webb, and John Dorney Esquires. For the County of Hereford. Sir Robert Harley Knight of the Bath, Sir Edward Powell Knight and Baronet, Sir John Kirle Baronet, Sir Robert Pye Knight senior, Walter Kirle, Francis Kirle, Edward Harley, Robert Kirle, Thomas Baskervile, Ambrose Elton se∣nior, William Littleton, Edward Broughton, Samuell Moor, John Flacket senior, John Flacket Junior, Thomas Rawlins, Martin Husbands, Francis Pember, Samuel Trotman, Iohn Patshall, William Crowther, Iohn Iames, Henry Iones, Iohn Cholmeley, Colonel Iohn Birth, and Thomas Blaney Esquires, Nathaniel Wright Doctor in Physick. For the County of Hertford. Charles Lord Viscount Cranborne, Robert Cerill Esquire, Sir Richard Lucy Knight and Baronet; Sir Iohn Garratt, and Sir Iohn Read Baronetts, Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir William Litton, and Sir Iohn Witterronge Knights, Richard Iennings, Row. Litton, Ralph Freeman, W. Leamon, W. Priestly, Thomas Tooke, Edward Wingate, and Iohn Heydon Esquires, Iohn King Doctor of Physick, Alexander Wilde, Richard Por∣ter, Gabriell Barber, Captaine Scroggs, and Gravely Norton Esquires, William Carter, Thomas Meade, William Dawges, Isaac Pulper Gentlemen, Iohn Healing, Iohn Humer∣ston, Iohn Robotham, Ioseph Dalton of Hertford, Wil∣liam Foxwist Esquire, Iohn Pemberton and Roger Pem∣berton
Esquires, Sir Brockett Spencer Baronet, Thomas Dock∣wray Iohn Humerston senior, Edmund Smith, and Thomas Da∣cres Esquires. St Albans. The Major for the time being, William Foxwist Esquire Recorder, Iohn King Doctor of Physicke, Iohn Robotham, and Iohn Pemberton Esquires, Roger Pemberton and William Leaman Esquires. For the County of Huntington George Mountague, Edward Mountague, Valentine Wal∣ton, Onflow Winch, Abraham Burrell, Terrill Iocelin, and Oliver Cromwell Esquires, Sir William Armine Knight and Baronet, Thomas Templer, Iohn Bonner, Robert Vintner, and William Drury Gentlemen, Master Robert Robson, Do∣ctor Simcots, William Leaman Esquire, Sir Thomas Dacres, Knight, Iohn Baldwin, Adam Hill, Nicholas Pedly and Iohn Castell Esquires. Kent. Iohn Bois of Fretvill Esquire, Iohn Bois of Beauchanger Esquire, Sir William Strickeland, Sir Edward Monins, Sir Iames Oxenden Knights, Henry Oxenden Esquire, Sir Tho∣mas Pierce, Iohn Dixwell, Colonell Henry Honywood, Sir Richard Hardresse, Alderman Sabine, Robert Hales Esquire, Sir Thomas Godfrey, Sir Michaell Livesay, Colonel William Kenwricke, Master Bixe, Captaine Humphrey Scott, Cap∣taine Plummer Senior, Captaine Thomas Plummer Junior, Sir Edward Scot, Master Robert Scot, Sir Iohn Hony-wood, Captaine Thomas Westrow, Captaine Thomas Broadnax, Sir Henry Heyman, Sir Peter Godfrey, Lambert Godfrey, Ri∣chard Browne, Colonel Iohn Browne, Sir Iohn Sedley. The Major of Maidstone for the time being, Sir Iohn Rivers, Sir Humphrey Tufton, Sir Isaac Sedley, Captaine Augustine Skinner, Captaine Richard Beale, Captaine Richard Lee, Master Goerge Newman, Sir Iohn Rayney, Sir Nicholas Mil∣ler, William Iames, William Skinner, and Anthony Ham∣mond Esquires; Sir Thomas Walsingham, Sir Thomas Stiles Baronets, Sir Anthony Weldon, Master Tho. Blunt, Master Thomas Seliard, William Boothby, Edward Bois of Beauchan∣ger Esquire, William Read of Folkstone. The Major of
Dover for the time being; Stephen Monins, William Skinner Esquire, John Twisleton, Colonel Tomson, John Golwell Esquire and Edward Ash Esquire, Sir Edward Masters, John Nut Esquire, and Sir William Man. For the City and County of the City of Canter∣bury. The Maior for the time being, Sir Edward Masters, Sir William Man, Sir John Roberts, Knights; Thomas Den Re∣corder, John Nutt, Edward Masters, Thomas Scot, Esquires; Avery Sabine, Allen Epps Gent. John Ladd and John Lee Al∣dermen. For the County of Lancaster. Sir Ralph Ashton, S r Thomas Stanley Baronets; Richard Ashton of Downham, Ralph Ashton of Middleton, Richard Chuttleworth, Alexander Rigby, John Moore, Richard Holland, Edward Butterworth, John Bradshaw, William Ashhurst, Pe∣ter Egerton, John Nowel, George Dodding, Nicholas Conliffe, John Starkey, Thomas Birch, and Thomas Fell Esquires; Ro∣bert Conliffe, Robert Curwin Gent. Thomas Chittam of Nut∣hurst, Savile Ratcliffe Esquire, John Halstead of Rooly, William Shaw, Edward Werden, and Samuel Birch of Ard∣wick, Gent. For the County of Leicester. Thomas Lord Grey, Theophilus Grey, Sir Edward Hartop senior, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Sir George Villers Baronet, Sir Martin Lister, Sir Thomas Hartop, Sir Roger Smith, Quarles, John St. John, Thomas Babington, Peter Temple, Arthur Stavely, Henry Smith, Thomas Haslerigg, William Hewit, William Noel and Francis Hacker, Thomas Beaumont, William Danvers, Thomas Cotten, John Stafford, Thomas Pu∣chin, William Shereman, Thomas Goddard, and William Jesson Esquires; John Goodman, John Swinfield, and Francis Smal∣ley Gentlemen; William Stanley, Richard Ludlam and Ed∣ward Cradock Aldermen; VVilliam Benbridge. For the County of Lincoln. Lindsey. Edward Lord Clinton, VVill. Pierpont, Nathaniel Fiennes Esquires; Sir John VVray Knight and Baronet, Sir VVilliam Armin Baronet, Sir Edward Ayscough, Sir Hamond VVhichcot, Sir Anthony Irby Knights; John VVray, Francis Fines alias Clinton, Edmund Ayscough, Thomas Grantham, Thomas Hat∣thet, Edmund Andarson; Mollineux Disney, Henry Pelham
Esquires; Edward Rossiter, VVilliam VVray, Francis Thor∣nah, VVilliam Owfield, Francis Mussenden, VVilliam VVolley, Charles Hall, Henry Massenbeard, Deyner Massenbeard, Ale∣xander Emersor, Thomas Rosseter, John Sheffeild, VVilliam Broxholme, John Nelthorp  Richard Bri∣an, Isaac Knight, Edward Skinner, and Vincent Amcotts E∣squires; Thomas Rand, and Nehemiah Rausan Gentlemen. For the parts of Kesteven. Kesteven. Edward Lord Clinton, VVilliam Pierpont Esquire, Sir VVil∣liam Armin, Sir Richard Earle, Sir John Brownelow, Sir VVil∣liam Brownelow, Sir Thomas Trollopp Baronets; Sir Hamond Whichcott Knight, Thomas Grantham, Thomas Hatcher, Ale∣xander Popham, Thomas Lister, Mountague Cholmeley, Fran∣cis Pierpont, VVilliam Armin, Henry Pelham, Edmund Hall, VVilliam VVelby, John VVeaver, Richard VVilliams, VVilliam Dowman, Thomas Disney, Mollineux Disney, VVilliam Ellis Esquires; Edward Skipwith, John Archer, VVilliam Bury, VVilliam Savile, Thomas Cornewallis, VVilliam Thompson Esquires; the Alderman of Stamford and the Alderman of Grantham for the time being. For the parts of Holland. Holland. Sir Thomas Trollopp Baronet, Sir Anthony Irby Knight, William Ellis, William Lorton, Iames Harrington, Thomas Ogle, Thomas Read, Iohn Harrington, Thomas Irby, Iohn Hobson, Iohn Willesby, Samuel Cust, Francis Mussenden Esquires; Thomas  William Hobson, Francis Empson, Thomas Hall, Wyat Perkins, Edward Tylson, Iohn  Martin Iohnson Gentlemen. For the Borough of Boston in the County of Lincoln. Boston. The Major for the time being; William Ellis Esquire, Re∣corder, Edward Tilson, Iohn Whiting, Thomas Askam, Charles Emson, Thomas Welby, Thomas Law, Thomas Tooley Alder∣men; Edmund Tilson Alderman, Iohn Hobson, William Hob∣son, Francis Empson, Iohn Browne, Charles Empson, Wyat Per∣kins, Iohn Whiting, Thomas Welby, Thomas Hall, and Martin Johnson Gent.
For the City of Lincoln. The Major for the time being, Henry Pelham Recorder, William Marshal Alderman, Thomas Marshal Alderman, Alderman Goodnap, Alderman Brasbridge, Captain Origen Pert Alderman, Edward Emis Alderman. The City of London. Sir John Gayer Knight, Lord Major of London, the Lord Major for the time being, Isaac Penington Alderman, Sir Iohn Wollaston Knight, Thomas Atkins Alderman, Thomas Adams Alderman, Iohn Glyn Esquire, Recorder, Sir Iohn Cordall, Sir Thomas Soame, Sir Iacob Gerrard, Knights and Aldermen; Iohn Warner Alderman, Abraham Renoldson, Sir George Gar∣rard Knight and Alderman, Sir George Clerke Knight and Alderman, Iohn Langham, Thomas Andrews, Iohn Foulke, Iames Bunce, William Gibbs, Richard Chambers, Thomas Foot, Iohn Kenricke, Thomas Cullam, Symon Edmonds, Samuel A∣very, George Witham, Iohn Bide, Thomas Vinor, Aldermen; Samuel Vassall and Iohn Venne Esquires. For the County of Middlesex, City and Liberty of Westmin∣ster. George Earl of Desmond, Sir Henry Vane senior Knight, Sir Richard Winne Knight and Baronet; Sir Gilbert Gerrard Ba∣ronet, Sir Edward Barkham Knight and Baronet, Sir Thomas Fowler Knight and Baronet, Sir Richard Sprignall Baronet, Sir Gregory Norton Baronet, Sir Edward Hungerford Knight of the Bath, Sir Iohn Danvers, Sir Iohn Franklin, Sir Robert Pye senior, Sir Iohn Hippesley, Sir William Roberts, Sir Iohn Trevor, Sir Iames Harrington, Sir Edward Powell Knights, the Lieu∣tenant of the Tower of London for the time being, Iohn Glyn Esquire, Recorder of the Cities of London & Westminster, Laurence Whittacre, Francis Gerrard, Iohn Huxley, Iohn Tren∣chard, William Wheeler, Iohn Morris, Richard Dounton, Thomas Lane, Iohn Spelman, Robert Scawen, Humphrey Edwards, Iohn Browne, Iohn Packer, Robert Packer, Iustinian Pagett, and Tho∣mas Swallow, Thomas Falconbridge, and Laurence Swetman Esquires; William Bell, George Manley, William Hawkins, Iohn Brigham, William Barnes, Stephen Bourman, and Edward Martin Gent. Silvanus Taylor; Iohn Honner, Iames Parcoll, Ralph Hall, Isaac Penington Alderman of London, William Leaman, William Iones Esquires; Sir Tho. Middleton Knight,
Edward Carter, Solomon Smith, Daniel Procter, Iohn Hooker, Iosias Barners, Gilbert Gerrard, Iohn Hawtree, Thomas Marsh, William Ball, Thomas Hubard, Iames Prince Esquires. For the County of Monmouth. Iohn Herbert Esquire, Sir Trevor Williams, Thomas Mor∣gan, William Herbert, Henry Herbert, William Morgan, Ed∣mond Morgan, Thomas Herbert, Thomas Hughs, William Iones, William Baker, Thomas Pury jun. Henry Baker, Iohn Parry, Iohn Walter, Iohn Hanbury Esquires; Henry Vaughan, Christopher Catchney, William Blethin, Roger Williams, William Packer, Rice Williams Gent. For the County of Northam∣pton. Lord Fitz-Williams, William Ward Esq; high Sheriff of the County, Sir Iohn Dreydon, Sir Gilbert Pickering Baronet; George Mountague, Iohn Crew, Zouch Tate Esquires; Sir Chri∣stopher Yelverton Knight and Baronet, Richard Knightley E∣squire, Sir Iohn Norwich, sir Edward Nichols Baronets, sir Richard Samuel, sir Humphrey Orme Knights; Iohn Barnard, Richard Knightley, Edward Hanbury, Philip Holeman, Edward Harby, Richard Samuel, Iohn Norton, Iohn Claypoole, Iohn Thornton, Thomas Pentloe, Richard Owsley, Thomas Elmes se∣nior, and William Iesson, Iohn Cartwright, William Lifle, Tho∣mas Andrews and Richard Andrews Esquires; sir Iohn Eger∣ton, sir Samuel Danvers Baronets; sir Iohn Danvers Knight, Robert Andrews Esquire, Oliver Saint-John, Toby Chancey, Thomas Brook, Richard Trist, Iohn Wiseman, William Dreyden, Erasmus Dreyden, William Barnard, Esquires; Henry Free∣man, Francis Quarles the younger, Richard Trist the younger Gent. Iohn Clerk, Edward Shughburgh, Ed. Farmer, Edw. On∣ly, Iohn Parker, Iohn Cleypoole Esquires; William Lewis Gent. For the Town of Northam∣pton. The Major of Northampton for the time being, Io. Gifford, Iohn Fisher, and Francis Rushworth, Aldermen. For the County of Notting∣ham. Densell Hollis, Wil. Pierpont F. Pierpoint Esq; sir Ed. Wort∣ley Knight, Sir William Lister Knight, Francis Thornhagh, Iohn Hutchinson, Gervas Piggot, Gilbert Millington, Ioseph Widmerpool, Charles White, Nicholas Charlton, Clement Spel∣man, Iervis Raynes, Henry Ireton, Edward Ayscough Esquires, Iohn Mason, Gervas Lomax, Wil. Nix, Iohn Martin Gent. Retford. The Bailiff of Retford for the time being, Sir Hardolph Wastneyes Baronet, Hardolph Wastneyes, Edward Nevil, Ri∣chard
Dobson, William Clerkson, Miles Newton. Esquires, Christopher Hussey, Thomas Bristow, and Iohn Pinder Gent. For the Town and County of Notting∣ham. The Maior for the time being, Francis Pierpont, Gilhert Millington, Iames Chadwick Esquires, Huntington Plumtree Doctor of Physick, Iohn Iames Alderman, William Nix Alderman, Charles White Esquire, Nicholas Charleton Esq; Iohn Gregory Gent. Gervas Lomax Gent. For the County of Norfolk. Sir Thomas Woodhouse. Knight and Baronet, sir Iohn Hol∣land Baronet, Sir Iohn Pots Knight and Baronet, Sir Iohn Ho∣bart Knight and Baronet, Sir William Paston Baronet, Sir Iohn Palgrave Knight and Baronet, Sir Richard Berney Ba∣ronet, Sir Isaac Astley Knight and Baronet, Sir William Playter Knight and Baronet, Sir Ralph Hare Baronet, Sir Va∣lentine Pell Knight, Sir Miles Hubart Knight of the Bath, Sir William Doyley Knight, Sir Thomas Beddingfield, Sir Tho∣mas Guibon, Sir Thomas Gawdy, Sir Edward Astley, Sir Tho∣mas Hoogan; and Sir George Windham Knights, William Heveningham, Framlingbam Gaudy, Iohn Spelman, Iohn Coke, Iames Calthorpe, Erasmus Earle, Miles Corbet, Francis Iermy, Robert Wood, Thomas Windham, Thomas Atkin, Iohn Bux∣ton, Gregory Gawsell, Philip Skippon, Philip Beddingfeild, Iohn Houghton, Robert Haughton, Ia. Scamler, Io. Walpoole, Ro. Wal∣poole, Ed. Chamberlaine, Tho. Russell, Robert Wilton, Robert Ier∣my, Hamond Ward, Thomas Wilde, Samuel Smith, Thomas Sou∣therton, Rob. Sheppard, Edw. Heyward, Roger Townsend, Tho∣mas Waller, Thomas Wright, Robert Long, Iohn Web, Iames de Grey Esquires, Iohn Reimes, Henry King, William Coney, Iohn Brewster Gent. Edward Gawdy, Robert Rich, Martin Sedley, Henry Tailor, George Hunt Esq; Toby Frier, Thomas Toll, Esq; Gabriell Barber Dr. of Physick, Simon Smith, and Iohn Beckham Esquires, Thomas Lincolne of Thetford. For Lynn Regis. The Major of Lynne Regis for the time being, Miles Cor∣be Esquire Recorder, Thomas Toll Esq; Iohn May of Lynn Alderman, Thomas Nelson Alderman, Thomas Robinson Al∣derman, Bartholomew Wormall Alderman. For Yar∣mouth. Edward Owner and Charles Gooth Bailiffs, and the Bailiffs of Yarmouth for the time being, Miles Corbet Esq; Recor∣der, Thomas Iohnson, and Robert Gower of Yarmouth Ald.
For the Ci∣ty & Coun∣ty of Nor∣wich. Henry Wats Major, and the Major for the time being; Samuel Smith, Recorder; Erasmus Earle Steward, Thomas Arkin, Alder∣man of London; Jo. Tooley, Jo. Thacker, Chr. Barret, Tho-Baker, and Adrian Parmenter, Esquires; Master Thomas Barret and Ma∣ster Barnard Church, and the Sheriffes for the time being; Matthew Peckoyer, Henry Wats, Samuel Puckell, Mathew Linsey, Thomas ofts and William Symonds, Aldermen; John Salter, John Grey, samuel Brewster, John Cullier, John Tofts, Henry King and Tho∣mas Wasted, Gent. For the County of Northum∣berland. Sir John Fenwicke, Knight and Baronet; Sir John de la Vall, Sir Thomas Widdrington, Sir Robert Collingwood, Sir William Selby  Twisell, Knight; Thomas Middleton, George Fenwicke, William enwicke, Robert Clavering, William Shaftoe, Robert Fenwicke, Thomas Lorraigne Henry Ogle. John Salkeild, Charles Middleton, dward Fenwicke of Stanton, William Babingham, and John Hall, squires; Ralph Salkeild, Gent. Thomas Pye, Gent. Henry Horsley, ent. Edward Fenton of Stanton, Esquire; George Payler, Esq. For the County of Oxford. William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons, and Master of the Rolles, Thomas Lord Viscount Wenman, Sir John anvers, Knight; Iames Fiennes, Iohn Fiennes, Esquires; Sir eter Temple, Knight and Baronet: Sir Robert Pye, sen. Knight; ir Will. Cobb, Knight; John Doiley, John Thynn, Thomas Knight, William Tipping, Robert Scroop, Edward Clarke, Edmund Dunch, d Bulstrode Whitlocke Esquires; Sir Peter Wentworth, Knight  the Bath; Sir Nathaniel Brent Knight; Sir James Harrington, night; Iohn Lenthall, Thomas Tipping, Edward Dynon, Bar∣olomew Hall, William Draper, Thomas Apletree Robert Ien∣nson, Richard Cope, Esquires; Henry Goodwin, William Bar∣olomew, Gent. Iohn Tanner, and Thomas Hales, Esquires; incent Barry, Esquire. For the Vni∣versity and City of Oxford. The Major for the time being, Bulstrode VVhitelocke, Esquire corder, Iohn Doyley, Esquires; Sir Nathaniel Brent, Knight; hn Selden, Esquire; D. Cleyton, Dr. Saunders, Diggery Wheare nt. Alderman Southam, John Nixon, Alderman; Alderman histler, and M. Thomas Dennis.
For the County of Rutland. Thomas Lord Grey of Grooby, Sir Edward Harrington, Knight and Baronet; Sir James Harrington, Knight; Evers Armin, Tho∣mas Waite, John Osborne, Thomas Levet, Christopher Browne Robert Horseman, and Samuel Barker, Esquires; John Hatcher John Greene and William Busby, Gent. Win. Srice, Gent. and Ed∣ward Hor man, Gent. For the Towne and County of Newcastle upon Tyne. The Major for the time being John Bakiston, Esquire; Edward Wright Esquire Recorder; Henry Warmouth, Henry Dawson, Tho∣mas Ledyard. William Dawson, Thomas Bonner, George Dawson, Aldermen; Henry Rawlin, Sheriffe; Edward Man, Christopher Nicholson, Robert Ellison, Gent. George Fenwicke, Robert Young George Blakiston Phineas Allen Gent. M. Pailer. For the County of Salop. William Pierpoint, Esquire; Sir John Corbet, Baronet; Robert Wallop, Thomas Mitton, Thomas Nichols, Humphrey Mackworth, Walter Long Robert Corbet, Andrew Floyd of Aston, Lanceld Lee, Thomas Hunt, John Corbet, Esquires; Sir Humphrey Brigg Knight and Baronet; Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight; Robert Po∣well, Samuel Moore, William Steventon, William Littleton Fran∣cis Foster, Thomas Kettleby, Edward Whichcott, Robert Clive, Ro∣bert Charlton, Thomas Mackworth Rowland Hunt Humphrey Ed∣wards, Leighton Owen, Roger Rowley, William Jone, Esquire Thomas Moore, Creswell Tailor, Isaiah Thomas, and John Prowd Gentlemen; Arthur Chambre, Esquire; Hercules Kinnersley a Thomas Baker, Gentlemen; Thomas Clive, Esquire; Rowland Hill Thomas Locher, and William Cockton, Esquires; The Major  Shrewsbury for the time being, Arthur Wad, Richard Whitehal John Wybunbury, Samuel Sanford, Gentlemen; John Thyn D∣ctor William Child, Samuel Towers, Esquires; Jeremiah Powell Richard Harris, Henry Powell of Worthen, Edward Cresset, Franc Harris and Michael Stevens, Gentlemen; Isaac Shepheard, Esquire For the County of Stafford. Sir Richard Skeffington, Sir William Brereton, Sir Charles E∣gerton, and Sir John Merrick, Knights; John Bowyer, Edward Leigh. Michael Noble, John Swinfin, Samuel Fenwick, Thoma Crompton, Edward Manwaring, William Jolly, Edward Bromston Esquires; Henry Stone, Philip Jackson, Leicester Burder, Joseph Whitehugh, Thomas Pudsey, William Bendy, and John Simco Gentlemen.
For the City of Litch∣field. The Bailiffes for the said City for the time being, The Sheriffe of the City for the time being, Ralph Biddolph, Esquire; Michael No∣ble, Esquire; Richard Draffgate, Thomas Saxon, Henry Met, and Thomas Miners, Gentlemen. For the County of Somerset. Sir Edward Hungerford, Knight of the Bath, Sir John Horner, Sir Samuel Roll, Alexander Popham, Robert Wallop, Edmund Pri∣deaux, Hugh Rogers, Roger Hill de Pounsford, John Ash, E∣squires; Sir Thomas Wroth, Sir Robert Gorges, Knights, Edward Popham, William Strode, Richard Norton, Clement Walker, Tho∣mas Hodges, Robert Blake, John Harrington, John Pyne, John Palmer, George Searle, Thomas Grove, Lillisbone Long, George Horner, James Ash, Esquires; Collonel John Venn, William Strode Iunior, Esquires; John Preston Henry Henley, Henry Bonner, Wil∣liam Capell, Thomas Hippesley, Jonathan Pyts; Richard Cole, John Buckland, John Whitby, Robert Gough, John Wroth, Charles Stemings, Edward Baber, Thomas Bampfield Nicholas Saunders. George Lutterell Robert Harbin, Esquires; Giles Strangwaies ef East Charleton, Esquire; Will. Prin, Esq. and Sir George Farwell. Knight; John Saintbarbe, John Carew, Iames Strowde William O∣range Esquires; and Master Souddersinns, Gent. and the Major of Taunton for the time being. For the City and County of Bristoll. The Major for the time being, Edmund Prideaux Recorder Ri∣chard Aldworth, Iohn Gouning, Luke Hodges, Esquires; Iohn Birch, Henry Gibs, Iames Powell, Edward Tyson, and Robert Aldworth, Hugh Browne. George Hart, Iosias Clutterbucke, Ioseph ackson, Walter Sandy, Sheriffe; Iohn Hagett Gent. Iohn Young, Iohn Orey Iohn Pope, William Grigg Dennis Hollester, Thomas Shewell and Robert Haines Esquires. For the County of Sout a up∣ton. Sir Henry Worsley, and Sir William Lewis, Baronets; Sir William Uvedale, Sir William Waller Sir Thomas Gervoice, Sir Iohn Evelin, Sir Henry Mildmay, and Sir Iohn Compton Knights; Robert Wallop, Richard Whitehead Richard Norton, William Iepson Lievtenant Gen. Cromwell, Edward Doddington, Iohn Lifle Ioh. Button Will. Wheeler, Edw. Hooper, Ioh. Bulkley Iohn Remp, Will. Stephens, Arth. Hide, Esquires; Ioh. S. Barbe Edward Goddard, Ioh. Hooke, Nich. Love, Wil. Pitt, Thom. Husse Richard Major, Ioh. Button jun. Ioh. Woolridge, Edw. Dowse Hen. Cam∣pion. Tho. Bet worth, Francis Tilney Iohn Fielder, William Ball, VVilliam VVither, Francis Rivet, Tho. Cole, Hen. Bromfield fames
Tutt, Ric. Moore, Ric. Moore, Tho. Creswell of Heckfield, and Io Pitman Esqs. Edw. Boate, Iohn Hildesley, Alex. VVilson VVilliam VVouldgar, Moore Fantleroy, Tho. Dowse of Elden, VVill. Geor and Tho. Gale, Gent. The Mayor of VVinton for the time beig Ralph Riggs, and  VVhite Aldermen; Ed. Exton, and Georg Gallop, Esquires. For the Jsle of Wight. Sir Hen. VVoorsley Baronet, Sir VVill. Lisle, and Sir Iohn Leig Knights; Ioh. Lisle, Ioh. Bulkeley, Ioh. Kempe, Esq; Sir Robert Di∣lington, Barenet; Sir Ioh. Barrington, Knight and Baronet; Rob Dillington, VVil. Oglander, VVil. Boreman, Iohn VVorsley, Thom Boreman, VVill. Stevens, Esqs; Edw. Dennis, Ioh. Richards, Esqu Thomas VVavel, and Tho. Legg Gent. Eustace Man, Gent. and  Iohn Dingley, Knight. For the Town and County of the Towne of Southamp∣ton. The Major for the time being, George Gallop, Edward Exto Thomas Mason, Richard VVhitehead, Paul Mercer, and Richa Major VVilliam Stanley, Robert VVroth, Henry Brasbridge  Peter Legay, Merchants. For the County of Suffolke. Lester Devereux, Esq; Sir Edm. Bacon, Kt. and Bar. Sir VVilli Playters, Sir Sym. D'ewes, Kts. and Baronets; Sir Will. Spring,  Butts Bacon, Baronets; Sir Roger North, Sir Iohn Wentwoth,  Tho. Beddingfield, Sir Nath. Barnardiston, Sir Will. Soame, Sir Ioh Rous, Sir Phil. Parker sir Tho. Barnardiston, Kts. Will. Hevening ham, Brampton Gourdon sen. Hen. North sen. Mauris Barrow, Isa Appleton, Hen. North jun. Nich. Bacon, Charles Fleetwood, Rober Reynolds, Ioh. Gourden, Tho. Bacon, Nath. Bacon, Fran. Bacon, Io Brook, Will. Bloice, Tho. Blosse Tho. Scot, Brampton Gourden j Tho. Terrill, Tho. Cole, Ioh. Hodges, Ioh. Colton, Rich. Pepis, Ed Harvey, Gibson Lucas, Rob. Brewster, Theo. Vaughan. Iames Ho∣bart, Francis Brewster, William Laurence, Alexander Bence Squire Bence, Esquires; Thomas Gypp of Berry, Master Manning Giles Barnardiston, Sam. Faireweather of Halsworth, and Maste Thomas Dandy. For the Towne of Ipswich. The Bailiffes for the time being, Nath. Bacon, Esquire Recorder; Francis Bacon, Iohn Aldus, Robert Duncon, Peter Fisher. For Bury-S. Edmonds. The Aldermen for the time being, Thomas Chaplin, Samuel Moo∣dy, and Master Clarke. For Ald∣burgh. The Bayliffes for the time being, Francis Bacon, Recorder; Tho∣mas Iohnson, Iohn Bence, Henry Cheaney, Thomas Gipps, Gentle∣men.
For the County of Surrey with the Borough of South∣wark. William Lord Mounson, Denzill Hollis Esquire, Benjamin Weston Esquire, John Glyn Esquire, Recorder of London, Sir Ambrose rown Baronet, Sir Thomas Gervois, Sir Richard Onslow, Sir John Maynard Knight of the Bath, Sir John Dingley, Sir John Howland, Sir William Elliot, sir Richard Bettison, sir Matthew Brand, fir Tho∣mas Walsingham, sir Robert Needham, sir Robert Parkhurst, sir Ro. Wood sir Robert Gorges, and sir John Evelin, sir John Lenthall, sir Ed∣und Burgesse Knights, Edmund Jordain, Thomas Sands, Nicholas ove, James Sherley, Nicholas Staughton, George Farewell, Henry Ton∣all, Arthur Onslow, Robert Wood, Francis Drake, George Evelin of VVatton, Joh. Goodwin, Robert Goodwin, Joh. Farewell, Hen. Weston, Thomas Lock, John Turner, John Cartwright, Sackford Gonson, Ro. urse, Robert mead, and Lancelot Johnson Esquires, Robert Hullman, George Thompson, Robert Haughton Cornellus Cook, Richard Wright, George Snelling, Thomas Hudson, Henry Hardwick Gentlemen, Willi∣n Oldfield, Herbert Hay, George Duncombe, Arthur Squib, Samuell ous, Robert Titchborn, John Loyd, Esquires, William Wymershall High Sheriffe of the County of Surry, sir Poynings Moore, Thomas mith, and Edward Bish Iunior. For the County of Sussex. Sir Thomas Pelham, sir Thomas Parker, sir John Chapman, sir Gre∣ory Norton, Baronets, Anthony Stapley, Herbert Morley, sir Thomas rsfield of Denne, Henry Shelly, John Baker, Hall Ravenscroft, Edward owse, William Hay, John Busbridge, Herbert Board, Herbert Sprin∣ate, Herbert Hay, Peter Farnden, Tho. Jefferay, William Michelborn ho. Collins, John Board, Anthony Crutenden, Anthony Fows, Francis elwin, William Newton senior, William Cawley, Thomas Middleton, h. Downs, George Oglander, James Temple, Tho. Chase, Ralph Coo∣er, George Churcher, and Peter Bettisworth of Fining Esquires, Tho. enshaw, Wil, Freeman, Tho. Green of Marden, Thomas Millet of arden, William Cook, Nich. Shephard, John Fag, Wil. Morley, Hum∣rey Edwards, Arthur Bettisworth, George Green, Phil. Jermin Ser∣ent at Law, Steven Humphrey, Nathaniel Studley, Robert Spence, Ro∣er Gratwick, Wil. Spence, Robert Heath, John Everenden, Edward anning. Thomas White, Richard Yates, John Roberts, Tho. Chalo∣ Esquires, Capt. Simon Everenden, Tho. Brian, Hen. Peck Esquires,
the Major of Chichester for the time being, Ambrose Trayton, T Springet Esquire fir Edward Culpepper, Baronet, sir Thomas He Knight, and Master Whitfield. For the Cirty of VVarwick. Sir Peter Wentworth Knight of the Bath, sir Richard Skeffing Mr William Jesson, Godfrey Bossevile, William Purefoy Joh. Bar John Hales, William Colemore, Ph. Willoughby, Tho. Boughton,  thony Staughton Esquire, Gamaliel Puresoy, George Abbot, Wal Willington, Thomas Bassenet and Robert Wilcox, Esq; sir Robert ton, Collonell Archar, and Collonell Peito. Vpon the Ci∣ty and Coun∣ty of Coven∣try. The Major for the time being, William Jesson, John Barker, J Rogerson Aldermen Henry Harwell Esquire, Master Matthew Su Mr. Samuell Snell, and Mr. John VVightwick. For the County of VVorcester. Sir Thomas Rous, Baronet, John VVild Sergeant at Law, Rich Cresheld Sergeant at Law, Humphrey Salway, Edward Dingley, Je Buck Esquires, Edmund Giles, VVilliam Hopkins, William Stephe Henry Hunt, Tho. Symonds Gentlemen, William Ligon, Hen. Bron ley of Vpton, William Brown, William Moore, William Collins, Th Cook, Thomas Milward, and John Gyles Gentlemen, John Dor Edward Thomas, William Jefferies, John Latham, Thomas Jolly  mund Wild, Nicholas Lechmere, Thomas Graves, William Di Esquires. For the City and County of VVercest∣er. The Major for the time being, John Wild Sergeant at Law, Re der, John Nash, and Henry Ford, Aldermen, Robert Stirrop, and D niell Dobbins Gentlemen, James Tailor, and Nicholas Wildy G tlemen. For the County of VVilts. Philip Lord Herbert, Charles Lord Cranborn, James Herbert Eson Denzell Hollis Esquire, Benjamin Weston Esquire, sir Edward H gerford Knight of the Bath, Sir Nevil Poole, sir Edw. Bainton K sir John Evelin Knight, Edward, Bainton, Alexander Popham, W Long, Edward Poole, Robert Jennor; Thomas Hodges, Rich. Whither Thomas Moore, Joh. Ash, Rob. Nicholas, William VVneeler, Phil. Sm & Edward Ash, Esquires; sir Iohn Danvers Knight, sir Anthony Ashley
ooper Baronet, Edmund Ludlow senior, Edmund Ludlow junior, lexander rhistleth wait, William Sadler, Edw. Goddard, Tho. Ben∣t of Norton, Robert Hippesley, and Edmund Wainford, Iohn Lisle, hn Bulkley, Wil. Stevens, Thomas Grove, Hen. Hungerford, Edward ucker esquires, Iohn Goddard, Edward Martin, Gabriel Martin, homas Goddard, Edward Stokes, Richard Talbors, Richard Gfford, ill. Iessey, Thomas Baily, Robert Good and Rob. Brown, Gentlemen, ohn Stephens, William Huffey and Thomas Hussey Esquires, Richard rouch William Coles, Thomas Carter, Robert Nicholas of Semley Ed∣ard Stratton, Edward Manning, and Edward Nicholas Gentlemen; hn Dove Esquire, William Ball, John Laurence, and Thomas Hunt, squires, Humphrey Ditton Gentleman, The Major of Sarum for the ne being, Iohn Ivy Senior, Gentleman, Franis Dove Gentleman, hn Read Gentleman. For the County of VVestmer∣land. Iames Bellingham of Levant, Henry Laurence, Richard Salway enry Ireton, Edward Wilson, Nicholas Fisher, Rowland Dawson, Al∣n Bellingham Esquires, Roger Bateman, Richard Brainthwait, Ger∣se Benson, gentlemen. Iames Bellingham of Gathorn, Thomas Brath∣ait, John Cowell, William Knipe, Anthony Knipe, Ioseph Booth Ro∣rt Stevenson Gentlemen. For the Isle of Anglesey. Sir Thomas Middleton, Thomas Buckley, Nicholas Bagnall, Tho. itton, Thomas Glyn Esquires, Iohn Glyn Recorder of London, Iohn ood, Hugh Owen, Richard Wood Esquires, Richard Owen-Theo∣ esquire, Owen Holland gentleman, William Griffith Doctor of Law, illiam Bould, Henry Owen, Paris Loyd, and Richard Mer∣k Esquires, Owen Wood, William Iones, Esquires. For Bracknok Sir VVilliam Lewis Baronet, Hore Games, Howell Gwyn of Glan∣ane, Iohn VValebife, Edward Rumsey, Edmund Games, Thomas wis Gentlemen. For Cardig∣gan. Sir Richard Price Knight and Baronet, Thomas VVgan, Iames wis Esquires, David Lewis, Iohn Lloyd Verdr. Gentlemen, Thomas ans, Thomas Lloyd, and George Howell Gentlemen, Iames Phillips
Esquires, Iames Iones, Henry Middleton, Iohn Lewis, Daniel  Oliver Lloyd, Morris Vaughan Richard Herbert and Iohn Io Gent. The Major of Cardiganfor the time being Iames Lewis of Al ranvahan, Iames Philips, John Iones Esquires Tho. Parry Gent. Abe Grissith John Vaughan Aldermen David Sturlook, George Gw Recorder. For the County of Carnarvan. Sir Richard Winn Sir, Thomas Middleton Sir Wil. Williams, J Glynn Recorder of London, Thomas Glynn of Glynulluine Esqun Griffith Iones Owen Wynn Maurice Wynn, Thomas Madrin Jo Bodarda William Lloyd Esquires, Edmund Glynn Gentleman Th mas Williams, William Foxwist Esquires, Robert Coitmore, Ri Winn, Esquires, Edward Williams Esq. Grissith Bodarda Gent.  Griffith Thomas Esquire. For Carmar∣then. Arthur Anslow. John Lloyd Wil. Davies, Hen. Rice, Anthony Ri Esquires Sir Edward Vaughan Knight, Howell Gwinn, Francis Lloy Nicholas Williams James Iones, Tho. Williams, Henry Price Da Philips, Richard Vaughan, John Mansell, Evan Thomas, Char Gwinn, Francis Iones, Iohn Lewis Iohn Harris, and Geo. Iones F Sir Rice Rudd, Iohn Vaughan, Henry Middleton, and Rowla Gwinn Esquires. For the Bur∣rough of Carmar∣then. The Major for the time being, Sir Rice Rudd, Iohn Bloome, Io Vaughan, Henry Middleton, Rowland Gwin, Thomas Woodfor Rich. Thomas Esquires. For the County of Denbigh. Sir Thomas Middleton Knight, Sir Wil. Middleton Baronet,  Iohn Trevor Knight, Sir Robert Needham Knight Tho. Middle Esq; Simon Thelwall Jun. Iohn Trevor Esq; Robert Soutley, O Saisbury, Owen Brereton, Rich. Middleton, Owen Thelwall, Io Edgbury Ed. Wyn of Llangthan, Rich. Basnet, Iohn Peck, Wat Kyfin. Ed. Tailor, and Ralph Crutchley Gent. Rich. Egerton, Rich vies, Col. Iohn Iones, Roger Wilbraham Gentlemen. For Flint∣shire. Sir Tho. Middleton Knight, Thomas Mitton Esq; Sir Iohn Tre
Knight, Thomas Moulton Esq. Simon Thelwall of  Esq. Tho∣mas Ravenscroft Esq. Roger Hanmer Esq. Roger Ellis, Luke Lloid, John Aldersey, Ralph Hughes, John Salisbury of Railegrige the elder, and Tho. Halford Esq. Robert Gethin, and Thomas Dymocke, Gen. and John Trevor, Esquire. Glamorgau. Philip Lord Herbert, Algernon Sidney, Walter Strickland Esquires. Edward Lewis, Bussey Mansell, Edward Prichard, Evan Seys, Willi. Basset, Humphrey Windham, Thomas Carne Will. Herbert, Edward Herbert, Edward Stradsing John Herbert, Tho. Spencer, Rich Jones, Philip Jones, John Price, Rowland Dawkins. Merioueth. Sir Thomas Middleton, Thomas Mitton John Pough, Collonel John ones, David Lloid, Theodor John Vaughan of Trowscot John Owen Rowland Lewis Esq. Edward Vaughan, Owen Salisbury, Rob. Amoyll, owell Vaughan, Will. Wynne, Rob. Wynne John Vaughan, and Ed∣und Meyrick, Esquires. Mountge∣mery. Sir Thomas Middleton Knight; Sir John Wittiwrong, Knight; Thomas Mitton, Isaac Thomas John Corbert, Francis Buller, Roger Pope, Rich. Owen Brochwell Griffithes, Edward Vaughan Esq. Rees Vaughan, Richard Price. Evan Lloid Richard Griffith of Sutton, ugh Derwas, Thomas Rogers Charles Lloid of Dolobren, John Ni∣olls, Lodewick Middleton, Richard Glynne, and Lodowick Lewis Esquires; Rowland Hunt John Price and Mathew Morgan Esquires; ich. Harris, Robert Griffith Edward Owen, Rich. Griffith, Samuel iggs Gentlemen; Simon Thelwall, Thomas Hunt, Samuel Moore, Sabrel Winne, Esquires. Radnor. Sir Robert Harley, Knight of the Bath; Richard Knightly Richard owler, Edward Broughton. William Beamount, Francis Pember, enry Williams, Silvanus Tailor John Williams, Esquires; John avies of Bringwin, David Lloid of Dissert, William Sugdon of Bre∣g; Samuel Lloid of Knighton, Walter Vaughan of Bringwinn, Gen∣men. For the coū∣ty of Pem∣brook. Arthur Annesley, Esquire; Sir John Meyricke Knight; Sir Richard hillips, Barrouet; Rowland Laughorne, William Davies, Arthur
Owen, William Phillips, George Bowen Walter Conney, Hugh Phi∣lips, Abraham Woogan Maurice Cannon, Thomas VVarren, Th∣mas Powell John Mathias, Hugh Laughorne, Collonel James Lewis, and Griffith White Esquires, George Hayward, William Laughor, Tho. Barlow, George William Griffith and Henry Bowen, Gentlemen. The Major of the Towne of Pembrooke and Tenby for the time being. Haverford West. Elthred VVogon, Ienkin Howell, VVill. Meylor, Will. Bowen, VVil. VVal∣ter, VVill, VVilliams. And be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, Tha the severall and respective Commissioners, hereby appointed for the severall and respective Cities, Counties, and places aforesaid, shall within eight dayes next ensuing, the publication hereof meet toge∣ther at some convenient place, in every of the said Cities, Countie and places respectively, And afterwards three or more of them at the least shall once in every week at the least, meet at such convenient pla∣ces as they shall think fit and appoint for the more speedy executio of this Ordinance; and the said respective Cōmissioners are hereby re∣quired and authorized at the dayes and places of their first meeting to divide and apportion the severall sums of money appointed b this Ordinance to be levied for the maintenance of the said Force upon the severall and respective Wards, Divisions, Hundreds, Lathe and Wappentakes, within the severall Cities, Counties and place aforesaid, according to the usuall proportions, and divisions  rates in the said places, and likewise shall and may there agree  devide and sever themselves for the better execution of this Ord nance into such Wards, hundred places and divisions within the respective Cities, Counties and places as to them shall seeme axped∣ent, And to take to their Assistance for the more speedy execune of the said service in their severall divisions, such able and fu∣ent persons as they shall thinke fit, and to assemble and meet  often as to them shall seeme good, and forthwith the  Commissioners, or any two or more of them respectively are  authorized and reuired to direct their warrants to such  or persons as they shall think fit within their severall and respe
divisions, to be Assessors of the said Rates, which said persons are hereby authorised, and required to ssesse all and every person and persons having any reall or personall Estate, within the Limits, Circuits and bounds of their respective divisions according to the rate and proportion in this Ordinance mentioned, And be it further Ordained, That the severall and respective Commissioners in each of the severall Counties, Cities and places, or such as they or any two of them shall nominate and appoint, shall have power to Assesse and levy the severall summes before men∣tioned upon the Lands, Goods, Annuities, Rents Offices, or other estate reall or personall, in such manner and form, and according to the most equall and usuall Rates for levying of money, for maintenance of the Forces, for the defence of the King and Parliament, or by a certain Rate upon the true yearly values of Lands, Rents, Annu∣ities, Offices, Hereditaments, and according to the true value of goods, Chattells, Debts, or other Estate reall or personall within the said severall Counties, Cities, Limits, or places respectively, And to the end the said Rates be equally and indifferently Assessed, and the monies duly collected and true account thereof made, The said Asses∣sors are hereby required within six dayes after such Assesse∣ment made, to deliver one Copy of their respective Assesse∣ments fairly written and subscribed by them unto the said respective Commissioners, and the said respective Commis∣sioners are hereby ordered and required, to signe and Seale three duplicates of the said respective Assessements, whereof one Duplicate the said respective Commissioners are to deliver to the respective Collectors, with warrant to them to collect the said Assessements; And one other, Duplicate to such person or persons, as the Houses of Par∣liament shall afterwards appoint for the receiving of the Monyes to be levyed by vertue of this Ordinance; And the third duplicate unto the Committee of the Accompts of the Kingdome who are hereby authorized to administer and Oath to the person that shall bring the said Duplicates to the Committee for the accounts, as hath been accustom∣ed
in the Court of Exchequer in case of the Estreats of Subsidies: and the said severall commissioners or any two of them are hereby respectively authorised from time to time to nominate one or more sufficient and honest persons in eve∣ry division or ltment, to be Collectors of the said Mo∣nies so assessed and rated, which said Collectors are hereby authorized and required to collect the said Monies so asses∣ed; and the said Commissioners, or any three or more of them are hereby authorized to allow and pay to the said respective Collectors, and their subcollectors one penny a piece in the pound for their paines in collecting the said monies, and one penny in the pound to the Commissioners Clerks respectively for their pains in faire writing, the said Afsessements, and Duplicates, And if any person shall re∣fuse or neglect to pay any sum of money, whereat he shall be rated or assessed, That then it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said Collectors, or any of them who are hereby required and authorized thereunto to levy the sum so asses∣ed by distresse and sale of the goods of such person so refu∣sing, or neglecting to pay, deducting the sum assessed and the reasonable charges of distrening, and restore the overplus to the owner thereof: and to break open any House, Chest, trunk, box or other thing where any such goods are, and to call to their assistance any of the Trained bands, or any other forces within the Cityes, Counties or places where any resi∣stancy shall be made, or any other person or persons whatso∣ever, which said forces and persons are hereby required to be aiding and assisting in the premises, as they shall answer the contrary at their perills. And if any question or difference happen upon the taking of such distresse between the parties distrained or distreining, The same shall be ended and deter∣mined by the said Cōmissioners, or any two or more of them And the said severall Commissioners or any two or more of them are hereby authorised to use such other lawfull wayes or meanes for the speedy levying of the said assessements, as to them shall be thought fit; and if any person or persons; shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessement, and convey his or their Goods, or other personall Estate, whereby the
sum of money so assessed, cannot be levyed according to this Ordinance, then the said respective Commissioners or any two or more of them are hereby authorized to imprison the persons & sequester the estate of every such person for the ad∣vancement of the said service, & the tenants of all Houses and Lands which shall be rated by vertue of this Ordinance, are hereby required and authorised to pay such summes of mo∣ney as shall be rated upon such House, and Lands, and to deduct out of thir Rents, so much of the said rates as in re∣spect of the Rents of every such House and Lands, the Land∣lords should, or ought to pay and beare, and the Landlords both mediate and immediate, according to their respective interest are hereby required to allow-such deductions, and payments upon the receipt of the residue of their Rents: And be it provided, that every Tenant paying the said Asses∣ment, shall be acquitted and discharged, for so much money as the said assessement shall amount unto, as if the same had been actually paid unto such person or persons unto whō his Rents should have been due and payable. Provided also & be it Ordained; That all Fee-farme Rents or other Rents due to his Majestie all Rents, and other summes reserved by the late Court of Wards, out of any Wards, Infants, or Lunatick estates and all other manner of Rents payments, and sums of money, and all Annuities issuing out of any Lands within any City or County, shall be liable towards the payment of any sum by this Ordinance to be Taxed & Leavied. And all the Tenants of any Fee-farme Rent, other Rent, summes of money, or Annuities aforesaid, are hereby directed & authorized to pay them proportionably accor∣ding to the Rates and Assessements by this Ordinance ap∣pointed and Ordained. And all such Tenants shall be here∣by saved & kept harmelesse by authority of both Houses of Parliament from any further payment of such portion of any such Rent, Rents Sums or Annuities either to the Ex∣chequer, to the Cōmittee of the Revenue, to the Court of wards, or to any other person or persons to whom any such Rent Rents payments, sums of mony, or annuities as afore∣said, shall or ought to be paid, to all intents and purposes
whatsoever, as fully, and as amply as if they had paid the same into the Exchequer to the Committee of the Revenue, or to any person or persons, to whom the same is reserved & become due. And if any diffrence shall arise between Land∣lord and Tenant, or any other concerning the said rates, The said several Commissioners or any two or more of them in their severall divisions have hereby power to settle the same, as they shall think fit. And it is further ordained that if any person or persons, shall find him or themselves agrieved, that he or they is or are over rated, and shall within six daies after demand made, complain to the Commissioners who si∣gned or allowed his or their assessement, the major part of the said Commissioners who signed or allowed his or their asses∣ment, shall have power upon examination within 8 dayes after the demand as aforesaid, to relieve such person or per∣sons as they shall see cause: and the said collectors and every of them are hereby required from time to time to pay such sm and summes of money as shall be by them collected by vertue of this Odinance, to such person or persons as the houses of Parliament shall afterwards appoint for the recei∣ving of the monies to be levied by vertue of this Ordinance. And be it further ordained by the said Lords and Commons that if any person or persons shall wilfully neglect or refuse to perform his duty in the due and speedy execution of this present Ordinance, the said respective Commissioners, or any five, or more of them, have hereby power to impose upon such person or persons so refusing or neglecting their duties such fine or fines, as to them shal be thought fit, and cause the same to be levied by distresse and sale of goods in manner and form aforesaid; provided that no fine to be imposed by any of the said Commissioners shall for any one offence exceed the sum of twenty pounds, to be paid for the Forces raised by ver∣tue of this ordinance, and that no fine to be imposed upon a∣ny Assessor, Collector or other person to be imployed by the said Commissioners in the said service, shall for any Of∣fence exceed the summe of forty shillings, which said fine not exceeding forty shillings shall and may be assefsed and im∣posed by the said cōmissioners, or any three or more of them
and that no priviledged place, or person, Body politique or Corporate within the Cities, Counties, and places aforesaid, shall be exempted from the said Assessements and Taxes. And be it further Ordained, that the said severall and respective Commissioners, and every of them shall from time to time give a true and perfect accompt of all their doings and proceedings in the execution of this Ordinance to the two houses of Parli∣ament, or to suck persons as they shall appoint; Provided alwaies that such Rates and assessments that shall bee made by vertue of this Ordinance upon any Peeres, Members, Assistants, or At∣tendants upon either of the Houses of Parliament, for any Rate or Tax made within the Cities of London and Westminster, or Lines of Communication, shall before the same be Leavied, be presented to the respective Houses, where any Peeres, Mem∣bers, Assistants, or Attendants shall be concerned therein re∣spectively, and by such respective House allowed, and approved of, any thing in this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstand∣ing, provided also, that every Lord Lievtenant who is not disa∣bled by Ordinance of Parliaments to sit in the house of Peeres shall in their severall and respective Counties be Commissio∣ners now appointed by this Ordinance. Provided alwaies, That nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be extended to charge either of the Universities, or any of the Colledges, or Halls within the said Universities, nor any the Rents and Revenues due and payable to the said Universi∣ties or Colledges, or any of them, nor to charge any Master, Fellow, or Schollar of any of the said Colledges, nor any Rea∣der, Officer, or Minister of the said Universities, or Colledges, or any of them for and in regard of any stipend, wages, or pro∣fit whatsoever arising or growing due to them, or any of them, in respect of their said severall places, and imployments in the said Vnivesities; and that nothing in this Ordinance contained shall be extended to charge any of the Colledges of Winchester, Eaton or Westminster, or any Hospitall, or Almes-house, or any free Schoole, or any the Rents and Revenues due and payable to them, or any of them; and that the Tenant, and Tenants of all
and every the said Vniversities, Colledges, Halls, Hospitalls, Almes-houses, and free Schooles respectively, shall be charged by vertue of this Ordinance, for so much onely as the Lands and Tenements held by the said Tenant, or Tenants respectively are worth by the yeare, over and above the Rent or Revenue there∣fore respectively due or payable to the said Vniversities, Col∣ledges, Halls, Hospitalls, and Almes-houses, or any of them re∣spectively, any thing in this present Ordinance to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliament. FINIS.
