H121 E462_27 99862743 114919
Knaves and Fooles IN FOLIO. Discovered, and then Advised, that once at the last they will grow both wise and honest. Or, A Meanes to undeceive, and so to beget a right understanding and judgement throughout the three Kingdomes, hitherto deluded by the aforesaids. Dedicated with all respectivenesse both for discovery and caution against the aforesaids, to all the wise and honest of the three Nations, whom wee highly prize and honour, especially the Honourable Citie of London, whose goodnesse, piety, easie be∣trust, and credulity of such unworthies, hath been too much wrought upon and abused by depraved Polititians of all sorts. In which Tract is shewed the wickednesse of the one side in their severall pretences, and the weaknesse on the other side, in being through too much credulity surprized and circumvented by such pretenders, who intend not what they pretend; but bave their own self-ends to com∣passe under such pretexts.—Conceived very usefull to be taken know∣ledge of, by all sorts whatsoever. For that wee hope the Reader will finde himselfe fully satisfied thereby, which may probably much check, if not totally break the neck of this Ʋncivill Civill Warre. The deafe Adder will not heare, charme thou never so wisely, nor will fooles bray'd in morters, forsake their follies. But rebuke a wise man and he will love thee,—whereas a foole rebuked will hate thee. The Contents of the Booke are in the next Page. LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons for R. H. In Queens-head-Alley. 1648.
The Contents of the Booke in general are about divers errours and mistakes of the peo∣ple concerning the Kingdome, the Parliament, the King, and lastly themselves in particular, fully cleared, and all, or most of their Objections answered. The severall particular Contents are as followeth. 1. THat the State at large is King, and the King so called is but its Steward or highest Officer; also not selfely highest, but made so by the favour of the people, in opposition to particulars, not the generall, see Sect. 46. 58, 59. 2. That the welfare of the same State in Peace, Justice, and safety, &c. is the end of the said Steward and Officer, and so is it the Highest power and so King and Soveraign of all Deputy-powers whatsoever, &c. see 46 58 59. 3. The peoples errour in their vast acceptation of the title, King of Eng∣land, &c. cleered at Sect. 63. the margent also. So concerning his Dues or Rights any way, as the Crown, Throne, Scepter, &c. see 53 'th margent, so all of 58. 4. The peoples unjust Objections and Exceptions against the Parliament answered, and their just ones complyed too, and provided for, at 29. 30. 47, 48. to 56, 57. As for Royallists and Malignants in speciall. See 55. 5. That the Parliament (as they say) hath wronged them more then the King: and that they are as very slaves as the King can or will make them, &c. see the next afore: so also in full, sect. 71. 6. Till the King come home (as they say) no Peace nor settlement will be. Answered at—72. 7. Their mistakes and errours about the Treaty; also the wicked policy of some to deceive the simple about the same, discovered: see Sect. 21. and Ise∣where. 8. That they, (as they say) fight for the Kingdome and themselves, and not against, &c. In fighting for the King against the Parliament; also that they ought to fight for the Kings Rights, Dues, & cs. the Covenant likewise binding tbem thereto.—73.
9. They fight against the Parliament as wrongers of the King and them∣selves, &c. 74. 10. Concerning Religion, so Independents and Sects, the peoples mi∣stakes and exceptions about them, cleered, sect. 54. see the margent also. 11. Divers Quaeries concerning Treason, Rebellion, and disobedience, in relation to the State at large, the Parliament, the King, and the Army; al∣so concerning sideing with, or against any of them, or newtralizing, usefully resolved, satisfyed, and cleered, from sect. 59. to 63. 12. An addition of some Quaeries or Particulars more concerning the next aforesaid Subject, set downe, because omitted there, as at sect. 65, 66, 67. 13. The title King not rightly translated from any Language: see sect. 63. all the margent. 14. Also who are Murtherers and Theeves in this Warre; who not, see sect. 68, 69. 15. An application to the Parliament, at sect. 64. 16. Another to London, at sect. 63.
TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, IF our Adversaries write all, or any thing, and we nothing at all, the conquering Sword will bee conquered by the Pen; so also, Justice, Piety, and Purity by pravities—It may not bee, which rather then it shall, we the meanest of many, have in love to justice, and integrity, for the common good of this our distracted and almost destroyed Nation, adventured the combat: For we expect rather wicked (though weake Sophisticall, and brangling) oppositions, then a genuine Reply, or Compliance. So rest I thine, S. H.
GOod Reader, our earnest desire to give full satisfaction, hath inlarged the Margine, which I pray thee faile not to read, lest thou come short of our intention,—thine instruction—
Knaves & Fooles In Folio Discovered and advised. SECTION I. I Alwayes took Men for Men, till now of late; and now I finde them Fiends, and Monsters, and withall monstrous Fooles: Monsters they are, as murthering men like themselves, and in murthering themselves also, by in inforcing o∣thers defensively to kill them; which in the in∣forcer, is murther, in the inforced killing: I say, unjust offenders or defenders, are murthe∣rers: But the just offender, or defender, may kill, but cannot murther. 2. But to the poynt, There is a crew of Lunsford, Langdale, Goring the Monopolist, Culpepper, Hopton, Glenham. &c. Under the Kings, the Princes, or Dukes names, (which the silly people idolatrize) they proclaim, summon, or demand Forts, Towers, Towns, Castles, &c. And bribe for them, write letters, give commissions, and all is for themselves, &c. Will the Lords of their own yeeld them up to the treacherous Steward, their right and might, &c? crafty knaves and tray∣tors lately returned into the Kingdome, who formerly pretended the King, but intended themselves onely; so politickly to deceive the peo∣ple, they made use of the Kings name to draw the people on their side, who thought they fought for the King, but it was to raise the fortunes of these fellowes, by raising themselves. And thus those crafty knaves caused the poore ignorant sottish people to murther one ano∣ther to make themselves great; for which the Fooles were jeered by these Knaves, &c. And withall these Knaves applauded and magnified themselves for this their act of gullery and knavery.
3. The same persons are now come again to act the second, yet The Scot will also gull fools under the same pretenses, and then Beavers must vaile Bonnets to Blew-caps. the same part or Tragedy, to the same Tune, under the same pretences for the King, Liberties, Lawes, &c. But it's for the same end of selfe∣investment and advancement, as afore unto their own, and above their own if they can. 4. For they (Demetrius-like) care not a Rush for Diana: so, nor they for the King, but to King themselves. Or, as the one lived by making silver Shrines, and these by Shrines of Silver. 5. For what's the King, or Diana to either of them, but as con∣ducing? 6. What mad fooles are all sorts to be so gul'd, and led by the nose, and jeet'd at for their folly? to think these Rake-shames, who fought against the Kingdome, as before, under pretence for the King, (a fine piece of As against the Kingdom, the Kings King, &c. treason) yet all to bring about their owne ends, as to advance themselves over the Kingdome, and King it both over it and the King; yet shew the King to the people. Who but fooles, I say, can think these fight for the King, &c. and not for themselves? And how agrees it with the duty of faithfulnesse to the Kingdome (their Mother) to fight for the King her servant (did they truly so) against it See to it yee fooles what you doe, they have no com∣mission from the King, nor can the King give Commis∣sion,—would he give it. or her, and so against theire own also, in conclusion. 7. Is it possible? Can Libertines settle the Liberties of others? or the irreligious Religion? Can the godlesse be for God? Can con∣traries concentrize? &c. 8. Their return now, is but to serve their own turn, though their pretences be as afore: It's onely, I say, to cause the people (under co∣lour as for the King, Religion, and Liberties) to aid them (to the mur∣thering of one another) to help them to their lands, livings and Do fooles, do, spoyle your grain, and so your gaine, by rampant hors∣men. Sowed you to reap so? Doe, send them money and means to inable them to take away your meanes, &c. meanes, as also their preferments, offices, Monopolies again, &c. 9. Fooles that you are, besides the aforesaids, it's also to conquer you by your selves, by your follies, &c. As by your ignorance, credulity, and easie betrust, and then to rule over you as Conquerours, and put all on the King, as if onely his doings; for which they are hypocriti∣cally sorry, but cannot help it, though they be the onely helpers and hurters, as having power, but not wit, but wilfulnesse. 10. You have fought against them formerly for the kingdome, and your selves; as, for your Religion and Liberties, &c. Why fight you for such as fought against you, and you against them in the foresaids? and they have still the same intention you fooles, see you not your folly? Will not braying in a mortar make you leave it, and grow wise? I see you have no other eyes but eyes, &c,
11. The King fought against you in the same particulars, and you against him by way of defence, for your selves. He fights still, yet more covertly and cunningly, against you, for the same ends; and by you, to end you, and begin himselfe a-new. 12. Why fight you not against him, as afore? Or why fought you against him before? Or why, of all whyes, fight you now for him, or on his side, against your selves, and your posterities? Sure you are besides your selves, that you thus side not with your selves, but a∣gainst, &c. 13. Fooles of all sorts, what think you? Will not the King and Are not those Clergymen, so all sorts tray∣tors, that be∣tray their countrey so? Are they not murtherers that give way to the peoples murthering for their own ends; how then to plot all? &c. these Traytors, these Prevaricators, &c. be revenged on all sorts, Presbyters as Independents, Layicks as Clergy-men, for outing him the Viceroy, and these his vicious Royalists, and his pragmaticall Prelats? Do Presbyter, do, flatter thy selfe, as Agag, the feare of death is past: But know (young man) for all this, thou shalt come to judgement; and as thy sword hath made many a woman childlesse, so shall thy mother be chidlesse this day—Precipitation waits on prostraters, &c. 14. And you Citizens, as civilly and demurely as you look, it will not do, you have had a finger in the pye, &c. It's you monied the Ar∣mies, and the Scots against the King: so against the Prelats, and that Faction; it will fraction you, if ever they come to be whole againe: they may Come in, my Lord, come in: but for I this Jael drives tbe naile into his Temples. smile on you, and you may (Agag-like) flatter and befoole your selves with the feare of death is past; but be sure they will smite you under the fifth rib. 15. And what can you expect from such Leaders and Comman∣ders as aforesaid, but to be led like slaves, or beasts, and commanded like fooles? What are the Citizens as very fooles as the foole? For shame, learn wit and wisdome, or suffer like wiseakers, &c. 16. For my part, I did never see such adventurous fooles in all my life, that will hazard Life, Liberties, and Religion, &c. on bare words; of the woordy, of irreligious Rakeshames, that helpt to perjure it in the North, and call God to witnesse it, that they intended no such thing as raising of Armes, though raising of Arms was their onely intention. 17. Words and Mottoes for God, Religion, &c. are but words, and words are made of lettetrs, and yet letters are lets to the Opinion pi∣nions up judgement. understan∣ding of many, when they look at them, and not to things, to real∣ties, &c.
18. You fooles of all sorts, Is it nothing to engage Life, Liberty and Religion on bare words of such Recreants? What, for nothing? Are the aforesaids things of no value? In other matters you will not trust the Trusty without security, no not with trivials, and will you trust the trustlesse with life, Religion, livelihood, and liberties? You fooles, why engage you, or think to engage, before they ingage suffici∣ent security, that these things (they having victorized) you shall have without any intrusions to your hurt or confusion, &c. You Calves, will you go like Oxen to the slaughter, or like Fooles to the stockes with laughter? &c. 19. Well, the King they will have home, I that they will, and so Note. If he come in a conquerour, there is no law but lust, no lives, liber∣ties, religion, or estates, but ad placitum. Then the Mi∣litia his, he wil master all at his pleasure; with the Navie he will bring in Forraigners to force all, and he will gar∣rison all Countries with his Faction, and inforce the Countries to pay for the rods that must whip them. And he and his Queen will jeere, scorn, and insult over the foolish English, and make them work to maintain their revelling, &c. He will also disarm all, & onely Arm his party: Then will he do with you, so yours, to take your Sonnes and Daughters, your Fields and Vineyards as he pleaseth. will you: more knaves and fooles are you both. Nay, are you not mad men as well as fooles? Will you have him home without cau∣tions and security from him and them, against his and their beslaving you? If you bring him home like a Conquerour, it's you the Con∣querours are conquered, and leave your posterities slaves, and capable of cursing you their foolish fathers, &c. I have told you before, and now tell you again, They pretend the King onely to draw you on, but onely intend themselves, &c. 20. Was Kent never conquered hitherto? And shall their follies now foile and conquer them? Fooles, be wise for shame, know and be cer∣tain, See Sect. 44. if fit to treat with. So Sect. 46. Is not the Kingdome Lord & King, &c. Se Sect. 46. Is it for the ho∣nour of the guiltless Lord to treat with his guilty ser∣vant? I am a∣basht at its basenesse, &c. that you be secured (and that not with words, for they are wind) of safe and just conditions before you entertain him, that so you and your posterities may live free, according to your birth-rights, and not as slaves. Remember the Northern protestations and oathes broken, being so solemnly taken at his coronation; doe they not crowne all for fooles that trust any further then groundedly secured? 21. To treate with, is the pretence, but the intention is to make use of the ignorant and giddy-brain'd idolatrizing people, to throng in threans and multitudes to him, and so over-power themselves and theirs; yea, the whole kingdome with their weight and levity. He will then scorn to treat or intreat, but will intreat all his opposers as his de∣posers. How think you fools? will that be? Surely to your not being; when it will bee too late to help either your selves or your posterities, &c.
22 Oh but the Citizens, no, nor the Countries, will not fight a∣gainst Kent, Essex, nor any the Countries, they will rather fight for them, &c. But know they what's for them?—See Sect. 24, 27, 33. 23. What, are the grave Citizens such fooles, what if against Kent or Essex be for them, however for the kngdome: how then, I say? 24. Is all Kent or Essex, or the Countries thus befool'd? I cannot think it; but admit so, we ought be against them in all unjustnesse or endangerings to themselves or the kingdome; and in being against, we are for. Fooles know, it's not words, or expressions, or oculars define, but things, natures, intentions, intrinsiques, and occults. 25. We ought also to be for our selves, and ours in safety and ju∣stice, so for the kingdome, and that first of all, though against the Countries, if so it were; but so it is not, but for them. Also—&c. But Kent and the Countries promise well in such and such particu∣lars as appeares by their petition and its Comment. The Comment speakes commendably, and better then the Petition, what then? These are but words, who shall secure us, that, that is their intentions one∣ly? May it not be to insinuate, and so by degrees (in the interim) to gather company to side with them, and stave off all opposers: for who would not side with, and who will oppose such petitioners, such Commenters, if their aimes reacht not beyond their words and pro∣mises? 26. And therefore yet again, who but fooles would side with them, &c. such and such being their Leaders, Heads and Commanders? and who but Fooles, Knaves, or both, would not oppose them, having such petitionary commands, and prostrating Commanders,—ex∣cept they change their Commanders, so their commands and de∣mands, of forcibly bringing in the King; they are not to be commu∣ned with, but commined rather, &c. 27. If you will not be against the Countries, but for them, then open their understandings by discovering the adversaries cunning pre∣tences and deceits, and the error of some particulars in their petitions, Let the righte∣ous smite me, and it shall bee a kindnesse: let him reprove, and it shall be an excellent oyle. &c. Oppose them in this sense, for their own and the kingdomes good. Better are the rebukes of a friend, then the kisses of an enemy. 28. Blandishments blind fooles, but friendly checkes open the eyes of the wise.—But who is so faithfull to give them, or so wise to ac∣cept of them? 29. Well, but the Parliament hath abused you and them, &c. as
you object and except; but admit so, so now you will not comply to them any longer, but defie, &c. What then? Will you right you selfe the wrong way? Will you out of the Frying pan into the fire? Is not pinching better then fleying? &c. But know fooles, the Parliament is forced for necessity and policy sake, to doe many things they would nor, and deny many things they would grant, and to conceale many discoverables, because time is not yet for them: and you are brainlesse, ignorant, opinionated, and wilfull withall; and so not able to beare or digest them, though for your good, such is your badnesse. 30 Hath the Parliament wrong'd you? Admit so, what then? will you accept therefore no righting at all, nor any right things from them? Sure in not complying to you in your preposterous pretended treaty with the King, intended fiding with him to inslave your selves and your posterities, and the whole kingdome; they have righted you, and complyed to you, in that they have not complied to you for your destructions, by murthers, losse of friends, husbands, parents, chil∣dren, also in that they would preserve your grain, your fruit on the ground, which the rampant horses would have ground to powder for you, and against you, &c. 31. In short, be wise at last, suspect and search into the pretenses of your suggesters and prompters of such petitions, they have their own ends, not yours, except your ending. Remember what your Com∣manders are, and their ends, &c. many their Officers are for plunder, and whats yours, more then for you, &c. Clergy-men are many of them great cheaters of the people for their own ends, urging (Demetri∣us like) Diana, Diana; so they the King, God, Religion, Liberties, and against the Parliament, but all is for you to fight to force them under the ground aforesaid, till you are groundlesse, &c. 32. Inforce not the Parliament by importunities, (as Phaeton did Phoebus) for the guidance of the Sunnes Chariot; it's beyond your management, keep in your orbs and spheares of understanding and rea∣ches, lest you be out-reacht, yea lest you out-reach your selves, which is soon done by reachlesnesse and ignorance, &c. 33. But yet again, the Citie will not fight against the Countrey, lest the Countries combine against them. A fine pretence and a foolish feare, because the greater feare should feare away the lesse. As for aid∣ing, or being against, what is so, see before at Sect. 27. Inform them well, and you shall form them anew, and they shall finde it's for them. Am I against my father, or am I not rather for him, if in his error,
wilfulnesse, or passion, he were ready to perpetrate murder, or treason, &c. if I disarm and withstand him, judge your selves, doe not I save him? So the designed object also from destruction, &c. 34. Theres no such for's, as such againsts, &c. 35. And why rather feare you not this greater feare, that for want of aiding the Army against (as you say) but I say for the Countries against the Goreans, and all disloyall treacherous Royalists) why cast you not? I say, the Army may be cast, and the Royalists remaine vi∣ctors, where are you then? when the whole kingdome (out of weaknesse some, out of wickednesse other some, shall overwhelme you like an inundation or deluge, who shall then check them from giving you check-meat by plunderings and massacres, and what not? &c. 36. But these adverse youngsters will politickly pretend, they only intend to stand on their guard, and to defend, not offend, and fooles like themselves, think this is very faire, as foule as it is; but may it not be to ingratiate themselves into the opinion of weaklings; why, they are honest men, defence is according to Nature, and Reasons law: but may they not intend also by this to make us secure & improvident on purpose to surprize us? may it not be to gain time to multiply their multitudes ad infinitum, and then over-power and finite us? Is it wis∣dome in warre to beleeve suggestions? Doth not Nature and reason teach us also to secure our selves? And how shall that be, but by dis∣sipating them at first, not suffering them to body or numerous it. The nature and malignity of their petition, the nature, & cōposition of the leaders and the led, shewes that their glistering pretenses are not gold (though gilded) but lead; their words, expressions, and postures, shewes their intended prostration of us, &c. though we know also they will by these courses prostrate themselves and their own in conclusion; who offends them, so, as such offensive defence need bee? Doth not their arming inforce arming? Doth not their universall violence (as they will have the King home fas aut nefas) import them virulent? and what may be presaged from such depraveds, but pravities? much more may be inferred from the contents of their discontented petition; so from the leaders and the led, so from their words, expressions, and postures; but comprehensive understandings will save us the la∣bour, and incomprehensive or wilfull ones, will make us labour in vain, &c. 37. Lastly, comes Sinon, a slye fellow, a Gre∣cian traytor Scotes, dark∣nesse,—Clan∣destiner. Idam, Sinon, or Scotos, the Scot, or the Clandestiner, he comes mouthing it, Breach of Covenant, breach of Covenant. It's
queried, In what? He bawles out, Oh Templum Domini, Templum Do∣mini, Religion, the Kirk, Gods honour, worship, service, suffer insuf∣ferables, Sects also must be diffected, and his King erected in his rights, &c. and our State dejected, or else all is not right, &c. 38. But oh the hypocriticall villany of this cheating world, Re∣ligion, with the rest aforesaid, are made the Bawds to all villany; Oh shame to all such Atheisticall, inhumane, and barbarous Barbarians, for they care not for Religion nor the rest, a rush, but as religious o∣culars are conducing to their occults—their Clandestines, &c. their ends are our endings and the beginnings of themselves; it's plunder, the milk and the honey, and the clusters of our Canaan Grapes they gape after; yet our fooles are foild with these follies, and herein also to trust the trustlesse, with Life, Liberty, and Lands, on any tearmes, their security being onely a few—pious—pretenses, which possesses with a security like to that of foolish Lakish, a retchlesse Citie,—and so a Citie soon wrackt, &c. 39. Well, well, wee have broken the Covenant about Religion, How trow? Why, we Presbyter it not? Answ. Nor should wee as qualified, for it's contrary to Gods word, so to the covenant which en∣joynes the nearest to Gods word, which Presbytery as quallified is not, as qualified it may, so we except against our excepters, and require their compliance, &c. But doth the covenant allow to invade? and that al∣so without covention or conviction? &c. in what conventicle was this Doctrine forged, trow? &c. 40. Surely if the Covenant be strictly seen into, we shall be forc'd to call our Clandestiner to an account, that we may see into Synon, or the Trojan horse, &c. 41. His next reason of invasion, is the Kings erection, & our States dejection: That is, the Scots owne Kinging it over us, under pretence of the King,—a fine piece of gullery. 42. Well, how proves the Scot we have broke this Covenant? oh well enough, well enough. Its so indeed, if his ill enough be well e∣nough. Thus he proves it, we are to maintaine His Majestie in all his Might and Mightinesse; Is not this proofe sufficient? are wee not gone by this? Well, thus we yet recover our selves; Doth not the Scot deal Divel-like? For the Devill saith to Christ, cast thy selfe downe; yet thou shalt not be cast, for God hath promised that the Angels shall secure thee, &c. But oh, Sir Sinon, Sathan leaves out (in his or thy wayes) So our Clandestiner (Devill-like) deviates the Kings High-way, which
is,—as the King continues us in our Religion and Rights, &c. How now Clandestiner, is this done? how is it then, we are undone? For what meanes all the yellings and bleatings over the Kingdome, &c. Of infinites, for murthers, massacres, and undoings? &c. How doth Synon, or our Senate, or our Synod: so our Citie, yea all the Cities and Coun∣tries in England; yea each Individuall answer this. I am at a stand, &c. yet I will stand to it. Had the Covenant been absolute, oh Scot, it had been so much the more desolate, like thy selfe that urgest it. For to Is not the co∣venanting to protect blood-shedders, blood-shed∣ding in the Covenanters & protecters? sure it is, or nothing is sure. What had Saul done to lose the King∣dome, &c. oh consider,—can or doe his fi∣nites paralell our infinites. Are dumbe Divines of God? O pro∣fitlesse Pro∣phets. covenant to protect him in all his greatnesse, who by thy owne confes∣sion is guilty of infinites of blood-shed, I aske thee? What are inten∣tionall bloody, and knowing blood-shedders, and that of Infinites, contrary to oath and betrust? are they not mighty Mrs and Trs? Re∣solve my weake judgement, and scrupilous conscience, for so thou art bound in conscience to doe. Did not the Prophets of old say, Thou art the man. And againe, thou hast done foolishly; therefore the Lord (that is Justice) hath rent away thy Kingdome from thee. Thou David hast slaine Ʋriah, & drab'd his wife—retaliation shall retaliate, the sword for the sword, and thy ten Wives for his one, and that occulalry for thy occults, &c. So shall justice also retaliate a Jezabel, though a Queene, for a Naboth, though a Naball. For as the Dogs lickt the blood of Naboth, so shall they that of Jezabel. 43. To except against us for this quereing and alleadging Scripture to satisfie our scrupulous conscience, is against Scripture and Religion, and so against God: and whats that but irreligion and atheisme, and what are such but such, &c. 44. But our Covenant is first both in place and worth, also absolute in rendring and in nature, for rights of Kingdome and Parliament; if conscience you make as you urge and pretend, why then doe you so un∣conscionably invade the Rights of either, for the unrighteous? Your owne position as afore, the Kings guiltinesse allowes not his erection to the prostration of both States. Againe, the Kings supportment in his height and priviledges, are but respective, and so of no respect, if for∣feited. Consider, can respectives both in nature & in rendring answer to absolutes in both? being forfeited also as afore, &c. 45. Oh English, oh Scot, oh all sorts, consider, what fell on the Jew∣ish Nation for that their 12. Tribes did not call Saul to an accompt for some triviall wrong done to a paltry Pagan City; did not 3. yeares of famine fall on them, because Sauls plottings for their destruction, and the blood he shed was not answered for. Sure Saul would not pu∣nish
himself; who then but the 12. Tribes should have done it? which, cause they did not, they are punished till Saul's 7. sonnes, expiated for all, and so retaliated satisfaction in being hang'd up by the Gibeonites; which City demanded Justice, and petitioned not for Sauls supportance against justice, much lesse for his honor & greatnesse. Oh wise-headed Gibeonites,—oh foolish and giddi-brain'd English, oh depraved Scot, &c. 46. Thus much for Land men; let's now see if Sea-men have more wit, or more honesty, so have any thing to say to this businesse. Oh madnesse, ther's nothing but weaknesses or wickednesses in this world; for Sea-men say the same, and so Land and Sea and Aire, are I thinke nothing but aire. Well, I will land the Sea-men, and referre them for We say as much for the Armie, if you will not helpe them for their own sakes, yet help them for the King∣domes sake, your King: if the end of Governours be King of all Governors. what I have said to the Land-men, and so let them goe. For I resolve on brevity; for to say againe what I have said, is to present you with Coleworts twice sodde, only hints, the Reader cannot doe lesse then comment. I conclude then, is it not madnesse and folly, if the Parlia∣ment have offended you, or you are offended with it, you will (like Will: Somers) strike who ever is next you. Is it not Treason to strike at the Kingdome, which is the King King and yours? If you know it not, are you not weake? If you know, yet will not know, are you not wicked? Is it not a striking against the Kingdom, not to strike its stri∣kers, or to bring in it's Vice-roy to strike and conquer it? but you nei∣ther see, nor intend any such thing; ah weakenesse, &c. Your intenti∣ons we know not, but your actions portend no lesse; will you King the Vice-roy above the Roy? Is a people for a King, or a King for a peo∣ple? Whether is the meanes or the end King? whether is physicke or health King? If the Parlaiment have wrong'd you, right your selves in a faire way, so as you may not wrong the Kingdome, like a foolish fellow; who saith, the Mr. of the ship hath wronged him, and to re∣venge himselfe, will drowne the ship, that he may drown his Master, though withall he drowne himselfe and all the rest in it, &c. 47. It may be I have suffered by the Parliament as much as any; what then? I will not (Will: Somers-like) strike my next man or any, much lesse my Lord and King the Kingdome; no, I will suffer againe and againe, yea to death, yea death it selfe, rather then endanger or be the death of my Lord. I scorn to Traytor or Rebell it so: so I will not oppose my wrongers, to the wronging of my Lord; yea I will helpe them to the righting of him, &c. And if I cannot right my selfe with∣out wronging my Lord, I will never be righted, yet count I am right, &c.
48. Oh but some will newtralize it, and not take part with either, but defend against both; or if they offend any, it shall be the State who Are not these Traitos to K. Salus? have offended them, &c. But are these sayings for Seniors, for sage, wise, and grave Governours, or for any? If you travell, and some of the formost of your company are set on by thieves and rogues, &c. will you newtralize it? Are not those Thieves and Murtherers that op∣pose not Thieves and Murtherers to their power? For by not helping, you helpe to rob and kill, the rob'd and kill'd, &c. 49. What if your Parents and Masters, under whose roof you live, so owe duties to them answerably; If these were set on, will you newtra∣lize also, and only sefly defend? is not this murther and theft, as afore, if they miscarry: so is it not treason in nature and reason to Parents and Pay masters, or Maintainers, to whom you are engaged in all faithful∣nesse and loyalty, and so to leave them, will you to them turne Loy∣allists and treacherous? 50. Again, if they are conquered, are not you your selves conquered? they help you as well as themselves: and doth not retaliation and rela∣tion, so duty and reason, say the same concerning you? 51. Know you not oh weaklings, that you are more engaged to the Kingdome then any child or servant can be to his Father or Master; For parents and children are parted oft times you see to take the King∣domes part, to part it from dangerous encounters. 52. Sure, in a journey I will help my enemie, how then him who is not mine: but I am his, and maligne him I know not why nor where∣fore; for he hath done me no hurt, nor will, but much good, had I the goodnesse to acknowledge it. Doth he not help me, and fight for mee, in fighting for himselfe; yet for want of help may be conquered, and then the conquest of me is more probable and easie. Well foole, fight The maligned Armie. for thy enemie (if so) that's engaged on thy side, and side with him that he may be thy friend; fight then for thy friend, whose enemie thou art, &c. that he may continue thy friend. But yet if thou beest so malicious, thou wilt not fight for either, fight yet with them, though not for them, yet for thy selfe and thy Father and Mr. in company, &c. 53. Thus fight with, or for Parliament and Armie, though they be So the King∣dome. thy enemies, or thou art theirs, according to the premises, apply and save me the replication.—Fight with, or for them, as it conduceth to the Kingdome. 54. But the Armie is a company of Sectaries, Independents, &c. Tru∣ly thou knowest not well what thou saist, if well and wisely examined
what a Sectarist is: so, nor an Independent; nor will I now engage to In the Pre∣lates time they were pu∣ritans, men of tender consci∣ences, &c.—faithfull to death. tell thee: but be it as thou saist, yet thou saist nothing to the purpose. Oh madnesse; what's this to thee in this case? one hath thrown down Baals altar, Ergo, Gideon the sonne of Joash must dye: but the wiser Joash answered those fooles, if Shew Baals order, or leave your bauling,-shew us the same of God, &c.— Baal be a God, and be offended, hee will right himselfe. Sure if the Mahumetan Turk were faithfull to our State, and would fight to deliver it, I would fight with him Sectarists & Independents so cal'd, have saved the king dome & City, for none else would, &c. and for him: and owe we not him also thankes, honour, and reward? Diffe∣rent religions, nor irreligion, quit not humanitie and justice. God by Rom. 14. enjoynes them to be Sectaries and Independents, till convinced, and joyes in it, if in sincerity; see and be satisfied. Why condemnest and judgest thou him Let each one be per∣swaded in his owne consci∣ence,—note it in his owne,-not any o∣thers.—If the doubter be damn'd,-force not the doub∣ter, lest thou damne him & thy selfe. Is it nothing to condemne & damn?? he is Gods servant, not thine; Thou shalt not answer for him, therefore be answered: and suffer him to In∣dependent it, as well as he thee to Presbyter it, is it not just? Thou unjust one, who denies him this liberty?—yet wilt licentiate, &c. Promulga∣tors against fundamentals, I am against:—but yet reservedly,—to hold, none can with-hold: so I am against prophaners and blasphemers! what wouldst thou more? Know weaklings, know that the beauty of sincerity and justice, love, peace, and humanity; though accompanied with er∣rors in Religion, not against: so also with many occular deformities and seeming giddinesses, and fooleries—are preferrable before a forced and ignorant Classicke, beauty, and order, &c. without sincerity or any the rest aforesaid, &c.—why—art thou against—what God is for? 55. But are not such Royallists, so, all sorts under what notion so∣ever, Traitors, Murtherers, thieves, &c. that fight against themselves and their posterities, and against the Kingdome, their Soveraign, &c. under pretence, as for its Steward, the King, &c. Doth not shame and infamy attend them, besides base slavery? to them and theirs, &c. And though you be offended at the Parliament; yet why against your selves and yours, and the Kingdom? and yet why also against the Parliament? you say they have taken your estates, &c.—Oh fooles, have you neither witt nor honesty to reason wisely and rightly? Foole know, they act but secondarily, also justly and inforcedly; Is it not the King and your This is spoken only to Malig∣nants who have forfeited all. selves by the Scots owne sayings, (for all they seeme to stand so for the King) who have plundered you of your estates by turns, and now you would turne it upon the State. Why charge you not the King as doe his owne Countreymen? Doth not the scot charge him as the Originall cause of all the blood shed, &c. in the 3. Nations, know its a Nation of Di∣vines thus charge him, discharge him if thou canst. If hee be the first
cause, thou art the second, for seconding him against hoth States, the large and contract, Kingdome and Parliament:—so the Parliament: justly for thy treachery to the whole, and in behalfe of it, did force from Shall a mur∣therer cōdemn the Judge or Executioner for taking life or estate? whereas him∣selfe is the con∣demner & ex∣ecutioner of himselfe by thē. thee but part of thy estate, to helpe to secure what thou wouldst have be∣traid; whereas thou hast forfeited all, yea, life also. Foole, or Knave, or both, art thou not engag'd to them for thy life, and the remainder of thy estate, all being at their command (considering how forfeited) in behalfe of the Kingdome thy Soveraign? Learne wisdome and hone∣sty hence-forward to acknowledge what's right, and their goodnesse to one so unrighteous, and make amends for future, by dedicating thy life and estate to the State, for the State, &c. Fight against the Stew∣ards, yea all Stewards for thy Soveraigne, the Kingdome, thy King, &c. 56. But many are desperate; for the Parliament (as they say) hath abused them, and opprest them more then ever the King did, and they are as very slaves under them, as the King can make them,—and yet they have been as faithfull and deserving of the Parliament as can be; having ventured limbes, life, liberty & estate,—also, such and so much wages is due to them, but not a penny can they get, though they, so their wives and children are ready to famish; also they are contemned, slighted, & villified, &c. If it be so as afore, its a hard and urging case, &c. For men are but men, not Gods, &c. It becomes not the fountain of Justice to send out such foule streames; nor to be the cause of such floods of teares, nor of rending and tearing complaints, &c. Yet here answer thee, as at Sect. 47. whether repaire for satisfaction,—and implore them to doe as they would be done by. 58. If the rising of the people be not from some of the grounds fol∣lowing. Quaere. As first, The licentiat reading of lying Ballets and books to de∣fame the State and the Armie, and so to incense the people against both—also to divide the people amongst themselves,—which is most in∣famous—in so famous a Citiie, to suffer such insufferables,—and im∣plies, as if they fided with such base ones—against both States—which is not only great weaknesse, but wickednesse also,—may they be accepted for Protecters of Parliament and Kingdom,—which pro∣strate both as afore? Another thing that befooles the people—and so cause them o rise against—Parliament and Armie—yea themselves and theirs is, Igno∣rance of the Kings state, degree and condition, &c. and an opinion of him beyond what is, &c. which we intend to resolve by Quaeries in due sea∣son; only one or two instances here, &c.—under the notion (King)
and other titles of sacred Majestie, &c.—They are besotted to an I∣dolatrizing, as if rahter a God then a man.—Also as if all were his own selfely—cause King relates not, as doth Steward, which sends to a Lord; See sect. 46. where the end of Kings is K. as justice, safe∣ty, peace, &c. of the people, &c. whereas all his Titles, Glories, Crowne, Throne, Scepter, &c.—are the States at large, and his only by way of steward-ship and Deputi-ship; As are the Sword, Cap of Maintenance, so traine of Officers, the Cities, not the Majors. This ignorance, crafty knaves (especially depraved Clergy-men, and men of lost fortunes make use of, to incite the people for their own ends, as at Sect. 6. and 8.—But our loyalty to our Lord Salus enjoyns a plaine discovery of all particulars concerning him, to prevent (if it were possible) murthers, massacres, &c.— Quaere, if it be not treachery, not to treat hereof? or to intreate a∣misse Quaere. the intreater thereof, &c. The Parliament and peoples rights also are not known, which clee∣red, would cleere all, &c. and make all cleere up, &c. Pressures from Parliament (as said to be) incite also, so want of justice, &c. the remedies known, the cure may be easie, if care be. The bounds of obedience, so of Treason and rebellion (not by law∣lesse law only, but) by law rationall and so binding, are not knowns, and so the ignorant are bound to their good behaviour against all good behaviour, &c. 59. Is this or that treason, &c. against the K. Steward of the kingdom, Queries con∣cerning rebel∣lion and trea∣son: so of dis∣obedience. as selfly considered? (so much in every mans mouth) or not rather, as hee relates to the State at large, his Lord, so it's for his Lords sake, not his. Quaere also, If it be not as he continues in his sphear of government, or Quaere. The State at large. rather in the execution of government, according to the will of his* Lord exprest in his Lawes,—so in all faithfulnesse to him, &c. Quaere.—If out of his spheare he be not a privat man, &c. so not obey∣able, but resistable, &c. St. Paul, I knew him not to bee Gods high Priest. Quaere. Why? Because his actions were below his place as a Judge. Ignorant he could not be, that he was the high Priest, &c. 60. If to raise Armes against the kingdomes Army, the Kingdome be∣ing King, by Sect. 46. if it be not treason? the said Army continuing Quaere. faithfull to the kingdome, in its defence, is it not to take up Armes a∣gainst the kingdome itselfe? 61. If an abusing the Army, it continuing faithfull before, be not an affront to the Kingdome which is King?
62. If newtralizing, that is, not helping, siding, and taking part Quaere. with the Army against the Kingdomes enemies, be not treason to the kingdome? how then to take part against it? to suppresse or enslave it, by raising Forces of their own Faction, to keep it under,—or to leave the Kingdom naked to self insurrections, or forraign invasions, &c.—also to have brought the King forcibly home, to have born out, and coloured all their designes, &c—inforcings,—&c. If it be not lawfull to make the foresaid quaeries, and the like, with∣out Quaere. querelous inquisitions and exceptions? 63. Oh thou Citie of London, so all the Cities and Countries of Eng∣land Application. &c. yea each individual man therein, read reason, and call to mind, as thus, These Rakeshames that pretend the King, intend themselves, and are the same that fought against us as afore, to inslave us, and we a∣gainst them for our liberties, &c. why expended wee our blood and meanes? What, to yeeld and entertain them at the last? Much better might we have yeelded at first, and spared all, then now at the last;—seeing also by our affronts, their revenge is aggravated to the uttermost, e∣ven to the nullifying our Religion, and enforcing upon us a Regiment, or imperious government under its name; so our lives, liberties, and e∣states are gone, and we are in their hands like Rogues and Gally-slaves. King of En∣gland—&c. be∣fools—fools—the wise have eyes.—Lord Mayor of London—&c. Are they any any more then Titles?—Is not each ones life, land, liberty, and estate his owne by Law and Nature? Its onely the highest Title of honour allowed by the State,—So Prince of Wales, Earle of Essex, &c. As for the King we now understand our selves better then before, he is by Sect. 58. the kingdomes Steward, the peoples and kingdomes wel∣fare, (as the end of Kings and all Governours) is Lord and King. He hath also forfeited all by his faithlesnesse to his Lord—he is to the king∣dome, as is the Lord Mayor to the Citie, and no more, chiefe Deputie Go∣vernours both of them, yet not by any selfnesse, but as in favour conferred on, by and for the State, the Citie. The Lord Mayor is by Rx King of the City, in respect of all subordinate Rulers: 32 Kings, that is, Lieutenant Governours of Cties, Joshua conquered on this side Jordan. May the Mayor take up Armes against the Citie, or rob them by Sea or Land, or rebell and traytor them, or burn their houses? &c. And must the Ci∣tizens for all that, petition, intreat, and treat with their abusive treacherous servant? &c. Is not the Mayor a traytor, a rebell, for so doing? Apply them, &c. Rex. is Ruler, not King—So by Rex all are Kings, or none are—&c. It's falsly translated Kig or applied onely to one more then another: the word will not beare any thing but Ruler, yet that will hardly be rul'd; nor will the Hebrew or Greek beare the translation (King) at all, &c. Why then to these more then others? Ruler is also unruly,—so not right, as too selfly—Steward sends to a Lord, &c. May the Mayor master the Citie? will the Citizens side with him against themselves?—hath hee any commission to kill, rob, rape? &c.
As for the Parliament and Army, if they have wronged us, yet will not we wrong the kingdome to right our selves of them,—but let's help them all we can; if not for themselves, yet for our selves, so ours, &c. Yet, why not the Army for themselves also, seeing they have done us no hurt? Newtrality will nullifie us in our Religion, Liberties and Lives; we have experience of their trustinesse: and we have experi∣ence (except we want sence) of the perfidiousnesse and treachery of the other Armies, they are generaly Atheists, their commanders men of no Religion, onely politick pretenders to deceive: their actions and designes define them as afore.—As for the Army if Sectaries, if Inde∣pendents, &c. yet we know not well, if so, because the true definition of either is not agreed on. However, what is it to us? If faithfull to us and the State, it's to God, not to us. They suffer us to Presbyter it; Ju∣stice requires, we suffer them to Independent it. Destroyers of Funda∣mentals, so Blasphemers, they allow not of, often declared by them—Thus qualified, how is it we allow not of, them? seeing God himselfe doth, by Rom. 14. Well, let's weigh all aforesaid, and let's immediat∣ly send them all the help we can, if not for their sakes, yet for our own, and ours, and the Kingdomes, to set a period to these troubles, &c. For if the adverse Army have the better, we have the worst of it. We are politickly called Fomenters of Warre: we must be wise, and not feare words, we must foment, (if foment they call it) that is, we must stir up and second defensively, against such offenders, who would surprize us, by preventing resistance; by such aspersions they foment all they can, by raising the Countries, to raise them, to the Countries razing. If we foment not just defence against their unjust offence, we are great of∣ders. In short, let's not traytor it to our King the Kingdome, nor to the Parliament, nor the Army, wherein they continue faithfull, &c. so nor to our selves, nor ours: but now before we part, resolve, to dissolve these fomenters, these Achans, these troubles of Israel, &c. And let's learn to beare (till we know how to help it) lesser injuries from Parlia∣ment and Army, if so' rather then the great, intollerable, the inexpressa∣bles from the other side, &c. and consider, and doe not we our selves foment our own miseries? there was likelihood of a period before this, but we cry out of Parliament and Army, for not setling the kingdom, and that they doe nothing thus long, when as we our selves breed and In that Some a∣mongst us in plotting a∣gainst the State, the Army and In∣dependents, so called,—and inviting in the Scots—also fiding it with the Roy and his Roya∣lists, &c. - Last∣ly, to force home the King, under pre∣tence of a Treaty. increase new work, new troubles to them and our selves. And now, Oh State Representative, a word or two to you, and I have
done, onely to minde and hint you, for more (sure) I need not doe, if you be noble minded, generous and genuine; but if contrary, as ignoble, &c. What shall be done to set you right? I tax not, but preventively cau∣tion; Remember the universall, naturall, rationall precept, Doe as you would be done to, &c. Is not this enough to Naturalists, Moralists, Gen∣tiles? How then, if Christianity be added? Shall it adde nothing? If deducted, lesse you cannot be, and be men, &c. Statues you may be, but not Statute-makers—except as afore.—Would you be abused, or trea∣cherized with in the least of your trusts? Surely no; then doe not so; Would you not traytor and skellom, and base fellow, that fellow that should so abuse you in the meanest betrust? &c. If so, inferre, Which you may lose in a moment, cause you are mo∣mentary. Also, are they of moment, like your ho∣nour, fame, so the love and welfare of your friends and posteri∣rities, & your quitting them from slavery? Consider, &c. what's due in just retaliation for failing in the greatest betrusts mortality is ca∣pable of? as of Life, Livelihood, Liberties and Religion, &c. See to it, O see to it, I speak onely to the guilty, if any be: blemish not, nor bespot your Honours—by treacherous aspersions, &c. though many be laid upon you, never the like on any Parliament before, and that without controll—or commination, yet let it not be justly. Remember the love of the people in chusing you, so of their great hopes and joy in your faithfulnes; forfeit them not, we intreat you, but free your free choosers, so all your friends, so your own posterities, that they may blesse you in future times, and your names and remembrances may be famous for ever; else, infamy for ever attends you: so the cryes and curses of your choosers, so of your children and posterities, so of all your friends and kindred, yea of the whole kingdome or people your true King, who made you what you are, and commissioned you, &c. but not to commit them, &c. On beslave not, nor vassalage your Lords, to any their Stewards. Consider and digest what I say, and digresse not, &c.— O let not any insinuations, flatteries, hopes, promises, Or in your power to keep, as to give, &c. I adde to the aforesaid cau∣tions, nor let envy, hate, malice, or re∣venge—to—or against any,—hurt the Ge∣nerall, quit thy self if thou canst, if not, reserve it till thou canst not offend. prefer∣ments, or dishonorable honours circumvent you, and so begt con∣tempt and jeering from your circumventers. Is there any thing so com∣fortable and cheering, as a cleare conscience, even as a moralist, &c. None can give you, or preferre you, but you must first inable them by giving to, and preferring them; reserve rather then give to such, to re∣ceive againe, and so to be beholden, and give thankes for what's your *own. But what are such givers and receivers—also—receivers, a∣gain, from such; given to, givers? &c.—of what also is neither the givers nor receivers own but their Lords, the Kingdomes, their King? What I say, are such, &c. &c. but &c.—Oh consider, consider, &c. and comply to justice, equity, and all honorable things. Honour your
selves by your wisdomes and fidelity, as you have done, which preferre as more noble, and withall immortall, in that it shall live when you are dead—before all other base and by-ends—which shall when you are gone, infamous you; and leave a base and sordid stench of you, to all eternity, &c.—Give forraigne States cause to honour you, and make not your selves a jeering stock to the whole world, till it come to a proverb, As ill as an Englishman,—as base as a Britain, &c. How wisely and ably did the Holland State quit themselves of their Tyrannous King, & continue faithfull to the people that followed them, and govern them with peace and love, cause with justice, protection and safety? Sure the same wayes would have had the same effects with us. What shall I say? It's with the latest, but not too late, if this you will do. Inform the people aright of their own rights, yours and their Vice∣royes, when at the rightest,—also as now, postur'd, qualified, and condi∣tioned with all kind of wrong doings, to a most righteous people to him; Why spare you, or feare you to speak? May, yea, doth it not betray us? If we have, doe, and must venture our lives, what is't (if just and right, and withall conducing) shall silence us? Had Hester been silent, where O let not one woman put down so many men for cou∣rage & faith∣fulnesse, &c. being also not so engaged as are you. bad she and hers been? You have fought against, and dare you not speak, nor give way to speak against, in what's just,—also when it is for the Kingdome and the people, &c. Conducingly, give way, and you shall finde men will speak out. Justice and your ingagements, the King∣domes welfare, and to prevent its illfare, claimes this at your hands, and we dare, however, quaere, if it be not treachery to the Kingdome, the people in generall (our Generall or King, &c.) Not to allow the exhi∣biting of the aforesaids, as conducing to their delivery, &c. the children are come to the birth, give strength to bring forth? Now we have done, and deliver up what is said, with our selves, to the judgement of the inge∣nuous. And the blessing of God be with you, &c. DIXI.
Postscripts. THis Book lying by me some time after it was written (by reason of some hinderances) it hath now furthered it selfe with the addi∣tion of some second thoughts, I hope very conducing as to the ge∣nerall,—so to particulars, &c.— Is not treason, the betraying of just trusts and ingagements? Is not Quaere a∣gain. Of Treasons. that of a Kingdome the greatest trust? Are not all sorts ingaged to the Kingdome, before the Steward, or any? Nay, are they ingaged to the Steward at all, but for the Kingdomes sake? And is not their failing it alone (how then in siding with the Steward, or any against it) the greatest treason? What is it then in the Steward most ingaged by oath, betrust, and al∣lowance, not onely to faile or neglect, but to endeavour his uttermost against his Lord in the highest degree? False Trusts, Oathes, &c. to faile for true and just ones, is not trea∣son, but faithfulnesse and justice,—as, to faile the Steward in behalfe of his Lord.— If it be not treason to preferre any selfe-end, or any one, as the Ste∣ward Quaere. called King, or his sonnes called Prince or Duke, or any one, or a∣ny thing whatsoever, yea though it be Religion, Gods worship, or Ser∣vice, as cal'd, or indeed, &c. before the generall good, to its suffe∣rance,—cause it's King and Soveraigne, and God himselfe preferres it before the aforesaids,—s I will have mercy before Sacrifice, &c.—the Sabbath is for man,—in humanities, &c. Traytors (however smiled on) are smit with contempt as the basest of men, and are not trusted of their Trusters, but in cases of necessity, and that with much feare and jealousie, &c. See to this all sorts, from the the Throne to Threshold,—it imbaseth the best: See to it, I say, Parliaments, Kings, Princes, Peers, Priests, &c. the corruption of the best is worst of all. 66. Oathes, Covenants, &c. in behalf of the Steward, against his Lord Of Oathes, Covenants, &c. the kingdome, binds not, all sorts are bound to breake them, except
they will bind themselves to be Traytors, Murtherers, and Theeves. 67. Rebellion is to resist just Governours in their just Governments, Rebellion. disobedience is the same: else it's none. If the most ingaged Governours, or Stewards, that affront their Lords Salus, and his Lawes, and their ends of Government, Justice, and Protection, be not the greatest Rebels?—Oft-times they rebell first and most, and yet tax the faithfull to their Lord, for Rebels, cause they side not with them in their rebellion against their Lord. Will the Steward urge his Lords servants to keep false Oathes and Trusts to him against his Lord, and yet hee makes no reckoning of true ones? Sure he, by unjustly accusing of them, he justly accuseth himselfe much more. 68. Murther is without just cause to kil, or nor to save if we can—what Murther. is it then in the most ingaged Stewards to save and protect—yet con∣trarily to murther, or endevour the murthering of their Lord Salus, and his faithfull servants,—cause they will not side with them a∣gainst their Lord, &c. What is't also in the servants that side with them against their Lord to ruinate him,—so his faithfull servants, is it not murther as well as treason? The justly inforc'd to kill, either in defence of their Lord Salus, or of themselves, though they kill, I say,—yet they murther not, &c. 69. Hath the same definition or bounds that murther hath, the unjust Theft & Robbery, Of Warre. sides taking is theft, the other is none. The name and countenance of warre quits not, nor qualifies it from murther and theft on the unjust side,—it aggravates rather by its continuance—and violent perpetrations,—also as done with defiance, and a high hand, openly, &c. as if justifiable, as also by the Steward against his Lord, &c. 70. See to the aforesaid definitions of Treason, Murther, Theft, and Rebellion, &c. all sorts,—both States, the King, Princes, & Dukes, so cal'd, yea Peers—Priests, and Prelats.—So all Countries and Cities, &c. Names. Titles, &c. of Kings, Princes, etc. with the rest, alter not natures:—but ingagements make the aforesaids more unnaturall and greater Treasons, Thefts, Murthers, &c. yea, each individuall, and apply as cause i, and for future,—let it lessen thee to lessen the aforesaid offenders, &c. 71. Well, but the King wrong'd them not, as hath done, and doth the Parliament, nor can they be greater slaves to the King, then Object. the Parliament makes of them,—&c.—by imprisonment, by plunde∣rings and contempts, &c.
I answer, If it be the objection of Malignants and Royalists, see then in part to Sect. 55. in speciall,—in generall to 47. Answer. If it be the good deserving and faithfull party that complains— see to Sect. 56. so 47. and for full satisfaction as followeth. Yet all sorts by the Scots position, may charge their sufferings originally on the King. Each one forgets what the King did, so what they are freed from,— being onely taken up with their present sufferings, of which they are most sensible,—also they minde not, or call not to minde what the King intended to doe,—the which I hope when I have minded them of, they will be of another minde, &c. Hast thou forgot the infinite Monopolies, as of Sope, Tobacco,— Pins, Leather, Wines, &c. and indeed what not,—also the ten shillings Scarce any commodity exempted, & all in time would have come under the Monopo∣lists. But all this is forgot. a peece for the needlesse freedome, called the new Corporation, &c. and the rest of which were coming on ad infinitum.—And amongst the rest Pole and Ship-money as Capitals? Was it nothing to quit thee of the charge, attendance, trouble and vexation, &c. one way or other, to an undoing thee in thy estate, and in the peace of thy minde, &c. By the Staring Star-chamber, and the High-Commission, &c. What sayst thou to the vexations suits, troubles, and attendance at Doctors Commons, twixt the Parson and thy person, about trivials,—as Holy-dayes keeping, or not,—besides infinites more, which I need not stand to name. Did not the Court of Wards keep watch and ward over thee? Now thou mayst doe as much by it, &c. Hast thou forgot the German Horsemen, projected for thy projection and perpetuall inslavement, and not for a present defence, as are ours. The Spanish Navy had the same intention, and had done the deed, if Note. All these pur∣posel, inten∣tionally,—not inforc't there∣to. Hurrying it in the popular streets in their popular Cha∣riots & state∣linesse. the Hollanders had not undone it, &c.—Privy-Seales for money,-and the prison for non-payment thereof, opprest the able and rich cir∣cularly,—&c. And all these not for thy just and necessitated defence, but for thy offence, as on purpose to raise a stock, a Magazine of money & means from thy self, to provide Scorpions to whip thee. So manicles and Fetters for a Turkish inslavement, also to support (him that should be) thy protector, in all Revellings, Maskings, Pleasures, Playes and Delights, &c. by the ruine of thee and thine,—whilst thou and thine thus op∣prest, are pining and languishing with griefe and pressures, &c. Now for the Parliament, let's see what they have done to thee:— admit much amisse, yet beleeve the Scots in this, that the King (the
Kingdomes Steward) is cause of all: for if he had not done the afore∣saids, these after necessitated doings by them had never been done—So when thou accusest them, thou dost implicitly accuse the accuser and misuser of them and the, as the originall cause of all. Is It not the aforesaid doings of his—by the Scots own saying—that hath been the cause of all these Warres, Bloodshed, Losse of Estates, Plun∣derings, olland payes xcise with∣out exception losse of trade,—So excise, &c. that thou so exceptest against? Lay it then where it should be, and not upon the immediate occular, instrumentall, inforced Afflicters of thee,—to whom no question its an affliction, thus to afflict thee, &c. Is not thy Lawyer, Councellor, and Atturney inforc'd oft-times to undoe thee with charges and expences against thy offending adversa∣ry? who will have the Cloak from thy back, and next thy suit, yea thy The spirited man chuseth to yeeld to this, rather then to his—insulting ad∣versary. shirt, and so strip thee to nakednesse if thou defendest not,—another keeps back, or layes claime to thy Land, and estate, and will unstate thee, if thou defendest not.—Yea also it may be, though thou defen∣dest,—his might will out-right thee, and the expences may exceed the principall, that it had been better to have yeelded at first.—But who knowes the issue of things? It may be thou mightest on easie tearmes have recovered all, of others, then, others have done so.—Adven∣tures must be adventured on, or else we must give up our rights, as our Cloakes and Clothes, &c. to each unrighteous challenger, which no spirited man can yeeld to.—Adventure we not our lives, and all wee have, on darings, challenges, and abuses, rather then be out-braved and insulted over? A stomackfull resistance and defence is an honor, and it oft prevents offences, &c. Thus by the Scots own saying, the Kings offence hath inforced the Parliaments and thy defence; and that defence, these expences, pressures, and undoings, &c. But thou wilt yet say, the Parliament hath opprest and abused thee beyond a just and necessitated defence;—Be it so, this yet justifies not thy unfaithfulnesse to thy Lord the Kingdome, if his Stewards contrary to his will (who provided them for thy protection, and to doe thee ju∣stice) abuse thee,—right thy selfe of the Steward as thou canst, with∣out wronging thy Lord;—see for further satisfaction at Sect. 47. But oh you fountaines of justice,—let your honours, your fames,— and your names be more precious, and blemish them not by such pro∣ceedings, but for this; see in full at Sect. 64. 56. &c. But now last of all, I have met with a list of their extravagancies, e∣normities,
&c. as great offices, places, incomes, &c.—as Colonels in the Warre,—keepers of Townes, Cities, Castles,—Houses, Parkes, and Forrests:—Also great advancements by Bishops Lands,—and lastly by depraved injustice, oppression, corruption, and bribery, &c. These last are justly exceptable against, if high and heinous, &c.—Trivials must not be too much prest—or censured:—thou canst not Angelize men. David—that man of men—bid—Mephibosheth—and Ziba divide the Land,—whereas the whole was Mephibosheths, &c.—But let's examine the other;—which before I doe, I will place thee (their accuser) in their places,—cause by reflection—thy accusation will be the better judged of, &c.—Lets now see how thou canst come off, &c. Admit the Offices, &c. places—before-named, so the keeping of Castles, Townes, Towrs and Forts,—were in thy disposure by—consent of the Kingdome—as—are many places in the hands of each Lord Major, By custome and consent of the City.—&c.—but in speciall in the hands of the King, when time was,—its not then—a power usurp'd so farre as confer'd—by consent, by way of betrust—&c.—Doth not nature—and reason first accommodate ones self—and theirs—as nearest, before remotes—provided they supply those places with—persons—faithfull, and each way fitting.—If this they faile of, they are faulty,—for they ought prefer the universall, in justice,—safety,—and rights,—before selfe-ends that are not right.—Said not Solomon to his Queene, thou shalt have sonnes to make Rulers over all Lands?—Did not Eli and Samuel make their sonnes Priests—and Judges,—and they might—had they beene right; why should not honour—pleasure—and profit—be theirs, seeing confer'd on them (provided universally improv'd) as upon, or to others.—Who is't, that having—friends,—kindred, or children,—would not doe the like?—as—for the adventurous and faithfull in the Wars,—they are worthy of it,—so are the States, if they—would improve themselves worthy for the universall.—Is not his Excellency the Lord Fairfax—so Lieutenant Generall Cromwell—worthy of their confer'd honours—and remembrances?—Nature, reason,—justice,—and policy of State, enjoyne honours—and rewards—to all deser∣vers, Men are men, and need en∣couragement, &c.—and the State as Judges ought to consider of it, and performe accordingly to all,—and I would they did;—no State, no Prince, but does, will, may, yea ought to doe it, &c. But what if we now parallell or discrimen the Parliaments and Kings actions? &c.
Those of the King—what he did,—and that not of necessity, &c.—Note. Went he not against Scotl. with force to have setled E∣piscopacy, &c. but of a high hand—and with intention, &c.—projecting the utter be∣slavement of the people or Kingdome,—and to have also—ruined Religi∣on,—and only allowed some Complements and Ceremonials, which hee would have called Religion—to have deceived weakelings therewith.—They are I say apparant at Sect. 71. to F: Those of the Parliament at Sect. 71—from F: to 72. The Parliaments actions are not originally-intentionally, or volun∣rily , &c.—but contrarily—inforcedly, for the universall; so thy particular defence, and so farre is just and approveable, and of thee to be approved of,—what's beyond I disapprove, but its not easily apparent what they are:—but this remember,—that both of thy inforced suf∣fering, —so of thy unjust suffering by them, the Scots make the King the originall cause of all,—sc—by his still continued,—offensive, con∣tending Note. for the command of thy life, liberty, estate, and religion, &c. Rememher the Instance before in a Law suite, and answer thy slfe. Hee is at this instant, the cause of defence,—and so of thy pressures in expences, feares—and inforcements—&c. which by the Scots account—thou oughtst put on his account, and not on the enforced defensive State—except thou and thine wouldst be unstated for ever. But this I dare adventure on—in behalfe of the Parliament,—that could they quit themselves of being offended,—and assailed on the King side—that so all clouds were over, and the Coast—cleare, and the Heavens serene—they would make—thee, thine,—and the whole Kingdom absolute freemen,—both in lives,—eestates, liberties—It conduceth to their honor, end, & betrust,-so to the hap∣pinesse of their posterity, kind∣red, & frends, &c. and religion.—As for Religion, if they—allow liberty—of consci∣ence, which in conscience—they ought, by Rom. 14. to allow us, let each be perswaded in his owne conscience, &c. so by many other places is al∣lowable, with the cautions at Sect. 54. Thou hast no cause to except at what God accepts, except thou wilt except against him.—Is't not faire (thou excepter) that thou shalt enjoy thy liberty—to Presbyter it? &c. Wilt not thou retaliate,—and allow—as thou art allowed? From the parallell of Parliament and King aforesaid, thou maist ga∣ther, thou art as was the Israelites' twixt—Solomon—and Rehoboam, Solomon had used them hardly,—but Rehoboham projected to pro∣strate them, to bow and bend them, so as to make them plyant to his tyranny,—he would whip with Scorpions,—and his little finger—should be more oppressing then his Fathers whole body.—Is it not so 'twixt Par∣liament and King? the Parliament have enforcedly opprest thee,—and so farre is just on their side,—and must as a fore, be charged on the K.
not them:—but their voluntaries are like those of Solomons,—the See the K. at Sect. 71. to F. Parliament Sect. 71. at F. Kings are like the Intentionalls of Rehoboam.—Admit both sides—cannot be avoided,—is it not wisdome to lessen our enemies,—and wisely—take part with the lesser,—to overthrow the greater?—which alone we cannot doe; which done, we have but—one enemie, as Solomons—hard usages to contend with.—Consider what I have said, and be wise,—'twixt Solomon,—and Rehoboam you may be ruin'd,—if you side with both:—so if you side it strongliest with Re∣hoboam, The K. fetch∣eth in Scots & Forreigners a∣gainst us.—you fide with your ruine also:—but break Rehoboam to pie∣ces,—and my life for thine wee shall all piece—together againe—in peace and plenty, &c. This lastly remember, the Parliament hath quit thee from all, as at 71. E. to F, &c. is it nothing?—But what did the King ever doe for thee, shew if thou canst? Its yet objected,—no peace or settlement will be till the King come 72. Object.—home and be setled.— Its 'cause thy braine and witt is unsetled,—and 'cause knaves and Answer. fooles—suggest severalls to thee, out of which thy weakenesse cannot winde:—but of what nature soever thy thoughts are, or their sugge∣stions be—see to the contents of the particulars,—and so to their answer—and call to minde—all other particulars in this booke not referr'd to.—Help to settle it by sideing with Solomon against Rehoboam,—as thou hast read in the instances foregoing,—for thy selfe (if not for theirs—) so for the Kingdom, &c. which is thy King, &c. How wouldst thou have him come home;—what like a Conquerour? If so, thou art a slave according to—Sect. 71. E. to F. See more under treaty, and take heed he conquer you not by yeelding, that may be won by smiles and wiles, which could not be by force and blowes. —Yet againe, thou saist, thou fightest for the Kingdome, thy selfe, and 73. Object. thine,—in fighting with,—and for the King against the Parliament; also that by Covenant, &c. thou oughtst to fight for the King, his Rights and Dues, &c. What thy intentions are—I know not, but thy actions in fighting Answer. for the King, &c. are absolutely against the Kingdom, thy selfe, and thine, see 71. to F. &c. See also the discrimen 'twixt Parliament and King, see at Sect. 71. O. to 72. For the Covenant,—thou art mistaken,—its for the King respe∣ctively—see Sect. 42. to 44.—and for the Kingdome the Parliament, See Covenant the 3. it selfe. so each particular as thy selfe and thine, so each one,—its absolute, see Sect. 44.
Thou yet wilt fight against the Parliament as wrongers of the King∣dome, Ob. 74. the King, thy selfe and thine? Truly—I cannot see how they can wrong the King, what ever they Answ. If by the Scots sayings he be guilty of the blood shed in the 3. Natiōs, its well neare 3. or 400000. lives, are they not so many murthers?-for one Nabal—a Iezabel: how then? doe to him,—hath he not forfeited all?-hath he not only—wron∣ged,—but sought the ruine of all?—what saith lex talionis to this?—I am silent,—be thou judge,—can the end doe the means a∣ny wrong,—to use it any way for its conducement, no juster and bet∣ter way being?—By this argument, if thou oughtst fight against them as wrongers of him, which they are not,—why then not against the King, which is so in the highest degree, and that of his King, as at Sect. 71. to F. Why also not for them against him, by the argument at Sect. 71. O. to 72.— I have been large, cause I would meet with all objections,—-and ex∣ceptions,—and so satisfie circularly,—which I hope I have done,-and 75. so I conclude with invocation and application as followeth.— I doe then implore all sorts, even from the highest to the lowest,—-as the most honourable Senate and City,—and the Worthies of the Sy∣nod:—so all Countries, Cities, Townes-and Villages; yea each Indi∣viduall,—remember and consider what I have said, and refresh memo∣ry by review of the Contents,—all your scruples—(except you will find or make knots in bul-rushes) are satisfied and cleered,—you may tush, pish, slght,—and wrangle,—but answer you cannot,—so must of neces∣sity—contend against the light of nature, reason—and justice,—and what are such,—&c?—newtralize not, as it conduceth to the universall,—but helpe Parliament and Army, and so your selves—against the King the Kingdomes Steward—& servant,-so any other, &c.-much more Let not Judg Ienkin's book, nor any such deceive you, it savors of much weaknesse, or wickednesse, or both,—It's easily answe∣red had we leisure. take heed,-you take not up Armes against Parliament, or Army,-or any that is faithfull to—his, & your King, the Kingdome, in behalfe of the Kingdomes Steward or any, &c. Land-men,—Sea-men,—so all sorts of either—defame not your names, and so your posterities-with the aspersions of treacheries,-rebelli∣ons,-murthers,-robberies, and rapes As any these things are a∣cted, &c., &c. For all are guilty in the afore∣saids-that-neutralize it in King Salus behalfe, much more that rise a∣gainst—King Salus, &c. Take heede of the depraved of the Clergie Those that are good of thē I honour., who define the aforesaids amisse in behalfe of the King?—also of their crying up, great is Darius and Diana,— 'cause they—(as the Demetrians) live by—one or both—its their own ends they aime at,-& neither King
Darius, nor the Goddesse Diana—they care for, but as conducing, &c. The same ends they have to deceive the devoutly religious,—but un∣principled, So the devout yet iggnorant noble women were stirred up against Paul under pious preten∣ces.—as Templum Domini—the Church: so Gods Ministers, like∣wise Religion,—Gods—honour,—worship,—service, but define all these amisse,—so outing of all but themselves, as Sects, Independents, &c. but it may be, cannot, or will not describe a right what are Sects—outable,—but for this see to Sect. 54. and be satisfied. Their-suggestions-are not their ends,—their ends are to end—all their opposers, and non-complyers under those pretences-of Sects, In∣dependents, Seperatists, &c. that come not under them,- 'cause they loose the Soveraignty over them,—and the sallarie of their meanes. It is strongly conjectured, were it not for these sufferings, by their se∣peration,-they would suffer them with silence, &c. would the State confer on them 2. or 300. l. a year certain, to officiate,-&c. you should finde all these winds & storms allaid, and they'd be calm'd,-when they see the confluence of their auditory conferred nothing,-nor the others declining them lost them not any thing, &c. Consider, oh consider then, and doe as did the Israelites in case of 76. the Levites,-delay not, free your selves immediately,-and right your wronged King Salus, against the treacherous, perfidious,-hypocriticall, irre∣ligous-Scot Where are the wits of our wits, and wise ones, are they—seers—that see nothing? thinkes any one the wily pretending Scot—will come in for any ones end but his own? will he raise the King, but to be raised by him? will he not confluent with numbers, having two garrison Townes for his inlets,—truly he designes to undermine—and bring the English to canvesse breeches,—and wooden shoes—&c.:-so all others,-under what name and title soever,-settle the Kingdome,—so your selves, in an assured-safety,—justice, peace, and rights. I say delay not, ob State,—oh Army,-and City,—con∣sider Discover the Scotch trea∣chery to all the Countries—cause it to be read in Churches. how to raise all Countries (under apparent and just grounds)-as one man (for present dispatch of these troubles) against the Scot, so all other enemies, and lye not lingring under languishing and disquie∣ting uncertainties,-be not be-fool'd, with Letters and Declarations—from any,—know you not who,-and what they are?—Know you not also that the Traytors, Hopton,-so the rest, may thus write, and the other must put too his hand and seale,—be it one, be it all, its all to no purpose-with the wise and knowing, &c. I may infinite it, but this is enough, if any thing will serve. Only Reader I finde it a common errour, that many Zealots eager
of the common good,-spend themselves for it,-so many continued use∣full bookes are writ,-and by the Athenian Readers eagerly read over,-that done, he hath done with the booke,-and ther's an end of all. Its also (cause little) pamphleted, & under that notion, slighted, so it serves him not for any use,—no not when he hath most use of it, as being lost,—also lost to his memory: so that if he be trayered or rebelled,-&c. he knowe not their bounds,—so is bound hand and foote.— Few also informe their children—or friends, so that in a moment ignorance—betrayes all sorts;—whereas the wise, that they may not be surprized,—would read, to remember—and dispose of, so—as may be alwayes in a readinesse to redresse the errours of ignorance, &c.—Let this Memento admonish thee for future,—and I have my desire, if thou hast the benefit, which is the end of my writing, &c. Nay Reader, over shooes, over bootes,—if thou wilt excuse me∣thod, 77.—thou shalt have matter (which is more materiall) in its stead.—Wee could methodize also, would time allow us; but It will not, so we must as we may.—A few Miscelanies more, and I have done,—with things that have, and if not look'd to, will undoe us.—78. Pitty & com∣passion. Pitty & compassion are most human passions, yet oft the most inhumane, cause not manlily managed; cannot we pitty? but we must precipitate the All for one. 'Cause it's call'd pitty, & complemen∣ted with see∣ming, circum∣vents judge∣ment. universe—for urius?—this is more cruell then cruelty it selfe,—but its unnaturall names and occulers, deceive our occults and under∣standings, &c. The present obvious object is most possessing to the dis∣possessing of all the absents.— I have heard of one that hath beene charged with the blood-shed of 3. Nations,—which may amount to some 2. or 300000.—of the peo∣ple his Creators—&c.?—This Officer being also further engaged by oath and betrust to protect them—yet in cold blood, projected To Command all that was theirs. their prostration, that he might out them of their lives at his pleasure. Yet this offending Officer—seeming sorrowfull (yet not for his sins, for he goes on,—but) at some respective suffering, for positively its none,—except great attendance and a plentifull Table be a suffe∣ring, &c.—But he seemes moved I say at his ill condition,—not at his ill conditions, and its like in a cruell pitty, to procure his enlargement, and the peoples confinement. But can the engaged (by choise, oath, betrust, love, and relations) to doe Justice, and right? do this to their loving choosers? Doth not the Covenant also binde our State and the Scot, so all to maintaine the
Kingdomes rights? and what are they,—but justice,—and satisfacti∣on; what can,—for what cannot be satisfied for?—Is not the inno∣cency—and honour of the Nation—a-Right? why should any thing be done to its dishonour:—so the States.—Will the State unstate us of all?—is it done like a State? Did,—or could hee sorrow and repent it were well:—but its no Murthered. satisfaction.—Considering the infinites, finited by him,—and his engagements as afore to the contrary,—as to protect, &c. If each not so engaged—should murther one, and then suffer some Those were not their bro∣thers keepers as was he. restraints, or suppose repent, must this procure their enlargement,—then let's all murther-one-by-one till we have gone the round. Manasses repentance—if reall, is not to our point, I will not exa∣mine it,—reason and justice allowes it not,—so then nor God. I can oppose with examples:—but the power is in reason, which examines them all, &c. See at Sect. 42. 45. concerning retaliation of this kind,—& com∣ply—to justice and reason. Sensiblenesse and pitty-doe well,-but to be insensible of the most pittifull object that can be objected, doth ill,—and to manage these As so many murthers. humane and feminine passions—man like, doth best of all.—Sure Samuel—was pittifull,—yet hee hewed Agag in pieces: and David, pittifull, yet delivered hee up 7. of Sauls innocent sonnes to the Gi∣beonites for the Gibbit, &c. None hath power to quit or qualifie but the wronged,—who cannot 'cause they are not, and who are, cannot,—cause—they may not.—Nature, reason, justice, and the Covenant,—besides the end of Go∣vernors, all I say, demand Justice, how comes it then wee are justled out of it? oh irreligious, atheisticall, inhumane and bloody Nation, to drink & swallow down at a draught so much blood, & never reluctate. Justice—and retaliation—in and by justice, is not cruelty, its—79. Of cruelty. cruelty—not to be so cruell, it multiplies offenders, and murthers the of∣fended. Samuel nor David, as afore were not cruell, in satisfying Justice, though the act seeme cruell. Justice is the Queen of vertues, injustice is the Queane of vices. The first establisheth, the latter demolisheth Thrones. Much may be said 80. Justice. of the aforesaids, but we have transgrest beyond pardon; yet if mur∣thers may be pardoned, what may not?—However will not our zeal for the common good procure a pardon? &c.
81 We could not have conceived, had we not said one word of the Kings subordination, as Servant, Officer, or Steward, to the State at large, that there is no understanding so short, but would selfly (at one present apprehension) have comprehended and reacht it, but we finde it other wise, &c.-But now that which we have said, seconding their capa∣cities, how can we question it, but that each one is fully satisfied; which if yet they be not, no endevour shall be wanting of our side, &c. Would God they would not in weaknesse or wickednesse be wanting to them∣selves and theirs, so to their native countrey, their true King. We shall then define a King,—which rightly done, will right all understandings but unrighteous ones. A true and righ King then, (to whom the title may be rightly ap∣plied, is such a one—who by a right self-power selfly commands, and is selfly obeyed. 82. A right self-power—is not any self-power unjustly inforced, gai∣ned, Note. or usurped. Which is thiefe-like, and Tyranny, though cal'd Con∣quest. Note again, A Self-power, not Deputative,—Kings it.—Selfes, are—Parents and Pay-masters, and just Conquerours, &c. By this no Deputy powers can be rightly cal'd Kings. All are Deputy-powers that are not Self-powers, as afore, &c. Who is King then? whether he that doth and ought execute the laws, The wills of The Lawes are the wills of the State at large, or the people, &c. others, and that for Them, not Himself: Or, those that set those Laws, also, enjoyns him an Oath to execute them, and none other? Also for Themselves, not Himselfe. And doe also allow Honours and Revennues respectively, as the said Lawes are lookt to, not over-lookt Judge all men of what we say. Finde me any other use of a King, or any Governour, if you can,—then Justice, Safety, and the Welfare of the People, &c. This lost, he is uselesse. For what saith our Saviour? Salt which hath lost his savour, is uselesse, and so good for nothing, but, &c. Just Conquerours are, Who defensively conquer their unjust offending adversaries. These set their own Lawes, and so command, and are o∣beyed Selfly: and are justly Masters of Liberties, Livelihoods, and Lives of the conquered. And this is our just right at this time, over those Scots we have conquered in this their unjust Invasion. But had they conquered us, it were Thief-like Murther and Theft, as it is neverthelesse in all they kill or take. 83. Will you have Scripture to second our Arguments in behalfe
of the Kinghood of the State at large. Whether (saith our Saviour, so St. Paul) is greater, Woman or Man? the Sabbath or Man, for whom both Woman and the Sabbath are made? Whether is greater, the God, or the Temple which sanctifieth it? Apply, between the State and the King, &c. 84. Lastly, will you have an Argument from the State or Parliament? Doe they not (King) the State at large, and Servant, and Officer the King, in their taking up Armes in loyalty to their said Lord and King the Kingdome, against the King, so call'd, for his disloyalty to the said State? And doth not this taking up Armes against it, accuse him of, &c. &c. &c. We from the premises quaere it, If Justice and Loyalty can allow any Self-titles of Kings, &c. to any Deputy powers, to defeat the State at large of its Kinghood,—Yea, to its Serviling to its Servant? to the hazarding of Life, Liberty, and Estate. Consider of it, O States, consider of it, Steward sends to a Lord, Vice-roy to a Roy. Much more I could have said in poynt of Reason, to a full satisfa∣ction of all scruples and objections; but we have not time to doe it, so must contract our selves, though for contract understandings, we wish we could have inlarged, &c. 85. But we have Atheisticall, (yet hypocriticall) adversaries to deale withall, who will pretend Religion, &c.—These, however, pre∣sume to conquer us by Scripture, though they cannot by Reason, and to subdue all our Reasons, yea our Reason, our Sense and our Senses thereby, so they fetch out of Scripture all that seemingly makes a∣gainst us, in behalfe of the King, of rather themselves under colour of his name, and then demand of us, what we can say to this, to that? &c. Yet the parti∣culars are answered, might we ex∣hibit them. Bidding us quit our selves, if we can. It were infinite to answer to all particulars, which cause we cannot, we will discharge our selves by one generall Position, which shall prostrate all their positions, &c. We then say, this of Kings and Governours, is a poynt Rationall, and of the Sen∣ses, and not of Faith: and as so, it falls under their Regiment for tri∣all, and not under that of Faith. So then, whatsoever is brought out of Scripture, and however rendred, must have a construction that a∣grees with, and overthrowes not, neither Justice, Reason, nor the Senses, &c.—This is enough in it selfe, however, it's as much as time will al∣low us to say at this present, &c. onely we remember thee of our Sa∣viours and St. Pauls sayings, at Sect. 83. so at 42. 45. which are as ratio∣nall (though in Scripture) as are these.
86. But yet againe, they have not done with us: For if neither Reason nor Scripture will doe the deed,—Lawlesse Law shall,—So Judge Jenkins comes marching on furiously, Jehu-like, so as hee admits of no opposition,—and now are we (conceived) put to flight, yet are we not fled, nor will so much as turn our backs, &c. but keep both our station and posture—and so make head against all his impo∣stures, as followeth. We have not time, I say, to deale with each of his particulars, which had we, we would, &c.—so we must, as we may. Wee therefore in our Generall Position, as afore, answer, and so put to silence all, he or any one can say, &c. We then say, Law, so called, is the Creature of its Creator the State at large, made for its service, (and not to its dis-service, much lesse to servile it) by the States) the said States Commissioners, and that is way of Ju∣stice and Safety, so all other accommodations of the said State, and not to the King or any other against it.—Now if a Law (so called) which should be made, as afore, for the use of the State at large, by the said States, trusted to make lawes, in behalfe of their Lord, and not in behalfe of any his servants against him, if they shall, I say, make, and so call that a Law, which is not so, as being quite contrary to their betrust, and the end of Law, as in accommodation of some of their servants, against their Lord.—Quaere. If it be not absolute treachery in them to be∣tray the liberties and rights of their Lord, to any of his Servants, &c.—nay we say then, it's no law, though made as afore also, called so, and complemented with If a known long practis'd Physitian pre∣pare (as hee calls it) phy∣sick for his patient, and ceremonies it with the complements of a viall or galli pot, and all other circumstances, can all this make it physick? if apparantly destructive to its ends, and in stead of saving will kill, may not such Physick be kild, &c. Apply, &c. ceremonials to make it passe so,—we say again, it's no law, so binds no, nor may, nor can, nor shall it bind the Lord, or a∣ny of his retainers, so as to be abused, by any his servants, except in be∣halfe of the said Lord, which just necessity warranting,—is—sufferance, no abuse. In short, we care not what Judge Jenkins, nor any, or the law it selfe (so called) saith or doth, or would doe, as to binde us to Kings, or any Governours (alias the kingdomes and peoples Stewards, and Servants)) if contrary or destructive to its ends,—the freedomes and rights of the Generall, &c. whereas it ought rather to binde all Kings and Governours (who are indeed most bound) to accommodate the
LORD The State at large. GENERAL, though to their owne selfe-sufferings, &c. Thus much in short, to Law, so to Judge Jenkins his large and famou∣sed Law-piece, most infamous, in that he aimes to treacherize it to his Lord and King, the State at large, &c. and servile him to his servants, &c. Thus our just, our rationall, and as so, our true and lawfull definiti∣ons of treason and rebellion, &c. stand good, against Judge Jenkins his unjust, irrationall, and destructive (and therefore illegall) though cal∣led legall-definitions, &c. 87. Only I will tell thee, thou hst now no colour of ignorance left to prevaricate &c. nor to beare out thy former perpetrations, Forgoe them then, and once at last turn wise and honest: all thy undertakings against, or neglect of thy Lord Salus, must now needs proceed from im∣pudence, not impotence,—thou now knowest what the King, so called in reality, is. I hope, nor Titles, nor Names, nor rich Rayment, nor a great Train, or State, shall now deceive thee; Nothing can make a man more then a man, lesse they may. A Magazine is the richest place indeed,—but let each fetch away his treasure, what is it? 88. I am not factious, nor partiall, I am against both, Parliament and King, as they forfeit their ends and betrusts, and are against the kingdome. And I am for one or both as they are faithfull to their Trusts, &c. 89. More I hope I need not say, but yet if any shall in pretence of love and duty to the King (so call'd) alias the kingdomes Steward, be so treacherous to the Kingdome their true King, so to themselves, their posterities, kindred and friends, to oppose us, in defence of the said King or Steward, against the kingdome, we heartily desire them to de∣cline all base and treacherous ends to the aforesaids. And if it be on∣ly their injuditious judgements (after all we have said) they will recti∣fie them; and let them with ingenuity pursue the acquiring and purchasing the truth with us, as wee will with them; and let the convinc'd com∣ply. And we further heartily intreat them, that they would, as be∣seems the civil (if they will needs reply) perform it not perfunctorily, but with Nervous and strenuous Arguments, not idle and fallacious to a∣buse the people, and lose time, and as if they sought rather a vainglori∣ous conquest, then the true glory of truth.—Also that it may be without scurrillity or contempt, and they shall be answerably dealt with. For we hold exclamations, jeerings and contempts, to proceed of ill na∣tures, ill educations, or weaknesse, &c. like Schoole-boyes, who when  weake in dispute, doe in wickednesse fall to scolding and fifty-cuffs, &c. Dixi. Onely, If nothing will do, we are undone, and so are most of our undoers. FINIS.
❧ AN APOLOGIE. AS we have Cautioned in case any write against us, &c. So we hold it necessary also, to say something; lest any one in a pretence of love and loyalty to the King or Kingdomes Steward, although it may be Demetrian selfe-love, and not to Diana,-also, hate to Paul, &c. may be the true ground, and not love to the King:—but admit, love, &c. to him—its not right nor just in opposition to his King, the Kingdome.—However, least they should in a purposed re∣venge upon us, under the pretences aforesaid, suggest. This man writes against the King; also dishonours him, &c. by meane Objection. expressions and rendrings; also intimates this or that of him, &c. Also the title is tart and offensive. To the aforesaids I answer as followeth. To the last, first. If the Ti∣tle Answer. should offend thee; yet be not offended,—For thou either hast, or wilt finde, that those who conspire against the Welfare, Crowne, Peace, and Dignity of our Soveraigne Lord King Salus, are farre worse then Knaves, for they are Traytors; why then should we fear to offend them? And those who are ensnared or deluded by them; may they not, right∣ly (at the least) be cal'd Fooles. And to the former objection, I answer, I doe not intentionally to wrong, dishonour, or abate any thing of the Sewards just Dues and The neglect of others ne∣cessitates us. Rights,—but what I must doe of necessity in defence and vindication of King Salus. And if so he suffer, it's sufferable;—what also, if it be his insufferables, are the cause of his sufferings? But ther's not any thing his due, in opposition to the Kingdomes sufferance, in safety, justice, and Rights,—for if more be given him, then his due, to the wronging of the universall,—so particulars,—in their Rights of Justice and safety, &c. Reason, Justice, & necessity require, a reducing all to rights, that so hee may have his owne due, and not beyond; especially to the encroachment upon what's his Lords, the Kingdomes. However, if he should lose any of his just Rights for Salus sake, its just and right.—But if it be consci∣ence and justice in any thus to plead for his Rights; How is't, they
plead not for the Rights of Here's adoo about the King the King, with pretences of love & loyal∣ty to him, &c.—Well,—now we have shew∣ed you the true & right King,—make good your precences,—else you are only a Preten∣der. the true King indeed? to whom they are first and principally bound in nature and reason,—so by Covenant the 3d &c.—So it appears to be craft, not conscience. Nor doe we intimate any thing injuriously against him, for Deserts are no injuries;—only we inferre, from the Scots sayings, and their taking up Arms against him,—so from our States taking up Armes also, and traytering those that side with him against the States: and thus both States Actions are directions and Warrants for us, what we may say & doe; For, if we are enjoyned to fight against him,—sure its as he is, &c. &c. &c.—Sure also, we are enjoyned, and so may speake and write as well as fight,—the last being the lesser of the two, and contained in, the Greater—fighting, &c.—being also never forbid,—and were wee forbid, we conceive forbiddings cannot justly discharge us of our just du∣ties to our Lord and King the State.—Again, to forbid us, were to for∣bid the Covenant, which also enjoynes us, as doth reason and justice also, to support the Kingdomes rights first and absolutely. The Stewards se∣condarily, respectively and conducingly:—but what rights are due, to universall wrong-doers? Now the kingdoms Rights are safety, peace, and justice,—so to have its honour maintained, and its innocency cleared,—though the Stew∣ard should suffer in his honour or any way, for the accommodation there∣of,—how then if the sufferance be just?—For the means must suffer for the End, and any way is just, that necessarily conduceth to it. And how can we be able to make good the Covenant, except the means that conduceth thereto be allowed? that is, to speake, write, and act any right things in behalfe thereof, and to oppose any its opposers whosoever.—Also to render the Steward in such expressions, as that his condition & place may be plainly distinguisht from that of his Lords,—who must be allowed rendrings thereafter, that his dues may be rendred him. Again, we are necessitated to what we have done, and its our offensive Adversaries that write all this, not we, by enforcing us to write it;—Shall any one or any thing bind us from defending our King, being clearly con∣vinced here∣of, and that it's our duty and high time to speak? God forbid. for if treacherous bookes be writ, and opinions held so generally to the ru∣ine of King Salus, is't not treachery in all, not to bestir themselves (in their power and place) in his behalfe? And shall such wicked treache∣rous ones goe unpunished? and shall the loyall Defenders (forced by such disloyall offenders) suffer, &c.—truly, better is expected, &c. though we will not presume to say what. So now we have done, and appeale to justice and ingenuity, hoping our love, duty and zeale to our Lord, King Salus (which in the presence
of God, is our only aime) will save us from any rigid censures, of any our triviall slips and failings in his behalfe, &c. In which we being Hu∣manes,—must needs humanize it.—If now wee suffer by injurious Censures, &c. its as Martyrs, &c. Two Cautions for thy better understanding this Booke, which should have beene placed at the beginning. Reader, 1. WHerever thou readest or hearest the expressions, Kingdom, People, State at large, or Salus Populi, &c. thou wouldst in thy mind, put in their places Kings, Prince, Soveraign, yea Emperour, or Gods Anointed, &c. or any rendrings as high as thou canst; for there is none higher, but God Himselfe; not Religion, his honour, worship, ser∣vice, &c.—as see in Quaere, before 66. also at 83. So, Salus is Head, Chiefe, &c. And so do thou apply in thy thoughts,—so in thy actions, &c. This we say is the right King, to whom the Name is due,—and to whom thou owest more then thou canst pay, and for whom thou maist pay any one, be it whom it will, if justly occasioned in his behalfe. 2. Again, whereever thou hearest or readest the Titles, King, Prince, Gods Anointed, Saced Mjestie, or Soveraign, &c. in their stead, con∣ceive in thy mind, Stewrd, Servant, or Officer to the aforesaid Lord and King, for  right, by all the preceding arguments. The Contents will send thee whereto make good both the aforesaids. Val.
A further Addition or continuation of the Contents of the Booke for better direction, and satisfaction, which through hast were left out at the first. 17. THe Scots chiefe arguments for their Invasion, answered at Sect. 37. to 45. 18. The Scots charge the King with the blood-shed of 3. Nations,—so doe they charge—him also in their taking up Armes against him, &c. by both which they accuse him, so and so, &c.—From whence may much be inferd,—and this amongst the rest, that the wel-fare, justice, peace, & safety of the State, is—King, Chiefe, &c. and the King a servant thereta,—Sect. 55. 19. Some causes of the Peoples rising, &c. explained at Sect. 58. to 59. 20. Of oaths, &c. made to the King, when binding, when not, at Sect. 66. 21. An answer in behalfe of the State, to a Catalogue of Exorbitances charged upon them,—Sect. 71. at M, 22. The State and King discrimen'd, shewing what the King hath done,—and intended to doe against the kingdom, but not any thing freely, for its good. Also, what the State hath done for us—and what accidental∣ly against us. examined at Sect. 71. all, especially at O. & S. 23. Pitty and Compassion at Sect. 78. Cruelty,—at Sect. 79. Justice,—at Sect. 80. rightly defined. 24. A true King, tuly defined.—Sect. 81. to 83. 25. The State at large proved King, chiefe, head, &c. by Scripture,—which is reason also,—and the King—(so called) is the said Kings Stew∣ard—and Servant, &c. 83.—the end there, being King and Chiefe, &c.—the Meanes,—Meaner,—as—servant, to the Lord, its end. 26. All that may be collected out of Scripture, in behalfe of the King,—answered in a position, at Sect. 85.— 17. Judge Jenkins, all of him in the Kings behalfe,—answered by a Position, Sect. 86. FINIS.
