J983 E569_1 99862854 165319
Lieut: General Jones's LETTER To the Councel of State, Of a Great VICTORY Which it hath pleased God to give the Forces in the City of Dublin under his Command, on the Second of this instant August, against the Earl of Ormond's and the Lord Inchiquin's Forces before that City. Together with the List of all the Prisoners and Ammunition taken, and the Narrative of Captain Otway, who was in the Fight. Die Saturni, 11o Augusti, 1649. At the Councel of State at White-Hall; ORdered, That the Letter from Lieutenant General Jones from Dublin of the 6th of this instant August, relating the Victory which it hath pleased God to give the Forces of the City of Dublin under his Command, against the Army of Ormond before that City; together with the List of Prisoners and Ammunition taken, and the Narrative of Captain Otway, be forthwith printed and published: And that it be sent to the Lord Major of London, to be sent to all the Ministers within his Iurisdiction; who are hereby required to publish the same to morrow, being Lords day, the 12th of August in their publique Con∣gregations, That there may be upon this occasion, an Acknowledgement of the goodness of God to this Commonwealth, in so seasonable a Victory; and that it be also sent to the rest of the Ministers within the late Lines of Com∣munication to be published as aforesaid. GUALTER FROST Secr' London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England, August 11. 1649.
Right Honorable, THe Lord hath blessed this your Army with good success against Ormond and his, for which Gods most holy Name be ever glori∣fied. The account of that service is thus briefly: On the first of this instant, the Enemy began his approaches to this place more then formerly, and that night was Ormond, Preston, and the chiefest of that Army, at a Work begun at Baggotsrath, about a quar∣ter of a mile hence Eastward of the City, upon the Sea, thence they purposed to run forward to our Tren∣ches on the Land-side, and to raise their Forts towards the Water, for hindering the landing of those supplyes and Forces expected. They had before cut off the wa∣ter-running from the higher grounds into the City, whereby our Mills had been driven, and in their present work would they have cut us off from all forage for our cattle: To this end was that very night, a Brest-work by them made crosse the high-way, neer Baggotsrath, whereabouts was the onely grazing-place left for us. As for the Castle of Baggotsrath,, I caused it to be be∣fore demollished, so as it was not capable of a Garri∣son, foreseeing what our prejudice might be in their possessing it. On thursday the second, we discovered a party of the Enemies, drawn to Baggotsrath, about fifteen hundred foot, besides horse. We found a necessity for removing them, and that speedily: and seeing the nearness of the Enemies camp at Rathmynes, (less then a mile from Baggotsrath) where they might be readily relieved with greater force as occasion might require; therefore did I advance with so much a greater strength, about twelve hundred horse, and four thousand foot. The Enemies work at Baggotsrath we soon entred,
yet not without strong dispute: most of the Enemies foot there were slain and taken, their horse having de∣serted them, after the first charge. Our horse and foot pursuing their advantages, we be∣came at last wholly engaged with their whole Army, whom after two hours fight, we totally routed. We slew on the place, and in the chase, about four thousand; and have two thousand five hundred and se∣venteen prisoners, most of them Inchiquines English, and of our run-aways. We got one whole Cannon, three Demi-Cannons, one long-square gun, carrying a ball of twelve pound, one Saker-drake, and one Mor∣ter-piece, (all these brass) and some Trayn-carriages, and about two hundred draught Oxen for the Trayn. The Strength of the Enemy was by themselves since acknowledged Nineteen thousand; Ormond narrowly escaped: Of our men there are not twenty missing, many wounded. The greatest loss fell on the horse, wherein my Regiment hath much suffered, which I hum∣bly desire may be considered, together with my former losses in the same kinde in former Services, and there∣fore that larger Recruits may be given me: To which end I have employed thither this Gentleman Captain Otway, one faithful and forward, whom I make bold to recommend unto your favor. This whole work is the Lords doing, and it is mar∣vellous in our eyes: By whose especial providence it was that we should thus engage, we our selves at first not so far intending it: Neither did the Enemy ex∣pect our so doing; nor would they have willingly en∣gaged with us, if it might have been by them avoided, they reserving themselves for the coming up of Clan∣ricard with his Connaght forces about Three thousand, and the Lord of Ardes with his Seven thousand Scots,
all ready for marching; Inchiquine also being looked for, who had the week before gone towards Munster, with two Regiments of horse, for appeasing some stir∣rings there by Owen Roe, raised in his absence. Never was any day in Ireland like this, to the confusion of the Irish, and to the raising up the spirits of the poor English, and to the restoring of the English Interest, which from their first footing in Ireland was never in so low a con∣dition, as at that very instant, there not being any one considerable landing place left you, but this alone, and this also (without this the Lords timely and most graci∣ous goodness and providence to us) almost gone. Yet is not all this any ground of Security, whereby may be kept back or delayed the Supplies designed us; for most of our Garisons are yet to be taken in, and the Enemy to be speedily followed, that they recover not (which yet they may do to a considerable number) and that they either possess not themselves of this Har∣vest, or hinder us of it. For our selves as at present, we are not in condition to prosecute this great Victory as we should and would, wanting pay for our men, and ne∣cessary provisions, which would be now made over to us speedily and plentifully, this being the time, and the occasion being now offered for a full ending of this War, by its vigorous prosecution, the opportunity whereof is not to be in any case omitted; besides the security therein rendred to your affairs there, whereun∣to all these movings might have been dangerously car∣ried, as they were by Ormond and his Party intended. All which I leave to your most wise consideration, and as ever, remain Your Honors most faithful Servant, MIC: JONES. Dublin, Aug. 6. 1649.
Prisoners taken the second of August, 1649. Field-Officers. COl: Christopher Plun∣ket Earl of Fingal. Col: Richard Butler the Lo: of Ormonds brother. Lieut: Col: Michael Searl Adjutant General. Lieut: Col: Aldworth. Lieut: Col: Standley. Lieut: Col: Tho: Fortescu. Lieut: Col: Jesper Taaff. Lieut: Col: Gerard, Lieut: to the Fuiseers. Major Roger Garland. Major Oliver Fitz Simons Major Comin. Major Henry Littell. Major Charls Norwood. Major Riddar, Major to Col: Blunt. Major Fleetwood, Serjeant to the Fuiseers. Major Shalop. Sir George Bingham Ba∣ronet. Captains. Daniel. Leston. James Fleming. Dunn. Geoghegan. Henry Fitz Gerrald. George Cusacke. Christopher Barnewell. Balthazar Newgent. William Whittly. Harbert Lewis. Petty. Cosby. Jackson. May. Graynier. Thomas Bourke. Daniel Mac Nemara. Pierce Mac Kee. Fergus Mageins. Thomas Pluncket. Povey. Morris Harbert. Townsen. George Darcy. Milemay. Ofield. Aymes. Roger Flangherty.
Ben: Pierce. Arthur Asten. Dun. Fitz Gerrald. Dillon. Cap: Lieut: James Wade. Cap: Lieut: Dawning Barret. Cap: Lieut: Foacks. Cap: Lieut: John Alexander. Barth: Fitz Gerrald. Reformadoes. Holmes Cornee 41 Lieutenants. Robert Coyne. Arthur Reynolds. William Dallon. Robert Lack. Nicholas Raw. Francis Coyn. Richard Andrewes. John Crisp. Tho: Whitely. James Gislyne. Henry Moss. William Merrill. Paul Symons. Math: Brown. Edward Coates. Rich: Betsworth. Thomas Power. Clement Greene. Francis Hill. Thomas Hill. Foxe. Barret. Hamilton. Searle. Alexander. Illwell. Mevet. Gibs. Harris. Browne. Nevet. Andrewes. Street. Roe. Reynolds. Thomas. Towsen. Lock. Barnes. Gilborn. Fay. Ross Dempsey. William Bourk. Francis Fox. Dutton. Thomas Darcy. John Pollet. Garret Harbert. John O Teige. Miles Bourk. Walter Hussey. John Andrews. George Welsh. Richard Pluncket. Carbery Higgin. Thomas Pierce. Edward Dowdal. Garret Reeves. 58.
Ensigns. Henry Colepease. Southwood. Nicholas Mayl. William Jewel. Simon Pordon. William Sanderson. William Pope. William Crosby. Peter Bulkley. Harbert Whitefield. Morton Vaughan. Henry Leigh. Robert Dreakin. George Green. Henry Bannester. George Giles. Samuel Floyd. Robert Fitz-Gerrald. Edward Jans. Palyn. Dickson. Lillies. Langford. Willonton. Bradley. Rogers. Brisby. James Ennis. Peter Smith. Peter Walsh. James Finis. Richard Mealey. Patr. Bolan. Michael Taaff. Patr. Boy Key. Mortogh Mac Hary. Owen Mahany. Jo: Tirrel. Edm. Mullegan. Daniel Kevanagh. Daniel Wyer: Tho: Street. 42 Cornets. Williams. Jolliff. George Mettam. George Borray. 4 Quartermasters. Jones. King. Smith. James Woods. Edmund Stacy. Blackwal. 6 Troopers: Mr: Lewis Richards. Mr: John Salman. Mr: Henry Wilkinson. Mr: Griffith Cox. Mr: Edward Heald. Mr: Gore. Mr: Richard Bealing. Mr: Baggot. Francis Witherington. Mr: Miles Gyncks. [Gent:] 10. Robert Hamilton Minister. Ten Servants. Six Gunners.
John Bellew Lieutenant of the Ordinance. The Clerk of the Store. Six Trumpets. Six Chyrurgions. Ten belonging to the Train of Artilery. Sixty nine Sergeants. Twenty Drums. Fifty six Corporals. Fuiseers. William Pets. William Fitz-Gerald. John Farling. William Dowdal. Rich. Maudsley. Matthew Simple. Bethel Vaughan. William Rowlandson. Captain Hooker. William Boyce. John Gulston. Edmund Pooley. Edward Garing. John Bryers. Thomas Tobe. John Jennings. Tho: Barrow. Christopher Sherman. William Blake. William Hopkins. Edw: Jones. John Williams. Peter Cropper. John Jackson. Robert Calvect. Ralph Goodwin. Robert Pain. Gerard Russel. Richard Ellis. Tho: Ellison. William Dextet. Stephen Foxwist. Henry Finch. Robert Dalvin. Thomas Stanly. Francis Needham. Robert Dalligeed. Mat: Cardy. Mat: Righby. Morris Nangley. Nicho: Allen. Tho: Kemp. Henry Booker. Peter Bogerd. Dennis Lord. Robert Gardner. Edward Gore. Robert Gneens. John Farehurst. Thomas Farrer. Christopher Perkenson. William Windesler. Halliwary. Brasse. George Moor. John Murfy. 56
A List of Artillery, taken from the Irish at Ram∣nies, the second of August, 1649. ONe brass Cannon, weighing seven thousand three hundred twenty one pounds, her length ten foot, her bullet weighing forty four pound. One brass Demi-Cannon eldest, weighing five thou∣sand four hundred twenty eight pound, her length e∣leven foot and an half, her bullet weighing thirty two pounds. Two brass Demi-Cannon of one mould, each weigh∣ing forty four hundred, their length nine foot and a half, their bullet weighing twenty six pound. One square brass Demi-Culverin, weighing two thousand eight hundred pound, her length eleven foot, four inches, her bullet weighing twelve pounds. One small brass Saker-Drake, weighing six hundred pound, her length four foot and a half, her bullet weigh∣ing six pounds. One brass Morter-piece, weighing nine hundred and twenty seven pounds, her shell weighing one hundred pounds. JA. MOLYNEUX Mr. Gunner. Two thousand one hundred private Soldiers, where∣of six hundred Irish, the rest being of Inchequines par∣ty, and have taken up arms for the Parliament, promi∣sing faithfulness. These had quarter on the surrender of the Castles of Rathgar and Ramaynes, whither for gaining conditions, they had betaken themselves.
More Prisoners taken. VVIlliam Cunningham, a noted Rebel. Mr. Buggot, Deputy Pay-master. Mr. John Harbert, Servant to the pretended King, who landed at Galway about six days since with the Kings Houshold-goods. Slain. SIr William Vaughan, Sir Edward Verney, Lieutenant Colonel Daniel Brother in Law to the Lord Taaff, Colonel Gerrard, Lieutenant Colonel Matthews, Bro∣ther in Law to the Earl of Ormond, Major Bretain, Lieutenant Colonel Beverly, Usher. Captain Otway, The Messenger that brought this dispatch who was an Actor in that Service, further re∣lates, That the Enemy marched away with such haste, as they left their whole Camp which was very well fur∣nished of all provisions of Victual, store of Wine, Silks and Velvet, Scarlet and other cloth, both woollen and linen, and some money, all the Cattle left in the Quar∣ters about Dublin as they found them there. The Enemy hath quit several Garisons upon their marching off; viZ. Manouth, Naas, Donahadee, and Richardstown. Wednesday the Eighth was appointed to be a day of Thanksgiving in Dublin for this great Victory. Thursday, Lieut: General Jones intended to march out again with his Army towards Drogheda. FINIS.
