m2192 e1184_6 99864330 116557
The down-fall of Babylon: OR, The Ruine of Antichrist: Being that mystery of Iniquity, which beginneth to worke in the children of disobedience, the Independents. By Alexander Mingzeis Minister of Gods Word. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last dayes scoffers, walking after their own lusts. And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers fell asleepe, all things continue as they were from the begin∣ning of the creation. 2. Pet. 3.3.4. Printed in the Yeare 1647.
To His Sacred Majestie CHARLES, By the grace of God, of England, Scotland, Fance, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, &c. Dread Soveraigne: WHither should Faith have its refuge, but to Faiths Defender? If Apostates dare abuse authority then surely truth may take sanctuary under your sacred protection. There are a frie of Locusts (in these licen∣tious times) smarmd out of the bottom∣lesse pit, which have almost consumed our Vine. And while we have gone about to drive out one Antichrist, a worse is come in his roome. Help therefore, O King, to drive out these Caterpillars. Let not
those which deny authority usurpe autho∣rity. Your humble Subject takes God to witnesse that he aimes not at the godly or truely religious, but onely at such, as whose consciences accusing them may have time and leasure enough to repent, and amend. The Lord turne them, and preserve and keepe your Majesty from all danger for ever, Amen. Your Majesties most humble and Loyall Subject, Alexander Mingzeis, Minister.
The Downefall of Ba∣bylon, &c. Christian Reader: MEE thinkes the very word sets foorth and declares the odious∣nesse of the Sect: for it intimates in the first place, that as they depend of none, so they are worthily called Inde∣pendents, and may in time proove pendants, if not dependants. First, therefore they depend of none neither God nor man. Of God they doe not, because they have denied Christ, the truth and principles of the Oracles of God. As first the use of the morall law.
2. The use of Scripture in generall. 3. In speciall or particular. First, therefore they have and doe deny Christ, by their cursed and blasphe∣mous detractions and calumniati∣ons. First in giving forth that Christ did more hurt in teaching the Lords prayer,As divers both in Countrey and City. and saving the Thiefe upon the crosse, then ever he did good in all his life. 2 In giving forth that he was but illegitimate,As a Wea∣ver in Kent, and a woman in the Ci∣ty. A Gentle∣man in Hartford∣shire, a I have been credibly informed. 1. John. 2.12. 2. Pet. 2.1. and a Car∣penters Sonne. 3. And lastly there and have beene some of them which have and doe flatly deny that ever there was such an one as a Christ in the world, &c. John saith that he is Antichrist which denieth the Father and the Sonne, that is, which denyeth Christ to be the Son of God, and have not our adversa∣ries done so? The Apostle Peter tel∣leth us, that there shall be false Tea∣chers among us in the last times,
who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And have not our adversaries done so? And St. Jude saith, that they were before of old ordained to this con∣demnation,Jude 4. which should turne the grace of God into laciviousnesse, de∣nying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. The Jewes de∣ny Christ, but never accused him of folly and ignorance, as some of our adversaries have done. The Turks confesse him to be the great Pro∣phet and Messi as that should come into the world,Deut. 18.15. Dan. 9 25. only they deny him to be the Son of God; but they ne∣ver gave forth that he was illegi∣timate, and a Bastard. Therefore In∣dependents are worse then either Turks or Jewes, Heathens or Infi∣dels.Rev. 13 4. The Divine Evangelist ma∣keth mention of a beast that should
arise out of the Sea, having seven heads and ten hornes, and speaking blasphemies,5.6. to whom the Dragon should give his power.. 2. And what is this beast, but the pernicious sect of the Independents? for are they not risen out of the sea of the promis∣cous and various multitude of peo∣ple? 2. Is not their power almost be∣come infinite and boundlesse, noted by the beasts seaven heads and ten hornes? 3. Hath not the Dragon, or Devill given them this power, (for sure I am) neither God nor man ever gave it them? 4. And lastly, doe they not in a most ample and large manner open their mouthes to blas∣phemy with the beast; yea in such a measure as was never heard of a∣mong Jewes or Gentiles, Turkes or Barbarians, insomuch that it is a wonder the Land doth not sinke un∣der the burthen of them. But to this it will be objected, that this is but
the error of a few, and is not known nor acknowledged by them all. I answer, by a part wee may judge of all, even as Apelles tooke Hercules length and stature, by the measure of his foote. Besides (as our adver∣saries cannot deny) but that those which have opened their mouthes in such a measure of blasphemy a∣gainst Christ, are also those which are of their owne sect and opinion, neither have they beene rebuked by them, or written or spoke against so farre as ever I have read or under∣stood (by any of them) for the same. Secondly, as these our adversa∣ries have denyed Christ; so they have, & do deny the use of the mo∣ral Law, bearing us in hand, that it is of no force, strength, or vertue. And indeede what can be better for law∣lesse, people, then to have the Law a∣brogated and abolished? Therefore (albeit there may seeme to be no
dispute against those that deny the principles of faith and reason) yet have I undertaken (for conscience sake, and their owne good) to shew unto them the use and necessity of the Law, and that it is in as great force, strength, and vertue (accor∣ding to the inlightening, and direct∣ing power of it) as ever it was. And that first by the testimony of Christ himselfe, who plainely telleth us, that he is not come to destroy the Law and the Prophets,Mat. 5.17. but to fulfill them.Rom. 3.31. And the Apostle that he did not make void the Law, but did e∣stablish it. And the reason is, be∣cause the Law is holy,7.12. and the com∣mandement is holy, just, and good. Therefore David made it his de∣light,Psal. 119.70. and the Prophet Isaiah con∣cludeth;Isay. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speake not accor∣ding to this word, it is because there is no truth in them. I must confesse,
as many as are led by the spirit of Christ,Gal. 5.18. are not under the curse or ri∣gour of the Law, by reason that in respect of our selves, and our owne weakenesse the Law can make no∣thing perfect;Heb. 7.1 but that hinders not the Law to be still in force, and per∣fect in it selfe,Ps. 19.7. not only as it is a rule of righteousnesse, and a light unto us, but also as it serveth to convince the conscience, and to lay it open. And therefore David used it as a lampe unto his feete,Psal. 119.105. and a light un∣to his pathes. And the Apostle plainely concludeth, that he had not knowne sinnes,Rom. 7.7. but by the Law. Wherefore take away this light, this lampe, and this rule, and our adver∣saries may doe what they list, blow out this candle, and they may goe whether they please; but they must not thinke to escape in the darke or to go away in a mist; for wee shall be able (even by the very lanthorne
of this Law) to trace and finde them out. And therefore they deny it lest they should be found out, & ruld by it.Joh. 3.19. For light is come into the world, and men love darkenesse, rather then light; because their deeds are evill. Thirdly, our adversaries (the In∣dependents) doe not only deny Christ, and the use of the morall Law; but also the whole Canoni∣call Scriptures, in calling them a dead letter, and in comparing them to a fountaine scaled up. Notwith∣standing the Prophet Isaiah proclai∣meth unto all,Isay. 55.1. to come freely to the waters, and to buy wine and milke without money, and without price: And the Prophet Ezechiel com∣pares them to the waters issuing forth under the threshold of the Sanctuary,Ezech 47.5. which grew into a river, and became impassible. David tells us, that the Law of the Lord is per∣fect, converting the soule; that the
testimony of the Lord is sure,Ps. 19 7. ma∣king wise the simple, and that the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoy∣cing the heart, the commandement of the Lord is pure, inlightning the eyes. And Paul saith in Timothy, that all Scripture is given by inspira∣tion of God,2 Tim. 3. 16. and is profitable for doctrine, reproofe, for correction, for instruction in righteousnesse. That the man of God may be per∣fect, throughly furnished unto all good workes. In the Epistle to the Hebrewes, he tells us, that the word of God is quick and powerfull,Heb. 4.12 and sharper then any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing of soule and spirit, and of the joynts and marrow, and that it is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And in the Epistle to the Ro∣mans he plainely concludeth the Gospell to be the power of God un∣to salvation.Ro. 1.16. And therefore if our
Gospel he did (saith the Apostle) It is hid to them that are lost,2 Cor. 4. 34. in whom the God of this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ (who is the Image of God) should shine unto them. I wonder what St. John meaneth, whereas he saith:Joh. 1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God. I hope our adversaries will not say, that God is a dead letter. But it is not the sence or scope of Scripture (will they object) which they call the dead letter but the let∣ter it selfe, which is the creature. I answer, then the Creator (with the scapegoat) may passe free, but take away the letter, I wonder what will become of the sence, and scope of Scripture. Yes, our new Enthu∣siasts and speculative Divines have found out a way to come by the
sence and scope of Scripture, with∣out the letter, and that is by Revela∣tion, and inditing of the spirit. But what spirit is that, which inditeth without Scripture? Must not Gods word and spirit be one?1 Joh. 5.7. And doth not the Apostle say plainely, that if wee or an Angell from Heaven preach any other Gospel then that which hath beene preached,Gal. 1.8. let him be accursed And is it not a new Gos∣pel to deny Christ, to deny the Scriptures, to deny Magistracie, to deny Ministry, and to deny the crea∣ture, or that man hath a reasonable soule? But seeing I have proved Inde∣pendents already to be worse then Jewes, Turkes or Infidels; let us now see what difference there is be∣tweene them and Papists. Papists say that the Holy and Canonicall Scriptures are imperfect and ob∣scure; therefore they restraine them
from the Laiety. Independents say that they are but a dead letter, and therefore uselesse, and unprofitable, and restraine them from all men. The Pope arrogates the knowledge and interpretation of Scripture only to himselfe, so doe Independents. The Pope he saith, that he is above and without all Law, because he hath the Law written in the table of his breast; so doe Independents. Only herein is the difference (if there be any) that the Pope and Papists (in some nature) refuse not to be tryed by Scripture; but our adversaries doe; for so much as they (notwith∣standing Malechie saith,Mal. 2.7. the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seeke the Law at his mouth) arrogate the key of know∣ledge, and of interpreting the Scrip∣tures only to themselves,A woman in Midle∣sex. and plaine∣ly give forth that the Scriptures are to be tryed by their spirit, and not
their spirit by the Scriptures. Be∣ing contrary to Saint Johns rule,1 Joh. 4.1. which adviseth us not to believe e∣very spirit; but to try them, whether they be of God, adding the reason, because many false spirits are gone forth into the world. But how should wee try them? whenas they have wrung the rule of truth and touchstone of Gods word, out of our hands, in calling it a dead letter, and uselesse creature. The Pope he saith he cannot sinne, only out of Peters chaire, he confesseth he may erre; but our adversaries plainely tell us, that they cannot sinne at all; And why? Because God sees no sinne in Jacob,Num. 23.21. nor transgression in Israel. And he that is borne of God sinneth not; Neither indeed can he sinne, because his seede abideth in him. O happy people, a royal Priest∣hood, and a holy Nation.1 Pet. 2.9. I won∣der they doe not also say, that the
showte of a King is among them. How hath God sent them the spirit of delusion,2 Thes. 2.11. that they might believe a lie,12. to the end that they might all be damned, which beleeve not the truth? For are they ignorant, or do they take no notice that Israel was e∣ven then committing whooredome with the Daughters of Moab,Num. 25.1. when Balaam did pronounce them with∣out sinne. And doth not the same author which saith;1 Joh. 3.9. he which is borne of God cannot sinne; also to conclude,1 Joh. 1.8. that he which saith he is without sinne, deceiveth himselfe, and the truth is not in him.Ps. 32.1 I con∣fesse, the man is blest, to whom the Lord doth not impute sinne. But that hindreth not, but that God see∣eth sinne in Jacob, and transgression in Israel.1 Sam. 7. 32.33. Yea, and that he will pu∣nish it with the rods of men; though he take not his everlasting mercies from us. But heere I shall intreat
thee (Christian Reader) to consi∣der what will become of this doct∣rine of our adversaries. They say God seeth no sinne in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel; therefore be secure, and let us sinne, that grace may abound. 2. Observe, that if there be no sinne, then the soule is made righteous; but a righteous soule needes no Saviour; therefore no wonder, that our adversaries de∣ny Christ. Againe, where there is no sinne there is perfection of grace; but where there is perfection of grace, there must also be perfection of glory (for so much as glory is the reward of grace) therefore by their owne consequent they must, and do injoy Heaven upon earth, which hath and doth make some of them not only not ashamed to deny the resurrection, and generall judge∣ment, but also plainely to give forth,The F∣milist, and the Mille∣natie. that the resurrection is already
past, that Heaven is upon earth, and that they enjoy Christ heere in the flesh: If this be not Apostasie, I know not what is; I cannot but wonder therefore that our adversa∣ries would seperate themselves from us,Jude 19 seeing wee have more rea∣son to seperate our selves from them. But they are gone from a∣mong us, because they were not of us,1 Joh. 2.19. and heerein they are farre worse then the Pope, for albeit he have swarved in some things; yet hath he not denyed the Articles of the Faith, as it is proved our adversaries both have and doe. And therefore also I must confesse, I should have taken the Pope to have beene the Antichrist; but that I finde a worse to stand up in his roome. It is said of that man of sinne, and sonne of perdition: Thes. 2.1. That he opposeth and exalteth himselfe above all that is called God, or that is worshipped;
so that as God he sitteth in the tem∣ple of God, shewing himselfe that he is God. And doe not our ad∣versaries so? For in the first place they take themselves to be the only people of God, condemning all but themselves. 2. They oppose and advance themselves above all that is called God: Above Christ, above the Scriptures, above people, above Priest, above Magistrate, above Mi∣nister, and above all the world: So that their power may well be com∣pared unto the Beares foote, spoken of in the Revelation, which in Da∣niel is said to breake in pieces,Rev. 13 2. Dan. 7.6. to de∣voure; yea, and to stampe all things under its feete. I read of a woman (in the Revelations) that was cloa∣thed with the Sun,Rev. 12.1. and had twelve Starres upon her head, and had the Moone under her feete; but I never read of a woman that trampled both Sun, Moon & Stars, & all under her feete.
Fourthly, our adversaries doe not only deny Scripture in generall, by calumniating, and traducing it: But also in particular in flatly denying some part of it. As first the booke of Psalms, questioning the Author; because some of the Psalmes beare the Titles of others besides David. 2. They question the first and se∣cond booke of the Kings, because they are thought to containe no o∣ther thing then what is expressed and set down in the first and second booke of the Chronicles. 3. They question some of the smaller Pro∣phets (as Amos by name) because he was a heards man.Amos 1.1. 4. In the new Testament, some of them question Saint Lukes Gospell, and the Acts, because the Authour was a Physiti∣on. The booke of the Hebrewes, because the Authour is uncertaine. The Epistle of Saint Jude, because there was one of Christ kinsmen
of that name in Mathewes Gospel, because he was a Publican, and the Revelation, because it was written in Johns banishment, when he was in the Isle of Patmos. Finally, and in a word, they make but little or no accompt of the whole booke of the old Testament; because they con∣ceive old things are done away, and all thinges are become new.2 Cor. 5.17. Not waying that the two Testaments are like twinnes, or the two Tables of stone, in so much that whosoever imbraces the one, must also make use of the other; because what is contained in the one, is also conclu∣ded in the other. For as the old Te∣stament which containeth the Law, doth also include the Gospel, by way of promise, and Revelation: So the new Testament, which contai∣neth the Gospel,Joh. 13 34.35. doth also include the Law, by way of precept, which is love,Ro. 13.10. being the fulfilling of the
Law.Gen. 38.27. So that (like Thamars twins) they seeme to goe hand in hand: What therefore God hath joyned together, let no man put asunder. Lastly, as our adversaries (the In∣dependents) deny God, deny Christ, deny the Scriptures: So likewise they deny all humane po∣wer and authority, whether it be Ec∣clesiasticall or Civill Government. And first they deny humane au∣thority in the Church; for they will have no superiour in the same, and their reason is,Mat. 23.8. because they are brethren; forgetting that Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus Bishop of Crete. And that Paul gives charge to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, that they should take heede unto themselves,Act. 20.28. and to all the flocke over the which the holy Ghost had made them over seers: And the Author to the Hebrewes, plainely exhorts us, to
obey them that have the rule over us,Heb. 13.17. seeing they watch for our soules, as they that must give accompt for them, that they may doe it with joy, and not with griefe, seeing that is unprofitable for us. And the Apo∣stle in Timothy exhorts, that the El∣ders which rule well,1 Tim. 5.17. should be counted worthy of double honour; especially they who labour in the word and doctrine; where we shall finde 3 orders or degrees of Rulers in the Church, in the Apostles time. First of Bishops (though they be now cryed down) which succeeded the Apostles. 2. Of Elders which were also preaching Ministers; but had not so great a power as Bishops. 3. Of Deacons, or reading Mini∣sters, which had no power in the Church but only to serve the poore and administer the sacraments, as appeareth by the 6 of the Acts, and 5 verse. I deny not, but that there
were also Lay-Elders, whom we call Church-wardens; but they served only to keepe the treasury of the Church, and to see good order, and decorum kept in it. And were joy∣ned with the preaching Elders; but might not medle with the dispensa∣tion of the word. Secondly, as Scripture doth allow of Ecclesiasti∣call government; so of civill or po∣liticall. And first whereas our bles∣sed Saviour told Pilate that he could have no power ever him,Joh. 19.11. but that it was given him from above. Where observe that Christ was subject even to a heathen Prince, a Tyrant, and an Infidell. And the Apostle exhorteth us to be subject unto the higher powers,Ro. 13.1. declaring withall (as Christ had done before) that there is no power, but what is ordained of God. And therefore Peter earnestly exhorteth us,1 Pet. 2.13. that wee should submit our selves to e∣very
very ordinance of man for the Lords sake, &c.Act. 25.11. This made Paul ap∣peale from Festus to Caesar, though a Heathen and Infidell, as Christ had done before to Pilate. What are these therefore that dispise do∣minion,Jude 8. and speake evill of digni∣ties? Saint Jude will tell us, that they are those who seperate them∣selves,19. sensually, having not the spi∣rit; though they boast most of it. And the Apostle Peter will tell us that they are presumptious,1 Pet. 2.10. and selfewilled, and such as promise o∣thers liberty,19. when themselves are the servants of corruption. Thirdly, Whose judgement (saith the Apo∣stle) lingereth not, and their dam∣nation slumbereth not. I wonder therefore in the end what will be∣come of this people; they will ad∣mit us no Magistracy, they will ad∣mit us no Ministry, they will admit us no Government, they will admit
us no King, they will admit us no government, they will admit us no Church, they will not admit us the Scriptures,The Mil∣lenary, they will not admit us Christ: For have not some of them plainely given forth, that wee are no Church?Mr. Hollis by name. nay, that our Church is no better then an house of office: That wee have neither Urim nor Thummim.A Maide. Nay, that wee are not a people, or at the least not the Lords people. I wonder what they will make us believe at the last; surely, that wee are not our selves; but (blessed be God) wee know both what and whom we have believed.2 Tim. 1.2. The com∣passionate Samari∣tance. page 29. Though they cry downe King, cry downe Parliament, cry downe or∣der, cry downe Bishops, cry downe learning, cry downe all; to the end that all things may be brought into disorder, and confusion. Sathan seemes to be let loose among us,Rev. 20 7. and the bottomelesse pit to be set open;Rev. 9.2. for of men or reasonable creatures,
they would make us worse then stocks and stones, or blockheaded asses; for have and doe they not plainely give forth, that a man hath no soule,Mr. Darby by name. and that stocks and stones have as much in them of God as man hath? Nay that God is in these dumbe and senselesse creatures,A Cap∣taine Mr. Bur by name. and that they are God. What is or will become of thee, O England, as long as thou intertainest such Doctors in the midst of thee? For sure I am, never Atheist, Heathen, or Infidell ever durst or would speake like unto this people, who change the glory of the uncorruptible God,Ro. 1.23. into the Image of a corruptible crea∣ture, or of a calfe that eateth hay.Psal. 106.20. And pity it were, but that we should case hay with a calfe, or be counted worse then stocks or stones, or then Oxen or Asses; if wee should be∣lieve all what our adversaries teach and hold forth unto us. O England,
thou wast once the glory and mir∣rour of Nations, the wonder of the world; but now thou art become the scorne and derision of the peo∣ple. The seate of Antichrist, a nest of vipers, and a cage of uncleane birds, even a place where Sathans Throne and Kingdome is.Rev. 2.13. Arise therefore, repaire thy beauty, drive out those locusts and caterpillars, which destroy the vine: Rid thy self of Atheisme, blasphemy, Antichri∣stianisme, and profanesse, the which that thou maiest doe, God grant, for Christs sake, Amen Postscript. OBserve (with me) Christian Rea∣der, that as Independents are worse then either Jew, Turke, Bar∣barian; so they are worse then that man of sinne, and Sonne of perditi∣on,
to wit the Pope. First, in re∣straining Scripture from all by their calumniation and traducing of it. 2. In regard they challenge the knowledge of it only to themselves. 3. In regard, they give forth, that they cannot sinne. 4. In denying the Articles of the Christian Faith. 5. And lastly, in advancing them∣selves above all that is called God, or that is worshipped. And as they exceede Antichrist in these five thinges; so they are like him in two. First in calumniating and traducing of Scripture. 2 .In bringing in stocks and stones to be worshipped, and acknowledging a divine power to be in them: So that instead of Christ and of his word, they labour and endeavour to bring in Antichrist, and their owne braine sick fancies, and Atheisticall whimsies, and opi∣nions. And instead of Christian and Civill Government in Church
and State, they labour and endeavour to bring in their owne licentious liber∣tie, which is nothing but disorder and confusion. And instead of a Christian or reasonable soule, they would make us believe that wee are no better then an Oxe or an Asse, or a Calfe that ea∣teth hay. Finally, and in a word, for Christ, they would have Antichrist, for the Scriptures, their owne braine sicke fancies and opinions; for Christian Discipline, Order, and Government, they would have nothing but disorder and confusion. For a Church they would have a Jake, for a steeple-house a chimney-house, and for the immortall and everliving true God, they would have us to imbrace, and worshippe stocks and stones, and other dumbe and senselesse creatures. But from such a people (good Lord) deliver us. Have a care therfore (O England) and heed that while thou art excluding or bani∣shing one Antichrist, thou have and do not intertaine a worse in his roome, which God forbid, for Christs sake, Amen. FINIS.
