M2857 E1431_2 99872529 169944
ΨΥΧΟΣΟΦΊΑ: OR, NATURAL & DIVINE CONTEMPLATIONS OF THE PASSIONS & FACULTIES OF THE SOƲL OF MAN. In Three Books. By NICHOLAS MOSLEY, Esq 1 PET. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul. Ignat. Epist. ad Philip. . LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Mosley at the Prince's Arms St. Paul's Church-yard. 1653.
TO My Honoured Kinsman, ROBERT BOOTH, Esquire. TIs not (dear Nephew) Blood, 'tis not Con∣sanguinity, those se∣veral ties and relati∣ons of Nature, more than a virtuous Mind and understanding Soul; those Powers and Faculties of your Soul, which I have known from your Childhood Active and Industrious, and now find crown'd with Habits Intellectual, These have layd an Obligation upon
me, of a more sacred civill reverence and respect unto your person; such Homage will I ever owe to the man where these are seated; for though I my self fall very short of such perfection, yet is it not the least of my comfort here, that I am a Philosopher, a Lover of Wisdome and Learning where ever I find it; my hand and heart is for it; to no petition against it, or the Nurseries thereof; for which cause I have entred my self a Student in the School of Nature and of Christ, there to find out this noble Science of the Soul; what I have met with here, and there dispersed, I have endeavoured to recollect and compile into this Volume; It is not therefore my own, I am no dis∣coverer of New Lights, no teacher of Strange Doctrines; I challenge in this Piece nothing but the Composure, the Substance or Matter you may find in the old and beaten path of Faith and Truth, which our Forefathers have trod, and
whose Footsteps we may securely fol∣low. To you then (as no affecter of No∣velty, but a lover of Truth) doe I dedi∣cate these my labours as a pledge of my Love, and part of that Debt owe you, accept then of these from him, who shall ever remain, Sir, Your obliged Uncle, to serve and honor you, NICH. MOSLEY.
The Epistle to the Reader. EVery man naturally desires to know, Aristotle. it is the ground the Philosopher hath laid and placed in the very frontispiece of his Metaphysicks; this innate desire to knowledge comes with the Soul of man, even that which Forms him, and distinguisheth him from beasts, and makes him like unto God, which is the Reasonable soul, immortal and intelectual; for when God said, Let Vs make man in our own image after our own likeness, and let them have domini∣on over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the air, and over the cattell, and over all the earth, and over every creep∣ing thing that creepeth upon the earth; man is not Gods Image in respect of his Body, but his Soul, which is a spi∣rit as God is, and the Image of God
in man consists in that wherein man excells and hath dominion over other creatures; now man excells not, nor rules over Beasts in the parts of his Body which are far stronger in many beasts than in man, but in the faculties of his Soul, having a minde endowed with reason, will, and un∣derstanding, which the soul of a beast is not capable of. This Intellectual facultie of the hu∣man soul hath one property, viz. that it is capable of all knowledge; and herein is the excellency of our soules again manifested, that nothing is a∣ble to know all things, besides God, the Angels, and humane Intellect; But forasmuch as human understand∣ing is ignorant of many things, and yet the Arch-philosopher saith it un∣derstands all things, we must distin∣guish twixt the power and act, and then there will be no contradiction; the Understanding knoweth not all
things actually that is proper to God, the Understanding knoweth all things potentially, this is true of the humane Intellect, & thus is Aristotle to be understood; This Soul of man hath an innate desire, an aptitude and ability of knowing all things, which kindles a desire of knowing all things actually, and makes the Intel∣lect practick, and to be in action; Hence are found out so many arts & sciences of all sorts, the arcana naturae, the very depth and secrets of nature comprehended within that general division of Moral, Natural, and Me∣taphysical; as for that Theological science, how hath it been enlarged and exemplified by writers on all points thereof, yea upon the deep mysteries of Divinity; of the Trini∣ty in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, of the two natures of Christ, of the in∣carnation of the Son of God, and the like? all which shewes that even to
this day the Tree of knowledge still workes in all men as well Christians as Heathens; we still account the attaining of knowledge a thing to be desired, and be it good or evill we love to be knowing all the sort of us. In this ensuing treatise thou hast (Gentle Reader) for thy benefit in∣tended (what in my Meditations for my own behoof I had digested) a discourse upon the Soul of man; a Science than which (of all that ever were or can bee attained to by the strictest disquisition of humane lear∣ning) none more necessary, as being most excellent, most profitable, most pleasant, and therefore none more desirable; if thou beest infla∣med with a desire of knowledge, learn to know thy own Soul. By the knowledge of the Soul we come to the knowledge of our selves, which how necessary it is, the
very Heathens may convince us Christians of by that notable famous sentence which was engraven upon the door of the Tem∣ple of Apollo at Delphos, and said to de∣scend from Heaven , know thy self, for a vain and foolish thing it is to un∣derstand other things, and to be ignorant of our selves; to bend a mans studies to know the Heavens, Elements, and other things, and not to know himself, is the part of a fool, and not of a wise man,Zabarell de mente humana. saith the Philosopher: But we come not to the true knowledge of our selves but by the knowledge of our Soul with its faculties and operations; for then wee are said to know our selves when we know our Soul more than our Bodie. Especially the Intellectual facultie of our Soul, by which we are that we are, by which we are distinguished from beasts, by which we are made like unto God. In one part of this discourse is handled the state of the Soul in the body of man, not somuch before the fall of our first pa∣rents,
as in his lowest and weakest condition cloged and pressed down with the fetters of Original sin, and depraved Nature, in∣closed and intombed in these bodies of ours, which carry about them a body of sin; And thus the Soul is considered as the Formal part of a Man; Form and Matter making one Compositum; And this takes up the first Book, being of the Physical Sci∣ence of the Soul. In another part is handled the state of the Soul of Man, not so much in its essence and Form cloged with the weight of mise∣ry and body of corruption, as in its Ope∣rations and Faculties abstracted from Mat∣ter and use of the body which is a more Spiritual and Divine condition, and this is the subject of the second Book; whether we consider the Soul abstracted from the body in those purer workings of the Intel∣lect, the Soul still quickning and remain∣ing in the body; or consider it as the body lying in the grave, and the Soul totally and really separated from it.
In another is touched the state of the Soul after death in a body glorified, when this corruption shall have put on incor∣ruption, and this mortal have put on Im∣mortality; wherein as the Body so the Soul is in the highest pitch of bliss and glory that ever it was, or can be capable of (which is infinite) therein being restored to the likeness of his Maker, not onely by that Righteousnes, Freedom of Wil, and clearness of Understanding in which it was first created, but in a far more eminent manner resembling his Maker in endless glory, bliss, and happiness; we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, not in a glass, darkly, but then face to face; And this Beatifical Vision of God is also a full Fruition of him, who is our summum bo∣num, the final cause of our Creation, & the Intrinsical end thereof (viz.) our per∣fection of state which consists in the full Fruition of God, who onely is our summum bonum. The first Book then is Natural or Physical, the second is Metaphysical, the third is Theological.
Consider we our Souls under the first Notion, and as by a ladder (whereof this is the first or lower most step) we may raise up our selves in an orderly ascent into Heaven, till we come to see God (not one∣ly as far as is possible to behold him in this Vale of tears and Veil of Flesh, but) till we come to be transformed into his Image, to enjoy and see God even as he is. If thou desire Knowledge, the study of the Soul is most useful for thee, what Sci∣ence soever thou most affectest, or what manner of Person soever thou art; Bee'st thou a Philosopher, it is necessary for thee; for if thou addict thy self to Natural Phi∣losophy, and to know the causes of things, the Soul is a subject for it, it is principium a∣nimalium, that which gives being to al living creatures, so saith Aristotle; is it the Mathe∣matical Science which for certainty and plain demonstration thou desirest? this thou hast in the Soul, the Soul of Man gives this demonstration; is it Metaphy∣sicks thou affectest, for the Nobleness of
the subject therein handled, Spiri∣tuall and abstracted from matter? the Soul of man is spiritual, im∣mortal, impassible, & abstracta à materia, saith Aristotle, so a Metaphy∣sical subject. Nay higher yet, Art thou a Chri∣stian & wouldst come to the know∣ledge and fruition of God? the Soul of man runns through the whole body of divinity, poynting and lead∣ing thee all along through the same. Mistake me not, I doe not judge it possible by any humane art and Science only to attain to true wisdome, by any light of Nature to reach to saving grace, or to that true light which lighteneth every man that commeth into the world, by the eye of sense to come to the eye of faith; I have not so learned Christ; yet as Philosophy is said to bee hand-maid to Divinity, and the
Law a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, so must the Reasonable soul be judged a necessary instrument towards the attainment of super∣natural gifts, for as natural Rea∣son without Grace can never find the way to Heaven, so Grace is never placed but in the Reasonable soul, and proves by the very seat which it hath taken up, that the end it hath is to be spiritual eye-water to make Reason see what by Nature it only cannot, but never to blemish Reason in that which it can apprehend; Grace hinders not the work of Na∣ture wherein it is able to work, nor faith blemish the eye of Reason in that which it can see and compre∣hend, and doubtless that is very far even to the eternal power and God-head, which makes the very heathens inexcusable; where Na∣ture is weak and cannot see, Grace affords an helper and instrument to
the eye of Reason, to bring to its sight those things which for want of due requisites, as convenient dist∣ance, &c. it was not of it self able to discern, such are all the Mysteries of Divinity, as the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, the Hyposta∣tical Union, the Incarnation of the Son of God, &c. all which are supra captum humanum, Mans Reason cannot attain unto, here Faith comes in and supplies this de∣fect; through the prospect of Faith Reason looks, and without Rea∣son Faith is useless; here Faith per∣fects Reason, and where it is wrong sets it right, never undermines it, may be above it, but not against it, nor without it. So then is it Grace, is it Faith thou seekest? thou find∣est it in Humane Nature, in a reasonable Soul; This is a gift of God proper to man onely and to no other creature; the meer Sensitive
creatures have not this gift of Faith, their nature is not capable of Faith, they are below it, this prospect of Faith would nothing avail the eye of Sense. The meer Intellectual creatures (as Saints and Angels in Heaven) they have not need of Faith, they are above it, their Intuitive intellect needs no glass to see him whom they behold face to face; onely to Man this glass is given, this glass of Faith to the eye of Reason to make the soul see what by nature it cannot whilst it is veiled and imprisoned in this mortall and fraile body; but af∣ter death Faith ceaseth; then whe∣ther in the body, or out of the body, viz. before the Resurrection whilst the body sleeps, or after the Resur∣rection when the body is raised to glory, and both are reconjoyned, we shall not need any help of Faih, but shall see him even as he is, know him
even as we are known, and be as the Angels in Heaven. Reader, being too conscious of my own weakness, the importunity of my friends prevailed not with mee, to make these papers publique, till I had received en∣couragement herein from some more knowing men, who took the paines to peruse them and then to return use this account ensuing.
MOSLEIO suo generoso Pie∣tatis & Philosophiae vindici ἘΥΧΆΙΡΕΙΝ. MUlta voluptate (vir mihi charissime) scripta tua quae pridiè hujus diei ad me dederas, recensui; & ne dig∣nitati tuae pro necessitudine nostra defuisse viderer, quid de instituto tuo sentiam, Doctissimo viro, tuique aman∣tissimo RUTTERO nostro palam feci; omnia , gravia, arguta, &  ita mihi apparent ut Sacramento (quod ait Orator) contenderim tua esse; nec vero quicquam scrip∣tione hac tua video, quod non utile sit antiquae & sobriae pietatis Christianos videre, certò sciam. Eaes in philosophicis mente quam ratio & ve∣ritas praescribit, ea in divinis, quam pietas, Ec∣clesia, & Deus suaserit; tam amico foedere Ec∣clesiam & Scholam Sociasti, ut planè in Philo∣sophicis Theologum egeris, in Theologicis Philo∣sophum; Aristotelem ipsum, , Christianum autem bona mente Sta∣gyritam. Consilio tuo quote usum scribis facilé cedo; tanta enim perturbatione & confusione rerum cum perculsa & prostrata jacent omnia, nulla res alia levare animum molestiis potest, nisi Deo animaeque vacare. Rectae voluntatis
conscientia, constansque in Deum pietas, maxi∣ma est rerum incommodarum consolatio; per∣ditis rebus omnibus ipsa se sustentat virtus, & ad bene vivendum satis est recte facere atque a∣nimarum saluti consulere. Quod reliquum est festination meae ignoscas velim; nec eos qui te non admirentur invidos, nec qui laudent as∣sentatores arbitrere; Macte pietate tuâ, atque optimarum artium scientiâ, ut bono reipublicae statu, meritam tibi reliquiae vitae dignitatem acquiras; Qualem me tibi semper fuisse existi∣mes velim futurum esse confidas, Pietatis tuae & Eru∣ditionis cultorem, R. BRIDE-OAKE.
Amico & literarum & meo NI∣CHOLAO MOSLEYO Bene audire Cum optime meruerit. ITa precor animitus, & istis preci∣bus opus esse nunc dierum, qui non nôrit, similis tui, parum est: De fama tua (modo recte fama nun∣cupetur, quae abore praesentis se∣culi pendet) periclitatus es valde; apud nostros enim, qui maxime sapiunt, quam desipiant maxime, vident omnes qui quicquam vident; quò à veterum sententiâ longiùs i ur, eò ad ve∣ritatem accedere proprius videntur hujusce ae∣tatis  (eo enim honore Blaterones istos A∣thenis dignati sunt) quasi inventis vix dum triduanis nugari, id demum Philosophari sit: At tu (MOSLEIE mi) veritatis simul & vetustatis Cultor, Philosophiam omnem (quam peperit Natura, perfecit Theologia) ita falebris suis exutam nobis reddidisti, ut à vulgo certe metuerim, ne libris tuis evolvendis saperent nimis, ni probè scirem vulgus esse cui sapere à querelis, à litibus nondum vacat: Quam male tibi scriptisque tuis ominer, vides; at illud mihi semper solenne amicis integrum me dare. Ita est (mi MOSLEIE) & Philosophiam
tuam ex ipsis sapientiae penetralibus depromptam ad gustum aegrotantis aevi fore si sentirem, nae ego famae meae minus quam tuae consulerim; quare cum (quod olim Seneca) posterorum ne∣gotium egeris, decus illud quod viventi tibi at∣que sentienti debetur, persolvant posteri: Plura post BRIDE-OAKIUM meum ut quid ego? cujus tu judicio fretus, & candore, popularis cen∣surae quasi Syrtes praetervectus, enatare poteris. SA. RUTTER.
Natural and Divine CONTEMPLATIONS Of the Passions and Faculties of the Soul of Man; In Three Bookes. THE FIRST BOOK. The Physicall part. CHAP. I. Of the Soul's original. MAN is a creature specifically distinct from all others, and that which gives him this dif∣ference is his Soul; both Man and Beast agree in their genus; for (not to speak of that Soul which is in Plants and Trees, as well as other creatures) a Beast is defined to be ani∣mal, so is man; yea animal sensibile, so is man; yet that is the full and perfect De∣finition of all Brutes, and that which
gives them hoc esse;Chap. 1. Book 1. and therein they fall short of the excellency of man's constitu∣tion, for that form which constitutes a man, is his soul, not Vegitative, which denominates him vivens, nor Sensitive, which denominates him animal; but that which makes man to be man, and deno∣minates him so, is his Reasonable soul; this gives the specifical difference; anima rationalis est forma hominis, is the current opinion of all Philosophers. Since man is made so excellent a crea∣ture (so above the excellency of all other terrestrial creatures, that the Psalmist in the deep consideration thereof cryeth out,Psalm 8. Lord, what is man that thou art so mind∣full of him, or the son of man that thou shouldst so regard him? thou hast made him paulisper inferiorem Angelis, something lower than the Angels; but all creatures else are brought into subjection under mans feet) and that this excellency and dominion of man is not in respect of his frail and mor∣tal body (many brute beasts excelling man in strength of body) but in the in∣dowments of mind; It is a thing worthy our greatest pains and industry seriously to search into the nature and quality of this soul, this which is formae informan∣tis hominem, whereby man is so distin∣guish'd
from other creatures. We come to the knowledge of things two wayes, by their Causes, or by their Effects; the effects are nobis notiores, and therefore we many times judge of things by the effects, which is a nearer know∣ledge as to us, but not so sure; to judge by the cause is the surest (though more difficult to us, because more remote) for scire est rem per causam cognoscere. For a more Mathematical demonstra∣tion, and certain science of the soul, we shall begin our examination of the soul from the souls beginning, from the cause and Original of the soul, and so proceed to the effects. Every soul hath an external and caele∣stial productive principle; so saith A∣ristotle in his Book de generatione misti,Lib. 1. which though it be true in one sense, of the vegetative and sensitive as wel as the Rational; for all living creatures which are begotten per propagationem, and gene∣rated ex semine, have not onely an ele∣mentary internal principle (for such hath the inanimate creatures) but an ex∣ternal and caelestial principle also: Yet the humane soul hath it in a far more e∣minent manner; the soul of beasts is pro∣duced from a caelestial cause, yet so, as
by, and from the power of the matter; the soul of man is produced from above, without any power of the matter con∣curring or intervening; the matter in∣deed is fitted and prepared to receive the form, but doth not at all produce it, that comes immediately from God; therefore saith Aristotle in the same place, sola mens humana est divina (viz.) Lib. 2. Gen. anim. ca. 3. In another place, Restat ut mens sola extrinsecus accedat, ea{que} sola divina sit; not comparatively in respect of others one∣ly, but because it proceedeth immediate∣ly from God, without the concurrence of secondary causes, whereas others are drawn out of the power of the matter, per media agentia naturalia,Fol. 975. saith Zabarella de mente humana. Nor is it natural Philosophy that teach∣eth this, but Reason and Religion con∣firm and back it; Let me reason with thee my soul, as a learned Cardinal did with his about this very point of the soules creation: I demand of thee (O my soul) who gave thee thy being, since thou hadst it not from eternity; thou wast created in time, and lately it was that thou hadst not a being; certainly it could not be thy parents in the flesh, for what is sprung from flesh
is flesh, but thou art spirit; neither did Heaven, or Earth, or Sun, or Stars produce thee, for these are corporeal, thou incorporeal; neither could An∣gels or Archangels, or any other spiri∣tual creature be the authors of thy being, for thou of no matter but meer∣ly of nothing wast created, and none but a power omnipotent can create a thing out of nothing, there∣fore God onely without any compani∣on or helper, with his own hands, which are his Wisdom and his Will, when it seemed him best, did create thee. Again a little after. "Besides the conjunction of soul and body (which is a principal part in the ma∣king of the humane nature) can be made by none but a workman of an infinite power; for by what art except divine can the spirit be joyned with the flesh in so close a bond as to be∣come one substance? for there is no likeness and proportion 'twixt the flesh and spirit, therefore he onely must doe it, who onely doth great wonders. Consider then (O my soul) from whence, from whom, in what manner, and into what thou art come.
First, From whence? From heaven thou art descended, a pilgrim and a stranger here for a time, thou art not here to continue and dwell; thy country is above, thither then aspire from whence thou camest; mind not earthly things, but seek those things which are above, that when this my earthly taber∣nacle shall be dissolved, thou be not pressed down lower with the weight of carnal l sts into the lowermost hell, but maist have a building of God, a house not made with hands eternal in the heavens. Secondly, From whom? From God thou camest, thou art the spirit and breath of God in men; O then breath again out of man to God; whilst thou art in this prison of flesh send out thy hot breathings to God, and draw in those cooler breathings of the Spirit from God; thy hot sighs and zealous prayers to God, his cool and gentle refreshments of love and pity from God; that when I shall have payd all my rights of nature unto death, and am gone into my silence, though my body lie in the dust for a time, my spirit may return to God that gave it. Thirdly, In what manner? Not per me∣dia naturalia, by any ordinary means, but immediately, and modo extraordina∣rio, without any companion, without any helper.
1 Learn then this (O my soul) that as God hath used no naturall meanes or secun∣dary causes in the work of thy Creation; so thou relie upon none in the work of thy sal∣vation; thou maist safely and boldly approach the Throne of grace without the mediation of Saints or Angels; there is but one Media∣tor unto us, who is both God and man, Christ Jesus. 2 Since God hath put nothing be∣twixt thee and him, beware that thou thy self interpose nothing; sever not what God hath not disjoyned; let not thy sin be a Wall of separation twixt thee and him; nor the mists and foggs of Carnall concupisence e∣clipss the Sun of righteousness from thee; from whom thou borrowest all thy light, and without whom thou art but Cimmerian dark∣ness. Fourthly, consider whither thou art come; into a Humane body, a Humane nature fitted and prepared to receive thee; but how? not as a Subject, but as a Prince; thou to rule as a Queen, it to obey as a Subject. Therfore know this (O my soul) by the concurrent opinion of all Philosophers, man is of a midle nature twixt mortal and immortal, twixt terrestri∣al and caelestial things; and some way re∣sembles both, participates of both; in that man is indued with Vegetative and Sensitive
faculties, he is like unto brutes and ignobler creatures, but in regard of his Intellectual faculty, especially that which consists in specu∣lation, he is most like unto God; twixt these two the Humane nature is sated, and in a kind participates of both; in this nature the soul sits as Emp ess; if Sense rules here, man lives as a beast, degenerates into a brute, if Reason and understanding rule, especially the speculative Intellectual faculty, man lives as God; suffer not then, O suffer not (my soul) thy vassals and slaves, Sense and Appetite, those ignobler faculties of thine, to rule and reign over thee, and so to transform the whole man into the nature of beasts, but rule and govern thou by those more noble and Diviner faculties of thine, Reason and understanding, by which man resembles his Maker is made like unto him. Lstly consider (O my sol) this myste∣rious conjunction of soul and body to become one man, flesh and spirit one substance, which cannot be but by a power Divine, and thou wilt cease (though not humbly to ad∣mire, yet) curiously to search into that sacred Mystery, that Article of Christian faith, touching the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, he Hypostaticall Union of the two na∣tures in Christ; St. Athanasius proves it and explaines it from this Union of the soul
and body in one man, saying The right faith is this, that we believe and con∣fess that our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, is God and Man; God of the substance of the Father begotten before the World, and Man of the substance of his Mother born in the World: Perfect God and perfect Man of a Reasonable soul and Humane flesh subsisting. Equall to the Father, as touching his God-head, and inferior to the Fa∣ther touching his Man-hood. Who although he be God & man, yet he is not two, but one Christ: One, not by conversion of the God-head into Nan, but by taking the Man-hood into God. One altogether, not by confusion of substance, but by Unity of per∣son. For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God and man is one Christ. The conjunction of soul and body is a se∣cret and hidden thing, but the Incarnation of Christ, the Union of the God-head and Man∣hood, far more secret; for without doubt great is the mystery of godliness, God
manifested in the flesh; and if it be so diffi∣cult a matter for man to find out the hidden things of this visible World, that none (as Solomon saith) can comprehend the works thereof from the beginning to the end, no not the workings of God within a mans self, how shall man attempt to search out those invisible things of Heaven, the hid∣den mysteries, the unsearchable things of God? therefore if thou beest wise (O my soul) seek saving knowledge, and embrace the wisdom of the Saints, which is, to fear God, and keep his Commandements; delight more in supplication and prayer, than in vain janglings and disputations; in charity that edifies, than knowledge that puffs up; for this is the way that leads to life & the King∣dom of Heaven, where shall be given to us little children humbly ignorant here an e∣quality of knowledge with the Angells which alwaies behold the face of their heavenly Fa∣ther; therefore sing thou with the Psalmist, Lord I am not high minded; I exer∣cise not my self in things too high for me:Psalm. 131. But I refrain my soul and keep it low, like as a child that is weaned from his mother; Yea my soul is even as a weaned child.
CHAP. II. Of the Attributes of the soul. Chap. 2. Book 1.AFter the Original of the soul, it will not be amiss, before we come to its Definition, to treat of the Attributes of the soul, (viz.) the Immortality and Eternity, the Indivisibility, impatibili∣ty, Separability and Impermixture of the soul; not but that these are more properly touched in the second Book, the Metaphysicall science of the soul as it is abstracted from bodily Organs; on∣ly here to shew (as I have already done the Divine principle of the soul) how far these properties of the soul have been, or may be evidenced by the light of Reason; by the truth of naturall Phi∣losophie: and first with the last, of the soules Separability and impermixture from the body, and so in order up∣wards. The Separability and immixture of the soul. The soul of man is inorganical, and hath its operations out of the body, and therefore it is separable from the body; separable (I mean) not as it doth sub∣sist after death without the body, as
some of the antient Plilosophers onely held; but even in this life also, whilst it is in the body, it is separated from it, so the Modern and most of the antients main∣tain;Lib. 3. de anima cap. 5. & 6. Aristotle every where affirms it to be a property of the whole Intellect, as well the patient as the agent; and from this property of the soul is gathered ar∣guments of the souls Immortality, by Scotus, Piccolomineus, Alexander Aphro∣diensis, Vicomeratus, Julius Pacius, and others. Art thou maried to this weak and frail body, (O my soul) seek not a divorce in any un∣warrantable, unnatural way; for though it be better to be dissolved and to be with Christ, yet (but for the cause of Christ) thou maist not put her away; not kill her, or hate her, but love her as a Wife, cherish her as a weaker Vessell; yet if she command, obey not, if she intice, consent not, let not thy Affections o∣vercome thy Reason to cap ivate thy love to her lust; in this case separate thy self from her, not in affection, but action, let thy Di∣viner faculties, Reason and understanding, be thy Counsellors, and rule thou in her, yet above her, and without her.
The Impatibility of the Soul. The soul of man is Impatible, it suffe∣reth not, for the rule is quicquid patitur corrumpitur; as the wood suffers by the fire till it be consumed of the fire; the soul of man not so; it receives Objects and Species, yet no way suffers or is hurt by what it receives.  But this property (you will say) the Sensitive soul hath as well as the Rational; for even as the Intellectuall faculty receives intelli∣gible forms, yet doth not thereby suffer (viz) passione corruptiva; so doth the Sen∣sitive also receive its forms and Objects, and is not hurt by them; and therefore saith Aristotle, sensus est impaibilis. To this I answer, that though this proper∣ty agree with the Sensitive as well as the Rationall faculty, yet with the Rational in a higher and much more eminent manner; the Sense is not hurt by any Objects, nor suffers any detriment so long as the Objects are presented in an orderly manner and due proportion; there the Sense in no sense is patible, (viz. passione corruptiva) but if a due proportion of the Objects be not obser∣ved, (for quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis) the Sense is destroyed
of its more vehement Object; for he that saith, sensus est impatibilis, meaning in the former sense, saith also, vehemens sensibile destruit sensum, and this, vhemens Objectum corrumpit sensum; as, too great a sound makes a man deaf; too great a light will make a man blind: But this cannot be said of Humane intellect, since there is no such vehement Object which can corrupt it, yea rather perfects it; for af∣ter we have understood the highest and difficultest matters, we are not made incapable of understanding easier (as with gazing upon the Sun, our sight will be so dazled with the light thereof, that we cannot presently see lesser lights) but much more capable to understand them than before; and herein is an ar∣gument of the Divinity and immorta∣lity of the soul. For were it mortall, it would certain∣ly be destroyed or wounded by its more forcible Object, but vehemens in elligibile perficit intellectum, ergo intellellectus non de∣bilitatur in operando, so incorruptible, so im∣mortall; 'Tis Scotus his argument for the souls immortality. Behold how sin overthroweth as it were the whole Fabrick of Heaven, God hath created
the Humane soul of an impatible nature, not subject to pain or punishment; sin enters the soul, and makes it liable to greater grief and torment than is imaginable; evill of sin be∣gets evill of pain, pain privative, and pain positive, paenam sensus, and paenam damni, pain of loss, the privation of eter∣nal felicity, banishment from the heavenly Country, loss of the inheritance of the King∣dom of Heaven, absence of God and want of the vision of him, and an utter exclusion from all good things for ever; this is the pri∣vative pain, which is more bitter to me (saith Saint Chrysostom) than the positive tor∣ments of Hell; nor is it any wonder if this loss cannot be expressed; for we have not yet known the beatitude of those things that are reserved for us, how then shall we apprehend our misery in the loss of them? but besides this pain of loss, there is a pain of sense, a worm that never dieth, a fire that never go∣eth out; nor can any tongue express, or heart conceive this pain, but such as know them experimentally; but a general torture it is in all the parts of the body, in all the faculties of the soul, the soul as well as the body is passive, a passion worst of all passions, a passion voyd of corruption, voyd of consumption; the wood suffers in the fire till it be totally consumed by the fire; and well were it
with the damned had they such pains which might at last consume them; but as the wid∣dows barrel of meal should not waste, nor her cruse of oyl be spent, so (though in a dif∣ferent sense (hers in mercy, these in judge∣ment) the worm shall continually gnaw and eat, but they not wast; the bush shall burn in the fire, and the fire not consume the bush for ever. These things are writ for thee (O soul) that thou come not into this place of torment; that if thou canst not patiently a∣bide the eternall fire of hell hereafter, thou maist not so patiently suffer sin here, but fly from it, as from a serpent; and if with any sin thou chance to be overtaken, that thou maist mourn and weep for them here, that so thou maist avoid this place of sorrow, where there is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for ever: For he that saith, Wo unto you that laugh and re∣joice now, for ye shall mourn, saith al∣so, Blessed are they that mourn now, for they shall be comforted; and the Psalmist, They that sow in tears shall reap in joy: He that now goeth on his way weeping, and beareth forth good seed, shall doubtless come again with joy and bring his sheaves with him.
The Indivisibility or impartibility of the soul. The soul of man is a simple essence, and is not to be found (except pr acci∣dens) in the Predicament of Quantity;Continuum non con∣stat ex indi∣visibilibus, sed in sem∣per divisi∣bila est di∣visibile; cum enim ex eis con∣stat in ea resolvetur. Sennert. lib. 1 cap. 4. Corpori suo modo coextendi∣tur quam∣vis ex par∣te anima extensio∣nem non habet. Sua∣rez. disp. 15. sect. 3.11. fol. 251. therefore it admits not of fractions and parts; is not capable of division; If it were corporeal, it would be quanta, and so divisible (as quantity is) in semper di∣visibilia; but being a spirit, it is simple, incorporeal, immortal, and so an indi∣visible substance. That souls Rational are multiplied according to the multiplica∣tion of the Individuals, I shall not deny to stand with Christian Religion as well as Philosophical verity; but that the soul is divisible or extensible, ad extensio∣nem corporis, I deny to stand with either; the soul of Beasts and Plants is material and corporeal, extensible as the body is extended; so as part of the soul is in part of the body, and the whole in the whole body; but the Humane soul, which is a spirit indivisible, in a most wonderfull manner, is tota in toto & tota in qualibet par∣te; so saith Philosophy. And though it fill the whole body,Bellarm. de ascensi∣one mentis in deum, &c. grad. 8. fol. 179. and 180. it
takes up no room in the body; it increa∣seth not as the body increaseth; only be∣gins to be where before it was not; and if the body decrease, if any member be cut off or wither, the soul is not dimi∣nished or dried up, onely ceaseth to be in that member it was in before, and that without any hurt or blemish to it self. Replet non occupat totum corporis locum, nec etsi corpus hunc locum jam ante occupave∣rit impeditur quo minus & ipsa in omnibus corporis partibus ad sit, & videmus eandem for∣mam quae primo infantis corpus replet, illud ipsum corpus, nihil auctam, ubi in vastam, aeta∣te virili molem excreverit, repleris. Senner∣tus, lib. 1. cap. 4. And herein (O my soul) art thou a live∣ly Character and Image of God, a resem∣blance of thy Creator in his infinite being and omnipresence; for God is a Spirit indi∣visible, filling all the World, and all the parts thereof, yet taking up no room there; nor may it be so imagined that God so fills the World, as part of God is in part of the World, and whole God in the whole World, for God hath no parts, cannot be divided, but as thou art in the litle World Man, so he in this great universe, whole in the whole, and whole in every part of the World, and so is every where present with his omnipoten∣cie
and wisdom; and when any new creature is produced, God begins to be in that crea∣ture, though the same from eternity, and when any creature is destroyed or dieth, God dieth not, nor is destroyed, onely ceaseth to be there, yet without variation or shadow of change; thus far the resemblance holds; though thou must ackowledge (O my soul) Gods Indivisibility infinitely to surpass thine;2 Chron. 6. his omnipresence and illimied great∣ness is such as Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain; and truly; for if another World were created, God would fill it, if more Worlds, yea infinite Worlds, God would fill them all, and where he should not be, there should be nothing. The Immortality and eternity of the soul. Touching the Immortality of the soul, the Grand Philosopher not onely sets it down as of opinion, but with many rea∣sons proves the same; I do not say all the operations and faculties of the soul, or the soul according to all its faculties and operations,Arist. de gen. anim. c. 3.  &c. i. e. restat, ut mens sola extrinsecus ac∣cedat eaque sola divina fit, nihil enim cum ejus actione commmunicat actio corporalis; which cannot be spoken of the soul were it mortal; and therefore I must needs be of Paulus Benius his opinion, who saies plainly, and proves it too, turpiter affixam à quibusdam Arist. mortalitatis animae opinionem. Benius in Timaeum Platonis, Decad. 2. lib. 3. See further Bishop Lawd against Fisher pag. 16. Num. 34. pun. 7. fol. 113. in margin. did Aristotle hold to be
immortal; a Christian may doubt of that, and not be counted Heterodox; since whether the operations of the Sensitive soul, as seeing, hearing, smelling, tast∣ing, touching, remain in the body glori∣fied, and in what manner, hath been, & is to this day a controversie in the Schools; and as for the Vegetative facultie (since there is no accretion or diminution in that state of glory) it is perished or alto∣gether useless: But that all the operati∣ons & faculties of the soul which are Es∣sential, as to understand, &c. are immortal, that he boldly affirms, saying, hoc solum est immortale, not understanding (as Pacius observes) the word (immortal) in that large sense as Plato did, to prove every soul to be immortal, the soul of Beasts as well as the Humane soul, (because every soul is life, and no life can be the Subject of death; therefore every soul is Immortal) which argument proves not the Immor∣tality of the soul and to remain after the body, onely proves that the soul is not the Subject of death, which is true, for when any brute beast dieth, it is not the soul but the animal or compositum
that dieth, but Aristoile to shew the Ra∣tional soul to be altogether Immortal, and to remain after the death of the bo∣dy, he adds the word aeternum, adds Eter∣nity to Immortality, saying, hoc solum est Immortale & aeternum, not but that the soul had a beginning, not Eternal à parte ante, but because it never shall have end, so Eternal à parte post. But wherefore do I spend my time in proving that which hath been so gene∣rally received of all, of what Religion or Profession soever? not Christian Religi∣on onely, but all the several Religions in the World have ever taught the Im∣mortality of the Soul; were it the Graeci∣an, Chaldean, or Arabian of old, or the Jewes, the Turkes, or other of the Gen∣tiles in these later times; and therefore they likewise hold there are rewards and punishments for souls departed accor∣ding as they have acted in the flesh, be it good or evill; Onely they have differed about the state of souls departed, in which some have held ridiculous things. Touching which we will proceed to shew how far this verity is evidenced to us by Philosophical principles, by the light of natural reason.
The Soul of man after this life remains and abides for ever whole and intire, as to its essence (for that is simple and un∣divided, as hath been sayd) though not as to all its faculties and operations; all the faculties of the soul remain not with the soul after the death of man (at least the operations) in that condition as be∣fore, and therefore may be said to be pe∣rished. The Intellectual faculty abides for ever with the soul, so is no way mortal; but for as much as the Sensitive faculty is or∣ganical, and cannot work without a body, when the body dyes, that faculty is sayd to perish; but this in respect of the body, not in respect of the soul, which faculty abides with the soul for ever potentialiter, though not actualiter, but is idle and cannot work whilst the body sleepeth in the grave; and as Ari∣stotle saith, An old man, had he the eyes of a young man, would see as well as a young man; so if after death the soul should enter in∣to a body, it would doe all the opera∣tions which before it did; now since all these faculties as to the soul remain, (though in respect of the body they are sayd to perish) it is necessary (and that according to the principles of Philoso∣phy)
that sometime the soul should re∣assume a body, or else these faculties are reserved and kept in vain: But because no power or faculty can be in vain,Vide Pacim in Arist. de anima lib. 3. c. 6. sect. 5.  Et lib. . c. 10. sect. 5. yet that is in vain which is never reduced in∣to act; and that Deus & natura nihil fru∣stra operantur, according to Aristotle, and the rule of Philosophy; therefore it must needs be confessed that the soul shall sometime come into the body again; which Conclusion is confirmed by very good reason; for the soul is (according to its essence) a Form, and a Form natu∣rally desires the Matter to which it re∣lates, and without the Matter it is but imperfect; for nothing is perfect ex sola forma, not by Form alone, but Matter and form together; so that Matter concurs to the perfection of all created com∣pounded substances; otherwise death would not be so terrible if all perfection and happiness consisted in the soul. Being thus seasoned with these Philosophi∣cal verities thou maist more readily assent to those Theological truths of the soul's e∣ternity and immortality; thou seest (O my soul) how near nature rectified and rightly principled leads to Christ; what Affinity there is 'twixt Reason and Faith, Nature
and Grace; they thwart not one the other; the Truth of Philosophy agrees with the Truth of Divinity; and from this Philoso∣cal Principle will I teach thee a Christian Article of the Resurrection of the body, and life everlasting. For let me argue with thee (O my soul) in thine own natural princi∣ples; if the soul be a Form which naturally desires the Matter to which it is the Form, and without which it is imperfect; if it have Faculties which it cannot exercise without a body, and that God and Nature have made nothing in vain; therefore the soul must of necessity reassume a body; it must either be the same numerical body, or ano∣ther different from what it had before; if another, then must thou grant a , a Transmigration of souls, an error of the Pythagoreans; and is an impossibility according to the principles of Philosophy; because (as Aristotle every where affirm∣eth) a determinate Form requires a deter∣minate Matter; a specifical Form a specifical Matter, and a numerical Form requires the same numerical Mat∣ter, so the same Individual Soul requires the same Individual Body; and if the soul assume the same body, then must thou hold the Resurrection of that body, which Christi∣an Religion teacheth also.
CHAP. III. Of the Definition of the Soul. Chap. 3. Book 1. ONe and the same thing may be the subject of several Sciences, though diversly handled and considered in every one of them; and as it is diversly consi∣dered, so may it diversly be defined; Logick is not tied to certain matter, but runs generally through all kind of things, not standing so much upon the matter; Mathematicks handles things abstracted from matter, non re, sedratione; Metaphysicks handles things altogether separated from matter, but Physicks handles things not separated from mat∣ter at all, nec re, nec ratione. Thus are the Definitions of one and the same thing various, according to the several Sciences which treat of it: Aristotle puts an example of Anger, that being considered in the Physical Science, is defined to be A certain motion of the body for some injury received, with de∣sire of revenge; being in Logick consi∣dered, its defined onely A desire of re∣venge; the one expresseth the matter, he other not. The Soul of man is a subject for all
Sciences, Philosophical or Theological, and therefore admits of several Defini∣tions; but for as much as it is not our purpose at present to treat of the soul of man, either Theologically, as the Image of God in man; nor yet Metaphysically, as incorporeal, spiritual, and abstracted from bodily organs in its diviner con∣templative intellectual faculties which resembles the nature divine; nor yet to handle it onely in its Sensitive parts, which resembles the nature of beasts; but as it hath assumed humane nature, and is the Form of man, and so a part of him who is compounded of Matter and Form, who is in that respect of a middle nature 'twixt Terrestrial and Celestial, 'twixt Mortal and Immortal creatures, and participates of both; and this na∣ture too we consider not as in the state of integrity in which it was created, but in this lapsed & degenerate condition it groaneth under since the fall of man, and is intombed in a body of weak and sin∣full flesh, and operates not but by and with the body: The subject therefore of this Book is Physical, material, and in∣separable from the body, as well in its Affections, which we here handle, as in its Essence, such then must our Defini∣tion
be; for quale est definitum, talis esse de∣bs definitio. The Definition of the soul. The Soul is the act and perfection of the natural organical body, having life in power. I shall not stay to coment up∣on the words of this Definition, to shew how the soul is an act and perfection, which words are Synonima, the Greek word  comprehending both, and is the genus in this Definition; and how this  is not the second act, to wit, the Operation and Motion which is the soules accidens; but the first act of the body, not Artificial, nor Mathematical, but of a Natural body, nor of every Natural, but that Natural body which is Organical, and consists of many parts and members; and this body Natural and Organical having life not actu, sed potentia; this is the Definition given by Aristotle in his book De anima; where he also defines the soul to be that beginning by which we have life, sense,Lib. 2. ca. 1. Another Definition of the soul. Lib. 2. c. 2. and un∣derstanding chiefly; the which as it is a full and perfect definition of the Ratio∣nal soul, so take it disjunctively in it several parts, and it will agree with the soul of Plants and of Beasts; for the Soul
of Plants is principium quo primò vivunt, the soul of Beasts, quo primò vivunt ac sen∣tiunt, the soul of Men, quo vivunt, senti∣unt, ac intelligunt primò; the Soul is the beginning of life, and Vegetation chiefly; for when the soul is gone out of the body it ceaseth to live or grow any longer; the soul is the beginning of Sense chiefly; for the soul being absent, the body is altogether insensible; and the soul is the beginning of Understanding chiefly; for the carcass or cadaver is voyd of under∣standing when the soul is departed out of the body. And it is sayd (chiefly) because though the body Natural and Organical may be said to be the beginning of life, sense, and reason, yet that is but Organically, and Secondarily; the Soul is the begin∣ing chiefly and primarily. Totū compositū dicatur principium ut quod, cum sit illud quod agat, forma vero principium ut quo, cum agat beneficio formae, instrumenta deni{que} per quod, cum per ipsa operetur. Sennert. These are the Definitions given by A∣ristotle; the former being drawn from those things which are notiora secundum naturam, though nobis ignotiora; the latter from those things which are secundum nos notiora, though secundum naturam ignotio∣ra;
and those are the Effects and Faculties of the soul, which are called the second act of the soul, not the first act, and are the companions & associates of the soul; neither of which do we reject, but make use of both, since in the subsequent Chapters we shall consider the soul not onely as it is principium corporis animalis tanquam forma, or the act and perfection of a Natural Organical body, which is according to the former Definition; but as it is principium operationum tanquam ef∣trix, as it is considered in the latter, so making of two one Definition, thus. The Soul is the act, the perfection, and beginning of a Natural Organical body, endued with life, sense, and understand∣ing. And now having traced thee (O my soul) from thy original, the place and person à quo, to the place and person ad quem, from Heaven to Earth, from God to Man, and find thee clothed in humane nature, I shall not raise a consideration from that close conjunction, and mysterious union which is betwixt the soul and body, flesh and spirit; that being formerly couched in the first Chapter of this Book; but finding
thee seated in humane nature, intombed, and imprisoned in a body of flesh, consider (O my soul) into what a body thou art come, the body  (saith Plato) is quasi , the soul's prison and sepulcher, a dun∣geon foul and noysom in materiâ primâ, even in its first and best matter of which it is made, slime, and mud, red earth, and clay; For God made man (saith the Text) of the dust of the ground; And again, Dust thou art, and to dust shalt thou return; And again, Behold I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord which am but dust and ashes: And this first matter, if we look into its o∣riginal, it was of meer nothing, not of any other praeexistent matter; for then it would not be materia prima: It's true, in the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth, but as true, not out of another Hea∣ven and Earth, but of meer nothing; and thus much of the first matter of this body of flesh: But if we look into the second matter, this body of sinful flesh contracted by the fall of our first Parents, what is it but sanguis menstruus, worse than a menstruous cloth, or polluted rag? which is a thing so vile and filthy as cannot be expressed; the eyes refusing to b hold, and the hands to touch it, and the mind abhorring to think of it; in∣to
to such a dungeon art thou cast (O my soul) fettered and fast bound in the chains of car∣nal lusts and concupiscence, having thy Understanding darkned, and thy Will and reason captivated, and scarce the essence and definition of a soul remaining in thee, thy act being turned into power, nay rather impotency and weakness, thy perfection into much imperfection, thy beginning of life into a beginning of death and misery. There was a time when the soul of man en∣joyed more immunities, and though a pri∣soner as it were in the body, yet as Joseph who was made ruler and overseer of the whole house, and had the command of all in the prison, and whatsoever was done there that did he: The soul was not a captive to the flesh so long as man continued in his inno∣cency, but contrariwise had the care and command of all; the body was subject to the soul, the flesh unto the spirit; the inhaerent justice in which man was created subjected the inferior and Sensual parts to the supe∣rior Intellectual faculty, without the least predominancy at any time; so long as the superior continued in obedience and sub∣jection to God, the body was obedient to the command of the soul; but after that the soul had rebelled against God, the body took occa∣sion to rebel against the soul, so that to this
day there hath bin a continual civil war with∣in us, the law of our members warring against the law of our mind, and bringing us captive to the law of sin which is in our members; this is the miserable estate of mankind by nature, that in the deep sense thereof we may all cry with Saint Paul, O wretched creature that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? But stand thou still (O my soul) and see the salvation of our God; seest thou thy self in the state of nature, dead in trespasses and sinnes, an heathen, an alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, without hope, without God in the world? There is a law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made thee free from the law of sin and death; this Christianity teacheth, to this Christian Religion, not Heahenish superstition, leadeth: There is a state of Grace which is Christian, as well as a state of Na∣ture corrupt and hea henish;Rom. 6.14. they that are under this law, sin hath power on, but they that are under Grace sin shall have no power over: Ʋnto this state of Grace (O my soul) thou art called, a state of righteousness and justification by Faith, which is the gift of God; and say not thou with thy self, that this gift of God doth not extend to thee; for none are excluded that will lay hold on, and receive this gift really tendred to all; for as by
the offence of one, judgement came upon all men to condemnation, so by the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. The righteousness that comes by Christ doth recompence the loss by Adams transgression, and the advantage that comes by Christ is much every way; for not as the offence so is the gift; for judgement is in∣deed by one offence unto condemnation; but the gift is of many offences unto justifi∣cation. Secondly, By this (O my soul) thou art loosened from thy fetters, released from im∣prisonment; grave, and hell; by this thou art renewed in that image of God wherein thou wast created, and restored to thy antient right of rule and dominion; by this thou comest again to the true definition of a Soul, (viz.) The very perfection and act of a Na∣tural Organical, nay more, of a Supernatu∣ral Organical Body, and the beginning of llfe, not a Natural onely, but Superna∣tural, not Temporal, but Eternal also.
CHAP. IV. Of the Ʋnity of the Soul. Chap. 4. Book. 1.THere be three distinct Effects and Operations of the Soul from which we have drawn our Definition above∣mentioned (viz.) Life, Sence, and Un∣derstanding; and these have their di∣stinct Powers or Faculties (viz.) the Ve∣getative, the Sensitive, and Intellectual; the Vegetative Faculty hath the proper effects of the Vegetative Soul to produce Life, the Sensitive hath the property of producing Sense, and the Intellectual Faculty the property of the Rational Soul of begetting Understanding; of these we purpose to treat distinctly and apart in the next ensuing Chapters; by the way we shall say something of the Soul's Unity, to prevent some mistakes and errors which have arisen, and still may be, touching the Soul in its Essence and Powers; for when we see and learn these distinct Faculties and operations of the Soul, we are easily drawn to con∣ceit there are also three distinct Soules in Man; this was the Error of no mean Philosophers, Plato of old, Averroes, Gan∣davensis, Zabarel, and others of later daies;
and accordingly they held that these Souls had their peculiar and distinct places of residence and abode in Man; the Vegetative they placed in the Liver, the Sensitive in the Heart, and the Rational Soul in the Brain; but this doth Aristotle every where confute, so do the generality of Philosophers after him; Scotus, Pacius, Faber Faventinus, and others. For man is certainly One, and how comes a Trinity of soules in the Unity of a person? What is it that unites man and makes him one? it must be his soul, or his body; but not his body, that's clear, for first the body is united and preserved by the soul, not the soul by the body; wherefore we see by experience, that when the soul is departed out of the bo∣dy, the body continues not long after, but turns to putrifaction. Again, man is said to be one, not in respect of his body, but his soul; the body which is materia is nothing but in power, 'tis the Form which actuates and perfects; the Form gives being, and since ens & bonum conver∣tuntur,Forma ut dat esse, sic etiam dat unitatem. Senner∣tus. that which gives Being gives Uni∣ty, the soul of man gives him his being, dat hoc esse, the soul of man gives him to be one; now if there were three Forms,
three distinct souls in man, every distinct Form must give him a distinct being, so man would not be one but three, a Monster, a tergeminus Gerion; an opinion exploded as well in Divinity as Philo∣sophy. See Tertullian in lib. de anima. But man is but One, therefore but one soul in man, though distinct in its powers and faculties; there is a Trinity of facul∣ties in the Unity of a Reasonable soul; the Vegetative is a faculty of the Vegetative soul, the Sensitive of the Sensitive, and the Intellectual of the Rational soul; yet is there not three souls in man, but one soul. One Individual soul onely in man ac∣cording to Aristotle, which notwithstand∣ing hath dividual and distinct powers and faculties; one simple essence which is the Form of man distinguisht into three faculties of Vegetative, Sensitive, and Intellectual; one in respect of its essence, three in respect of its facul∣ties. Neither are these faculties one before or after another in time, but all are Co∣temporarie, there is no Priority or Poste∣rity in time (onely in order) amongst them. Object. Averroes and Zabarel who main∣tain
three souls in man, are against this position, and quote the words of Aristo∣tle in his Book de gener. animal. cap. 3. which are these, Man first lives the life of Plants, then the life of Beasts, and afterwards the life of a Man; from whence they would infer, that one facul∣ty is in time before another, and one succeeds another, therefore there are so many several and succeeding souls. Ans. But to this it may be answered; That because the soul hath need of Or∣gans and Instruments of the body to work withall, and that these Instruments are too weak, and litle fit to exercise the noblest Operations of the soul in the first times, therefore doth the soul exercise the Operations of Vegetation first, be∣cause those Organs are first fitted and prepared, and afterwards the Operations of Sense and Reason; and in this sense is Aristotle to be understood, where he saith, A man first lives the life of Plants, then the life of a Beast, and afterwards the life of a Man; to wit, in the Operations of the soul which are in time one before a∣nother, the Operations of the Vegetative soul are first, then of the Sensitive, and lastly of the Rational; and that will be granted by reason of the defect and
inability in the other Organs, which are not so soon fitted for the other faculties to operate; yet the faculties of the soul are in one instant of time without any Priority one of another in time, and so they continue after the dissolution of the soul and body; though the Operations of some of the faculties are perished, because the body whose Organs they require are perished; the faculties of the soul as well the Sensitive as Intellectual remain and abide with the soul after the death of man; although the Intellectual then is onely operative, as hath been elsewhere said; and as we cannot say (and say tru∣ly) that the Sensitive faculty is perished with the body, and the Intellectual only survives and abides with the soul, because it only operates, no more truly can we affirm that the Vegetative faculty in the first Generation is first in time, because it first operates; therefore saith Philoso∣phy, There is no Priority or Posteriority in the faculties of the soul; there are none before or after other in the Generation of man; See Magirus his Comment in Physi∣cam suam lib. 6. cap. 3. By this Philosophical Verity of the Unity of the soul in the Trinity of faculties, maist
thou more readily assent (O my soul) to that Christian and Catholick article of that sacred Mystery of the Unity of the God-head in the Trinity of persons; thou art an Em∣bleme of the trine-une-God, of one God in essence, and three persons in operation; one simple essence in three distinct persons, Fa∣ther, Son, and Holy Ghost; thou art one Soul, a simple and undivided essence in three di∣vided and distinct powers, Vegetative, Sen∣sitive, and Intellectual; and these are three, not confounded but so distinct powers, that one may not be predicated of another, the Vegetative is not the Sensitive or Rational; nor the Sensitive▪ the Vegetative or Intel∣lectual faculties; nor the Intellectual, either Vegetative or Sensual; so in the Trinity of persons in one God-head, they are all distinct, not confounded persons; we must not confound the persons, nor yet divide the substance; so saith Catholick faith; the Father is not the Son, nor the Holy Ghost;St. Atha∣nasius his Creed. Licet nam∣que in hac ineffabili & incomprehensibili deitatis essentia alter & alter id quidem requirentibus proprietatibus personarum sobrie Catholiceque di∣catur; non tamen ibi est alterum & alterum, sed sim  um: ut nec prejudicium faciat unitati trinitatis confessio, nec propri  it exclusio, vera assertio veritatis. Bernardus Epist. 190. fol. 1581. K. & paul infra. Alius pro∣cul dubio pater, alius filius, quamvis non aliud pater quam filius, nam per aliud & aliud novit pietas fidei caute inter personarum proprietates & individuam essentiae unitatem discernere, & medium iter tenens regiâ incedere via, ut nec declinat ad dextram confundendo personas, nec respiciat ad sini tram substantiam dividendo. Its truly said (saith Ursinus in his Catechism) the Father is
alius, another from the Son and Holy Ghost; the Son is alius, another from the Father and the Holy Ghost; and the Holy Ghost is ali∣us, from the Father and the Son; but not truly said the Father is aliud, the Son ali∣ud, the Holy Ghost aliud, for alium esse denotes the diversity of persons, but aliud esse the diversity of essence; now though the persons in the Trinity be dictinct, and the names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are proper names, and may not be predicated one of another, yet God is a common name, be∣cause the essence of the deity is common to them all, and may be predicated of any of them; therefore doth holy Church acknow∣ledge; the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God; not as a part of God or the Divine essence, for God is indivisible, and hath no parts, and there is no person in this Trinity but is perfect God and whole God; Even so the Soul is a Common name, and may be predicated of any of the faculties; not as a whole to its parts; for the soul is in∣divisible and hath no parts, and there is none of the faculties but is the full and whole soul. For as the essence of the soul is indivisible, and is whole in the whole, and whole in eve∣ry part of the body; so are the powers and fa∣culties of the soul of the same nature; for
since the powers and faculties of the soul are or at least flow from the very substance of the soul, and the substance of the soul is in all and every part of the body, it must needs fol∣low, that the faculties of the soul are also there intire. It is true,Anima quae est in toto corpore ea∣dem, eisdem quidem est ubique instructa facultatibus & in om∣nibus mem∣bris omnia quae sibi propria sunt agendi potentiam habet, per certa tamen organa certas actiones perficit, vi∣det per oculum, audit per aures, olfacit per nares. Sennartus lib. 6. cap. 1. Tom. 1. the Operations of the soul are not in every part and place of the bo∣dy; because in every part there are not requi∣site Organs; and therefore its said, The facul∣ties of the soul are in every part of the body as to their essence, though not as to their Opera∣tions. See Fab. Favent. theor. 82. in sine primi capitis. Again, in this Trinity of persons, none is be∣fore or after other, none is greater or less than the other, but the whole three persons are Coeternal together, and Coequal; so saith Athanasius; And thus far may the Soul of man with its faculties, in a sort (though in a weak and imperfect manner) hold the re∣semblance of God and the blessed Trinity; yet maist thou not (O my soul) but conceive, that this sacred Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, in a far more eminent manner excells that of thine; nor maist thou with safety too curiously search into this mystery, but
what in Reason thou canst not apprehend, with the Catholick Church, adore and believe; and the Catholick Faith is this, That we wor∣ship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in U∣nity; neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance; for there is one per∣person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost. But the God-head of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one; the glory equal, the Majesty Coeternal; Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Ghost; The Father Uncreate, the Son Uncreate, and the Holy Ghost Uncreate; The Father Incomprehensi∣ble, the Son Incomprehensible; and the Ho∣ly Ghost Incomprehensible; The Father Eter∣nal, the Son Eternal, and the Holy Ghost Eter∣nal, and yet they are not three Eternals, but one Eternal; as also there are not three In∣comprehensibles, nor three Uncreated, but one Uncreated, and one Incomprehensible; so likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son Al∣mighty, and the Holy Ghost Almighty, and yet they are not three Almighties, but one Almighty; so the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and yet they are not three Gods, but one God; so likewise the Father is Lord, the Son is Lord, and the Holy Ghost Lord, and yet not three Lords, but one Lord; for like as we be compelled by Christian
Verity to acknowledge every person by himself to be God and Lord, so we are forbidden by the Catholick Religion to say there be three Gods or three Lords; the Father is made of none, neither created nor begotten; the Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor created, but Begotten; the Holy Ghost is of the Father and the Son, neither made, nor created, nor begotten, but Proceeding; so there is one Father, not three Fathers, one Son, not three Sonnes, one Holy Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts; And in this Trinity none is before or after other, none is greater or less than another. But the whole three persons be Coeternal together and Coequal; So that in all things, as is aforesaid, the Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, is to be worshiped; He there∣fore that will be saved, must thus think of the Trinity. CHAP. V. Of the Vegetative faculty, with its operations and effects. THE Vegetative is the meanest, but the most common of all the other faculties, for this is the Nature of them
that the Inferior may subsist without the Superior, but the Superior cannot be without the Inferior faculties; therefore where the Intellectual facultie is, there must needs be the Vegetative & Sensitive, but where the Vegetative or Sensitive is, it doth not necessarily follow the Intel∣lectual faculty should be; therefore is the Vegetative more common than the Sen∣sitive, and the Sensitive more common than the Rational faculty; Vegetation is to Plants, Beasts, and Men common; Sense to Beasts and Men, but not to Plants; Reason is onely proper to Man, not to Plants and Beasts. We will begin with the lowest and most common; so in order upwards, to the highest and most special. The Vegetative faculty is the begin∣ing of life; so hath it been defined, princi∣pium quo primo vivimus; but here its also principium motus, and hath three Operati∣ons peculiar to it self, of Nourishment, Growth,Of Nou∣rishment, & Aug∣mentati∣on. and Generation, which are the several kinds of Motion & Mutation; Nu∣trition and Augmentation are indeed one and the same Operation, though divers∣ly considered; for that food which by Concoction is turned into blood, and that blood into flesh, is both Nutrition and
Augmentation; onely is called Nutriti∣on as it preserves the Animal, who hath a continual wast and consumption up∣on him, and needs a new restauration and recovery by this nutriment, and new converson of food into blood, and blood into flesh; and in as much as the Body or compositum hath regained by this operation of the Vegetative Faculty what it had lost, it is called Nutrition; but in as much as more is gained than was lost, it is called Augmentation; & as they are one in operation, so they are in the end for which they operate, they both tend to one and the same end (viz.) the perfecting of the creature so nourished, and augmented; which when it is con∣summated, those operations cease, & the other motions of diminution and alte∣ration come in their room; and herein they differ from the Generative operati∣on which looks not to the conservation of the Individual in which it is resident, so much as the begetting of another like Individual, by which Propagation and continued series of succeeding Individu∣als, the Species and forms of them may be preserved.Of Gene∣ration, or Precrea∣tion. The Generative operation is more noble and divine than either of the o∣ther,
because thereby living creatures come nearest to Immortality and Eter∣nity; for thereby (though the Individu∣als perish, for quic quid oritur moritur, and quic quid generatur corrumpitur, yet) are they in their forms preserved from cor∣ruption, the Species remain and abide as it were in a surviving kind of Immor∣tality, amidst the divers mortal and succeeding Individuals; for there is an innate desire and appetite in every living creature to Eternity; a Deity they all aym at, and since they cannot attain thereto in the singularity of Individu∣als, for they are all subject to corrup∣tion, every Individual hath in it this faculty to procreate and beget another like it self, whereby the Species is the same, and continued as it were unto E∣ternity; the end then of this faculty is to beget an Individual like to it self, as the Generative faculty in Man is to be∣get a Man, and one Horse begets ano∣ther. Hence may be noted three things. First, that these various motions and mutations before mentioned (viz.) of Generation and Corruption, of Aug∣mentation and Diminution, of Altrici∣on and Alteration are not in respect of
the Soul, but the Body or compositum; 'tis true the Soul is the cause and beginning of motion, and so may be said to nou∣rish, to increase, to diminish, to alter, or the like; but it is the Body is nourished, augmented, and diminished, for that is onely capable of dimensions; the Soul not so, for that's a simple and incorpo∣real Essence, and falls not within the predicament of Quantity (I speak of the Soul of man) as hath been elswhere sayd. Every thing procreated is by nature  corruptible, and what may be augment∣ed, may also be diminished. Every like begets its like; this is a  property in the Generative Faculty of all perfect Animals; a Man begets not a Beast, nor a Beast a Man in the course of nature, but Man begets a Man like to himself, and a Beast one like to it; and so every creature is preserved in their form and likeness, though not in the same Numerical body. There is a twofold Vegetative faculty in man, the one Temporal and caduce, because in a body sinful, mortal, and corrupt; the other Spiritual and Eternal, because in a body sanctified, and tending to a state of
Glory and Immortality; the one thou hast (O my Soul) by Nature, that Philosophy teacheth; the other thou hast by Grace, that Divinity: Yea and this faculty of the Soul in a Spiritual estate hath all the operations of Nourishment, Augmentation, and Gene∣ration which are in the natural and carnal condition, and that in a more eminent man∣ner: In what stature and age Adam was created, whether in full age, in a perfect natural condition, needing no accrescion being created in that full augmentation of parts which God and Nature hath prefixed unto man, and in which whether he had continued without diminution or declination to old age, but should have been supported by those supernatural abilities in which he was created, had he continued in his inte∣grity, I shall not here determine: But cer∣tain it is (and Christian Religion so teach∣eth) that since the Fall death hath passed upon all men, death natural as an effect of sin, and man cometh into this world, as by the course of nature he is to goe out of the world, in a weak and feeble estate; tender infancy brings us into the world, decrepid old age leads us out, and during the time of our abode here we labour under those va∣rious changes and counter-marched of Ge∣neration, Corruption, of Augmentation
and Diminution, of Altrition and Altera∣tion, from our womb to our tomb; from the day af our birth to the day of our death, toil∣ing and spending our selves in a circular motion till we are reduced to our first matter;Sir Walter Raleigh his Histo∣ry of the World, lib. 1. c. 2. sect. 5 we pass over our Generation from Infancie to Youth, from Youth to Manhood, in those purer motions of Nutrition and Augmenta∣tion, whose ends are to bring the Body to that determinate perfection of Magnitude which Nature hath allotted it. From our vigorous estate of Manhood, we decline to Old age, then to Dotage, this closeth our eyes, and layes us asleep in death, and this sleep brings us to our bed the grave; and this part of our life is attended with those impurer motions of corrupt Nature Di∣minution and Alteration, whose ends are to bring us again to our original, our first Parents, (viz.) Corruption our Father, and the Worm our Mother and our Sister; and thus we tread the Maze, and run the round, like the Suns yearly course in the Zodiack, ascending from the lower most House in Ca∣pricorn through those two seasons of the year Spring and Summer, to the highest House the Tropick of Cancer; and there's the Sol∣stice, where the Sun is got to that height that higher it cannot, but turns retrograde; and down it descends through the other seasons
of Autumn and Winter to its Vertigal point the Tropick of Capricorn from whence it came, the four Ages of man, to wit, Infancy, Youth, Manhood, Old age, be∣ing like the four seasons in the year (viz) Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter; or like the Suns Diary course in the Firmament, Psalm 19. which goeth forth from the ut∣termost part of heaven, and runneth about unto the end of it again; or like the Winds, or like the Floods; to all which the Wiseman compares the travels of man upon earth, saying,Eccles. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. One generation passeth away, another cometh, but the earth abideth still; the Sun ariseth, the Sun goeth down, and returneth to his place, that he may there rise up again: The Wind goeth towards the South, and turneth unto the North, fetcheth his compass, whirleth about, goeth forth, and returneth again to his circuits from whence he came: All Floods run into the Sea, and yet the Sea is not filled; for look into what place the waters run, thence they come to flow again. And this is the Felicity that mi∣serable man laboureth for under the Sun, and here's the fruit of all (viz. Death) for the end of all things is Death. And thus much of the Vegetative faculty in the state of corrupt nature.
There is (to answer this sinfull Genera∣tion and Procreation by our Parents in the flesh, by which we are made corruptible; mortal, subject to a transitory, short, and miserable life, but to an endless everlasting death (For all flesh (saith the Apostle) is as grass,Pet. 1. and all the glory of man as the flower of the grass; the grass wi∣thereth, and the flower thereof sadeth away: So doth the Psalmist compare the transitory life of man to the grass,Psal. 90.6. which in the morning is green and groweth up, but in the evening is cut down, dried up, and withered) to answer this, I say, there is a Spiritual Generation, a new Birth, and this is not of corruptible Seed, but of incor∣ruptible, by the Word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever: But it is with the Christian as it is with the Natural man in this, that none are generated and produ∣ced in their full and perfect stature, but in the tender age of Infancy; there are Babes in Grace as well as in Nature, which before they can attain to the stature of a man re∣quire daily food and nourishment, and much growth and augmentation of parts; much is required for the perfecting,Eph. 4.13 for the increase, and edifying of the body of Christ, before any Christian come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; these operations (after our Generation) then of Nutrition and Augmentation are requisite to bring up a Christian from his Infancy, to his Youth and riper years, and these con∣tinue with us to the day of our departure hence, because none attains to full age here, our perfection is hereafter. But we now be∣gin our growth here (after our conversion and new birth) first in Childhood and In∣fancy, and in this state we continue (so in∣sinuates the Apostle calling us children) as long as we are tossed to and fro,Ibid. ver. 14 and car∣ried about with every wind of Doctrine; from Childhood we skip not straight to perfect and full age, but by Youth and middle age; for after we are born to Christ in Infancy, debe∣mus adolescere, saith Calvin upon the place, we must not stay in Childhood, but Youth-out our time here, grow on to middle age, and be no longer Children in under∣standing; and this stronger and riper age of a Christian the Apostle seems to exhort to, where after his dehortation from Child∣hood, Be no longer children, he adds, but speaking the truth in love, grow up into him in all things which is the head, even Christ; and in this age we pass the time of our sojourning here.
Hitherto this twofold Vegetative faculty by Nature and by Grace have been examin∣ed, and agree in their operations; but now we shall shew a difference (and that a vast one) 'twixt the workings of the one, and the workings of the other; and first in the first note of the natural operation in this Chapter observed. The Soul in the Natural state cannot be said to be subject to,The first difference or passive in those seve∣ral motions of Generation, Corruption, Aug∣mentation, Diminution, &c. because it is impatible, incorruptible, indivisible; but the body or compositum onely properly is generated, corrupted, augmented, diminish∣ed, and the like; but in this Spiritual con∣dition the Soul as well as the Body is capable of some of these motions, and may be sayd to be begotten, nourished, increased,Necesse est animam cresci & dilatari ut sit capax dei, porro latitudo e∣jus dilectio ejus; nam & anima minime (cum sit spiritus) corpoream recipit quanti∣tatem, tamen confert illi gratia, quod negatum est natura, crescit quidem & extenditur, sed spiritualiter, crescit non in substantia sed virtute, crescit & in gloria, crescit denique in virum perfectum, in mensuram ae∣tatis plenitudinis Christi, crescit etiam in templum sanctum in domino, ergo quantitas cujusque animae aestimetur de mensura charitatis quam habet, ut verbi gratia, quae multum habet charitatis magna est, quae parum, parva est, quae vero nihil, nihil. Bernardus fol. 30 16. & 30 17. F. G. Item super Cant. sermo. 27. fol. 647. l. & K. to grow as well as the body groweth in a spiritual and intellectual sense; for here it is quan∣ta, as all abstracted Essences and Intelli∣gences (viz.) the Angels and Heavens
be quantae, for as much as they be finite, and so fall within quantity, but not quantita∣tem praedicamentalem, sed intelligi∣bilem, onely within an imaginary intel∣lectual, not a predicamental; a metaphysi∣cal, not a physical quantity, as hath been said. The se∣cond.That compositum which is generated may be corrupted, and that which is aug∣mented may also be diminished, this in Na∣ture, but otherwaies in Grace; we are be∣gotten and born not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, which endureth unto eternal life without corruption, without putrifac∣tion: And Augmented we are in a Christi∣an state, we grow and increase untill we come to that measure of stature of the ful∣ness of Christ, which we continue in without diminution; we doe not wax and wean with the Moon; we begin not senescere, to wheel about to our first principles by the way of old age; but we continue vigorous in that full and perfect age (supported by Gods grace) to perpetuity, without the least di∣minution or alteration in soul or body, or declination to old age, for quod se∣nescit (saith Calvin upon Ephes. 4.13. afore quoted) ad interitum decli∣nat; and so the Apostle, Hebr. 8. That which decayeth and waxeth old is
ready to vanish away; old age being Gen∣tleman-Usher to corruption; but in this blisful estate, there is Gneration without Corrupti∣on, Augmentation without Diminution, Al∣trition without Alteration. Every like begets it like to preserve its Image in succeeding Individualls;The third difference. the no∣blest of all generated substances is man; and highest facultie he hath, is to beget one like himself; so Man is the likeness of Man: But by our new Birth and Regeneration we are made like unto God; God hath begotten us in his own likeness, we are his off-spring, and have this honor to be called the Sons of God, and if Sons, then Heirs and Coheirs with Christ; Christ is the begotten Son of God, so are wee; he is the express Image of his Father, so are mee; But with this diffe∣rence. First, Christ is the begotten Son of God by Natural Generation, we are the begotten Sonnes of God by grace and Adoption onely. Secondly, as it is the property of every living thing to beget it like, so God in the Genera∣tion of Christ hath surpassed all in begeting a Son, like (nay most like) to himself, of the self same essence, an essence to subsist of himself, for as the Father hath life in him∣self, so hath he given to his Son to have life
in himself, so saith St. John, and as the life and being of God is not severed no more than his essence and existence, for Gods es∣sence is his existence; so we may say, as the Father hath being in himself, so hath he givē to his Son to have being in himself, but with this difference, God hath life and being in himself, because he is the Fountain of life and being, and hath it not elsewhere; and he hath given to the Son to have this life and being in himself, and by this is the Son a Fountain of being, but a Fountain of being from the Fountain of being, as God of God and light of light; this is the likeness that Christ hath with his Father; which as it sur∣passeth all that any living creature can con∣fer upon whom they begot; so doth it far sur∣pass the likeness of God in any of us the A∣dopted Sons of God, though we bear the Image of God in a far more Eminent man∣ner than any generated nature can do their Parents; for we shall be preserved to Im∣mortality and Eternity, not only in a series of succeeding Individualls, but also in our own Individual Soules and Bodies; and we shall be like unto God, not onely in that perfect Righteousness, Freedom of Will, Clearness of Understanding, in which we were first created; but surpassing all, we shall
be like unto God in the fruition of endless Glory, Bliss and Happiness.Chap. 6. Book 1. CHAP. VI. Of the Sensitive faculty, with its Operations External. IN the Sensitive faculties are inclu∣ded the Motive to a place, and the Ap∣petitive, of which more hereafter; there are incident to this faculty (though not Inseparably) eight Senses, five are Ex∣ternal, as Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, Touching, and three Internal, as the common Sense, Phantasie, Memo∣ry; of these in their order, but first of Sense in general, and of its properties, whereby it is distinguisht from the o∣ther two faculties of the Soul, Vegeta∣tive, which hath been handled, and Intellective, which hereafter comes to be considered. First, It differeth from the Vegeta∣tative, for, first the Vegetative hath no External Objects which it perceiveth or knoweth; its Objects are onely Internal, it discerneth nothing out of it self: but
but the Sensitive facultie discerneth and judgeth of divers and various Objects which are all External and not in the Sense. Secondly, Again the Vegetative is A∣gent upon its Object, and not Patient, as for example, the Nutritive facultie works upon its Object, (viz.) food, which it receives, by turning food into it own likeness; but is not worked up∣on by it, is not converted into its simi∣litude: but the Sensitive faculty recipien∣do patitur, receives its Object, and in that Receipt is Patient, and converted to that Actually which before it was not, but Potentially. Again, it differeth from the Intel∣lectual, for that judgeth and discerneth of Internal Objects, and External also, the Sensitive onely of External; the In∣tellectual judgeth of things absent, and future, as wel as of things past & present, the Sensitive of things present, (or past happily) not of things future; the In∣tellectual knoweth all things Material, and Immaterial, as well Forms ab∣stracted from matter as Form and mat∣ter together, the Sense severs not Form from Matter; the Intellect knoweth Spiritual and Eternal, the Sense onely
things Temporal and Corporeal. So here, a twofold Judgement in Man, one by Sense, which is External, and of things Material and Present; the other Internal by the Understanding of things Immaterial, Spiritual, and Future. The Judgement of Sense is very de∣ceitful, being External,The judg∣ment of sense not internal; the senses have no know∣ledge of them∣selves. and Judging of Objects meerly External; for therefore are the Senses called External, not onely because their Organs are External, but also for that their Objects are External, which they receive and Judge of with∣out any inward knowledge or Sense of themselves; for there is no Sense of the Senses, they do not perceive themselves, nor perceive that they do perceive; the eye doth not see it self, or see it self to see; the ear doth not hear it self, or hear that it doth hear; for of themselves the Senses are not any thing but in Power, nothing of the Act or Operation is with∣in them. 'Tis the Object without which works upon them and brings the Act of Judging and discerning. The sight of Sense or the Sense of See∣ing then is outward to Judge of things External, it hath no inward principle,The judg∣ment of sense is by external objects. no Internal Object to look into, but re∣quires External Objects and principles;
and interjected mediums also, other∣wise it is not Operative, it hath not the art of Judging at all; nor is every Object for every Sense, but every Sense requires his proper Object, or else there will be a false Judgement given; for the eye doth not judge of sounds, nor the ear of colours, the palate Judgeth not of smells, nor the nose of tasts; but the eye Judgeth of colours, those two ex∣tremes white and black, and the colours intermediate; the ear Judgeth of sounds, as shrill and sharp, or base and dull sounds, and their intermediums; the nose and palate are near a kin, and have Objects alike of which they Judge, the one of sweet or bitter smells, the o∣ther of sweet or bitter tasts, and their mediums; the hand or Sense of feeling hath its different Objects, of hot and cold, moist and dry, soft and hard, and the like, of which it passeth its Judgement. And by interject∣ed means.The Senses as they require their pro∣per Objects, so also fit Mediums for the conveyance of things sensible to the Senses; the Objects of the Sense work not immediately upon the senses, but by in∣tcrjected means; so the eye to discern and judge of colours, needs light and a
transparent perspicuous body, as Air, Water, Glass, Ice, or some such diapha∣nous body, actually enlightned, to con∣vey the Object to the sight, without which interjection the eye could not discern at all; and indeed many more things are required to make the Judge∣ment that comes of Sense perfect, which otherwise is very uncertain and deceitful; though positis omnibus requisi∣tis, all necessaries being premised, the rule holds true, sensus est semper verus; and this, sensus non fallitur circa proprium object∣um; and in this sense and no other is A∣ristole to be understood. The Senses by receiving things sen∣sible are made one, or like to those Ob∣jects they receive; for the Form and si∣militude of the Object presented to the sight is in the eye, and made one with it, and so of the other Senses and their Objects; the sight and thing seen, the ear and thing heard, the smell and tast, and their Odors and savours are all a∣like, no difference twixt the Sense and its Object, but talis est sensus, quale est objectum; such, potestate, in power, not in Act; not in act the same with the Object which is a matter; for the matter is not received by the Sense, the Form and
similitude onely is received into the Sense, abstracted from Matter; And therefore doth Aristotle compare the Sense to Wax, and the Object to a Seal; Now as the Wax taketh the impress and Form of the Seal, whether it be Iron, Brass, Gold or Silver, but no part of the Iron, Brass, Gold or Silver: So the sense receives the Form and print of the Ob∣ject or thing discerned, but no part of the matter of the Object. Nor was there any being in the Sense before, but a bare facultie, a faculty to re∣ceive sensible Forms; an aptitude & pow∣er of receiving colours is in the sight of the eye, in that Instrument or Organ of sight which is called pupilla, in English, the ball or apple of the eye, this hath a faculty, a power of receiving colours (as the Organs of the other Senses have of receiving theirs) but is not actually coloured, hath no colour in it, for then it could not receive those that are with∣out, nor have an aptitude thereunto, for saith Aristotle, intus existens prohibet alie∣num; the good man within doors keeps the stranger forth; But that the Senses may more readily receive their Objects, therefore are the Organs destitute and naked of the Nature of the Objects they
receive, as the eye is void of colour, and the ear of sounds; for if the eye had Actually in it either white or black, it could not receive another from with∣out; so when any savour or smell is actu∣ally in the Organs of those Senses, it is an impediment to other savours and smells, that they either not at all, or at least very weakly, are discerned; for in∣tus existens prohibet alienum; that which is within keeps all others out. Lastly, these External Senses are the five Ports and Gates of the Intellectual Soul, at least of that Intellectual faculty which is called Patient or Practical; and there is nothing entreth into this facul∣ty, but is let in thorough some of these doors, the Cinque-ports of the Soul, for so is the rule in Philosophy, nihil est in intellectu, quod non prius fuit in sensu. I need not tell thee (O my Soul) thou hast a conscience within thee is in stead of a thou∣sand witnesses, shewing thy miserable seducti∣on and Perdition by following the Judgement of Sense, and refusing the dictates of thy own Understanding, judging according to the outward appearance of External Ob∣jects; gilded apples and fruit of the tree, bona apparentia, onely pleasant to the
eye and goood for food; bitter in thy belly, though sweet in thy mouth; gall in digestion, though Honey in tast; nor need I to shew thee the resemblance and similitude twixt thee and thy Objects, which thou hast con∣tracted by receiving and embrasing of them; such as thy Object is, such art thou; sin is thy Object, therefore thou art such; such in Form and likeness; and since sin is a non-entity, privatio boni, the Form of sin is meer de∣formity; this print and Form hast thou with∣in thee as fully and plainly as the Wax re∣tains the Form of the Seal; through the Senses it is conveyed unto thee; the innu∣merable sinnes and transgressions where∣with mankind is involved springs from hence, even from this Sensitive faculty of the flesh; the Senses are the doors thorough which all sins of all kind have entred into the Soul of man; the rule in Philosophy, nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuit in sensu, holds true in sins of all sorts, which come not to the Soul, but thorough these wi∣der Gates which lead unto destruction; thorough these the three Grand enemies of Mans Salvation, shoot their poisonous darts at the heart of man. Help, help me, O Lord my God, for my Enemies have compassed about my Soul, the Flesh, the World, and the Devill; and the
dangerousest Enemy is my own Flesh, my bo∣som-friend is become my greatest adversa∣ry; they of my household are my deadly foes, the Flesh which I cannot fly from, nor yet drive from me, I am constrained to carry a∣bout me, it is so close conjoyned to my Soul, d stroy it I may not, though unwillingly I uphold it; feed it I must, though in feeding of it I nourish my Enemy; an Enemy worst of all enemies, not an open enemy, for against a professed Enemy one may make head, but thou my familiar, an intestine secret Enemy, who slayest unawares as Joab did Abner, and Amasa; this is the Enemy within, that betraies my Soul to its Eenemies with∣out, and sets open these Senses, the Soul's Cinque-ports, through which the World and Devill shoot their poysonous arrows, and have grievously wounded me, and death through these windowes hath entred my Soul. I open my eyes, and the world presents me with beautiful Objects, a Dalila, a Beth∣shaba; the Devill straight shoots his poy∣sonous dars, lascivious thoughts, unchast de∣sires, Carnal lusts, and concupisence, and fastens in my Soul; I open my ears, and the World presents me with the various sounds of blasphemy towards God, scandalous and reproachful speeches towards our Neigh∣bours,
perjuries, lies, cursings from my own mouth, and from the mouths of others; straight the Devil shoots his arrows, of An∣ger, Malice, Strife, Envy, Murther and the like; I would please my palate, and be∣hold I am presented with all the delicates the World affordeth; the Devil shoots his darts of excess, of Gluttony, Drunkenness and the like; to my feeling is presented the Worlds various Objects, of Warm and Moist, and soft and Smooth; the Devills darts are Adultery, Fornication, &c. Thus whether I See, Hear, or Speak, Tast, or Touch, I am assaulted on every hand by these my Enemies who bear a Tyrannous hate against me, and which way soever I turn me I find no safety; Perills and Dangers, Temptations and Trialls, Snares and Ginnes, Bonds and Imprisonment whither soever I goe do attend me; darts are continually cast, close Siege is laid to my Soul; sometimes they assault me vi & armis, in open field; sometimes by underminings, sleights and Stratagems; somtimes overt∣ly, sometimes covertly; alwaies malici∣ously. To thee do I fly for help against these evills, (O my God) for vain is the help of Man; unto thy Word have I recourse, where I find present cures and remedies for all such as will faithfully apply them; and first of the re∣medie
against the evils of the eye, this I find set down by holy Job, and practised by himself; I have made (saith he) a Covenant with my eyes, that I will not think upon a maid; The words are not, I will not lock, but, I will not think, for look I may, but not so long look, till that aspect doth pierce to my heart, and I begin to think of her beauty, and to lust after her imbraces. St. Au∣gustines rule for chastity accordingly is, occuli vestri si jaciantur in aliquem sigantur in neminem; we may cast our eyes on some, but fasten on none; for simple aspect cannot be avoyded; nor can that hard∣ly hurt the Soul unless it be continued; therefore saith Augustine, not the behold∣ing, but the continuance in beholding is pe∣rilous. The remedy against the evill of hearing, the Prophet David laies down, Psalm the 39. I said, I will take heed unto my waies that I offend not in my tongue, I will keep my mouth as it were with a bridle, whilst the ungodly is in my sight. Speak I may, that's not prohibited, but a caution given to take heed what I speak; I may speak with discretion if I speak, with de∣liberation; warily and wisely, rashly and foolishly; therefore, saith David, I will
take heed to my waye, that I offend not in my tongue; that is, I will ponder and consider beforehand what to say, my words shall not be many, and ex tempore, but few, and with premeditation; I will keep silnce awhile and muse, though it be pain and grief to me, and whilst I am mu∣sing the fire kindle, and at last I speak with my tongue. And this rule Saint James prescribes,Jam. 1.19 that every man be slow to speak; so Saint Bernard, Verba ante∣quam proferantur pensanda; we must stay to weigh our words before we utter them; and b cause we many times receive hurt from others tongues as well as our own, Saint Bernard's rule is for slow hearing as well as slow speaking; for the prophane and scandalous speeches of others doe suddenly infect our souls, if we lend a willing ear thereto; for words, saith Democritus, are the shadow of deeds; for what we doe hear with delight, we will as readily act; and therefore (saith he) many lose the benefit that comes by re∣fraining their tongue, because they refrain not their ears from others tongues. Now against Gluttony and Drunkenness the sins of the Palate, and against Adulte∣and Fornication which come by the Sense of
Feeling, the Remedies are such as Physici∣ans use to prescribe their Patients in their sick and weak condition (viz) abstinency from much meat and drink, a spare and mo∣derate diet,1 Tim. 5.2 such as Paul prescribes Timo∣thy, a little wine for his stomacks sake, and his often infirmity; a little wine to strength∣en him against his often infirmities, and but a little wine, to avoyd Luxury;In lib. de arte bene moriend. for in wine is Luxury (saith Bellarmine.) A∣gain, Physicians use Phlebotomie, lanch∣ing and cutting of Veins, and prescribe bit∣ter Pils and Potions, all which are enemies to Nature and the body of man; such are all fastings, and watchings, and humbling of the body, which though they turn to the Mortification of the Flesh, yet tend to the Vivification of the Soul; and this is the cha∣stising of the body which St. Paul speaks of,Cor. 1.9. saying, Castigo corpus, I chastise, I keep under my body, and bring it into sub∣jection, lest that by any means when I have preached to others I my self should be a cast-away. But for further remedy against such e∣vils as come to the Soul by these Senses, I will shew how the Soul hath five Senses by which it is cured, as the Body hath five by which it is wounded: As the Body hath five Senses, so hath the Soul; there are five Or∣ganical
Corporeal Senses; there are also five Inorganical and Spiritual Senses; the Body hath five, by which it is joyned to the Soul in life; the Soul hath five, by which it is united to God in love.De natura & dignita∣te amoris divini cap. 6. f. 1155. & serm. 16. parvis sol. 481. c. Et de vita & quinque sensibus a∣nimae, fol. 374 a. Et in caena domini serm. 5. fol. 1360. 'Tis Saint Ber∣nard's observation, his words are these, There are five Corporeal Senses by which the Soul gives sense to the body, which are (beginning with the lowermost, and so upwards to the noblest of them) Feeling, Tasting, Smelling, Hearing, Seeing: There are also five Spiritual Senses, by which Charity quickens and enlivens the Soul (viz.) Paternal Love, Social or Conjugal Love, Natural Love, Spiritual Love, and Divine Love, or the Love of God; and as the body by the means of life is joyned to the soul by five Organical Senses, so is the soul by the means of Charity joy∣ned to God by these five Spiritual Senses; the Love of Parents is the meanest Spiritual Sense, and answer∣eth the bodily sense of Feeling; the Love of God the highest and noblest Sense, and answereth the bodily sense of Seeing: So Love runs through the whole Soul, and without this Love the Soul is dead to God, Love, I say
not Lust; the Soul's Love,Chap. 7. Book. 1. not the Senses Lust; Love the action of Vir∣tue, not the passion of Vice; Love the fruit of the Spirit, not Lust the weed of the Flesh. Of which Love we shall speak more in the Chapter of the Af∣fection of the Soul. CHAP. VII. Of the three Internal Senses (viz.) Common Sense, Phantasie, Memory. THus much of the External Senses which are seated in the body, whose Organs are extra to judg of things out of themselves: Now come we to the Internal, which are intra cranium seated in the Brain, not outward in the body; and have their Organs in the Brain; the Brain is the seat of these Senses. The Internal do differ much from the External in the power of operation; the operation of the one is more general than the other; the External judge on∣ly of things present, the Internal of
things absent as well as present; the External judge onely of the differences of their own particular objects, the In∣ternal of the difference of every object belonging to every sense. And as the Internal are thus distin∣guisht from the External Senses, so are they likewise amongst themselves, both in their Situation and Operation; and first in their Situation. 1 Although they have all of them their Situation in the Brain, yet keep they their distinct and several seats in the Brain; the Common Sense possesseth the nearest seat of the Brain, which lieth in the fore part of the head called Sin∣ciput; the Memory keeps the remotest seat, which lieth in the hindermost part of the head called Occiput; the Phanta∣sie keeps the middle part of the Brain 'twixt them both: Thus is the Brain divided into three parts or Ventricles (as the Anatomists observe) in which there be issues and passages from one part to another, which are called Meates, through which the vitall spirits pass to and fro. Of Com∣mon Sense.2 They differ in their Operations; the Common Sense gives sense to the External, that's it work; we have said
heretofore, that there is no Sense of the Senses, they do not perceive themselves; but here we must lay down a contrary position, and all this out of the rules of Natural Philosophy, quilibet sensus percipit se sentire, the Eye doth perceive it self to see, the Ear to hear, and the like; and so the Senses have sense of their objects; to reconcile which seeming contradiction, we say the External Senses, virtute propria, of themselves, and by their own operation, do not perceive themselves; yet they doe it by another power, and this is by the faculty and operation of the Internal Common Sense, whose work alone is to give sense to the External. Which Common Sense is all one with the other five, not diverse from them; one and the same Sense divided into five conjoyned in one; the five External be∣ing as so many Rivulets arising from one Spring and Fountain (viz.) one In∣ternal Common Sense; and this Inter∣nal being like unto the center or point in the Circle (it is Aristotles com∣parison) from whence so many lines are drawn out to the circumference, which lines are united in one indivi∣dual point and center; in the same
manner are the five External Senses drawn from one, and again united in one Internal Common Sense; the ope∣ration therefore of this Sense, is to re∣ceive, perceive, distinguish, and discern the difference of the different objects presented to the outward Senses, and to give sense to the Senses; and therefore it is seated in the fore-part of the Brain, which part is more moist, and so aptest for reception, and is nearer to those out∣ward senses, whose ayd and assistance they most require, and to whom they are nearer related than the rest. Of Phan∣tasie.The operation of Phantasie is more exactly to weigh, and diligently to exa∣mine those forms and similitudes recei∣ved in the Common Sense; and this is seated in the middle part of the Brain, which is dryer, and so more apt for re∣tention; Phantasie is the highest faculty of the soul that any brute or irrational creature is capable of, and it differeth from Common Sense, for Phantasie re∣tains not onely those things which are, or were the objects of the External Senses, and by them presented to the In∣ternal, but those things also which ne∣ver were, nor ever will be the objects of Sense, being entiâ rationis, non entiâ rei,
chimaeraes, figments of the Brain, having no existence in nature, only a notionary, imaginary existence, but extra operatio∣nem intellectus nihil, no longer any thing than they are in our mind, such are the representation of Centaures and other Monsters which Poets and Painters have feigned and painted, which are not, nor indeed have any existence in nature, but are a meer imagination of the Brain; so Phantasie may be of such things as fall not within Sense, are not subject thereto; but otherways it is of the Com∣mon Sense. But this is by virtue of the Intellectu∣al Phantasie, for there is an Intellectual Phantasie, as there is an Intellectual Memory, which is proper to Man, not common with Beasts, as hereafter shall be shewed; for otherways Phantasie is not without Sense, nor is in any but sen∣sitive creatures, nor of any objects but what are sensible and fall under sense; and therefore it is that new born babes whose External Sensitive faculties in re∣spect of their Organs are too weak to o∣perate at their first production, are desti∣tute of Phantasie, till such time as fit ob∣jects be presented, and the Senses made capable to receive and discern them; and
so be reduced into act, till such time, I say, our Phantasie worketh not; there∣fore Phantasie presupposeth Sense, not onely in power in its faculties, but in act in its operations; Sense then leadeth the way, Imagination followeth after; for those things we phansie which we formerly have discerned; and what we never discerned severally or joyntly, we cannot phansie; but what we have discerned by Sense asunder we may joyn together in our Phantasie; for so we phansie a Golden Mountain, a Flying-Horse, a Centaure, which is part Man, part Horse, and the like, which notwith∣standing we never saw, nor ever were there such in nature; but this I say, by virtue of our Intellectual phantasie (for such is not in beasts) by which we ima∣gine those things joyntly which we ne∣ver saw but severally and in parts; for a Golden Mountain was never seen, but because we have seen both Gold and Mountains severally, our Intellectual phantasie joyns them together, and makes us imagine that joyntly which we never saw, nor could see but in sunder. Of Memo∣ry.The Operation of Memory is to lay up as it were in a store-house all those
forms so presented, judged, and exa∣mined; it is the Store-house and Trea∣sury of all Science; therefore Plato held, that scientia was nihil aliud quam remini∣scentia, all our knowledge was but a kind of remembrance; and the Poets called Ladie Mnemosyne, that is, Memory, the Mother of the Muses: This Sense differeth from the Common sense, be∣cause it retaineth the forms and simili∣tude of sensible things which are absent as well as present; the Common sense retaineth onely the forms of sensibles present; it differeth likewise from Phan∣tasie; for though Phantasie retain the forms of things absent as well as pre∣sent, and in that regard is called Me∣moria imperfectior, yet Phantasie retaines them without any apprehension or knowledge of time; but Memory retains them under the notion of time, but this onely of time past, not present or to come. Not of time present; we cannot be sayd to remember things present, they fall not under the object of Memory properly; things present fall under the External senses, those things we hear or see without any use of our Memory; nor of time future, that is not the notion of
Memory, things future we remember not, they fall not under Memory, but under Faith, Opinion, Hope, and Expectati∣on; but the object of Memory is the form of External objects conserved and kept under the notion of time past onely. And of this there are two sorts in man, a Sensitive Memory which is com∣mon with Beasts, and perisheth with the Body, and an Intellectual Memory pro∣per to Man, which is Immortal, and re∣mains with the Soul after death; this Intellectual Memory is called Recorda∣tion, or Remembrance, and onely found in such creatures as can rationally dis∣course; and this is a Memory of such things which were once in a manner clean forgotten, but brought again into our mind, and re-imprinted in our Me∣mory by reason and deliberation, and weighing of repeated circumstances of time, place, person, or other like things. We shall not insist upon that faculty which is called Common Sense, it being the same with the five External, they as the Rivu∣lets, it as their Spring; it as the Point, they as the Lines drawn from the Point, of
which we have raised our consideration be∣fore. Phantasie is the highest faculty that ir∣rational creatures are capable of; this sits as supreme Judge in the Sensitive Soul; yea and I may say too in the Rational Soul, e∣ven since the Fall of man, by which his Un∣derstanding was darkened, and captivated to the lusts of the fesh, and whose operati∣ons are slower, and more obstructed than the operations of our Phantasie; the opera∣tions of Reason and Understanding are im∣pedited many waies upon any perturbation of mind, either by immoderate Love or An∣ger, Fear or Grief, or the like; or else by some sickness and distemper of the body; or else by sleep; for then the External Senses rest, neither doth the Understanding that while work; but in all these cases the Phan∣tasie is working; and let a man sleep or wake his Phantasie is seldom idle; but man is slothfull, and loth to goe to that strict in∣quisition and painful search of things which the Understanding standeth upon, therefore he goeth to Phantasie, which is more nimble, easie, and ready at hand: This causeth man to run into so many er∣rors; for whilst right reason was his guide, he continued upright; Intellectus est semper verus, is a Maxim in Philoso∣phy;
for that judgement which Reason pass∣eth upon things, as it is with deliberation, so it is voyd of error; but when man rejected the judgement of his own Understanding, and followed the judgement of sensual Phanta∣sie (which was our first Parents case, and in them of us all) he runs himself upon a thousand errors, and involves himself in a sea of miseries; for the judgement of the Understanding is not so sure and true, but that of Phantasie is as deceitfull; for though Sense may give a true judgement in some cases, pofitis omnibus requisitis, as a proper object, present and presented to an Organ fitted and prepared to receive it by due mediums, convenient distance, and the like, yet Phantasie sticks not to these rules but passeth her sentence on all ob∣jects that have been presented to her by the Senses, whether they be present or absent, proper or common, near or far off; and who seeth not upon what weak principles, how rotten a foundation this judgement of Phantasie standeth? yet from hence all things are conveighed into our Memory, and there registred as they are by our Phantasie apprehended; true or false, good or bad, there they are reserved and kept. And thus we descend to the conside∣ration
of our Memorative faculty, from whence they pass into our Affections & Soul. The Memorative faculty as it takes and retains the impression of all vain objects presented by the Phantasie, so its operation is to think of them so retained: Memory then is the Magazine and Nurserie of our thoughts; this is the source of sin, and sink of all uncleanness, from whence springs e∣very wicked invention, every foolish ima∣gination, every evill thought and cogitati∣on, and these are the beginnings of sorrow, hinc illae lachrymae; sin creeps first into our thoughts, then into our words, then in∣to our actions; in our Memory our de∣struction is first hatched; Memory sends forth lusts, lust when it hath conceived brings forth sin, sin when it is finished brings forth death. Saint Bernard makes three degrees of sin, one in thought, that's from our Memory; another in affection, that's from our Will; the third in purpose and re∣solution, that's from our Mind; the thought to sin defiles and stains the soul, the affecti∣on to sin wounds the soul, but the resolution to sin kils the soul; thoughts breed de∣light, delight consent, consent action, action custom, custom necessity, necessity death. Thus sin, like the cloud arising at the first in the compass of a hand, soon over∣spreads
the surface of Heaven; or like a Gangrene beginning in the Memory, but quickly overrunning all the parts and fa∣culties both of soul and body; this is that Basilik which must be crushed in the shell, lest it grow to a Dragon, and drive the wo∣man into the wilderness; and this is done by resisting the beginnings, by driving all lustfull thoughts out of our Memories: It may seem (and really it is so) a difficult work to expel all those various thoughts and imaginations of the heart which are e∣vill, onely evill, and that continually; but when once the Memory is seasoned with o∣ther cogitations, the evill and corrupt will not so easily find entertainment, vitious and virtuous thoughts will not cohabit toge∣ther, the love of the World and the love of God, the lust of the Flesh and love of the Spirit cannot consist in one subject; If any man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him; they are contrary, which can∣not be in one place at one and the same time; the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and pride of life is not of the Father, but of the World. The remedy against these is the same with that against the evils of the eye set down by Job, I have made a covenant with my eyes, how then shall I think upon
a Maid? if I resolve to withdraw mine eyes from beholding vanitie, much more my mind from thoughts of vanity; where∣fore that my Memory be seasoned with purer meditations, I will call to remembrance the loving kindness of the Lord, I will think of God, and in him will I rejoyce; I will think upon my Redeemer how and what he suffered for me; I will think on the hour of death, and day of Judgement, of the joyes of Heaven, and of the torments of Hell; the consideration of these is of force to affright and drive away all the wicked thoughts of the World, the Flesh, or the Devil, of what kind soever, whether they be ambitious proud thoughts, or light and vain thoughts, or envious malitious thoughts; or they be thoughts of gluttony and excess, or thoughts of lust and carnal concupiscence, or the like. Let the mind and Memory be replenished with such pious Meditations, and holy Con∣templations, the thoughts of the World will find no admittance; Intus existens pro∣hibet alienum; where the strong man armed keeps the house, the enemy dares not enter; and whilst the soul is armed with the commemoration of Gods blessing, it will not open the door to the temptations of Sa∣tan, or lust of the Flesh, but say with Jo∣seph,
Behold my Master hath com∣mitted all into my hands, and there is none greater in this house than I, neither hath he kept any thing from me but thee;Gen. 39.8, 9. how then shall I doe this great wickedness, and sin against God. Praise then the Lord (O my Soul) and forget not all his benefits, which forgiveth all thy sin, and healeth all thine infirmities; call to mind the loving kindness of the Lord, and have them in everlasting re∣membrance; exercise thy Memory with such heavenly meditations as may build thee up unto eternal life; for this will be thy com∣panion for ever, whether in weal or in wo; it dieth not with the body, but is immortal as thou thy self; the rest of the faculties may sleep for a while with the body, but this survives to perpetuity: This is that Intellectual Memory or Recordation which none but reasonable creatures enjoy, which is not diminished by the bodies death, but infinitely inlarged; when all the thoughts, words, and deeds done in the flesh shall im∣mediately in a wonderfull manner come in∣to remembrance, the secrets of all hearts shall then be disclosed, and all such thoughts, words, and actions which in life time were slipt out of mind shall come again into fresh
remembrance with a Conscience,Chap. 8. Book 1. a Book which that day shall be opened, a Book of Mans life upon Earth, an account of Mans workes, where they that have done well shall go into life everlasting, but they that have done evill into everlasting fire. Which Recordation or Intellectual memo∣ry, if the Saints in Heaven (whose bodies yet sleep in the grave) had not, how should they sing misericordias domini in aeter∣num, the loving kindness of the Lord for e∣ver, as the Prophet David hath it, which Psalm and Song saith St. Augustine made for the glory of the mercies of Christ, by whose blood wee are redeemed, the Saints do joy∣fully sing in Heaven. Of which Memora∣tive facul y more shall be said hereafter. CHAP. VIII. Of the Appetitive faculty, and the Motive to a place. WEE have done with those Sensi∣tive faculties External and In∣ternal which have power of Judgement, Knowledge and Discerning; we come
now to those which have not this pow∣er in themselves, but are guided by the Counsell and advice of others, being moved by the Object, good or evill, ac∣cording as Phantasie or Reason presents it; the Phantasie imagineth it good, the Appetite is streight moved to desire it; This faculty is twofold (viz.) Appeti∣tive and Motive to a place. The Locall Motive Faculty is a power of the Soul moving the living creature from place to place to follow that which the Appe∣tite coveteth as good; or to shunne what it lottheth as hurtful; so that this Motive faculty is but an effect of the Appetitive, and necessarily follows it as the Effect doth the Cause; for where the Appetitive facultie is to desire good or shun evill, there must needs be this Motive also from place to place; otherwise the Ap∣petitive should be given us in vain, had we not this Motive faculty to seek after that wee desire, as good and pleasant, and to avoid what wee conceive to be hurtful unto us. Aristotle (I grant) adds another cause of this Motion besides Appetite, to wit, Intellect, (and under Intellect he comprehends Sense, to wit Phantasie) for what ever is desired or shunned is
under the notion of good or evill so de∣sired or lothed; now this knowledge must either be from Reason or Phantasie, for there is no knowledge but is either Sensitive or Intellectual; therefore must Intellect (which includes Phantasie) be another cause of Motion;Vide Sua∣rez. de me∣taphys disp. 35. Sect. 5. part. 15. fol. 172. neither do I intend to exclude Phantasie and Reason from being a cause; for when I mention Appetite onely as the cause, I do it partly because Appetite is the chief, Phantasie and Intellect are but subordi∣nate causes; and partly because I take Appetite here in the largest sense, as comprehending Phantasie and Reason; for Appetite in general is both Sensitive and Intellectual, as shall be said hereaf∣ter; so this Motive faculty being but an effect of Appetite, we shall be the brief∣er in it, and insist more largely upon the cause; the knowledge wherof will ne∣cessarily conduce to the knowledge of the effect. Appetite is a natural desire of the Soule, by which the living creature for the cause of preservation is moved ei∣ther to desire that which Sense judgeth as good, or to loth that which it appre∣hendeth evill and hurtfull; so that Appe∣tite is a necessary concomitant of Sense,
and follows her close; for where there is Sense, there is sorrow and pleasure, and where these are, there must be Ap∣petite. There is a twofold Operation of Sense; one whereby it perceives its Ob∣ject, as the eye beholds colour; which is the first and simple Operation of Sense; the other, whereby, upon the precepti∣on and apprehension of the Object, the Sense is affected with sorrow or plea∣sure; this is the second, and in a sort a mixt Operation, in as much as with the Object is joyned sorrow or plea∣sure, and to these are joyned Appetite and flight, for things pleasant we desire after, and things grievous we flie from; but this last Operation belongs to Com∣mon Sense (not to any of the External) to perceive good under the notion of good, or evill under the notion of evill, and accordingly to be affected there∣with is the Operation of the Internal, not External Senses; therefore it is this Common Sense to which the Appetite is so nearly related, that Aristotle saith, they differ not re, nor yet in subjecto, but onely ratione; not re, for they have no distinct being, but one and the same essence; nor yet subjecto, they have
one and the same subject, for the seat of Appetite is where the Internal Sense is seated, to wit, in the brain; this is to be understood of that Appetite which is called Sensitive, and is common to man and brutes. But there are three kinds of Appetite according to Arist. Appetite is divided into Lust, Anger, and Will; Lust is in that faculty which is called Concupiscible; Anger in that which is called Irascible, and Will in that is called Intellectual; Lust and Anger follow the judgement of Sense, for what Sense judgeth pleasant and good, Lust desireth; and what Sense judgeth grievous, the Irascible faculty rejecteth; and these are in brutes as well as in man; but Will followeth the judg∣ment of Reason, for so saith the rule in Philosophy, voluntas sequitur dictamenin∣tellectus, desiring and following that which Reason Judgeth good and desi∣rable; now this Appetitive faculty is proper to Man, and is not to be found in any other creature, so there are but two kinds of Appetite in brutes, yet three in Man. Or there is a twofold Appetite in Man, and but one in Beasts; it is Aristotle still, who divides Appetite into Sensitive,
and Intellectual; the Apetite in Beasts is altogether sensual, the Appetite in Man is sometimes governed by Sense, sometimes by Reason; and therefore he distinguisheth that in Man into Concu∣piscence, and Will; it is called Concu∣piscence when the Appetite follows the judgement of Sense, and not of Rea∣son. It is called Will when it followes the judgement of Reason, and not of Sense: so there are two causes of the Motive fa∣culty in Man, (viz.) Appetite and Rea∣son; Appetite, to wit, Sensitive, is the onely cause of Locall motion in Irratio∣nal creatures, but in Rational creatures both Reason and Appetite; not joyntly, as if there were not this motion without the concurrence of both; but severally, and a part, either of them hath this prin∣ciple of Motion, and sometimes we are Moved by Appetite, sometimes by Rea∣son, one while by Lust, another while by Will; by Appetite, when Lust and concupiscence which is the Sensitive Appetite overcomes the Will; by Rea∣son, when the Will which is the Intel∣lectual Appetite, and followes the judgement, and command of the In∣tellect overcomes the Concupiscence;
for these are contrary the one to the o∣ther, and so are their motions, and therfore there is a continual War in man twixt these two faculties, sometimes the one, sometimes the other gets the victo∣ry, sometimes Concupisence is the supe∣rior, and overcomes the Will, as in an incontinent Man it falls out, who doth contrary to that which his own Under∣standing bids him do, according to that of the Poet—video meliora proboque, Dete∣riora sequor, sometimes the Will over∣cometh the Concupiscible facultie; and that is when we do contrary to that which our Sensitive Appetite bids us do, because our Understanding com∣mands, and our consciences tell us wee ought not to do it, and so we chose to obey it rather than our Sense; Hereup∣on Arist. observes three motions in Man, one whereby Will and Lust fight one with another; the second motion is, that which proceedeth from the victory of the Will; the third proceedeth from the victory of Lust; now the Reason of this combate and contrary motion is this; the one follows the judgement of Sense, the other the judgement of Reason and Uuderstanding; Now Sense and Reason are for the most part of contrary Judge∣ments;
Sense judgeth of things as they appear good or evill at present without any consideration of time to come, it hath not cognizance of things future; but Reason hath knowledge of future times, and therefore judgeth of things not onely as they are at present, but as they may be hereafter; hence it comes to pass, that Lust which onely followes the judgement of Sense desires a thing as good, because it is so at present, re∣gardless of the evill it bringeth after∣wards; but Will following Reason, which looketh forward at things to come, flies from that present good be∣cause of that greater evill that doth follow it; as for example, a sick man is a thirst, he coveteth drink, for drink is pleasant and good to the thirsty, as food to the hungry, and sleep and rest to them that are weary; but this drink will prove hurtful to him afterwards; this the Sensitive Appetite knoweth not, be∣because it hath no knowledge of time to come, but Reason knoweth this; there∣fore Sense moves him to drink, but Reason bids him forbear; thus comes there these two contrarie Motions and Appetites in Man; one in respect of Sense and of the time present, ano∣ther
in respect of Reason and of the time future. Again, Appetite and VVill do differ in their Object, for though Good be the Object of both, yet the Object of appe∣tite is good sub ratione jucundi, a Delectable good onely; the Object of Will is good sub ratione honesti, it choseth things Honest as well as things pleasant; it pre∣ferres the good of honesty, before the good of pleasure; the Object of Appetite is a good present, particular, corporeal,Hooker Eccles. pol. lib. 1. Sect. 7. fol. 58. fetched from the Objects of this Earth, the dureless pleasures of this stage-play-VVorld by the eye of Sense; the Object of VVill is good absent, general and Spiritual, fetcht from the highest Hea∣vens by the eye of Faith and Reason to behold our chiefest good, even God himself. Again, they differ in the Maner of o∣peration; the one works Necessarily, the other Freely; the Appetite follows the judgement of Sense, and cannot but chose the good it presenteth; VVill fol∣lowes the judgement of Reason, yet freely not necessarily, it is a Voluntary Agent and free, not tied by any necessi∣ty to any determinate act; the fire works necessarily and cannot but burn; so do
Sensitive creatures; otherwise it is of Man in respect of his VVill, which is not necessarily moved to any one simple acti∣on, but freely may do or not do, may VVill or not VVill at his pleasure, for voluntas est libera libere{que} movetur ad bonum, is the current opinion of Philosophers antient and modern. In this Intellectual Appetite (Will) which accompanies Reason, art thou a resem∣blance of thy Maker, (O my Soul;) Man was made like unto God in freedom of Will and clearness of Understanding; in these for for his Naturals; and he was made like unto God in Righteousness and Holiness; in these for his supernatural endowments; which supernaturals though he totally forfei∣ted and lost by his fall, Original sin coming in the room of Original Justice, as Privation doth the Habit, yet did not Man lose his Will and Understanding by the fall; wounded in∣deed he was, not depraved in, not deprived of his naturals; his Understanding became more darkned, and his Will more servile; but some light the Understanding retained, some freedom the Will enjoyed after the fall; The Reason and Will of Man remained intire since the fall, as to their nature and essence, though not as to their Operations;
the Operations of right Reason may be impedited many waies, either through the imperiousness of evill affections and carnal lusts which have got the rule, or through evill habits and customes it hath acquired, and the like, but yet Reason and Under∣standing in Man as to its essence is perfect as well since as before the fall; homo est animal rationale, is the definition of eve∣ry man as truly now as then; Man is a rea∣sonable creature. And as Mans Understanding is not ta∣ken away by his fall, no more is his Will which is alwaies a concomitant of Reason, the essence of the Will is as intire as the es∣sence of Reason; and the essence of Will is freedom, take away freedom and the Will is destroyed, it is not Will longer than its free; for that is it whereby it is distinguish∣ed from Appetite, and whereby Man is dis∣stinguisht from Sensitive and all other a∣gents, and made like unto God, resembling him in his manner of working; God workes not necessarily, but freely; so we, what ever we work as men, the same do we wittingly work and freely, saith Mr. Hooker; else our actions would neither he righteous nor sinful in themselves, nor reward or punish∣ment due unto us for the same; for these do alwaies presuppose some thing done well or
ill, and that willingly and freely; and because of this freedom of Will in Man, onely Mans observation of the Law of his nature is righteousness; onely Mans transgression, sin, righteousness and sin is imputed to none hut voluntary free Agents that might have done better or worse than they do; Hence ari∣seth that conscience which is in every Man, and not to be found in other Agents, a con∣science either accusing or excusing every Man for the good or evill he hath done though never so secretly, for as much as he might have chosen whether he would have done it or no; Every Mans heart and con∣science (saith Mr. Hooker) doth, in good or evill even secretly committed and known to none but it self, either like or disalow it self, and accordingly either rejoyce, very na∣ture exulting as it were in certain hope of reward, or else grieve as it were in a Sense of future punishment. And this ariseth from an innate freedom that is in all Rational creatures, a freedom of willing and nilling those things which Reason judgeth good or evil; This light of Reason and Understanding is in all men, in all Intellectual creatures; the wickedest Man (that is wholly governed by the inferior Orbs, by unruly passions which flow from Sense, & not by the dictates of a right Under∣standing)
hath so much of this Intellectual power, which serves to struggle, to combate, and to fight with those powers of Sense and Appetite; and though it seldom prevail, yet it leaves a sting of conscience sticking like a thorn in the flesh; because in doing evill he prefers (and that wilfully) a lesser good before a greater; the greatness where∣of is by reason investigable and may be known. Known by an unregenerate man by the light of Natural Reason, much more by a regenerate man enlightned by the Spirit of God; which is an argument of the freedom of Will in all men; the will is alwaies, and in all men free, free in it nature and es∣sence, though in it operations an acciden∣tal servitude is acquired by the Fall; Man was created with a posse standi, and posse cadendi, without any servitude upon his Will; and though his choice was evil, and so he fell, yet to will and to doe that which was good was more natural to him; the Mo∣ral Law was writ in his heart, and made connatural, more easie it was for him to have kept than broke it; though since the Fall the course of nature is changed from a posse standi, or posse non cadendi, to a non posse non cadendi, from a liberty of
standing to a necessity of sinning, and all this by nature, not in massa pura, but in massa corrupta, by the vitiosity of Na∣ture, an evill servitude, and sad accident acquired by the Fall of man is more prone to evill than to doe good, we may not say so properly naturaliter as accidentaliter; the Will being wounded in its operations, having an accidental servitude upon it; so that now though to will be present with us, yet how to perform we know not; there is in the best so much predominancy of Sense and Appetite over Reason, through evill habits and customes accrewed, or the seeds of Original sin derived to them, they many times doe contrary to what their Wills desire, and their Reason presents as good, ac∣cording to that of the Apostle, The good I would, that do I not, but the evill I would not, that do I.
CHAP. IX. Of the Affections and Passions of the Soul. Chap. 9. Book 1. IT remaineth to treat of the Affections and Passions which are incident to the Soul, and are but as it were the sundry fashions and forms of the Appetitive soul, which Aristotle sometimes calls Ac∣cidents, sometimes Affections, sometimes Passions of the Soul. Affections as they are moderate, na∣tural, and engendred with the soul and body, are actions transient, not perma∣nent, and so are neither vitious or evill in themselves, nor ought nor can be re∣moved from our nature, which was the error of some Philosophers of the sect of the Stoicks; Passions as they are in∣ordinate and predominant, and so are vitious, and dangerous to the soul, and both may and ought to be expelled, such as fall not on a Philosopher, that is to say, a wise and virtuous man, for vir∣tus consistit in moderatione passionum; there∣fore although to be angry is natural to every man, and cannot be expelled the soul of any, yet to be inordinate and
immoderate in anger is the part of a fool, and not of a wise man, because where any inordinate Passions do bear rule, they cloud the understanding, and obscure the light of truth, as thick clouds the light of the sun; and there∣fore concludes Aristotle in the fourth of his Ethicks, Mansuetus vult imperturbatus esse, & non duci à passione, from a wise man all unruly and disordered passions are to be driven away. This is the exhortation given by Phi∣losophy it self to Boetius— — tu quo{que} si vis Lumine claro cernere verum, Tramite recto carpere coelum, Gaudia pelle, pelle timorem, Spem{que} fugato, nec dolor assit, Nubila mens est vincta{que} fraenis Haec ubi regnant,— And though there be several other Affections and Passions of the Soul which are not here nominated, but are notwithstanding in themselves as viti∣ous as these, yet these of Joy, Fear, Hope, and Grief, are the four Cardi∣nal and chief Affections unto which all the rest may be reduced; for there is
no Affection but is in respect of some Good or Evill, and that a Good or Evill present, or Good and Evill absent: Joy is an Affection of the Soul for a Good present; Hope an Affection of the Soul for a Good absent and future; Grief is for an Evill present; Fear for an Evill absent and future; which Af∣fections as long as they be but rightly, ordinate, and subject, nor may, nor can be expelled being natural and good, but when they grow heady, sensual, fleshy, & terrene, set upon the lusts and pleasures of this stage-play world, are vitious, and hurtful, which a wise man & a virtuous will keep under, and not suffer to range and rule; for these are they which are properly called Passions, when they grow exorbitant, according to the defi∣nition of Aquinas, Affectus est vehemens animi passio animum torquens & verum judi∣cium rationis impediens; otherwise it is of these natural and ordinate Affections, for they do neither animum torquere, nor verum rationis judicium impedire, so are not evill in themselves, and of their own nature, but through error in mans judgement, from whence the vitiosity passeth upon the Affections: Other rea∣sons may be given of the evill and ex∣orbitant
Passions which doubtless are stronger or weaker according to the temperature of the four elements in the body of man, from whence the com∣plexions have their denomination; if the complexion be Sanguine, it commonly feeds the Affection of Joy, and Mirth, and Love, and the like; if Cholerick, expect Anger, Hatred, Malice, &c. if Melancholy, then Sorrow, Fear, and Grief; and thus according to the tem∣perature of the body are Passions for the most part more or less predomi∣nant; the more temperate the com∣plexion, the more moderate the Passi∣ons, the better the constitution, the purer and nobler the Affections are. That all Affections of the Soul are vi∣tious, and not onely to be moderated, but wholly to be extirpated and expelled from our nature, was an error broacht in the School of the Stoicks, condemned in Christia∣nity, as well as by the Peripatetick Philoso∣phers of old. Mr. Hook∣er.It is not in our own power whether we will be stirred with Affections or no; It is as possible to prevent them all as to go out of our selves, or to give our selves a new nature; no more than
we can refuse to wink with the eye when a sudden blow is offered at it, or refuse to yawn when we see a yaw∣ning sleepy fellow, though by fre∣quent and habitual Mortification, and by continual watchfulnes,Dr. Tay∣lors life of Christ 2 part fol. 122. and stand∣ing in readiness against all in adver∣tencies we may lessen the inclination, and account fewer sudden irrepti∣ons, saith a devout and judicious Doctor of our English Church. Many ought to be corrected, few totally to be rejected; some Affections there are which are virtuous and godly in them∣selves; some are wicked and diabolicall, some are in themselves neither godly nor wicked. The good and virtuous are, Love, Pitty, Joy, Charity, &c. the diabolical are, Envy, Wrath, Malice, and especially that which your Greeks call , that is, a re∣joycing at other mens ill hap and misfor∣tune; the indifferent Affections are, Fear, Sorrow, Anger, and the like, which as they are not simply good, so are they not morally evill, since our blessed Saviour, who knew no sin, was notwithstanding subject to like Passions of Sorrow, Fear, Grief, and the like; such as accrewed to us by the Fall of our first Parents, and are infirmities and de∣fects
of pure nature, effects or fruits of sin, and so an evill, to wit of punishment, as well as other bodily defects, as hunger, thirst, sickness, yea and death, which come unto us but by the Fall, all these our Saviour was subject to, in all things being made like un∣to us, sin onely excepted. The evill of sin he took not, though he took upon him the true nature of man, so saith Saint Augustine, As Christ took upon him a true humane nature, so he took the true defects and evils of that nature, but not all; he took up∣on him the defects or evils of punish∣ment, but not the defects and evils of sin: Such Passions and Infirmities of Fear, Grief, Anger, of Sickness, Death, and the like, as are evils of punishment only, Christ was subject to as we are, therefore such are not simply sinfull, neither can they be simply good, since they be effects and fruits of sin. Nor was Christ subject to these Passions in the same manner and measure as we, Christ onely in the first motions, and sudden irresistible alterations, those twincklings of the eye as the Philosopher calls them, those Propassions as the Schoolmen term them, or Passions transient; but we not in Propassion onely for a flash and away, but in Passion al∣so,
in Passion permanent to entertain it, and retain it, many times either without just cause, or longer than occasion requires, or beyond due measure, by which the Affections come to be inordinate, the Mind moved, per∣plexed and troubled, Reason blinded, Judge∣ment perverted and depraved. These are the Diseases and Maladies of my Soul, far worse than any that can be of my Body, whether it be Lethargy, Phrensie, Apoplexie, Epilepsie, burning Feaver, or the like, all which are the most dangerous diseases of the Body; for though the outward Senses may be surprised by these, and my Body thereby made insensible of pain, yet whilst my Soul remains un-distempered, my Reason is able to discover and judge of these bodily distempers, either by its inflamation, or beating of its pulse and arteries, or by some extraordinary heat and lassitude; but when my Soul is diseased, my Reason is also wounded, and being sick hath no judge∣ment at all of that which she suffereth, for the self same that should judge is diseased, being surprised with those unruly Passions, which (like a tempestuous storm at Sea) carrie this little Ship of my Body into the deep, without Tacklings, Mast, or Rudder, or any to steer her aright, whereby she is expo∣sed to splittings, shipwracks, and all other
misfortunes of the Seas; But in the way of more strict Religion it is advised that he that would cure his passions should pray often;Dr. Taylors life of Christ par. 2. fol. 125. A Reme∣dy against passions in gene∣ral. it is St. Augustines Counsell unto the Bishop Auxilius, that like the Apostles in a storm, wee should awaken Christ, and call to him for aid, lest wee ship-wrack in so violent passions, and impetuous disturbances; A∣gain, a continual exercise, Vigilancie, and Circumspection of thy Reason is a Sovereign Antidote for the Ejection of these poyson∣som passions out of thy Soul; and therefore one advertisement given by Fundanus in Plu∣tarch, against such inordinate passions is not here to be pretermitted; Whosoever (saith he) will live safe and in health, ought all their life time to look to themselves, and be as it were in continual Physick; and not as the Herb Hellebore (which we English Neeswort) after it hath wrought the cure in a sick mans body, is cast up again together with the malady, so Reason also should be sent out after the passion it hath cured, but ought to remain still in thy mind to keep and preserve the judgement; for Reason is to be compared to wholesom and nourishing meates, and not to medicines and purgative drugs. Of all those several affections and passions incident to the Soul, and are either as Le∣nitives
or Corrasives (viz.) pleasant and wholesome, or harsh and noysom to the Soul, two onely as principal, I shall insist on; upon which the rest are founded, from whence they spring, (viz.) Love and Ire. Anger though simply, and as it is in it self considered, to wit, in its first motions and natural inclination, be neither good nor evil, yet is made good or evil according to the circumstances of time, and adjuncts of manner, and measure; all anger in all causes and in all degrees is not simply un∣lawful; to be angry when we ought, as wee ought, and as much as we ought, is not cri∣minal but praise-worthy; but when wee have no just cause, if then we be angry with our Brother, we are guilty of judgement, so saith our Saviour; yea though we have just cause we may miss it in the measure or in the manner, as when our anger exceeds the value of the cause or the proportion of other circumstances and adjuncts; thus Moyses anger (though for Gods cause and Religion) was reproved, because it went forth into violent and troublesome expressi∣ons, and shewed the degree to be inordi∣nate; other passions there are which arise out of this, which are in themselves sinful and damnable; those are hatred and malice; Anger persisted in turnes to hatred and
malice, and these are nothing but a conti∣nued anger; odium est ira inveterata, Anger with deliberation, and purpose of re∣venge, which is morally evill, and prohibi∣ted in the sixth Commandement; Envy is a∣nother sprig of this root, and that which in Greek is called ; the one proceeds from Anger mixt with Sorrow, repining at the prosperity and welfare of another; the other proceeds from Anger mixt with Joy, rejoycing at the calamities and miseries of others;A remedy against Anger, with its effects in particu∣lar. the worst and dangerousest of all Passions; for prevention whereof propound to thy self the example of meek and patient persons, remembring alwaies, that there is a Family of meek Saints, of which Moses is the President; a Family of patient Saints under the conduct of Job; every one in the mountain of the Lord shall be gathered to his Tribe, to his own Family, in the great day of Jubilee,Dr. Taylor. and the angry shall perish with the effects of anger, and peevish persons shall be vexed with the disquietness of an eternal Worm, and sting of a vexatious conscience, if they suffer here the transportations and sadest effects of an unmortified, habitual and prevailing anger. But love is the Queen of Vertues, the chief of all affections, and a duty enjoyned and commanded by God; upon this hang the Law and the Prophets; it runnes
through the decalogue, it is the fulfilling of the Law: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, and thy neighbour as thy self, is the whole du∣ty of man; Love is an lnseparable affecti∣on of the soul, Faith and Hope may cease, but Charity abides for ever, and joynes our souls to God; as the Soul is the life of the Body, so is Charity the life of the Soul, and as the Body by the means of life is joyned to the Soul, so is the Soul by the means of Love conjoyned to God; Love is the Soul's Sense and the love of God is the Soul's eye; There is another love called  which is that na∣tural affection which Parents bear towards their Children, and the Children again to Parents, & the like, which is one of the Soul's Senses, but not the noblest; for as the eye is the noblest of the bodily Senses, so is Divine love the noblest of the Soul's Senses, and is the Soul's eye by which we see God. As the body hath two eyes, so the Soul hath its eyes, Reason and Love; these are the eyes which the Spouse in the Canticle speaks of, saying, Thou hast wounded me my Spouse, my Sister, thou hast wounded me with one of thy eyes; now the eye of Love is the right eye, and seeth further than the eye of Reason; Ratio deum videre non potest nisi in eo quod non est, amor
autem non adquiescit requiescere nisi in eo quod est; ratio per id quod non est in id quod est videtur proficere, amor postponens quod non est in eo quod est, gaudere deficere;—ra∣tio majorem habet sobrietatem, amor beatitudinem, saith St. Bernard. Again, there is a twofold love of beatitude; one of desire, the other of enjoyment, est amor desiderii, & est amor fruitionis, t'is St. Bernards still; the love of desire is that natural Appetite or pondus natura∣le, which is in every creature towards their chief felicity; I mean not such a weight as alwaies tends downward, such as is the natu∣ral weight of Earth; whose perfection lies below in its Center; but such as looks upward, as the natural weight of fire; so mans love of desire lookes up to God, who onely is mans summum bonum, his chiefest felicity, and so beaitude, Let the eyes of my Soul (O God) for ever look up towards thee, especially the eye of my Love, which though in much weak∣ness it behold thee here not in fruition but in desire; Let this innate desire and love of my Soul towards thee so quicken and stir up my elicite acts and abilities to pursue the meanes tending to thee as thou hast pre∣scribed in thy Word; that at the last
my desires may reach to a Beatifical Vision and full fruition, and my love be complea∣ted in the enjoyment of thee; that the pant∣ing desires of my Soul here may be so taken up hereafter with the cool refreshments of thee the everliving Water, that I may say (Lord) it is enough, That I may so behold thy face in righteousnes here, that when I a∣wake I may be satisfied with it. Amen, Amen.
TO My much honoured Friend and Neighbour, HƲMPHREY CHEETAM, ESQUIRE. SIR, IN the Garden and Para∣dise of God (not that Terrestrial which long since perished, but the Heavenly which hath not suffered by any Cataclysm) grows the Tree of Life, and the Tree of Know∣ledge, which God as the chief Husband∣man and Gardener both planteth and watereth, and causeth to encrease: Though it hath pleased Almighty God to plant and sow semina quaedam &
frutices, some seeds and shrubs of Knowledge and Life in this earth∣ly Garden, and set Man therein to dress and keep it, whose fruits (though in this life they come not to full maturity and perfection, yet) serve us for a tast of those spiritual & never fading fruits in Heaven; since by the pains and indu∣stry of some Labourers in this Vine∣yard, and the blessing of God, the Sun of Righteousness shining upon their la∣bours, some fruits have been here ga∣thered relishing much of the Heavenly perfection. The Fruits ensuing are of this nature, which I as a Gleaner have gathered from others, and dedicate as the choicest of my labours, and as I hope the welcomest present unto you; the former Treatises adding little benefit, but what you have formerly reaped from your own experience, being ever the best School-mistris: The two parts
of this Rational life, the Practick and Speculative you may read in the Hi∣story of your own life, who have well nigh by the course of Nature finished both; the Clue of your thread being almost spun out, and drawing on a∣pace to the period set by the Prophet David, Psalm 90. Wherefore leaving those things that are behind, looking not backward at time past, you press for∣ward to the things that are before, if by any meanes you can attain to the Resurrection of the Just, to that state of life which consists in Beatifical Vi∣sion to come, which this ensuing Trea∣tise, though in much weakness points unto; May it lay the way open before you, and give you such a tast of the joyes of Heaven, as may sharpen your stomach, and quicken your appetite, but not hasten your progress thither; for serus in coelum redeas, may you
enjoy a long life here, and Heaven at the last, are the hearty wishes, and day∣ly prayers of, Sir, Your most devoted friend, and servant, NICH. MOSLEY.
TO My loving Brother, EDWARD MOSLEY, Esquire, one of the Commissio∣ners for Administration of Justice in SCOTLAND. Brother, A Kingdome or Common∣wealth is corpus politi∣cum, consisting of many, and in themselvs disagreeing mem∣bers, but mixt and united in one Civil society by the rules of Mo∣rality; that which formes and unites this Body, is Govern∣ment,
without which it would not be a Body, but a Chaos —rudis indigestaque moles Non bene junctarum discordia semina rerum. But rules of Policy and Govern∣ment are investigable by Reason, not by Sense; therefore Man only, who is animal rationale, is pro∣perly termed ; the Rea∣sonable Soul of Man runs through the whole Body of practick Philo∣sophy, teaching the duty of a good man in Ethicks, of a good Master of a Family in Oeconomicks, of a good Citizen and Magistrate in Politicks; which Duties consist in the exercise of all Moral Virtues,
especially those four Cardinal ones of Prudence, Temperance, Forti∣tude, and above all (of a Magi∣strate) that of Justice; Justice distributive, as well as commuta∣tive, without which no men of old were linked together in a Civil so∣ciety; nor at this day without it can be preserved. And though Solomon saw an Evill, and that a great one, under the Sun, an error proceeding from the Rulers, who placed ignorance and mean persons in high Thrones, when Wisdome and Nobility sate in ipsa abiectione, whereby hap∣pily Magistracie was brought into contempt, and Justice perverted,
through the weakness or wilfulness of such Juridicials, who fall short of the perfection of those Moral Virtues, those habits of the Mind, which doe compleat a Magi∣strate; yet against such Evill our Lawes have wisely provided, That none shall bear any high Of∣fice of Magistracie, no not the Office of a Justice of Peace in the Countrey, but Plus hault & meultz vailantz, men of the best ranck and qualitie, of the best reputation, and most substantial, as Lambert hath it. Such a one may you be in your place and calling, whose nurture and education from your youth up,
hath been in the studies of the Law, and in the study of Ethicks, as well Ethicae Christianorum as Ethicae Ethnicorum; not that Natural, onely drawn from the rules of Heathenish Philoso∣phie, but from the Fountain of Christian Divinity, which will so furnish you with all Intellectual Habits, not of Natural Virtues onely, acquired ex crebris actio∣nibus assuefactione & consue∣tudine, but of Supernatural also, infused from above, as may ren∣der you capable, and sufficient∣ly meriting those high employ∣ments unto which you are called.
Hence may you discover the ne∣cessity of this noble Science of the Soul, even for you whose conversa∣tion amongst men is Practical, and the Operations of your Soul such too, consisting in the excercise of Moral Virtues whose residence is in the Soul; the Reasonable Soul is the subject and receptacle of all Virtuous Habits acquired by Na∣ture, or infused by Grace. Yet is there another noble Sci∣ence of the Soul, whose end is not Action, but Contemplation, or Spe∣culation of the divine Essence; this I presume is your chief study and delight, in which you spend those spare houres of retirement are gain∣ed
from your State-employments; If these my poor and weak labours may be any help and furtherance of your meditations in that kind, I freely and heartily dedicate them to you, and rest Your affectionate Brother, NICH. MOSLEY.
Natural and Divine CONTEMPLATIONS Of the Passions and Faculties Of the Soul of Man; In Three Bookes. THE SECOND BOOK. The Metaphysical part. CHAP. I Of the Intellectual faculties of the Soul. AFter the discussion of the Ve∣getative and Sensitive it re∣maines to treat of the Intel∣lectual faculties of the Soul, which are not Organical, Corporeal and Inseparable, but have their Operations apart, and without, and so are separable from the body; meer Operations of the Rational Soul which acteth without bo∣dily
Organs,Chap. 1. Book. 2. and is of an Immaterial, Immortal Nature; There are incident to this Soul, three powers or faculties (viz.) VVill, Memory, and Understand∣ing; VVill is distinguisht from Appetite, (which is a concomitant of Sense and that necessarily) being it self a conco∣mitant of Reason and Intellect, sed tamen liberè, not tied by any necessity to any determinate act; Memory is another branch of the Rational Soul, and perish∣eth not with the body, remaining as an inseparable companion to all separated substances, and abstracted Forms, of which two faculties (viz.) VVill and Me∣mory sufficient hath been formerly said. The Intellectual faculty which is the highest and noblest of the Rational Soul, is distinguisht first into Agent and Patient; The Patient Intellect again is threefold, in power, in Habit, and in Act; In Power onely is the intellect in it self, and of its own nature, for at the first it is nothing else but a meer power or promptitude to receive intelligible Forms, and this is to be found in new born babes, and Infants who have not yet acquired the act or habit of Un∣derstanding but are capable, and recep∣tible of Intelligible Forms; which In∣tellect
Aristotle compares to the first matter, materia prima, which is nothing but in power; hath no Form but is capa∣ble of any; And where Aristotle saith, in∣tellectus cognoscit omnia, we must con∣ceive it in this sense, to wit in power; for although there be many things wher∣of we are ignorant, yet there is not any thing which our Understanding may not reach unto; as for example, wee know not the number Stars, or the Sands of the Sea, but this ignorance is accidental, not natural; for our intellect is capable of the knowledge of these, if any one should but teach us the certain number of them. The Intellect in Habit is that which hath received Intelligible Forms, even those which it had power to receive, but doth not act, onely hath power to act; and herein the Intellect in habit and In∣tellect in power do differ; for the Intellect in power hath power onely quoad essen∣tiam, non quoad operationem, but the intel∣in habit hath power tum quoad essentiam, tum quoad operationem; A learned man though he be asleep, yet hath this In∣tellect in habit, for as much as he hath received and retained those Intelligible Forms which gives him a power to ope∣rate and contemplate; although he doth
not actually know and contemplate; he hath the habit, though not the act, whilst he sleepeth. The Intellect Patient in Act, is that which is reduced into act and exercise; so that it doth not not onely actually receive what formerly was but in pow∣er, but also operates and works about those things it receives, and actually Un∣derstands them; which is done when the Phantasmes which are illustrated and made Intelligible by the Intellect A∣gent are actually received of the Pati∣ent Intellect, by which that knowledge which formerly it had not is acqui∣red. The property of the Patient is to re∣ceive Intelligible Forms from Phan∣tasmes illustrated by the Agent Intel∣lect, and from this property and Office of receiving Intelligible Forms, it is call∣ed Intellectus patiens. For as Sense is said to suffer because it receives Sensible Forms; so the Intellecct by receiving Intelligible Forms, recipiendo paitur, it suffers from Intelligible Forms as Sense suffers by its Sensible Forms. But the Intellect Agent is no way passive, being of it self perfect and
needs not an Object to supply its de∣fects, being nothing in power, but as A∣ristotle hath it, essentialit r actus, a pure act, and receives not Intelligible Forms; Its Office is to illustrate the Phantasm, and to make of sensible, Intelligible Forms, and of Particulars, Universalls, and ther∣fore the Intellect Agent is said omnia fa∣cere, as the Patient is said omnia fieri. Of these two Operations of the A∣gent Intellect (viz) to illustrate the Phantasm, and to Understand, the lat∣ter is onely Essential and remaines after death of the body, the other is less Essential and therefore remaines not with the Soul after this life; for although the Office of the Intellect Agent in this life be to illustrate the Phantasmes, and to make that Actually Intelligible, which was before but Potentially so, and to reduce the Intellect Patient into Act, yet this is not the sole and Essential Office of this Intellect, for as much as af∣ter this life it continues not with it; for after this life there remaines another manner of knowledge, Proper and Es∣sential to this Intellect, not per species impressas, by Intelligible Forms imprint∣ed from some Sensible Object, but per
species in elligibiles congenitas & innatas, as shall hereafter be demonstrated; And this is a part and faculty of that Rea∣sonable Soul which is forma informans hominem, and not an Extrinsecal assist∣ing Form, as a Mariner is of a Ship, as some would have it; it is that part of the Soul, by which it doth , In∣telligere & sapere, vel cognoscere & pruden∣tis munere fungi, as Aristotle hath it. By which there ariseth another distinction of the Intellect, into Practick and Speculative, for  intelligere is an Operation of the Intellect generally, but  sapere seuprudentis munere fun∣gi is the proper Operation of the Practick Intellect, whose end is Action, and Object, such things as fall under Action, and such Action as falls under Sense, and subject thereto; and whose Science is Morality, being conversant about Manners, and Moral Vertues. This Practick Intellect (for of the Speculative is our whole discourse in the subsequent Chapters) is that facul∣ty or Operation of the Soul whereby Man is distinguisht from Beasts, who live a Sensitive life, and Angells, who live a Contemplative life; And that Be∣atitude, or summum bonum, which every
man naturally coveteth after consists in action (viz.) in the perfect state of Mo∣ral virtues; this Happiness appertains to man as man, and without this Moral virtue none in this life can be accounted happy.De per∣fecta possi∣bilia secun∣dum natu∣ram, non de perfecta absolute ut extra∣ordinario dei munere. Forsca lib. 2 Metaph. cap. 1. q. 2. Sect. 7 fol. 420. I speak of mans Natural and Temporal happiness in this life, and not of that Supernatural and Eternal in the world to come, in Heaven, which con∣sists in the sole intuitive Vision & know∣ledge of the divine Essence; Aristotle I grant makes two parts of Natural and Temporal felicity, the one Practical, consisting in the perfection of Moral vir∣tues, the other Speculative, consisting in the perfection of virtues Intellectual; and this Speculative and Intellectual part of a mans life he esteemeth the no∣bler part, as a virtue of an higher order, and sufficient in his kind to make a man happy. But this Intellectual part doth not ne∣cessarily make him good who is endow∣ed therewith, or bring him to that per∣fect state of felicity in this life, since it is here commonly mixed with vices, and may be found in such, who though they know God, yet do not glorifie him as God. Besides this part of Intellectual Con∣templative
Virtue (viz) that Intuitive Vision of God, or the perfect knowledge of the divine Essence, is not natural to Man; Man attains not thereto by any strength of Nature, it is the gift of God; unto this light of Glory, unto these su∣pernal Joys, no man attains by his own strength; onely that which is practical, and consists in well doing, in the exercise of Moral virtues, is proper to man in his Natural estate, which is the opera∣tion of the Practick Intellect, and there∣fore Aristotle in the tenth of his Ethicks saith, The practick Beatitude agreeth with man as man; that which consists in Contemplation doth not agree with man as man, sed quatenus in eo est divi∣num quiddam & degit vitam quandam di∣vinam. And in this respect the Soul may be sayd mortal, because that part which consists in the exercise of Moral virtues, whose end i Action, and such as is taken from Sense and Phantasie, which is mor∣tal and perishing, operates only in this life by the help of Phantasie, and with∣out Phantasms the Soul understands not any thing; so saith Aristotle,  this Soul, meaning this Practical part, for the Speculative part of the Soul doth not
alwaies and altogether work by means of Sense and Phantasie, since it knoweth such things as are immaterial, and not subject to Sense, as God, abstracted Forms and Intelligences, and it own self, as elswhere shall be shewed: Though to speak properly and truly, the Rational Soul is not mortal in any part of its Es∣sence or Faculties, though the operations may cease in defect of requisite Organs; neither is there two several Intellects really distinguisht, but one intire Intel∣lect belonging to this Soul, onely in re∣gard of its several wayes of knowledge, and manner of operation in this life, Pra∣ctical and Speculative, the Intellect hath obtained its distinction of Practick and Speculative, which is but one in r, though divers ratione. But some have gone about to prove a real and essential difference 'twixt the one and the other, making Reason or the Rational faculty of the Soul (which is that part of the Intellect which is Pra∣ctical, and acquires knowledge by dis∣course, and that not without great la∣bour, difficulty, and uncertainty, run∣ing from the Causes to the Effects, and from Effects to the Causes, groaning un∣der the perplexity of framing demon∣strations
by wresting, deducing, infer∣ing, and concluding one proposition from another) making Reason (I say) but hand-maid and subservient to the Speculative Intellect, no part at all of its essence, nor adliged to it by the inseparability of Union or Identity — but a Caduce sparious faculty accidentally advenient upon the de∣gradation of our Nature; and is separable from the Soul at the instant of her emancipation from her Prison of Clay, and wholly useless to her in her state of restitution to the clarity of abstracted and intuitive Intellection. VVhich opinion of the Mortality of the Reasonable Soul, I have heretofore proved to thwart not onely the general belief of Heathens, as well Philosophers as others, be they Graecians, Caldeans, Arabians, Jews, Turks, or others, but also the Catholick Faith of holy Church, and concurrent judgements of all the Fathers. Nor can I be of opinion, that Reason is a faculty accidentally advenient up∣on the fall of our first Parents, and was not that Form which gave Adam his specifical difference from all other crea∣tures, ab origine, as well before as since the fall; if Adam was not created a Rea∣sonable creature, when God breathed
into his Nostrills the breath of Life, and he became a living Soul; if that Soul was not a Rational Soul, and therefore live∣ing because Immortal; either Adam was no Man, or every Man is not a Reason∣able creature, and then must wee seek out a new Definition of Man; there being no truth in these Reciprocal termes, or Convertible propositions (viz) No Man but is a Reasonable creature, no Reasonable creature but is a Man; which never yet were contradicted by any, since Ratio∣nality is as essential to Man as Risibili∣ty, which is proprium quarto modo, quod om∣ni, soli, semper, & convertibiliter accidit subjecto. But if you take Reason not as an Es∣sence or faculty, but an Operation of the Soul which is Practical in this life, and cannot Operate or come to the knowledge of any thing but by dis∣course and arguments, runing from Effects to their Causes, or from causes to their Effects, and for discharge of its office herein stands in need of Object, Form, Phantasm, and other bodily Or∣gans, this Operation of the Soul, (I grant) ceaseth and perisheth with the body; and after this life the Soul hath a∣nother manner of Operation, as hereto∣fore
in part, and more fully hereafter is demonstrated. Otherwise Rationality is the very Essence of the Humane Soul, and impossible it is to sever them, distinguisht they may be by suppositio∣nality, not reality of essence; for the rule is, nulla res potest distingui realiter à diffe∣rentia per quam essentialiter constitui∣tur. In this Rational Soul is the glorious I∣mage of the Almighty Jehova radicated and equally proper to it with its very essence, neither separate nor separable from this rea∣sonable Soul; this is it which carries the Re∣semblance and Portraiture of the Immense Godhead in the most simple Unity & indivi∣ble Homogeneity of Spirit, being tota in toto, & tota in qualibet parte; and holds the Effigies of the sacred Trinity, not only in her Ternary of faculties Vegeative, Sensitive, and Intellectual, heretofore ex∣plicated, but also (as the more learned num∣ber of Christians judge it) in these three faculties of Intellect, Will, and Memory, in this Chapter handled. Vide St. Aug. in 14 lib. de Trin. & lib. 10. de Trinitate.St. Bernard proving the Soul of Man to be Gods Image, and therfore ought to be more serviceable to him, thus speaks unto his own Soul. O my Soul, if thou
wouldst be beloved of God, reform his Image in thee, and he will love thee, renew his likeness in thee, and hee shall desire thee; &c. The Original thus. O Anima mea, si vis amari à deo reforma in te imaginem suam & amabit te, repara in te similitudi∣nem suam & desiderabit te; consilio namque sanctae Trinitatis ad imagi∣nem & similitudinem suam creavit te Creator tuus; quod nulli alteri ex creaturis donavit, ut tanto eum ar∣dentius diligeres quanto mirabilius ab eo te conditam intelligeres; con∣sidera ergo nobilitatem tuam, quoni∣am sicut deus ubique est totus omnia vivificans, omnia movens & guber∣nans, ita tu in corpore tuo ubique to∣ta es, illud vivificans movens & gu∣bernans; & sicut deus est, vivit & sa∣pit, ita tu secundùm modum tuum es, vivis & sapis; & sicut in deo tres sunt personae, pater, & filius, & spiritus sanctus, fic & tu habes tres vires, scilicet intellectum memoriam & vo∣luntatem; & sicut ex patre generatur filius, & ex utroque procedit spiritus sanctus, ita ex intellectu generatur
voluntas, & ex his ambobus procedit memoria; & sicut deus est pater, deus est filius, deus est spiritus sanctus, non tamen tres dii, sed unus deus, & tres personae; ita anima est intellectus, a∣nima voluntas, anima memoria, non tamen tres animae, sed una anima, & tres vires, ex quibus animae viribus quasi excellentioribus jubemur deum diligere ut diligamus eum toto cor∣de, tota anima, tota mente, id est, to∣to intellectu, tota voluntate, & tota memoria, hoc est toto affectu sine defectu cum discretionis intuitu; nec solus sufficit de deo intellectus ad bea∣titudinem nisi sit in amore ejus volun∣tas; imo haec duo non sufficiunt nisi memoria addatur, qua semper in mente intelligentis & volentis mane∣at deus; ut sicut nullum potest esse momentum quo homo non u tatur vel fruatur dei bonitate vel misericor∣dia, ita nullum sit momentum quo eum praesentem non habeat in memo∣ria. And with him many of the Schoolmen;Vide Aqui∣natem lib. 1. dict. 3 g. and Bellarmine also. Habet etiam a∣nima hominis imaginem in se quam∣vis obscuram divinissimae Trinitatis, tum quia habet memoriam faecun∣dam, vim intelligendi, & vim aman∣di,
tum etiam quoniam mens ejus in∣telligendo format verbum quod∣dam simile & à mente & à verbo pro∣cedit amor, quia id quod cognosci∣tur à mente & repraesentatur à verbo ut bonum continuo à voluntate dili∣gitur & desideratur; sed tamen longè altiore & diviniore modo pater deus generat verbum deum, &c. Which is confessedly true, this Image of the Trinity is but a most imperfect and obscure shadow of it, and doth ill quadrate and respond with its prototype and prime examplar. Again, Man is made after the Image of God, in respect of his Immortal Soul and invisible, for God is Immortal, so is the Soul of Man Immortal; and God is Invisible, so is the Soul; God is Incorporeal and Im∣material, so is the Soul of Man. Moreover, Man is made after the I- of God, in respect of his Dominion which he hath, not onely over the Fishes of the Sea, the Fouls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Field; for that is in regard of that Rational Soul and endowments of mind, in which Man as Man excells all other terrestrial creatures. But also in respect of that dominion which one Man hath over another; dominion be∣longs not to all the Sons of Adam, God hath
appointed Kings to Govern them, and there∣by hath imprinted a more lively Character of his own Image, upon Kings, than any other. But above all is Gods Image seen in the endowments of his mind, in the facu ty of the Soul, even that whose Act and Opera i∣on is the perpetual contempla ion of truth, and therefore is called intellectus divi∣nus & contemplativus, a divine Un∣derstanding and Contemplative mind; Tis is the power and faculty of our Soul, the pu∣rest, the noblest, and supremest faculty, call∣ed lumen animae rationalis, or anima a∣nimae; the Soul of the Soul, or the Eie of the Soul, and receptacle of sapience and of knowledge divine; This is that Eye of our Soul which by the bountiful grace of the Lord of all goodness, pierceth through the impu∣rity of our flesh, and beholding the highest Heavens, thence bringeth knowledge and Object to the Soul and mind, to conemplate the ever durng glory and termless joy prepa∣red for such as preserve undefiled,Sir Walter Raleigh. and un∣rent, the garment of the new Man, which af∣ter the Image of God is created in righteous∣ness and holiness, as saith St. Paul.
CHAP. II. Of the Speculative part of the Soul. Chap. 2. Book 2. THe Soul of Man as it is the Form of Man is notwithstanding an Im∣material, independent, & abstracted sub∣stance, though not so compleat & perfect as the rest of the Spiritual & Immaterial substances be, it is of the Order (though of the lowest Rank) of simple essences; whose Operations (in regard of its im∣perfect and lowmost rank of Spiritual substances) are not so noble, so com∣pleat and perfect as the Operations of other Intellectuall spirits be; but many times mixed with inferior Operations, and in some sense inseparable from them, or thence sprung, since all the knowledge which the Reasonable Soul attains to in this life by its natural strength, is, from Sense Mediately or Im∣mediately derived; this for the Science Practical properly, and the practick In∣tellect, whose Operations are determi∣nately Practical and not Speculative, as chiefly conversant about Manners
and Moral Virtues, whether Ethical, Oeconomical, or Political; and whose end is Action (viz. well doing) though there is another Operation of the Soul whose end is not Action, to do, but to understand, or contemplate; this diviner faculty of the Soul, this Contemlpa∣tive Intellect, whose Operations are de∣terminately Contemplative, not Practi∣cal; as chiefly about Theorie, and whose end is knowledge or truth; its principal end so, sui ipsius gratia for its own sake, for the love of truth, for the cause of knowledge; This I say hath its Opera∣tions more immixt and separable from bodily Organs, or External Objects; and herein is a diversity twixt the Rea∣sonable and Sensitive Soul; for to bring Sense into Act, as the Eye to see, &c. is required an External Object and bodi∣ly Organs; but to bring the Reasonable Soul into Act (viz.) to Understand or contemplate, which is the Operation of the Speculative Intellect, needs no Ex∣ternal Objects at all, for that which brings knowledge into Act, and makes the mind actually to contemplate, is meerly Interna, to wit, in the Soul; an Operation then there is a Science Me∣taphysical abstracted from matter; a
Science of things which fall not under Sense, come not from External Objects, and of which no Phantasm or sensible Form can be presented to the Under∣standing, of which we mean to treat of in this Book; the knowledge of the Soul which it hath of Immaterial substances in this life, (viz.) of it self, of Angells, and of God, with the different manner of Operation of the Soul in this Natural condition or body corrupt, and in the state of Separation or body glorifi∣ed. Yet is our knowledge of all Immate∣rial substances in this life very confu∣sed and imperfect, and agreeth not with the state of the Soul conjoined to the body, whose principal Operation is, to illustrate the Phantasie, and to make those things Actually, which were but before Potentially Intelligible, and to reduce the Intellect Patient into Act; This is the principal Operation of the Intellect Agent in this life, though not its sole and proper, nor Essential Ope∣ration, for then it would remain with the Soul after this life, which it doth not; for there is then another Operation and manner of knowledge, not per cor∣pus, sed per influxum superioris causae (as
Suarez hath it) proper and essential to the Soul, as hereafter shall be shew∣ed. Of the knowledge which the Soul hath of it self. The Operation of the Intellectual Soul is to know, yea to know it self, there is that faculty and power in Mans Soul whereby he may know himself; know himself, and be known by him∣self; for the Soul of Man is Immaterial, and so Intelligible as other Intellectual creatures which are meerly Immaterial; now in those creatures who are Imma∣terial, idem est intelligens, & quod inelligi∣tur,Lib. 3. cap. 5. scientia seu intellectus contemplativus & scibile. So saith Aristotle in his Book de anima; the Intellectual Soul is it which understands, the Intellectual Soul is it which is understood; it is not so with the Sensitive Soul, whose Organs are Ex∣ternal, and whose knowledge is fetch∣ed from Objects ab extra, and therefore neither knoweth nor perceiveth it self, as hath been elsewhere said; But the Ope∣ration of the Intellectual Soul is Intrin∣secal, it hath Objects Internal, it self is its own Object, alwaies present, never absent from it self; the Soul of Man is
not onely a straight line drawn forth to point at other things, but a reflex and circular line pointing at it self; It knows it self by inspection, or (if I may say with Plato in this Timaeus) by reflexion; for he compared the Soul that governs this World, and consequently the Soul which governs this Microcosm Man, (which is but a particle of that Soul which rules this Universe, both of them being Intellectual, and so may hold pro∣portion and resemblance) to a line wherein was Rectitude and Reflexion; and to number, which consisteth of Unity and Diversity. The Right & straight line of that Soul which rules the World, he made to be the Axle-tree and Diameter of the World (viz.) that imagined line reach∣ing from one Pole to another, on which the World turneth about as a Wheel; the straight line of the Humane Soul he made that right Operation and know∣ledge of the Soul, procured by a certain progress from the essence (as it were by aline drawn out) to the powers and fa∣culties, and from them to the act and Operation of the Soul, whereby the Soul looketh and pointeth forward,
and by a straight aspect contemplates things out of it self, External. Again, this Rectitude or right line he bended into an Orb or Globe consisting like numbers of Parity and Imparity, Indentity and Diversity; This reflex line of the Worlds Soul, was in respect of its circular motion upon the Axle-tree of the World; The reflex line of the Humane Soul, was that Operation whereby reflecting upon it self, it knew it self; And this reflex line of the Soul of the World, and of Man, had in her In∣dentity and Diversity. The Indentity of the Worlds Soul was in respect of the Eighth Sphaer which the antient Philo∣sophers called the primum mobile, for this Sphaer with one uniform motion is mo∣ved from East to VVest; The Diversity consisted in the motion of the seaven Planets in their several Sphaers; So the Soul of Man had its Indentity and Di∣versity; Indentity in respect of its Spe∣culative Intellectual faculty which is di∣vine, Diversity in respect of its inferior faculties. Furthermore this Circular and Cae∣lestial line of the VVorld he divided into two Circles, (viz.) the Eighth Sphaer, which is by him, and the Anti∣ents
called primum mobile, and moves from East to VVest; and the Sphaer of the Planets which moves in a contrary motion to the Eighth Sphaer (viz) from VVest to East; and these two Sphaers are said to bee conjoyned by two points (of the Axle-tree) cut∣ing through them (viz.) two Equinocti∣al points; Again, the other Circle (viz) that which moves from West to East, he subdivided into seaven Circles of seaven Planets, to all which he resem∣bled the Soul of Man, which is one es∣sence, and as it were one Caelestial Sphaer, and is divided into the Intellectu∣al faculty answering in analogy to the primum mobile or Eighth Sphaer; and the Irrational faculty answering in simili∣tude to the Sphaer of the Planets; for this faculty is opposite, and contrary to the Intellectual, and moves contrary to it, as the Planets do in a Counter-motion to the Eighth Sphaer; and as in the Hea∣vens the second Circle is subdivided into seaven Planets; so doth Plato, in his Timae∣us, subdivide the Irrational faculty of the Soul into seaven faculties, (viz.) the particular or External Sense, Com∣mon Sense, Phantasie, Memory the Co∣gitative, Concupiscible, and Irascible faculty.
As for example. α, β. Is the Axle-tree of the World. γ, δ. The Axle-tree of the Zodiak. And thus would Timaeus prove the Soul of Man to know it self by Reflexi∣on or Inspection into it self; which though it may be true in a sense, yet we are not to imagine such an Inspecti∣on or Intuitive Vision of it self in-this life, as the Angells and separa∣ted
Souls have of themselves; for this knowledge agreeth not with the state of the Soul as long as it is joyned with this Body, being hindred of the free and perfect exercise of those Actions, (which are Common and Essential to it and the separated Souls) whilst in this body of flesh, no more than the knowledge which now it ordinarily ex∣erciseth, agreeth with the state of the Soul departed and separated from the Body. And though idem est intellectus & quod intelligitur, scientia & scibile; yet are wee not to conceipt an Indentity of Essence betwixt the Understanding and the Object Understood; there is not such a Conformity twixt them in Essence, but in Representation. The Form and simi∣litude is there, the Intellect receives the species of things onely, and therefore is it called forma formarum intelligibilium, and so there comes an Identity, not of Essence, but of Proportion and Form. Thus the Soul knoweth it self in this life non per essentionā, by its own substance but per speciem, and without this species the Soul knoweth not it self in this life; though it needeth no Intelligible Forms
to know its self by after this life; but knoweth it self, (as other separated substances do themselves) by their own substance, and not by Form. Neither is this Intelligible Form innate and ingendred ogether with the Nature and Essence of the Soul; (as those Forms, whereby Angels and Souls departed know one another, are, as hereafter wee shall shew) but Im∣printed in the Understanding from some Object Sensible conveid to the Phanta∣sie, from the Phantasie by the Operation of the intellectus agens, to our Patient In∣tellect, where of Sensible they are made Intelligible Forms, so from Sensible Objects are produced Intelligible Forms; and without Sense no Intelli∣gence; this in the ordinary way and manner of the Souls Operation in this life, we have no knowledge, no not of Immaterial and Insensible Essences, as of God, or of our own Souls, but is in a sort deduced from Sense; for although some things are not sensible in them∣selves; yet they may be sensible in their parts, as a Golden Mountain which wee never saw but Phansie; or in their simi∣litude and Portraiture, as men absent, or dead, are known by their Pictures;
or by their opposites, as darkness by light, coldness by heat; or by their efects, as God, our own Soul, and the Vertue and Operation of natural things which are all hidden to Sense, but known unto us by their Effects; So God and our own Souls are known to us by their Effects and Operations; whereby may be inferred, that all our know∣ledge, yea our Metaphysical knowledge of abstracted and Immaterial substances do spring from Sense, and so the Con∣templative Intellect, neither immixt nor inseparable from bodily Organs, but Organical and depending on Sense, contradictory to what hath before been affirmed. To which I answer; although it may be said, that Immaterial and Intelligi∣ble Forms are drawn in a sort from Sense; yet it is to be noted, that Imma∣terial things do otherwise depend on Sense than things Material do; for al∣though our Intellect takes its principles from Sense, by which it is brought to the knowledge of God, arguing from the Effect to the Cause, as Aristotle ar∣gues, where from the Effect he proves the First mover to be Eternal, Immate∣rial, Infinite, although I say our Intel∣lect
may know God to be insensible and Immaterial even from Sensible and ma∣terial Effects; which is its usual manner and way whereby it attaineth to know∣ledge here whilst in the body; yet it un∣doubtedly not onely knows those prin∣ciples and Effects which are subject to Sense and Phantasie, but even God himself, without any help of Phantasie or Sensible representation; Even so, al∣though the Soul of Man doth come to the knowledge of it self by the Effects and Operations which it hath found in it self, and so of Sensible are produced Intelligible Forms; yet is not the Soul dependent of the body, either in respect of Organ or Object, but these Forms are illustrated and made Intelligible by Vertue of the Agent Intellect, and though Phantasie be made Instrumen∣tal, yet not so necessarily, but that this Intellectual faculty may operate with∣out the concurrence of Sensible objects, Intelligible Forms may be imprinted in the Understanding, though no Phan∣tasm appear, and many times through a vehement application of the Under∣standing to Contemplation, the con∣course of Phantasie is weakned, yea sometimes, though rarely, altogether
hindred, as those Holy Men who are gi∣ven to deep and Divine Contemplation of Immaterial and Spiritual Substances can witness, so saith Fonseca lib. 2 Metap. cap. 1. q. 2. sect. 6. & lib. 1. cap. 2. q. 3. sect. 6. Alluding still to Plato's Imaginary lines of the Soul (viz.) the Direct and Sphaerical, consider (O my Soul) the use of these with thy self; The direct line points to the knowledge of all things here without and beneath thee; Phe Sphaerical to all with∣in and above thee; That knowledge which is acquired in the direct line, is fetcht from Objects External, and so hath Sense for its base; looking at things External, Corpore∣al, Mortal, which are all below the Soul of Man; And though by the knoledge of these Externalls, wee may come to the noti∣on of Internal things, by the knowledge of others to know our selves; by sensible Ob∣jects to Intelligible Forms, whereby our Souls may be represented; Yet that knowledge must needs be imperfect, confused, and very un- ertain; no Quidditative knowledge of things Spiritual and Immaterial, as the Schoolmen call it; which is fetcht from ef∣fects, and not from the Cause, from the di∣rect line of External, Corporeal, and inferi∣or
bodies, and not from the Sphaerical of In∣tellectual spirits. A straight line is full of imperfection and deformity, whereas the Sphaerical is the perfectest, fairest and capaciousest of all the rest; Sphaera which is  in Greek signifies beauty, because of all other figures it is the fairest; and as it is fairest, so it is the perfectest and most Capacious of all the rest; and therefore it is, the Heavens are in a round and Sphaerical, not in a long and straight figure; for if the heavens were in the Form and figure of long or direct lines, there would be beyond them some place and body, or else a Vacuity, which argues a de∣formity, an emptiness and imperfection; so saith Aristotle in his second Book de caelo, and his fourth Chapter. Even so in the Soul of Man the Sphaerical line is the fairest, perfectest, and the most capacious; the Circular line reflecting upon it self, that eye of the Soul which contem∣plates it self, and hath its Objects Internal, that Soul which can see it self in it self, and commune with it own heart, is undoubted∣ly the divinest and perfectest, and Beautiful of all others; For to fetch our knowledge from outward Objects, and to bend our stu∣dies to know the Heavens, Elements, and all other Material and Corporeal crea∣tures,
is that imperfect line beyond which is somthing else, or a Vacuity; and though thou cast discourse of the Nature of all things here below, though thy line of know∣ledge be drawn from North to South, though it extend to all things from the Artick to the Antartick Pole, though thou givest thy heart to seek and search after Wisdom (as the wise man saith) of all things that are done under Heaven, of all works under the Sun, and yet art ignorant of thy self; all is but labour and travel, which God hath given to the Children of Men to be exercised therein, and without this Circumflex line, (viz.) the Souls self-Inspection and knowledge of it self, the end is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit; In brief, this Circular Sphaerical knowledge and Inspection of the Soul, is that Encyclopaedia which comprehends all o∣ther Sciences within it. Learn then this Platonick Idea, and Imaginary Circle (O my Soul) by which thou maist reflect upon thy self, and find thy self in thy self, by that Eye of right Reason who fetcheth its knowledge from Internal Objects and Intelligible Forms; whose base is Reason; lower it looks not, nor yet is hurri∣ed and tossed about with the Counter-motions of inferior faculties; may soar aloft some∣times
in Contemplation of Caelum Em∣pyreum, where those Divine, Immutable, and Impaible Essences (which Aristotle speaks of) do inhabite; the highest Hea∣vens where is the Throne of the most high God, and Quire of Innumerable Saints and Angels; may in a holy rapture somtimes with St. Paul, be caught up to the third Heaven, and there learn the secrets of God, which is not lawful for Man to reveale; may know things happily above Reason, above it self, but never contrary or below it self; This is a Science Metaphysical proper∣ly so called, which Grace not Nature teach∣eth; a Science Theological, a truth not ac∣quired by Humane Art and Industry, but by Divine Revelation, taught us by the Spi∣rit of God in the Scriptures. Stude cog∣noscere te, quia multo melior & laudabili∣or es, si te cognoscis, quam te neglecto si cognosceres cursum siderum, vires herbarum, complectiones hominum, natu∣ras animalium, & haberes omnium caelestium & terrestrium scientiam, St. Bernards Meditations, cap. 5. fol. 1054. Frustra cordis oculum erigit ad videndum deum qui nondum idoneus ad videndum seipsum, prius enim necesse est ut cognoscas invisibilia spiritus tui quam possis esse idoneus ad cognoscenda invisibilia dei, & si non potes cognoscere te, non praesumas apprehendere ea quae sunt supra te; praecipuum & principale speculum ad videndum deum, est animus rationalis intuens seipsum. fol. 3131.And doubtless this Inspection and know∣ledge of our selves, and our own Souls, is a Metaphysical, Supernatural, and Theolo∣gical Science; , nosce te ip∣sum is a Divine Lesson; so accounted by the Heathens, when Graven upon the door of
Apollo's Temple, 'twas feigned to have de∣scended from Jupiter; by the knowledge of our Souls, wee come to the knowledge of our selves, what we were, what we are, & what we shall be; by the knowledge of ourselves we come to the Unity of the God-head, by it to the Trinity of Persons, by it to the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures in Christ, by it we are confirmed in the most Mysterious Ar∣ticles of our Christian Faith; by it Gods Essence is represented and lively Portraid; look wee into our Souls, and God is our Ob∣ject, whose Form we are, whose similitude we retain; when no other created Form can be given which may represent the Divine Nature as it is in it self, God is pleased to Imprint an Intelligible Form of his own Essence upon the Reasonable Soul, by which God is United and made known unto us; for this is certain,Et Sua∣rez. Meta∣phys. disp. 30. sect. 11. part. 27. divina essentia unitur in∣tellectui creato beatorum more spe∣ciei intelligibilis, it is the general opini∣on of the Schoolmen, and other Divines; See Fonseca lib. 1 Metaph. Gods Image we are the sacred Histories are express; but principally in respect of our Souls; let us make man after our own Likeness, saith the Text, and again, God made Man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him.
Lift up now thy thoughts (O my Soul) to this thy Divine Exemplar; and think how that every perfection of the Image is placed in the Resemblance it hath with its Pattern; for though the Pattern should be deformed (such as is usually imagined of the Devill) yet the perfection of the picture is to be drawn like to that Pat∣tern; and therefore, though the deformity in the Pattern be truely its deformity, yet the deformity in the Picture is its beau∣ty. But if the Pattern it self be beautiful, the Picture then is most exact and perfect, if it imitate in its beauty, as near as may be, the beauty of its Pattern; and if every Picture had understanding, it would de∣sire nothing more than continually to con∣template its Pattern to frame it self to its imitation, and to be made conforma∣to it. God thy Pattern (O my Soul) is infinite beauty, a light in Which is no akness at all, whose brightness the Sun and Moon admire whose brightness that thou maist with ore ease imitate, his similitude de∣sire, and by all means endeavour, in which consisteth all thy perfection. Profit, Honor, Joy, Rest, and all thy good Know hat the beauty of God, thy Patter, con∣sisteth
in Wisdom and Holiness; for as the beauty of the Body ariseth from the due proportion of the Members and pleasant∣ness of Colour; so in this spiritual Essence the suavity of Colour is in the light of Wise∣dom, the proportion of Members, is in justice; But by justice is not meant any one particular Vertue, but that general which contains in it all the rest, that spiri∣tual substance is the fairest, whose mind shines with the light of Wisdom, and whose Will is replenisht with perfect justice. Now God thy Pattern (O my Soul) is Wisdom it self, Justice itself, and there∣fore is perfect beauty, and because these two are in Scripture expressed by the name of Holiness, threfore do the Angels crie on, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sa∣baoth;Isaith. 6. Levit. 11. Math. 6. and God himself cries out to us his Image and likeness, be yee holy, for I your God am holy; and Christ in the Gospel, be you perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect. Therefore (O my Soul) if thou the I∣mage of God desire to be made like thy exemplar, thou must prefer Wisdom and Justice before all things; True Wisdom is to judge of all things according to the highest Cause; the highest Cause I call the Will of God, or the Law which reveals
the same to men; therefore if thou love Wisdom, thou must not regard what the Law of the flesh dictateth, what Sense judgeth good, what the World allows, what kindred perswade, much less what flatte∣rers propound; but turn thy deaf ear to these, and onely harken to the Will of the Lord thy God, judging and esteeming that the most profitable, most glorious, and most desirable good, which is most agreeable to the Will and Law of God; This is the Wisdom of the Saints, of which the wise Man Writes,Wisdom 7.10, 11. I loved her before health and beauty, and chose to have her in stead of light; for the light that cometh from her never goeth out; All good things together came to me with her, and innumerable riches in her hands. Furthermore, Justice, which is the other part of spiritual beauty, comprehends all these Vertues which do adorn and perfect the Will, but principally Charity which is the Mother and root of all Vertues, and of which Saint Augustine saith,De natura & gratia cap. 70. Cha∣rity begun is Justice begun, Cha∣rirty continued is Justice continu∣ed, Charity perfected is Justice perfected; for who so hath loved hath fulfilled the Law; for love
worketh no evill,Chap. 3. Book. 2. therefore love is the fulfilling of Law, as the Apostle teacheth; and contrariwise, he that keeps Gods Word and Commandements,Rom. 13. the love of God is perfect in this saith St. John; therefore whosoever would be like unto this Divine pattern, must obey him, saying, be ye followers of God as dear Children, & walk in love; for the Son is the Image of his Father; now the whole beauty and perfection of the Image is (as we have formerly said) to be most like the pattern. See Bellarm. de ascensione mentis in deum per scalas rerum creaturarum, gradu primo. CHAP. III. Of the knowledge which the Soul hath of Angels and Saints departed. THE state and condition of the Hu∣mane Soul is twofold, and so hath two several waies of Operation, two waies of acquiring knowledge, one in the body Natural in this life, another
out of this body in another life; The O∣peration of the Soul in this life is per corpus, which is an impediment and let unto it, that it cannot exercise (as to all points) those other Actions and Opera∣tions which are Common to it and se∣parated substances, so fully and freely as it doth out of the body; So must the knowledge of the Soul in this life espe∣cially of Immaterial substances be more imperfect and uncertain, by how much more it useth the body; For Immateria∣lity is the cause in knowledge, and ac∣cording to the degree of Immateria∣lity is the degree to knowledge; there∣fore as God is said in be summè Immateria∣lis, so is he summè cognoscitivus; whereas on the contrary wee see by common ex∣perience, by how much more any thing recedes from Immateriality, the less doth it partake of knowledge; as all Corporeal Inanimate substances, for their overmuch Materiality, have no knowledge at all: but your animalia sen∣sitiva, Sensitive Souls, participate of a certain kind of knowledge, because they have some power over their matter, and in some measure are capable of Forms without matter; and this knowledge is called Sensitive; now the Reasonable
creatures higher than they have attain∣ed to a degree of Intelligence; their knowledge is called Intellectual, be∣cause though their Souls inform the matter, they may notwithstanding sub∣sist without the matter; so clear it is, by how much more the Reasonable Soul in this life stands in need of the body, by so much is it less knowing; but by how much more freed from the body, over∣coming the imperfection of matter, by so much the more Operative, by so much the more Knowing; But because the Soul of Man so long as it is in this body, cannot exercise all its Operations out of the body, therefore the Opera∣tion & knowledge of the Soul in this life (of Spiritual and Immaterial substances especially) cannot be so full and perfect, as it is out of the body in another life; First therefore of the knowledge wee have of Saints and Angells in this life. We have no Quidditative knowledge (as the Schoolmen call it) of abstracted forms & essences in this life; that is, such a knowledge as to define them not onely with their Common but their Proper names also, even to the last specficial dif∣ference, which is the proper and positive
knowledge of them; such a knowledge we have not, (which was a question started by Aristotle, but not assoiled) but a Quidditative knowledge impro∣perly so called, to wit, a confused knowledge of some Essential pre∣dicates, but not of all, and those too by Imperfect notions, partly Common, partly Privative or Negative, not Pro∣per or Positive, such we have; Some Es∣sential attributes we know, which are not Proper to them, but Common with other things, as that they are essences en∣tia realia perse existentia, substances, not accidences, that they are Incorporeal, Immaterial, Intellectual, Incorrup∣tible spirits, of a finite power and per∣fection, all this hath been found out by the strength of natural Reason, heathen Philosophers have taught it, and Aristo∣tle writes a whole Book, de deo & intelli∣gntiis abstractis; wherein he acknowledg∣eth them to be entia realia, for asmuch as he grants them a being in nature; & Substances, for as much as they are per se existentes, not inhaering like accidences in any Material or Immaterial entity; if then Substance not Material nor In∣haering, they must be Incorporeal and Immaterial, and if Immaterial, then In∣tellectual,
as hath been said, whence cometh their name Intelligenae, which is attributed to these spiritual essences by the heathen Philosophers, and that they are finite in power and perfection, their creation is an argument, for no created substance is infinite; but created they are, and all of them, though not all alike, in a necessary and an Essential or∣der among themselves depending one upon another, and all upon one as head, which is God, whom Aristotle calls in∣telligentia prima; And thus much of the Nature and Essences of Angells and Se∣parated Souls by the light of Nature, what they are; now of their Operations, what they do. The power of Angells and Souls ab∣stracted,Of the power of Angels & Forms ab∣stracted in their un∣standing▪ is seen in three things (viz.) in their Understanding, in their Will, and in their External Actions and Ope∣rations; as for the power of their Un∣derstanding, for as much as wee have proved them to be Intelligences Imma∣terial, and of an Intellectual Nature, it must needs follow they have in them the Act and Operation of knowledge, and this in a far more eminent manner than any Rational Soul in this life by it Natural strength can attain unto; wee
shall first speak of the Act and manner of knowing themselves, then of their Act and manner of knowing others. The fa∣culty of knowing them∣selves.Every created Intellectual spirit hath this power to know it self, which is not difficult to demonstrate by Natural Reason, since every Intellectual Spirit is of it own nature Intelligible, yea of it self actually Intelligible, and a propor∣tionate Object to any Understanding, much more to it own; therefore doth e-Intellectual Spirit actually know it self, yea with an Intuitive, Quidditative and Comprehensible knowledge, know it self and is known by it self. And how.The manner of knowledge which it hath of it self, is not (as ours in this life) per species impressas, by Intelligible Forms imprinted of some outward Ob∣ject, nor (as it knows other things) per species congenitas & innatas, but it knows it self per propriam subst antiam, by its own substance; It needs no Accidental Form to represent it self by, but every spiri∣tual substance knows it self, by its own substance, as an Adaequate and propor∣tionate Intelligible Object closely con∣joyned to it own Understanding; this is the way of knowing themselves.
God is known by all Intellectual Spirits after the same manner; they know themselves by their own Sub∣stance,Their power of knowing God, and how. and God by it as their Cause, Principle and Author; no other Spiri∣tual or Corporeal substance is known this way save onely God; yet is not this knowledge God of a proper Quiditative adn Comprehensive, but an Improper, Imperfect and confused Science, for God cannot properly be known, as he is in himself, of any creature, either by his Substance or proper Form, who is In∣comprehensible by any finite Power, much less perfectly known by the pro∣per substance of any Intellectual crea∣ture which is but a very imperfect Ana∣logical representation of the Divine Na∣ture: Therefore when it is said God is known by the proper substance of any creature, it is not to be understood of such a Quidditative knowledge, where∣by he is known as he is in himself, but a knowledge of God per substantiam tanqnam per effectum, as the Cause is known by the Effect, and thus the An∣gelical Natures know God by their sub∣stance, yet as the Effect of such a Cause, which standeth with very good Reason; for if here we may attain to the know∣ledge
of God in this life by Effects, if the invisible things of him from the cre∣ation of the World are clearly seen, be∣ing understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and God∣head; much more, and in a more emi∣nent manner may Angelical Spirits and Separated substances know God by their own Substances, as by Effects, for as they know their own substances, so must they know them to be Effects necessari∣ly, and Essentially depending upon God, and so by their own Substance, as by the noblest Effect made after the I∣mage and likeness of God, may they Naturally attain to the knowledge of their Maker. Of their knowing others and how.But the knowledge which Angels and separated substances have one of ano∣ther, and of other inferior creatures, is after another manner; not per substanti∣am, but per speciem; by Intelligible Forms; nor are these Forms imprinted by any outward Object presented to the Senses, and so to the Phantasie; but are Innate, Connatural and ingendred together with their Nature, and altoge∣ther Intelligible. The diffe∣rence twixt Sensitive, Rational, and meer intel∣lectual know∣ledge.True it is, the Sensitive knowledge is per speciem as well as the Intellectual,
but perfecter the Intellectual than the Sensitive, and the Angelical perfecter than the Humane; the Sensitive creatures know nothing but per species, and those of Objects singular, it knoweth nothing of Universals; the Intellectual know per species too, but by those he understand∣eth Universals as well as Singulars; all à genere generalissimo ad infimam speci∣em; as for example, when we conceive in our mind Substance, which is the highest Genus in the Scale of the Predi∣caments, and understand it aright, we understand also all its Species under it, the whole with all its parts, so the In∣tellectual creatures know per speciem, but such as represents some Universal Na∣ture with all its Singulars, the Genus with its Species, the whole with its parts; thus the Intellectual creatures excel the Sensitive in the manner of knowing per speciem. And as the Intellectual excel the Sensi∣tive, so do they differ in excellencie a∣mong themselves, the Humane from the Angelical and abstracted Intelligences, and these one from another, the Separa∣ted substances know that at once unico intuitu, by one and the same Form, (which we cannot but by many seve∣ral
Forms) running over the Cause with its Effects, the Universal Nature with its Singulars, with one simple aspect and apprehension, which we cannot but under many and divers Conceptions and notions; And thus much touching the Operation of the Angelical Intel∣lect; Now of their Will and Free∣dom. Where there is Knowledge there is Desire and Appetite, where there is no Knowledge there can be no Appetite, (we speak not of that Natural propensi∣ty which is given to every thing) where∣by, without any previous knowledge, they are inclined and are carried Natu∣rally to their good, as the Earth Natu∣rally desires the lowermost place, the Matter desires the Form, and the like, which is called appetitus naturalis, or pon∣dus naturae, but of that which is given to living creatures, and drawn out of the Power of the Soul, and is called appeti∣tus elicitus, even that Act and Operation of Natural Propensity, whereby every Soul that is indowed with knowledge, (according to that knowledge it hath of any thing, is drawn to affect and de∣sire it) so that desire or Appetite is a Companion of Knowledge and conco∣mitant;
and according to the measure of knowledge, desire attends in an answe∣rable measure; Sensitive knowledge is inferior to Intellectual, so is the desire; that which follows the Sensitive know∣ledge is called Appetite, that which follows the Intellectual is called Will; one follows necessarily, the other freely. VVill then and Freedom of Will be∣longs to Intellectual creatures,Of their Will. whether men or Angels, voluntas hominis est libera is a Philosophical rule, much more true∣ly may it be verified of the Will of An∣gels, which is far perfecter; But how far this Freedom extendeth, whether unto all the Acts of Angelical Will, or that some Acts are necessary, and which those are; and whether this Freedom be to all honest and good Acts onely, or it extend to wicked also; or according to the question propounded by Divines, whether Angels considered in their condition have posse peccandi, a liberty or Power to sin; this cannot be so clear∣ly evidenced by Natural Reason. Though divers of the antient Philo∣sophers have gone very far in this point, as Plato and Socrates, and of your Poets not a few, who held that moral evil
had place in Angels, and that they might do wickedly as freely as men, wherupon came the distinction amongst them of good and evil Angels; and the evil Angels they called Daemones; so that from the Effect and delusions of evl Angels, they were induced to believe that some Angels, were morally evil; and therefore to do evilly was not re∣pugnant to the Nature of Angels. Of their External Operai∣ons. 1 Nega∣tively.Now concerning the External Act and Operation of Angels, to wit, their Power and strength in working; First Negatively with Aristotle against Plato, we affirm the Angels can make no sub∣stance, nor yet any material alteration of bodies; neither by Creation nor by Ge∣neration; not by Creation out of meer nothing; nothing to produce some∣thing, all things to spring from nothing, something to be the Effect of nothing, nothing the cause of something, Natural Reason knoweth nothing of such Cau∣ses or Effects, nor is it in the Power of any created substance to create any thing, it is onely the work of an omni∣potent Power; Angels cannot do it, Philosophers were ignorant of it, nor doth it stand with the rules of our Faith and Christian Religion; And as Angels
have not the power of Creation; so nei∣ther have they the Vertue of Generati∣on; herein other animate creatures ex∣ceed Angelical Nature; they can beget their like, whereby their Species is pre∣served in the succeding Individuals; Angels have not the seed of Generation, not to beget their like, nor yet to make any Corporeal substance either by Edu∣ction of Form out of the power of the Matter, as Sensitive or Vegetative crea∣tures are produced, or by substantial Union and Conjunction of Form with matter, as Rational creatures are pro∣duced; neither can they alter any Mat∣ter and fit it for the Form, without which praevious alteration of some Pre∣existent Matter there can be no Gene∣ration, no Mutation or motion of mat∣ter à non esse ad esse, or ab esse ad non esse, nor yet in Alteration of Quality in the Matter, no such Mutation or motion of substance is ascribed to Angels, but an Accidental or Local motion of substan∣ces that they have. Then Affirmative power they have of moving of bodies by Local motion,2. Possi∣tively. And pow∣er of assuming bodies by Condensating and Solidating of air, when they have occasion, and laying it aside and resolving it in∣to the same matter when they please.
a truth in Divinity as well as Philophy; Philosophy teacheth that Angels do move Caelestial bodies; the Orbs are mo∣ved by them; Every Orb hath its proper Intelligence and Angel; the primum mo∣bile hath its Angel moving him from East to West, the rest have theirs; and this Local motion of bodies (though never so great) exceeds not the Angelical Power. And though every Angel moveth ac∣cording to his Will, yet is this Motive Angelical power finite and limited, it hath its bounds which it cannot pass, (though he would) being bound by Laws of Divine providence; he cannot cause a Vacuum, for though he may re∣move one body from its place, he can∣not prevent another for coming in the room. Thus much of Intellectual Agents is demonstrated by the light of Natural Reason; some have endeavoured also to shew the number of these Agents, and this from the motion of the Heavens; affirming that every Heaven or Orb had its proper Intelligence, and so from the number of the Sphaers would gather the number of Intellectual Spirits. And that there are as many Angels as
Sphaers is not difficult to demonstrate; But that there are no more Angels than Sphaers, or if there be more, how many more, cannot be shewed by Natural Rea∣son, nor are their certain number defi∣ned by Divine Revelation; but that there are a multitude more than those which move the Orbs, may easily be proved by the light of Reason. Aqui∣nas brings many for the proving thereof, nor were the Heathen Philosophers ig∣norant hereof, as Aristotle, Plato, Hera∣clitus and others; And thus much of the Knowledge which the Soul of Man hath of Saints and Angels in this life. As for that Knowledge we have of Saints and Angels, and of our selves in the Separated estate of the Soul, it is not inferior to other abstracted Essences, neither in the Power of knowing, nor Manner of Operation; Angels know themselves and all below them, or equal to them, with an Essential Quidditative and comprehensive knowledge, so shall wee, not onely by those general pre∣dicates and attributes, of Immaterial, Intellectual, Impatible, Immixed, Im∣mortal, and the like; but with a full, per∣fect, Intuitive and Comprehensive knowledge of our selves, our own Na∣ture
and Essence being actually Intelligi∣ble, and an Adaequate Object to our own Understanding. Angels know them∣selves by their own Substance, and God by the same, so shall wee; the Know∣ledge they have of all others, is per speci∣es, by Intelligible Forms, Innate and Aongenite, not imprinted in the mind by any External Sensible Object, such manner of Knowledge shall ours be, in nothing differing, in nothing inferior unto the Angels. And though sacred Writ hath been more silent and sparing in the Revelation, either of the Creation, or of the Nature and Es∣sence, or yet of the Operations of these Angels and Spirits Intellectual (as a Doctrine less useful and necessary for Mans salvati∣on) than of the Nature of Man or God; yet so much hath it imparted to her Disciples, as may evidence by necessary consequence the truth of this Metaphysical Science of Natures Angelical; the Fathers and Doct∣ors of the Church having little varied in judgement from the Curiousest Naturalist, and Philosopher in this point, all concur∣ring in this particular, the School of Christ and School of Nature teaching one and the same thing, without any grand Variation and dissenting.
The Creation of Angels (though holy-Churches-creed) is no where plainly pointed out in holy Writ, otherwise than in the first daies Creation under that General notion of Heaven and Earth, which may contain the whole host of Heaven, so those words, Genesis 1.1. (In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth) are by most understood (viz.) by Heaven, not onely it, but all things therein contain∣ed, as Angels, and the like, whose proper seat is Heaven, which may seem to be thus also explicated by St. Paul. Col. 1.16. For by him are all things created that are in Heaven and that are in Earth, Visible and Invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, Principa∣lities or Powers, (viz.) four of the Orders of Angels; further also by God him∣self in the 38 Chapter of Job, saying, where wast thou when I laid the foun∣dations of the Earth—when the morning Stars sang together, and the Sons of God shouted for joy? that is to say, the holy Angels who were created to∣gether with Heaven and Earth, even in the beginning or morning of that first day, as some have hence gathered. Of all created substances, some were crea∣ted Visible, Material, Corporeal, others
were created Invisible, Incorporeal, Spiri∣tual of their own Nature; that the Angels are such created Invisible, Incorporeal, and Spiritual substances may be gathered out of the word of God; David and Paul, Prophet and Appostle, both terming them Spirits; and if Spirits, then Invisible by Mortal eye, and then Incorporeal at least as unto Hu∣mane or other natural body of their own Na∣ture, for so our Saviour hath resolved it, say∣ing, a Spirit hath not flesh and bone as I have. And the Schoolmen have decreed and concluded, that Angels are meerly Spiritu∣al and Incorporeal substances, and no bo∣dies or Corporeal Natures, and with them a∣gree the Fathers, not a few, though Origen, and after him Saint Jerome would seem to maintain, that Angels as oft as they sin∣ned and fell away, were thrust into bodies, and there remained as a punishment unto them; which opinion is exploded by all, both Antient and Modern, as savouring of Platonism more than Christianity; Yet may we not deny but that Angels have been in bodily shapes, and so seen and appeared unto our Fathers of old; wherefore we must either grant unto them real bodies, or that they did delude and deceive the Patriarches with
Phantasms and meer Apparations, which is not to be conceived of the holy Angels; and therefore St. Bernard put a kind of necessi∣ty in it, that Angels should have bodies, otherwise how could they be ministring Spi∣rits sent out to minister unto them who shall be Heirs of Salvation? to men who yet live in the body? how shall they perform this Mi∣nisterial Function of discoursing, of walk∣ing and talking, of eating and drinking, and the like, without a body? all which not∣withstanding, Angels have done as sacred Writ accordeth. But it may be objected, if we do grant unto them true real Visible bodies, then must we also grant them all motions, and mu∣tations incident to such Bodies, to wit, of Generation, Corruption, Augmentation, Di∣minution, Altricion & alteration, then such as may be borne, fed and nourished, may die, may suffer and the like as other corporeall Creatures doe; how then are they meerly Spirituall and of an Incorporeall nature. To which may be answered, First,1 Nega∣tively. nega∣tively; True humane bodies Angels have not, humane nature no spirituall substance ever assumed except the Son of God the second Person in the ever blessed Trinity, of whom it is said, He took not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of A∣braham,
and by whom it is verified, A spirit hath no flesh and bone; so no hu∣mane or fleshly Bodies are ascribed to Angels. 2 Affirma∣tively.Secondly, affirmatively; True reall bo∣dies they have (not newly generate, created, or begotten, but) assumed of Air and other Elements, so condensate, consolidate, and contract together, as that it may be seen, felt, touched, &c. Beyond the very nature of Air; such a Body as is not essentiall, but accidentall, taken up for a time, as we do put on our Cloathes, and may be dissol∣ved again at pleasure as soon as their Ministery is accomplish'd; now such a Body is not subject to those Mutations of Gene∣ration, Corruption, and the like, nor may it be said to die, to suffer, to feel, o feed, or the like, as a humane Body may. Thus is the nature of Angels Spirituall not carnall, Incorporeall not corporeall, and surpasseth the humane Nature in Un∣derstanding, freedom of Will, and exter∣nall Operations. First, in Understanding, in regard of that Intuitive Vision they have of God per lumen Gloriae, (besids those superexcellent naturall Endowments Intellectual of seeing God per lumen na∣turae) alwayes beholding his Face,Vid. Hockers Eccles. pol. 1. Sect. 4. fol. 53. as the Text expresseth, they are so acquainted
with the Mind and Will of God, that Ir∣repercussa mentis acie divinorum judiciorum abyssum intuentur, as St. Bernard hath it; in comparison of which knowledge Angelicall, all ours is but as that of Babes and Sucklings. Out of whose Mouth notwithstanding God hath perfected his praise,See Mr. Hooker his first book of Eccles. pol. Sect. 6. fol. 56. or ordained strength, as the Psalmist hath it, here on Earth, till such time as we grow up to perfect Man-hood, to the measure of the fulness of the stature of Christ, where shall be given to us little ones an equality of knowledge with the Angels, to be like unto them who alwayes behold the Face of their Heavenly Father. As touching their Freedom of Will and Power of working, the Angelical far surpas∣seth the Humane Nature; Bellarmine puts these differences betwixt them, First, in the Power and Rule over Bodies. The humane Soul can onely move his own Body at his pleasure, it cannot move others after the same sort; Again, the humane Soul moves its own Body upon the Earth in a slow motion step by step, it hath not power to bear it upon the Water, or elevate it above the Air, or carry it whither it pleaseth: but the Angels by the Power and Freedom of Will, by the meer force of their spirit, can
lift up mighty Bodies, and carry them whi∣ther they please; Thus did an Angel take up Habacuc, and in a short space brought him to Babylon, with a Dinner for Daniel, and carried him back again into the Land of Palestine. Again, Man cannot fight with his enemies in Mind and Will onely, but stands in need of Hands, Weapons and the like; but an Angel by the sole power of his Spirit, and Will, without either Hands or Armes, can both fight against, and also overcome a whole Host of Armed-men; so an Angel in one night slew of the Assyrians one hun∣dred eighty and five thousand. Again, Man by the Art of Painting and En∣graving may make such an Image of Man, so lively represented, that it may seem to live and breath, yet not without great paines and labour; but an Angel without any paines, without Hands, without Instru∣ments, can even in an instant, as it were, so frame a Body of Elements that it shall be taken for a true humane Body of very wise Men, such a Body as can Walk, Speak, Eat, Drink, yea may be touched, handled, and washed. Thus Abraham prepared Meat for Angels, and washed their Feet, as th' A∣postle hath it, entertaning Angels una∣wares,
supposing they had been Men; the same which happened to his Nephew Lot, when he received two Angels into his house for Men as strangers and Travellers; so the Angel Raphael for many dayes to∣gether dwelt, and was conversant with Tobia the yonger, Walking, Talking, and Eating, and Drinking, as if he were truly Man, and yet when he was to leave him said, I seemed to Eat and Drink with you, but I use invisible Meat and Drink, and so vanisht suddainly out of their sight; a great power certainly, and an admirable, so quickly to make a Body as shall not be discerned to differ from a humane and li∣ving Body in any thing, and the same again to dissolve in a trice as oft as it plea∣seth him. Again, the Soul of Man is so closely conjoyn'd to the Body, that without it the Soul cannot move from place to place, but God hath not so tied a Body to Angeli∣cal natures, but without a Body they may most swiftly pass from Heaven to earth, from earth to Heaven again, or whither also they please. Thus as the Angelical Nature is next unto God in Dignity, so doth it resemble Gods Omnipresence in Subtilty and Agi∣lity. God is every where by the infinity of of his being, and needs no local motion,
since he is every where; Angels also do pass in so easie and swift a motion, from place to place, and have their Presence in all places, as in a sort they may be said to be ubiquitary. The number of these Angels are uncer∣tain, not revealed in the Word of God, but without doubt so many as cannot well be com∣prised in the Art of Enumeration; millions of millions ministring unto God, and ten thousand times ten thousand standing be∣fore him; whereupon Dionysius, and with him Aquinas do conclude that the number of Angels are more than are the number of all corporeall substances whatsoever; and although their number be so infinite, yet they do every one differ amongst themselves, not onely in individuall number, but also in specificall form. Yet for all this number almost infinite, they are reduced into nine Ranks and Or∣ders, under some of which every of them are comprehended. The first and highest Order is that of the Seraphims; secondly, Cherubins; thirdly, Thrones; fourthly, Do∣minions; fifthly, Principalities; sixthly, Powers; seventhly, Vertues; eightly, Arch∣angels, and the ninth and last Angels, of all which Names we read in the holy Scrip∣tures, by which their severall Offices, De∣grees
and Orders are dignified and distin∣guisht;Chap. 4. Book 2. Wherefore else serve these different Names, if they signified nothing? but sure there is a difference twixt Angels and Archangels in degree, then why not twixt the rest? quid ergo sibi vult gradualis distinctio haec? saith St. Bernard upon the same subject. But Dionysius makes but three Orders of all, (putting three in every Order, so making a ternary of Trinities, alluding to the Sacred Trinity) viz. Three Superior, three middle, and three inferior Orders; The highest Orders are the Seraphim, Che∣rubin and Thrones; The midlemost Orders are the Dominions, Principalities and Powers; The lowermost are the Vertues, Arch∣angel and Angel; but of this enough is said. CHAP. IV. Of the Knowledge we have of God, and his Attributes. THat which may be known of God by the strength of naturall reason, is drawn from the Works of his Crea∣tion;
for as the Cause is known by the Effects, so is the Creator by the Crea∣ture, the Physical Science of Causes and Effects here below brings us to a Me∣taphysical Knowledge of the cause of all causes, even God above, whose Deity may be seen in every place, omnia sunt derum plena, was the saying of Thales Milesius an antient Philosopher thus cited by Aristotle,Lib. 1. De anima. and thus said the Poets of old, Jovis omnia plena—paersentem que re∣fert quaelibet herba deū; not the meanest of the Creatures, but manifest a God-head. The Philosophers therefore (excepting the Epicureans, who held that this great & spacious universe was nothing else but Theatrum caeco atomorum confluxu genitum) searching out the causes of things, and finding a concatenation of them, in an orderly dependance one upon another,Simplicius Philoponus, Ammonius, Averrores, alii{que} multi viri illu∣stres, neque numero pauciores, nec autori∣tate infe∣riores iis qui de sipere maluerint mundum à deo ut causa efficiente pendere affirmant. Scaliger. and a necessary conjunction of every of them with their Effects (ne daretur pro∣gressus in infinitum vel circulus committendus, an absurdity in Nature, which other∣wise they would run into) were forced to acknowledge one Supreme cause of all things, which was God. Plato, Aristotle, Galen, and others from hence do prove that there is a God.
The quod sit is thus proved, the quid sit may from thence also be concluded; for when we look upon the Fabrick of Heaven and Earth, wee may see the Greatness and Power of God; when we behold the Governance and Guidance of all in so great a Beauty, Order and Distinction of all things, we may judge of the Wisdom, and Knowledge of God; when we consider the commodity, pro∣fit and Use of all things, we may ex∣perience the goodness and Love of God; and so we may come to know God in his Predicates and Attributes, (viz.) that he is Ens, Actus, Substantia, Vivens, Aeternus, Justus, Sapiens, &c. Yea, un∣der such conceptions and notions as are only proper and essential to God, not agreeing with any other, may God be apprehended by us in this Metaphysi∣cal Science, (viz.) that he is Ens infinitum simpliciter, that he is Actus purus, causa prima, primus motor, immobilis, &c. And so we come to the knowledge of God, quodsit, and quid sit, both that he is, and what he is. Yet is not this knowledge compre∣hensive of him, these Motions of Gods Essentiall Attributes (though Proper to him, and Communicative to none beside) are not quidditative; an infinite
Essence cannot so be comprehended within the Sphaer of a Finite capacity; neither know we him hereby as he is in himself, but as he is represented unto us in the Glass of his Creatures as in his Effects, which representation is very imperfect, not able to set forth the Di∣vine Perfection; It is therefore a quid∣ditative knowledge improperly so cal∣led, to wit, a confused knowledge of some (but not of all) Essentiall Pre∣dicates and Attributes proper to him. And hence may we learn another of Gods Attributes (viz.) that he is In∣comprehensible, understanding this in reference to Created substances, no created intelligence is able to compre∣hend him; otherwise of himself he is Comprehensible as an adaequate Object of himself; for as God is said to behold himself, or to see himself in himself, so may he most properly be said Adae∣quately to see himself; for so we say the Soul of Man reflecting upon it self sees it self in its self; and not only the Soul of Man, but all other intellectuall spi∣rits are actually Intelligible of them∣selves, and a proportionate Object to their own understanding, and therefore
do know themselves with an Intuitive, Quidditative, and Comprehensive Know∣ledge; and shall we deny this Know∣ledge to God, cujus intellectio reflectiturin seipsam seu in ipsum intelligentem, & qui non minus intellectivus quam intelligibilis, saith Suarez; so Comprehensive of himself, but Incomprehensible unto us, that he is and must be granted, and under that notion known to us, which is Negative Know∣ledge, no Quidditative or Positive Know∣ledge of him. Our Knowledge of God and his At∣tributes, is threefold, Negative, Relative, or Positive, our Negative conceptions of God are under these Attributes or Predicates of Infinite, Incomprehensi∣ble, Immortal, Increate, Immutable, Independent, and the like; our Relative notions are under the Predicates of Creator, Governor, Maker, and Pattern, &c. The Positive are under the Predi∣cates of Being, Act, Substance, Eternal, Just, Wise, &c. Now our best Knowledge of God in this life is by Negation, and is preferred before our Positive notion of God, both by Dionysius and St. Augustine, as Suarez hath observed, and he gives the Rea∣son,
Because (saith he) if we desire to know any proper and absolute Attri∣bute of God, and not that which is com∣mon, Analogical, or Relative, we under∣stand it easilier and more distinctly by what God is not, than by what he is; and that is by these Negations of Infi∣nite, Immortal, Incomprehensible, Im∣mutable, Immense, and the like; that is to say, God is not Finite, not Compre∣hensible, not Mutable, not Circumscrip∣tive, &c. For to know what God is not, suffi∣ceth any one Negative Attribute which is proper to him; as for example, God is Independent, that is to say, not de∣pending on any, by which very Attri∣bute all created Substances whatsoever are excluded, and God is known by this as Proper to him alone; and thus wee come to God easily by knowing first what he is not; whereas if we go about to know what God is by Positive and Absolute Attributes, we must then run over all the Attributes of God which are both infinite in number and perfecti∣on; upon which consideration, Cicero in his first Book of the Nature of the Gods, hath these words; Dost thou ask me (saith he) what God is? I will answer with Symo∣nides,
who being demanded the self same question by Hieron, a Tyrant, desired a day to consider of it, and being demanded the next day, he craved two dayes longer, and still as the question was pressed he doubled the time for his answer, Hieron wondring, asked for what in∣tent he did so, because (saith he) the longer I consider on it, the obscurer it is to me, rectè autem dixit obscurior, saith Fonseca, for suppose you should know some Attri∣butes of God, there remains an infinite number more to be known, nor is there any one at all which may be understood as it is proper to God, but as it is Analo∣gically common to God and the crea∣tures. Wherein Nature hath been lame, and Reason blind, the Scriptures have afforded us both staff and prospective, by which as it were setting us upon the Pinacle of the Tem∣ple, we may walk and view the Almighty, not only in his works, his back parts, but even in his face, to wit, in his Nature and Essen∣tial being. O how hath it pleased God (O my Soul) to manifest himself unto thee in the sacred Scriptures, that by knowing of him thou mighst learn to fear him, to love him, to obey him, and to believe and trust in him
for thy own healths sake and Eternal feli∣city? 1. God reveals himself to be causa prima, the first of all Causes, and himself without all causes, having both being & beginning from himself; I am Alpha and Omega (saith God of himself) the first and the last, even so to the creatures as these two Letters are to the Greek Alphabet; Alpha is the first, O∣mega the last of the Greek Letters, God is both to every creature, Alpha the first, O∣mega the last of every Entity; Blasphe∣mously impious then were those of the Classi∣cal Consistory, who demanded why there was a God; since no cause can be given, neither indeed can there be any; for could there be any Cause of him, it must be before him and better than he, and consequently God, which is impossible. 2. God reveales himself to be Infinite in Power, not limited, not bounded, he is, an Almighty and omnipotent God,Genes. 2. Psal. 132. so Isa∣ack in his blessing of his Son Jacob, stiles him saying, God Almighty bless thee, so David calls him, the Almighty God of Jacob; again, most high and Almighty, Psal. 91. the Scriptures are full of this At∣tribute of God, being seaventy times therein expressed as some have observed, and being further evidenced unto us, both by his In∣ternal
and External Actions, in his Opera∣tions ad intra before all time, and his Ope∣rations ad extra in time; In holy Scrip∣tures is set forth unto us a Theological Sci∣ence of Gods omnipotency, even in his Ope∣rations ad intra, which are those of Beget∣ing, Breathing, and Proceeding, and this is a Science purely Theological, not acquired by Humane Invention, not Investigable by Natural Reason, not Attainable by any rules of Philosophy, onely delivered us in a Mystery which we must look into with the eye of Faith, not with an eye of Reason; it is a Science Supernatural, non ratione pro∣banda, sed fide tenenda; we must not go to prove it by Mathematical demonstra∣tions, but by Theological principles and rules of Faith; a curious search is not so safe, as humble ignorance; we may not pry into the manner of the Eternal Generation of the Son by the Father, or Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son, thus much onely is necessary to be believed, that there is a person begetting, a person begotten, and a person proceeding, a Trini- of Persons in the Unity of a God-head, di∣stinct according to the several relations of Father Son and Holy Ghost, which in a sense are included, and may be gathered from
this power and Internal Operation of God, Begetting and Breathing. And these Operations ad intra (viz.) generandi & spirandi, in such an In∣effable Incomprehensible manner, argues an omnipotency Divine, and Power infinite in all the branches of Infinity; but unwilling I am to wade too far into this Mysterious point, this bottomless Ocean of Gods Internal Workings, but rather to view it a far off as it is dispersed into Smaller and Shallower Rivulets, and treat of Gods Power in his Works ad extra. All things were made of God, and with∣out him nothing, from the highest Angel to the meanest Worm, from the highest Hea∣vens to the profoundest Abysse; this Work of Creation is Wonderful, and argues an infi∣nite perfection of Power, whether we respect the Magnitude, Multitude, or Variety of things created, the Magnitude is seen in the greatness of the Earth, who hath measu∣red the bredth of the Earth, and the depth of its Abysse? saith Ecclesiasticus So great it is that a great part of it lies yet un∣discovered, yet this Vast Earth being com∣pared to Heaven, is but as a point or prick, (for so have Astrologers observed) where∣in so many thousand Stars do shine, the least whereof is bigger than the Earth; the
Multitude of things is seen, if wee consider but the Sand of the Sea, and drops of rain, the Multitude of Minerals lie buried in the Earth, the several sorts of Grass, Herbs, Fruits & Plants upon the Earth, the number of Men, Stars and Angels, besides the in∣numerable sorts, forms and Individuals of living creatures, going, creeping, swim∣ing, flying, and the variety of things in this Multiplicity, even in every Individual of every kind is wonderful, Man from Man differing in shape and feature, and one Star differing from another in glory; yet all this great Universe with the Infinite num∣ber & variety of things therein contained, to be made of nothing, of no preexistent matter, yea and in nothing, & all this in an instant, in the twinckling of an eye, to be created, and as speedily and easily to be dissolved, argues an Almighty and omnipotent God; Nor are his works less wonderful in that Mysterious but Fundamental point of our belief, the Re∣surrection of the body, after so many Revo∣lutions of daies and years, being turned to dust and ashes, this dust dispersed into the four quarters of the World, or turned into o∣ther bodies, being eaten up of wild Beasts, or devoured by men, such as Cannibals who feed on mans flesh; yet these same bodies, Millions of Millions, however dispersed or
transformed, in the twinkling of an eye, at the sound of the Trumpet, to arise, the self-same Soul to be reunited to the self-same bo∣dy, the same Individual Form to reinform the same Numerical matter, argues an Om∣nipotent hand and Almighty Power, which God both can and will bring to pass, so doth the Catholick Church profess. Nor is Gods Almighty Power manifest∣ed onely in these created beings which have or shall have a being in Nature, real Ex∣istencies do not Adaequate Gods Omnipoten∣cy, but it extends to all kind of beings what∣soever, to all Negative and Privative be∣ings, as Darkness, Blindness, and the like, quae inhaerent entibus realibus, without which they subsist not; and so have a being in Nature Formally, yet not a Posi∣tive, but Privative being; to all Imagi∣nable beings, meer entia rationis, which have no being in Nature in any sense, but only in the Intellect; to all possible things, entia possibilia, though never Future, all things whatsoever are absolutely, simply, and generally possible to be done,In his Book of Gods om∣poten∣cy. saith Doct∣or Preston, under which those things which never shall come into real being, those things which may be, but never shall be, Contingents possible, though never Future are comprehended, those things which are
impossible with Man, are notwithstanding possible with God so saith our Saviour, for with God nothing is impossible, so said the Angel, non erit impossibile a pud deum ullum verbum, so is the Origi∣nal, where by (verbum) significatur id quod mente concipi potest ut factibile saith a Schoolman, all that is imaginably possible to be done,Non potest facere prae∣terita, ut non fuerint, necres dum est ut non fit. Suar. Disp. 30. and implies not a Contra∣diction, falls with the Omnipotency of God, and though God cannot do contradictions, though somthing there is that is impossible for God to do, as to lie, to deny himself, to call back yesterday, that is to say, things that are past, that they should not be, nor any thing that is whilst it is make it otherwise than it is, he cannot make truth fashood, and the like; yet this is not through a weakness and defect of his Power,Lib. 6. E∣pisto. 39. for so hath Saint Am∣brose resolved it; istud impossibile non infirmitatis est, sed virtutis ac ma∣jestatis, it argues the greater perfection of Power, even as Infallibity is not the imper∣fection, but perfection of Knowledge, and to have no freedom to sin, is not an imperfecti∣on, but perfection of freedom of Will. 3.Gods E∣ternity. Gods Eternity and Immortality also is clearly set forth in holy Writ, so Saint Paul, to the King Eternal, Immortal, and onely wise God, &c. But thou wilt happily reply,
(O my Soul) that this Attribute appertain∣eth to thee, and therefore not appropriate to God alone, who art also of an Immortal, Invisible, Immaterial Nature, as hath been elsewhere proved, a simple Essence void of Composition, or such matter which is sub∣ject to Dissolution, Death and Destruction; and true it is,Patet hic quomodo avum diffe∣rat à tem∣pore & ae∣ternitate, à tempore quidem ra∣tione finis quaem tem∣pus habet avum non habet; ab aternitate ratione principii quod avum habet aeper∣nitas vero non habet. yet know thou a difference twixt Eternity simply so called, and that which is improperly so called, or betwixt Duration Increate, and that which is Cre∣ate, or inter aevum & aeternitatem, age & eternity; there was a time when thou wast not, and when thou wast thou camest to that being by the pleasure and will of God, who can as easily (when it pleaseth him) reduce thee to nothing again, though thou hadst no principles of corruption in thee; but God was from everlasting Immor∣tal, and remains Immortal to perpetuity, and this of Necessity and Intrinscical Na∣ture; for it is impossible for him who is the cause of all causes, life and being it self, and the Fountain both of being and life, by any means whatsoever to come to nothing, but as he was from Eternity, so to continue to Eternity. For this Attribute of Gods Eter∣nity is a duration Increate, which implies a Negation of all such Created Durations and Permanencies, as consist of a continual Suc∣cession
and flux of time, for in Gods durati∣on is no Succession, so hath Boetius defi∣ned it, interminabilis vitae tota simul & perfecta possessio, where by (tota si∣mul) is excluded all Succession, which though it have a Totality of being, yet is not altogether or all at once, there is no such differences of time past and time future in Eternity, all is present with God, no time past or any time to come, but all in the pre∣sent tense, my Father worketh hither∣to, and I work, and again, this day have I begotten thee, though it was from Eter∣nity, before all times, years, and daies, for E∣ternity with God is no more than this instant with us; wherefore, although our Souls may in a sense be called Eternal, Immortal, &c. yet it is said of God by way of Eminency, which is not appropriate to any other, who onely hath Immortality, &c. And though God be Eternal both in Es∣sence and in his Operations, yet we,Etsi enim aeternitati dies & an∣nos attri∣buimus id tamen faci∣mus nostri melioris intellectus causâ. Sen∣nertus. who are compact of Succession, and are not perfect all at once, neither in being nor in working, but stand in need of time coming to supply what was Wanting in time past, cannot speak nor think of Gods Eternal being and workings as they are in themselves, but ac∣cording to our capacity, comparing time with time, so conceipting a real or at least an
Imaginable Succession of time, so we say God was, because we conceive him Coexist∣ing with time past, God is, because Existing with time present, and is to come, because of his being with all times, and beyond all times to come, whereas in God, is, neither was, no will be nor flux of time, but all pre∣sent, yea Eternally present both God in his being and in his Operations, God is from Eterntiy, and all the Acts and Operations of God are from Eternity And though God is said (and truly so) to have done many things in time, as to have created Man in the beginning of time, so have sent his Son in the fulness of time, &c. which implies a Succession, and no sim∣ple duration of God, as to his Operations, yet are these works ad extra, which are ma∣nifested to us in time, no breach of true E∣ternity, though they admit of Succession and Variation, Gods Eternal workings in time manifested to us, hinder not Gods Inter∣nal workings before all time; the World and every thing therein were from Eternity, as unto God to whom all things are present, and were Eternally so, though manifested to us by the creation, which is ad ex∣tra, to be in the beginning of time. Gods im∣mutabili∣ty.4. Which brings us to another Attri∣bute of God, whereby he is pleased to make
himself known unto us, to wit, his Immuta∣bility, I am God (saith he of himself) and change not, yesterday and to day, and the same for ever, with whom is no Variation nor shadow of change, neither Substantial nor Accidental; no Substantial, for God is a ne∣cessary, being and impossible for him to be o∣therwise than he is, therefore cannot admit of any Substantial change; nor yet any Lo∣cal change, since God by the Infinity of pre∣sence, and Immensity, is in every where, and there is no place where God is not, so cannot be said to move or change from place to place; nor yet is he changable in his Acts and qualities, those mutations which may seem to happen in respect of his Divine workings ad extra, when God makes any thing which was not formerly made, argues no more Mutability in God, than the make∣ing them in time, argues a Temporal Suc∣cession and no simple Eternity in God, as hath been said before, for this Mutation à non esse ad esse is not in God but in the Crea∣ture, not in the Agent but Patient, for an Action Transient and External as this is, makes a Mutation or change in the Crea∣ture, but not in God, and though there are no External workings or Actions Transient, but flow ab intra, from Immanent Actions of God, yet argue they no Mutation in God,
since as they proceed from some Immanent Act of God, so are they Eternal and Immu∣table in him. Again, some Acts of Gods are necessa∣ry, as those whereby he loves himself, some are free, as those whereby he loves the Crea∣tures, those things which God knows and Wills necessarily those he knows & loves Im∣mutably; of such Acts of God there can be no dispute, but they may stand with Gods Immu∣tability, but how the free Acts of God, as his freedom of loving or not loving his Crea∣tures, can stand with Divine Immutability is the grand question, which here we will o∣mit to resolve, intending briefly to assoil this doubt in the Metaphysical part of the Sub∣sequent Chapter. Gods Im∣mensity or Infinity of presence.5. Immensity is another Attribute whereby God is made known unto us in the Scriptures; Great is our God above all Gods, who made Heaven and Earth, and filleth Heaven and Earth, and yet Heaven and the Heaven of Hea∣vens is not able to contain him, God is every where present, yet is contained no where, but is above all, and in all, and through all, as the Apostle speaks; in every place God is present, not Virtually onely, but Really and Substantially, the very Essence of God is diffused into all parts of the World,
as the Soul is in the body Indivisible, and wholly, not onely in an Indivisible point, but a Divisible and Expatiated Circumference, for if we grant this manner of real presence to Inferior and Imperfecter Substances, as to the Soul of Man, we may not deny it to more Noble and Superior Natures, as to Angels, much less to the Divine Nature, to be whole in the whole, and whole in every part of the whole, in all places real or Imaginary whole, for where God is not, there is nothing, and where there is nothing he is in him∣self. For suppose we more Worlds and more Heavens, yea imagine we infinite numbers of them more, (all which fall within the compass of Gods infinite Power) there could not be any Imaginable place throughout them all which Gods presence did not fill; for if his Power extend to the making, his pre∣sence will extend to the filling of all, o∣therwise God would be less Infinite in being than in working, existendo quam agen∣do, which is impossible, since all the Attri∣butes of God are Infinite, and in infinitis non datur magis & minus; this serves to shew the Immensity of Gods Essence, the In∣finity of his presence, which is not limited to any place Real nor Immaginary space, is incapable of Termes, can neither be Circum∣scribed
nor defined in the Predicament of ubi, for as the Spirit of God witnesseth, There is no end of his greatness, magnitudi∣nis ejus non est numerus; so the Latine renders it, so all the Fathers Unanimously teach, Nazianzen, Athanasius, Hilary, Damascen, Hieron, Ambrose, and last∣ly St. Bernard, de consideratione lib. 5. speaks of the length and bredth, the height and depth, which is in God, who is incompre∣hensible, since no place can contain him, and yet there is no place but where he is, nus∣quam est qui non clauditur loco, & nusquam non est qui non excluditur loco; God is no where, because concluded in no place, and God is every where because ex∣cluded from none. 6. God is ens simplex & actus pu∣rus, and this simplicity is sufficiently mani∣fested in holy Writ; I am that I am saith God to Moses, and again, I am hath sent me unto you, that is (as Doctor Preston hath it) a pure Act, all being, whole, entire, a simple and Uniform being without parts, ac∣cidents or any Composition, not like to the Creatures, for the best of them, although they have not a Substantial and Physical sim∣plicity, i. e. no compounded of Matter and Form, nor consisting of Integral parts, yet a Metaphysical and Accidental Compo∣sition
they have and no simplicity, for as much as they are compounded of Essence and Existence, of Act and Power, or of Actions and Qualities, which, whatsoever it be called, cannot he said of God, who is a simple and Indivisible Essence, whose Essence is his Ex∣istence, and whose Act is Power, Power in God is neither objectiva nor passiva, such distinctions are not in God, whose Power is purè activa, and all that is in God is but one God, so do those words impart (viz.) I am that I am, as much as to say, whatso∣ever is in me it is my self, in God is no∣thing but himself, nihil in se nisi se habet, saith St. Bernard, hear him further, But God is a Trinity, what then? do we over∣throw Gods Unity by confessing a Trinity, no, but we confirm the Unity, we acknowledge the Father, and so the Son, and so the Holy Ghost, yet not three Gods but one God, what means this number and no number, as I may so speak? For if three, how is it not a num∣ber? And if but one, where then is the number? But I have (saist thou) both what I may number and what I may not, the Substance is one, the Persons are three, and what Ridde or Mystery lies in this? none at all, if we may divide the Persons from the Substance, but since these three Persons are that one Substance, and that one Sub∣stance
those three Persons, who can deny a number, for they are truly Three, yet who can call a number that is but truly One? Or if thou hast as thou thinkst sufficiently numbred them by professing three, what dost thou number? Their Natures? That's but one, their Essence? It's but one, their Substance? It's but one, their God-heads? It's but one, but thou wilt say, I number not these, but the Persons, which are not that one Nature, that one Substance, one Essence, and that one God-head, Thou art a Catholick and maist not profess this. The Catholick Faith believeth the proper∣ties of the Persons is no other than the Per∣sons themselves, and that the Persons are no other than one God, one Divine Nature, Sub∣stance, and Supreme Majesty, reckon there∣fore if thou canst, either the Persons without the Substance which they are, or the proper∣ties without the Persons, which they are. Qui du∣plici impi∣etate & numerum trinitati minuit, & tribuit uni∣tati. Ber∣nard. E∣pist. 190. fol. 1581. G.Or if any go about to divide and sever the Persons from the Substance, or the Pro∣perties from the Persons, I know not how the Trinity will own him for a Worshiper—wee may therefore acknowledge Three, but not to prejudice the Unity, and acknowledge One, but not to confound the Trinity; This is a great Mystery and a sacred; if any would
know how this Plurality is in Unity, or Uni∣ty in Plurality, I answer, it is rashness to search, Piety to believe, life everlasting to know. 7. To these we may add another Attri∣bute appropriate to God, by which he is made known unto us in his Word (viz) his Invisibility, where it is expressed as in the place before mentioned, To the King E∣ternal, Immortal, Invisible, and one∣ly wise God; no man hath seen God at a∣ny time, neither indeed can see him with Mortal eye, and though this manner of In∣visibility be not the proper Attribute of God, & so doth not sufficiently set forth the Divine perfection, being common also to all Spiritu∣al Substances, as well the Rational Soul in this life, as Souls abstracted and Spirits In∣tellectual; for as much as no Spirit is Visible with Corporeal eyes; yet God in a more emi∣nent manner is Invisible. There is a twofold sight, one of the body, another of the mind, the light of the body is the Eye, the light of the mind, Understanding; with the bodily eye no Spirits can be seen, but with the eye of the mind they are Visible, not properly and fully in this life; we know not any thing but per species impressas, by Intelligible Forms imprinted in our Understanding from some sensible Objects; not our own Souls, much
less those purer Intellectual Natures; But the Intellectual Spirits and separated Souls do see themselves and other Created Sub∣stances though Superior, and so are they Visible with an Intuitive Vision from In∣nate and Connatural Forms; which way notwithstanding God is not Visible to any Created Intellect; And thus Invisibility comes to be Appropriate to God alone, and not Communicative to any besides; no Cre∣ated Substance can see God as he is in him∣self by any Natural way of Created Intui∣tive Vision of the Understanding, without the infusion of some other Supernatural Endowments; which agrees with the rules of our Faith, and of Sacred Writ, profess∣ing God to be Invisible, and to dwell in an unaccessable light. Yet may we not otherwise but according to Catholick Faith believe that God is Visible too. 1. He is Visible to himself, as he is Com∣prehensible of himself, because he is equal∣ly Intelligent and Intelligible, non mi∣nus Intellectivus quam intelligibilis, as hath been elsewhere said, therefore Visi∣ble in respect of himself, though Invisible in respect others. 2. Visible in respect of others, (viz.)
all the blessed Saints, and Angels; these enjoy a full Fruition and Beatifical Vision of him; not a glimse as I may say, or some Cre∣ated brightness and illumination in a glass, & per aenigma, either in the glass of his Creatures as Naturalists with the eye of Reason, or in a more Spiritual glass, as Christians with an eye of Faith, in this Vale of tears may behold him; but face to face, clearly and as he is in himself Intuitively not in any Natural Created light, but by an eye and light of glory unexpressi∣bly Supernatural, by which God is pleased to convey Intelligible Forms of his own Essence unto us; which Vision is meant and signified by Saint John in his 1. Epistle. 3.2. Wee shall see him even as he is (viz.) in a glorified estate, per lumen gloriae, by a light of glory un∣expressible.
Of the Knowledge and Will in God CHAP. V. Chap. 5. Book 2.WEE have treated of God and his Attributes, which are of the Es∣sence of God; we come now to treat of the Knowledge and Will in God, (as much as may be known by Natural and Metaphysical Reason) which by Ana∣logy to things created (though there be nothing in God but is of his Essence, for quicquid in deo est deus est, yet) in a pe∣culiar manner we shall here handle as Faculties and Operations, and not as those which are of his Essence. That in God there is Knowledge is so plain and evident by Natural light, that none of the Philosophers who acknow∣ledge a God hath ever denied it; Aristo∣tle in his Metaphysicks and Ethicks af∣firms it, proving it further from the Im∣materiality of God; the more Immate∣rial any thing is, the more Intellectual, as we have formerly said, now God is summè immaterialis, therefore is he summè cognoscitivus.
Again, from the Effects and Works of God in this World; the order and beau∣ty that is in them manifesteth they were produced both by an Intellectual and free Agent,Ʋnus hic mundus sa∣tis super{que} de monstrat deum esse summè bo∣num, quiá sponte id fecit quod non teneba∣tur facere; summè po∣tentē, quia potuit ex nihilo face∣ne quod vo∣luit; sum∣mè sapien∣tem, quia tam, admi∣rabiliter & sapienter omnia fe∣cit. which opinion was generally received of all Philosophers after A∣naxagoras and Hermotinus Clazomenius, who were the first that taught it, as Plato and Socrates, yea and Aristotle in 1 Me∣taphys. cap. 3. affirm. This Knowledge in God, according to himself must needs be Infinite, for so in the precedent Chapter hath been proved; the Knowledge & the Object known are Adaequate and Proportionate the one to the other; the Object is Infinite, such therefore must the Knowledge be; and this is called Gods Knowledge Essential. Besides, there is a Knowledge of God External, and this is also Infinite, & in∣tensivè & extensivè, as the Schoolmen term it; by which is set forth unto us that Infinite perfection which this Knowledge hath even in all the conditi∣ons and properties incident to perfect Knowledge; for first it is most clear and evident, secondly most certain, thirdly most infallible, with a most perfect and simple aspect beholding every truth as it is in it self, and judging of every
truth (though in themselves not equal) according to the measure of Verity that is in every of them; some being Increate truths, some Create, some Mediate, o∣thers Immediate, some Necessary, some Contingent truths; yet all these Varie∣ties fall within this Infinite Knowledge which seeth every Verity according to the state in which it hath Determination and Certitude, and judgeth thereof ac∣cording to the measure and degree of truth that is in every of them. And this resolves the doubt which some have made how a Future Contin∣gent (which may or may not be) can be foreknown, (since till it come to pass it is not determined to a being or no be∣ing, till which there can be no determi∣nate truth in either proposition; which was Aristotles argument, from whence is concluded, that even God himself could not foreknow either part, to wit, the Affirmative or Negative of such Future Effects as determinately true; for what is not true is not knowable, for truth is the Object of Knowledge, and there∣fore what is not determinately true can∣not be known as determinately true, so God hath no certain and infallible Knowledge of such Contingencies fu∣ture:)
For this doth not hinder but that such Contingencies may be certainly known even before they have any being, at least with that Knowledge which ac∣cording to its all Infinite and Eternal ve∣rity comprehends all times, and every Object knowable, and beholds them as they are in themselves, in the self same manner, and according to the measure of truth they have in them. Neither doth this certain and Infal∣lible Knowledge of Future Contingen∣cies destroy the Nature of a Con∣tingent; for God doth infallibly know Contingent Effects under the no∣tion of Contingencie, as well as necessa∣ry Effects under the notion of necessi∣ty, without the destruction of either, without any change or Alteration of the Object; otherwise that Knowledge is grossly deceived that knoweth any thing to be Contingent, when by the ve∣ry Knowledge such Contingent Effects cease to be Contingent, and forthwith become Necessary. Besides, Knowledge is not a Cause, but rather a Consequent of a future Event, for scientia nil ponit in re, it adds no ne∣cessity to the being of the thing known, though it may add certitude to it self, for that's the perfection of Knowledge;
the ground of Science is not necessity but certainty. And for the Will which is in God by the like argument it may be proved; for God is an Intellectual Agent, so hath been said; and there is no Intellectual Agent but worketh for some end, and is also determinate to that work by some Appetite, will and desire; hereupon the antient Philosophers laid it down for a rule, mentem & amorem esse causam mundi efficientem; according to those Verses quo∣ted by Aristotle, 1 Metaphys. cap. 4. out of Hesiod and Parmenides, to prove this Assertion; Aristotle besides every where affirming that God worketh intelligendo & volendo. God as he is an Intellectual, so is he a a free Agent, all his Operations ad extra are freely and willingly done, not dri∣ven on by any necessity of Nature; True it is, the love wherewith he loves him∣self is necessary, arising from the dignity of the Object and necessity of it; God as he is summum, so is he necessarium bonum, which being the Object of his Will can∣not but be willed necessarily ex necessitate naturae, himself being the Object of his Will, necessitates his Will to love him; voluntas divina etiam naturaliter ac necessario
vult suum principale objectum, saith Suarez; But there is not the like necessity in a∣ny created Object to compel Gods good-will unto it, but so to love it as he may also not love it; Though it was the opinion of certain Philosophers of the Sect of the Stoicks, who held, That all things here below were Ruled and Go∣verned by a certain Fate; and though they denied not that the Order of these Secundary Causes proceeded from the good-will of God, Yet they Attributed thereunto a necessity altogether Inevi∣table, even in respect of God, because they supposed that God did order and work all things ex necessitate naturae;Deum liberè, nec ex necessi∣tate naturae agere & liberimè hunc mun∣dum pro∣duxisse ra∣tioni hu∣manae con∣trarium non est, cum enim deus sit ens perfectissimum à nullo dependens nullius indigens sibi ipsi sufficiens,  & (quam vocem pulchrè excogitavit Scal. ex. 365. sect. 2. ; nullam creaturam dei voluntas necessario appe∣tet, nullamque neario producer, nec ulla re cogetur ejus potestas, sed ipse liberimè vult, pouisetque sivolsset mundum hunc vel longè ante producere, vel post, vel planè non Sennertus But clear it is by Natural Reason, that as God works knowingly, so he Acts willingly and freely; for is freedom of Will an Essential and necessary Con∣comitant of all created Intellectual crea∣tures, whether Angelical or Humane, and shall we deny it in God? This free∣dom of Will in God may be proved from the effects of Divine Power. Ask
we therefore why God made no more Worlds than one; or the Angels, where∣fore he Created in such a number and not in a greater or lesser multitude, and the like, the resolve must be ei∣ther that he could not, or he would not; to say he could not, must exceedingly Derogate from Gods Power, which we have heretofore sufficiently manifested to be Infinite; to say he would not, is to grant him freedom of Will, and that whatever he doth, he doth not necessari∣ly but freely. Nor is not God therefore free because he is Immutable, as some would thence conclude so, for Immutability and free∣dom of Will in God will very well stand together, and it is no more than to say God is Immutably free; for that necessity which comes from Gods Immutability, thwarts not Gods VVill, but necessarily inferrs this perfection of Will (which we call freedom) to be as unchangable as his other Attributes, of VVisdom, Goodness, Power and Eternity are; nam ineo quod deus semel liberè decrevit immuta∣bilis permanet, saith Suarez; so to speak in reference to this present time, and ac∣cording to our capacities, God necessa∣rily willeth now, what formerly he did
VVill; but this is necessitas ex supposi ione, or immutabilitatis, though to speak pro∣perly, there is neither time past nor time future with God, to say he hath willed or shall VVill; But God doth Will and Will freely from Eternity, and to Eter∣nity abideth in the same freedom Immu∣tably. This Metaphysical Science of Gods free Will in all things agreeth with the Faith which Holy Church professeth; the Scriptures every where are plain and full; not Metapho∣rical, but Literal and proper, and so are un∣derstood by the Fathers, He doth what e∣ver pleaseth him; and again, Who worketh all things according to the Counsel of his own Will; whereby it is evident, that the Power and Will of God are two distinct things; he doth not what ever he can do, but he doth whatever he pleaseth; so that the Effects of God are the Effects of his Will, God willeth what he doth, and doth what he willeth; to do which is an Act Ex∣trinsecal, is an Effect of his Will and love which is Intrinsecal. Though there are and have been some Stoicks in the Church of Christ as well as in the School of Nature, who have maintained that all things fall out by such an Intrinse∣cal
necessity, that even God himself could not have made things otherwise than they are made, nor Govern otherwise than he doth Govern. And however few have been so bold as to call thus in question the Infinite Power of the Supreme Cause, yet have many laid an Inevitable necessity upon all Secundary Cau∣ses and Effects, even the Liberal Actions of men and Angels; saying, all things are Ne∣cessary in respect of Gods decree, nothing can fall out Contingently; It is impossible for ought that is, not to have been, for ought that hath been, not to have been, for ought that is, not to be, for ought that shall be hereafter that shall not be. But there are Contingencies in Nature, some things that might have fallen out o∣therwaies than they do or shall, as well as there are some things which could not fall out otherwaies than they have done; we speak not onely of those Extrinsecal Contingen∣cies which proceed from Natural Causes, (for those come not from the Power (but rather from a defect and weakness of the Power) of their Immediate Cause, which toughit work necessarily, is notwithstand∣ing unable to resist the Counter-workings of all other Causes conducing to that effect, and so produceth an Effect praeter intentio∣nem
suam, which therefore is called Contin∣gnt) but also of those Intrinsecal Effects which flow from a Cause, that of it own Intrinse∣cal Power and Vertue is able to give Con∣tingencie to them, as being not determinate to one Effect, but is inspired with Variety of choise, and this is the Praerogative of all Ra∣tional and Intellectual Agents, yet none of these that fall out praeter intentionem dei, besides the mind and Will of God; he willeth Contingencies as well as Necessi∣ties. Nor do they fall out extra scientiam dei, Gods infinite Knowledge comprehends them all, those which are in their own Na∣ture absolutely Contingent, are not Casual in respect of his Providence and Eternal Wisdom; in that he comprehends the number of all means possible, and can mix the seve∣ral possibilities of their miscarriage in what degree or proportion he list; he may, and of∣tentimes doth Inevitablely forecast the full accomplishment of his proposed ends by mul∣tiplicitie of means in them themselves not Inevitable but Contingent, thus Doctor Jackson. And though some Theologists as well as Naturalists have or do question how there can be a certain Knowledge of a Future Con∣tingent; I answer.
1. All Contingencies are Finite, but Gods Knowledge is Infinite, therefore must they needs be swallowed up and comprehen∣ded in that Infinite, Infinite not to be In∣comprehensive of them. 2. Infinite and Eternal Knowledge hath Coexistence with all times, therefore the Fu∣turition is no impediment; with God is no distinction of times, flux of time belongs to the Creature; he knoweth all things in aeter∣nitate sua, as we do in praesenti tempo∣re; our instant is Gods Eternity; all things are present before him, and Eternally pre∣sent. So Contingents (future in respect of us, not of God) do fall within this Infinite E∣ternal and Infallible Knowledge, and not onely Contingents future, but Contingents possible, though never future, as in the case of Keilites, Sam. 23.11, 12. God did as certainly know that the Keilites would have delivered David to Saul, if he had stayed in their City, as that David should thence de∣part and be safe. Therefore the prescience of God is most certain and infallible of Future Events of what kind soever: but this proceeds not from a necessity of the Event, but from the Infinity of his Science. 3. Gods Knowledge is as large and ex∣tends
as far as his Power, otherwise it should not be Infinite; but Gods Power extends to Contingent Effects, to all that may be, as to all that must be, to all that never shall be, as to all that necessarily will be, to all possible Effects though they never come to pass, as to those that are already accomplisht; for Gods Power which is Infinite cannot be determi∣ned to produce all it can of it self, but in that it produceth these Effects rather than other, makes some entia realia, others only entia possibilia, is meerly by the determi∣nation of his Will and Knowledge; therefore entia possibilia, such are all Future Con∣tingents, fall within the prescience of God, and are certainly known of him. He calleth things that are not, as though they were, saith the text, & the Psalmist, thou knowest my thoughts afar off; God is a searcher of the heart and trier of the reins, the desires of the soul, & thoughts of the heart are not hid from him; he long before knows all the free and volunta∣ry acts of men, and certainly can foretell the Event of every Future Contingent; this is by Vertue of that Infinite Knowledge which is proper to God alone. Prevision and Pre∣diction of Contingent Effects none is capa∣bel of but God alone, and those to whom God is pleased to reveal it; and therefore
though the Prophets of old have foretold (as we may read in holy Writ) of many effects of this Nature, which most truly and certain∣ly came to pass; yet it was not they, but God in them foretold them,Luk. 1.70. so saith Zacharie in his Benedictus; As he spake by the mouth of his Prophets since the World began, and St. Peter in his 2. Epist. 1.21. Prophesie in old time came not by the Will of men, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. The Devils have formerly spoken in O∣racles, and taken upon them to foretel such Future Events; but this is above the Na∣ture of any Angel; a Conjectural Know∣ledge they may have at the best (such as a Mariner by his long Experience may fore∣tel of the Wind, the Husbandman of rain, the Physician of diseases, and the like) by which the Devils have presumed to foretel such things to come, in which also often they have both deceived themselves and o∣thers. And where this Knowledge could not be attained, wherein they could have no proba∣ble conjecture of Future Events, they have in Oracles uttered Amphibologiously, and in a double meaning, that so (if the Event proved otherwaies) the fault might be im∣puted
to the Misinterpretation, and not to the Prediction; But a certain Knowledge of a Future Contingent that they have not, it is onely proper to God. Your Astrologers, Genethlialogists,Vide Sen∣nertum lib. 2. cap. 2. fol. 34. a & b. and other such Diviners, who (like Gods Apes) take upon them to imitate him in such Pre∣dictions, are here to be derided and rejected as Impostors and deluders of mankind; since they pretend not to Divine Revelation and Inspiration of God, from whom alone such Effects do come to be certainly known. The consideration hereof may make us with the Appostle cry out, and say, O the depth of the riches both of the Wis∣dom and Knowledge of God; Great is the Lord, and great is his Power, yea and his Wisdom infinite; sapientiae ejus non est numerus. Stand thou in Admiration and Adora∣tion of this Knowledge of God (O my Soul) & say with the Prophet David, such Know¦ledge is too wonderful forme (O God) I cannot attain unto it: for of such Know∣ledge doth the Prophet David there speak, (viz.) of the Knowledge of Future Cogi∣tations, saying, thou knowest my thoughts afar of; not such as there alrea∣dy are, but such as shall be hereafter, nor
such as shall be, but such as may not be here∣after also. Now the heart of Man is deep and un∣searchable (profundum & inscrutabile, saith the Steptuagint) and who can know it? It is answered, I the Lord which search the heart and trie the Reins; this makes the Psalmist crie out; such knowledge is too wonderfull for me. If we but cast in our mind the number of all mankind that have been since the Crea∣tion of the World living upon the face of the Earth, and add thereto the num∣ber of those that are, with those that shall be conversant upon the Earth before the Con∣summation of this Universe, and we shall find they will not fall within the number of Arithmetick; Millions of Millions, and ten thousand times ten thousand are not the one half of them. Let us withall cast in our mind, the several various thoughts and de∣sires of the heart which this day and night hath passed us, thee and me, much less the thoughts of every mans particular heart since the beginning of the World throughout the whole course of his life; we are not able to re∣count them; yet (such is the infiniteness of his Wisdom and Knowledge) that
God in the Book of his Remembrance hath the number of all, with the names of every one that hath been, or now are, from the be∣ginning of the World to this very instant, with a Register of all, and every one of their Thoughts, Words, and Actions, of what Na∣ture soever, or how secretly soever commit∣ted; nor onely so, but every mans thoughts and imaginations of heart that shall be, nay more, every thought that may be (though it never be) fall within the compass and comprehension of this infinit knowledge of God; the thoughts which are not in thy heart (O my Soul) but furthest from thee, nay and against thy mind as loathsom to re∣tain, are known to God. It was not in Hasaels heart to kill his Master, to take the strong holds of the Chil∣dren of Israel and set them on fire, to slay the young men with the sword, to dash their Children, & rip up their women with child; when he answered the Prophet, What? is thy Servant a dog, that he should do these great things? nor was it in Peters heart, (he was not guilty of such dissimula∣tion) to deny his Master when he answered our Saviour, though all should forsake thee, yet would not I; and again, though I should die with thee, yet will not I deny thee, yet these were fore∣told,
and so came to pass as they were foretold, by that admirable Knowledge of him, who searching the hearts, and trying the reines, seeth not as Man seeth, but knoweth the thoughts afar off, even such as are not, yea and depend upon the Will of Man, whe∣ther ever they spall be or not; Such Knowledge is too wonder∣ful for thee (O my Soul) thou canst not attain unto it.
Naural and Divine CONTEMPLATIONS Of the Passions and Faculties Of the Soul of Man; In Three Bookes. THE THIRD BOOK. The Theological part. CHAP. I. BUT oh the Trump hath sounded; the Earth hath o∣pened her Womb, those that slept are awaked, the bodies of the dead are raised to life, and blessed are they that have died in the Lord. No longer now shall we view the Souls of those departed in their Meta∣physical
shapes and abstracted Forms, e∣very form to its Individual determinate matter, and every Soul to its Numerical body; the Soul hath quickned and revi∣ved the Body; the Body is again reunited to the Soul in an Indissoluble Conjugal knot, in an everlasting wedlock. But since Corruption cannot Inherit Incorruption, or Souls Immortal ever dwell in trunks of clay and dust, there∣fore hath the Body cast off her old Gar∣ments, and changed her attire: she was sown a Natural body, she is raised a Spi∣ritual body; sown in weakness, but rai∣sed in Power; in dishonor, but raised in Glory; sowen in Corruption, but raised in Incorruption, that she may for ever dwell with the Incorruptible Soul in U∣nity. There are no jarrings twixt Soul and Body here as in the dayes of their Pil∣grimage upon Earth, the flesh lusting a∣gainst the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; she who was earst Rebellious, is now Obse quious to the Dictates of the Soul; now is she wholly subject to the will of her Lord, yielding obeysance and obedience with admirable Agility and Celerity of motion; now not the least Ponderosity of a Massie substance or
Natural body to foreslow her motion appears any more, but the Perpensility of a Caelestial and Spiritual body, mounted as it were on the wings and Plumes of a Cherub to expedite the Souls Injuncti∣ons; such Homage and obedience the Bo∣dy paies unto its Soul, that (as St Au∣gustine saith) ubi volet spiritus ibi protinus erit corpus, nec volet aliquid spiritus, quod nec spiritum nec corpus possit decere. 1. Hereupon is the body enfranchised of sundry Praerogatives and Immunities, which are altogether inconsistent with it in its Natural condition; whilst it was Elementary, its Natural motion ten∣ded downward according to the Nature of the Predominant Element; the ascen∣dent motion of a Physical body is Ex∣centrique and Irregular, which motion is Concentrique and Consonant to a bo∣dy glorified; solo voluntatis impetu, &c. at the beck and command of the glorious Soul is the body mounted from Earth to Heaven, whose Nature it is to be wholly subject to that glorified Spirit, from whose Redundancie the body likewise receives its Glorification. 2. The Humane body in the state of Nature, in a slow Progress marcheth for∣ward step by step, and that not without
some Earth or other solid body to tread or go on; whereupon the Earth is made a cause of our walking;Causa fine qua non. but in the state of Glory, most swiftly, and as it were in an instant, it moves from place to place, from one part of Heaven to a∣nother, abs{que} adminiculo, without the be∣nefit of Earth or other Element to im∣press the least Vestigias or footsteps of his treadings. 3. In the terrene estate the body is Opaque and Luskie, Dark and Pur∣blind; Beautified onely by the Addita∣ments of External colour; but the Spi∣ritual body is Diaphanous, transparent, transplendent, not like those lesser lights which onely appear in the night, but like the Sun at noon day in the Firmament of Heaven,Matthew 13.43. Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father; The Cōfulgurations of bodies glorifi'd are like the bright shining of the Sun, or compare we them to our Saviours glorious Body after his Exaltation, which no doubt exceeds all the glory can be expressed or conceived, when this transfiguration up∣on the Mount was so glorious, That his face did shine as the Sun,Matthew 17.2. and his Raiment was white as the light; yet such is the condition and state of these bodies which are fashioned
like unto his glorious Body, accor∣ding to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things unto him∣self.Phillip 3.21. Yet doth not this transcendent Glory superadded to the Humane body alter the Nature and Essence of the same, the same Humanity is retained as well after as before the Resurrection; the same bo∣dy that is laid in the dust, the self same body ariseth and ascends into glory; that body is resumed in the Resurrection which was assumed in the Conception, onely one to a Mortal, the other to an Immortal life, alterius gloriae sed ejusdem naturae, the glory is different, but the bodie's the same. The glorified bodies of Saints, and the glorious body of our ever blessed Savi∣our in Heaven, all of them of one Na∣ture and Substance, made up of Flesh, and Blood, and Bone, Nerves, Sinewes, Arteries, and what else conduceth to the perfection of a Humane body. To deny this is to run into the Heresie of Eutiches condemned in the several Councils of Constantinople and Chalcedon, who affirmed that the body of Christ was not of the same Nature with ours, and that ours also after the Resurrection
were not Palpable or Visible, but more subtle and slender than VVind or Air. But (as we have said) the same bo∣dy that is laid in the dust, the same ariseth and puts on Immortality and glory, a body of flesh is sown in disho∣nor, but the same body of flesh is raised in glory; Consonant hereto are the words of Job,Job. 19.25 26, 27. I know that thy Redeemer li∣veth, and that he shall stand at the latter day day upon the Earth; And though after my skinne wormes destroy this body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold, and not another, though my Reines be consumed within me; thus we read, and thus is our Creed, so is preached, and so is believed, for the Resurrection of the flesh is an Article of our Faith, a Funda∣mental point of that Religion the Church Catholick professeth, and that our Saviours body is of the same Sub∣stance is another Fundamental, Athana∣sius is plain, perfect God and perfect Man, Of a Reasonable Soul and Humane Flesh subsisting; yea Palpable flesh and Visible even after his Resurrection, our Savi∣ours words are full for it, behold (saith he) my hands and my feet, that it is I my self;
handle me and see, for a spirit hath not flesh and bones as you see me have. And therefore those words of the A∣postle (flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God) are to be understood of sinful lusts and corruptions of the flesh,1 Cor. 15.10. and not of the flesh and blood it self dis∣mantled of these. And as the substance of a Humane bo∣dy continues intire, so hath she her facul∣ties and qualities perfect (though not all) for in as much as the body is purged of sin and corruption, those qualities which argue corruption and infirmity must needs be perished also; absit labes (silicet corruptionis) assit effigies, assit motio, absit fatigatio, assit vescendi potestas, absit esu∣riendi necessitas, &c. Soft, soft, (O my Soul) dash not thy self on the Rock of Contention, be not prolix in Polemick discourses and points Controver∣sal, since thou art devoted to thy calmer Theoremes, and Diviner Specula∣tions. The case standing thus, that none have admittance to those glorious Mansions in the new Jerusalem, the City of God, but bodies purged from their filthy lusts and sin∣ful
corrption; bodies morigerous, submisse and pliant to Soul and Spirit; see then and lament the wretched estate of us Mortals upon Earth,An evil it is under the sun, an error pro∣ceeding from the ruler, folly set in great dig∣nity and the rich set in low place, ser∣vants on horseback and Prin∣ces walk∣ing as ser∣vants up∣on the Earth. Eccles. 10.5, 6 & 7. whose lives and conversations Diametrically oppose the glorified Saints in Heaven. Apame, was but Concubine to the great and mighty King Darius, yet was she seen sitting on his right hand, and taking the Crown from off his head, did set it upon her own, she also stroke the King with her left hand; Semblable to which is the rule and Dominion which Impetuous and Impla∣cable flesh usurpeth and excerciseth over the Souls of Mortal men in their Pilgrimage here below, leading them Captive to the Law of sin and death. This is that miserable Bondage under which the Sons of men in this Vale of ars do groan, from which Bondage of Corrupti∣on and body of sin, they wait with earnest expectation to be delivered into the glori∣ous liberty of the Sons of God; And not onely they but our selves also which have the first fruits of the Spirit; even we our selves groan within our selves waiting for the Adopti∣on, to wit, the redemption of our bodies; not that we should be found naked, and our bo∣bodies unclothed, but clothed upon; that Mortality might be swallowed up of life.
It is not a change of our bodies, but of our Raiment and Vestments which we do look for, a Crown of glory for a Crown of thornes, the Robes of Righteousness for the Raggs of Sin; This change must be inhoate here, though compleated hereafter, the Foundati∣on must be layed on Earth in Grace, but fi∣nished in Heaven in Glory, the Garments of the Old man laid aside, and the Garments of the New man put on; the lusts of the flesh mortified, the fruits of the Spirit quickned;Ephe. 4.22, 23, & 24. We must put off concerning the for∣mer conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceipt∣ful lusts; and be renewed in the Spi∣rit of our mind; and we must put on that new man which after God is crea∣ted in righteousness and true holiness, that we may henceforth serve in the newness of the Spirit and not in the oldness of the letter; For if we live af∣ter the flesh wee shall die, but if we through the Spirit do mortifie the deeds of the body, we shall live. Woe is me, that I am constrained to live in Mesech, to have my habita∣tion in the tents of Kedar, my Soul hath long dwelt with them that are Enemies to peace, they are daily fighting and troubling it, the Body with all its sinful
lusts rebel against my Soul, and when I la∣bour for Peace, they make them ready for Battel, they will not have her rule over them, whom thou (O Lord) hast made the Monarch and sole Empress of this little World, but attempt by continual Insurrecti∣ons and Intestine Wars to introduce an Ar∣bitrary Power over an Athenian and Popu∣lar Government For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant me (according to the riches of his glory) to be strengthned in the inward Man, in the spirit of my mind, by the might and Power of his Spirit; who rai∣sed up Jesus from the dead, that (as he died for my sin, and rose again for my justification, so) I may die to sin, and live unto righteous∣ness, and being buried with Christ into death by Baptism, may walk in newness of life, that being planted together in the likeness of his death, I may be also in the likness of his Re∣surrection; kowing this, that my old man is Crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth I should not sin; And though I live and walk in the flesh, yet that I may not war after, but a∣gainst the flesh (the weapons of my warfare being Spiritual and mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds) to the cast∣ing down of Imaginations and every high
thing that exalts it self against the Know∣ledge of God, and bringing into Captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, and having in a readiness to revenge all disobedi∣ence of the flesh against the Law of my mind, which is onely subject to the Law of God; Help me (O God) so to keep under my body and bring it into subjection, that I my self be no a castaway. Thy will (O Heavenly Father) be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, and as thou hast praepared an Heaven and fitted the body with all Obsequiousness to serve, and the Soul to rule and command with all just Authority and moderation; all this in the Resurrection of the body at the last day, when Soul and Body meet again in a glorified estate to Possess the Heavenly Mansions; so fit and and prepare them here, that whilst they are in this Earthly Taber∣nacle, all Schism being abandoned, all Re∣bellion Anathemaized, the heel may not kick against the body, or the foot tread upon the head, but (however it fareth in the body Politick) there may be such an orderly subjection in the body Natural, that my flesh may be subject, not Predominant to my Spirit, my Body unto my Soul, and both Soul and Body subject unto thee. O my God do thou thus set my foot over the
threshold of thy Heaven,Chap. 2. Book 3. put thou my Soul into this happy condition of an inchoate blessedness; so shall I cheerfully spend the remaindr of my daies in a joyful expecta∣tion of the full Consummation of my glo∣ry. Amen. Bish. Hall his Susurium cum Deo. CHAP. II. Of the Organs of the body, and the Ex∣ercise of the Sensitive faculties of the Soul by them in the state of glory. AS the appearance of the Bride new∣ly come from her Chamber in the daies of her Espousals, on the Solemni∣ty of her brideale and other Nuptial Rites, bedecked and adorned with all the Ornaments both of body and mind that may render her gratious, and A∣miable in the eyes of her Betrothed; or like the Kings Daughter all glorious within, and without in clothing of wrought Gold, brought into the Kings Palace attended on among the Hono∣rable VVomen by a Train of Virgins that be her fellows: Even such is the in∣ward
grace and outward Magnificence, Pomp and State of the body in the mor∣ning of her Resurrection and Ascension from the Chamber of death, to be Es∣poused again to the Soul in an everlast-VVedlock, the Bill of Divorcement be∣ing cancelled and Nullified by an Act of perpetual Oblivion. Her Soporiferous bed of rottenness she thenceforth lotheth and outrunneth; leaving behind her load of inward Corruption, all waywardness of mind, and frowardness of disposition; and her Troops of Natural Imperfection, Deaf∣ness, Dumbness, Blindless, Lameness, &c. such Sons of sorrow and servants of sin and perdition presume not to ap∣proach the marriage Chamber; all other her Companions in the flesh, that were faithful and serviceable to her, and in∣strumental to the Soul in the Acts of grace, are still her attendants, and are admitted into the Royal Palace, and invested with the Robes of Glory and Immortality, as a badge and livery of the glorified Soul, whose Servants and Ministers they are. Those Organical parts of the body in which the Soul was exercised, and without which it could not Operate
(in which respect the Soul as to such fa∣culties and Operations might be term∣ed Mortal) are revived with the body and useful to the Soul in their several Stations. I do not, I dare not here affirm that all the parts of the body do still remain Organicall after this life, so as the Soul may exercise all the Powers of her tri∣ple life, Vegetative, Sensitive, and In∣tellectual, as she did in her Natural and Physical state according to those several Organs in which the Faculties were resi∣ent and peculiarly seated; Nourishment Growth and Generation (the proper Effects of the Vegetative life) accom∣plish their ends in this life, whereunto when they have obtained, those Opera∣tions cease, and the Organs rest from that labour and imployment; but since the Senses are Operative in a glorified body, (for it's not deprived of Sense) I have no reason to think the Soul hath utterly rejected her manner of Operati∣on by bodily Organs, declining those old Servants as useless and incon∣sistent to such a glorified state; Eyes, Eares, Nose, Mouth, Palat, Hands, Feet, and all to be quite emancipated & freed from the service of the glorified body and Soul in their works of that kind, but
to believe the Senses External, and Sen∣ses Internal are Organical in Heaven as they were on Earth, and subservient to the Soul in their several stations & pla∣ces of residence as Eye, Ear, Nose, Palate, Nerves, Brain, by which the Soul doth exercise its several faculties of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, Touching, and the rest. The eye (the Noblest of the Exter∣nal Corporeal Organs) offers it self first to our consideration, which is not ob∣scurely proved by holy Writ, to be use∣full, and serviceable to those in the state of glory; for this the damned in Hell do so far enjoy, though to their tor∣ment and woe, to see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, and they themselves thrust out; But the Saints to their endless joy and com∣fort have the use of their eyes and sight to see and behold the Splendor and Beauty of their own bodies, being chan∣ged from vile to glorious, after the fashi∣on of Christs most glorious body which exceedeth the brightness of the Sun, as the Apostle witnesseth, Acts 26.13. What delight and pleasure must it needs be un∣to the Saints in Heaven to see every part of their body, Hands, Feet, and all issu∣ing forth such raies and beams of light,
sufficient to dispel all mists and dark∣ness from them, without further assist∣ance of Sun, Moon, Stars, or other Lu∣minaries? Nor is this Optick faculty of the Eye limited to it own body, so, as not to be of use to discern other Objects; for all the Saints and Servants of God whose bodies are likewise glorified, yea, and the glorious body of Christ himself, Christ the head with all his members, are all of them Visible Objects of this Sense; I know (saith holy Job) That my Redeemer lyveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day vpon the Earth—whom I shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold, and not another. It is not enough for the eye to behold its own glorifi'd Body shining as the Sun, but it beholdeth an infinite number of Suns together, no Parelia, nor yet in their Eclipss, but the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs, and the holy Church throughout all the World, whose bodies do not onely send forth a glorious shine, but every member, part and Organ of those bodies are be∣spangled with the like raies of glory and splendor, to the admiration of the beholder
Who doubts (saith Bishop Hall) that these eyes shall see the glorious man∣hood of our blessed Saviour advanced a∣bove all the Powers of Heaven? and if one body, why not more? if our elder brother, why no more of our Spiritual Fraternity? Certum est,Bellar. in praefati∣one ad li∣brum de ae∣terna feli∣citate. beatos homines om∣nes ab omnibus videri, & sciri, & inter se fa∣miliariter versari ut amicos & proximos, saith another Doctor; so then there is a Communion of Saints in Heaven as well as on Earth, a society of bodies Visible one to another. Besides, the Vision of new Jerusalem apperteins to the glorious Saints; to them it is given to see Jerusalem built up with Saphires and Emeruads, and pre∣tious Stones, the Walls, Towers, and Battlements with pure Gold, the Streets thereof paved with Beril, Carbuncle, and stones of Ophir, and the Citizens thereof singing Hallelujah, and saying, Praised be God who hath exalted it for ever; which was the Prophecie of Tobias, and of Isaaih; which also Saint John in his Revelation saw (together with a new Heaven and a new Earth) to wit, the Holy City, the new Jerusalem descend∣ing from God out of Heaven, having the glory of God, and her light was like un∣to
a stone most pretious, even like a Jasper stone, clear as Christal, it had no need of the of Sun nor the Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof, and the Nations of them that are saved do walk in the light of it. Yea we our selves (together with the whole Creation) do with earnest ex∣pectation wait for a Renovation and Melioration of the state of all things at the coming of the day of God, wherein the Heavens that now are, being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and wee shall (as it is promised) see new Hea∣vens and new Earth wherein dwelleth Righteousness, as the Apostle Peter hath it, 2 Peter 3. Chapter and verse. 10. What neither the eye here can see, nor the ear can hear, nor the heart of Man conceive in their Natural state, shall all be Object and Visible to the eye in the state of glory; so saith St. Bernard, Erit quando iam non dicetur, Audi filia & vide & inclina aurem tuam, sed leva potius oculos tuos & contemplare; quid? plane ea modo quae interim quidem etsi non videre adhuc & audire tamen credere potes; verum etiam quod sicut non videt oculus, sic nec auris adivit, nec in cor hominis ascendit, quod
praeparavit deus diligentibus se; nimirum tant a capiet oculus resurrectionis, quanta nec auaitus nec animus nunc captat; these eyes shall behold them and not anothers, therefore in another place he addeth, nec novos tibi instaurandos pates, sed tuos uti∣que restaurandos; not that they shall be of another Nature, but of another glorie. The Ear also is exercised with Va∣riety of sounds and voices, both Articu∣late and Inarticulate; the Organs of speech are as intire and perfect (yea more) in Heaven than on Earth; we may not conceive a deficiency in any part, there are, Guttur, Lingua, Palatum; Quatuor & dentes & duo labra simul. For the bodies of the glorified Saints are true, real, and lively bodies, and per∣fect in every member, even as our bless∣ed Saviour after his Resurrection was manifested to be, both by his Conversa∣tion and Confabulation with his Apost∣les and Disciples, speaking of many things perteining to the Kingdom of God; and by his hearing and answering of questions; and further from his voice from Heaven to St. Paul, and his reply to the Quaere of St. Paul. Such bodies and bodily Organs for Vocal musick have all the Saints to sing
& hear Halellujahs sung; a great voice was heard of much People in Heaven, saying and singing Hallelujah, in a most Melodi∣ous tune, the ditty or ballad whereof was, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God. There is a ful Quire of Saints, thousands of thou∣sands harmoniously canting the praises of the Lord, and as full a Chorus with the like affectionate melody again and again ecchoing and resounding the like praises and loving kindness of the Lord. And as the company of singers is great, so are the songs and Canticles va∣rious, though all of them Eucharistical; some in Memory of our Creation, others in Memory of our Redemption, some in triumph of the Holy Martyrs, some in joy of Converts and Penitents, others in Honor of Chastity and Virginity, and those who were not defiled with Women, the redeemed from amongst men being the first Fruits unto God and to the Lamb; others for the Victory of all Saints over the World, the Flesh and the Devil; over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the number of his Name; others for the judgements of God inflicted upon the
ungodly ones; There is sung the song of Moyses, and there is sung the song of the Lamb; yea there is sung the Psalm of Da∣vid, misericordias domini in aeternum, as St. Augustine affirmeth; & fortasse non solius dei laudes in civitate illa canentur, sed etiam tiumphi sanctorum martyrum, & confessorum praeconia, & virginum gloria, & sanctorum omnium contra diabolum victoriae cantibus ex∣tollentur; haec enim omnia in dei laudes & gloriam redundabunt; And all these songs and cantons cannot but be wonderous pleasant and delightsom to the ears of all the blessed and glorified Saints of God, for which Cause, the Ear is Orga∣nical and serviceable to the Soul and Body in their state of glory. In the next place consider we the Sense of Olfaction, and those sweet smel∣ing savours and Odors in the Nostrils of all the Saints; to shew that the body is not destitute of an Organ for the ex∣ercise of this Sensitive faculty of the Soul, no more than of the rest which are so useful to her in this state. For though the Scriptures afford not so pregnant proofs for the two Senses of Smelling and Tasting, as for the other three, yet may we not in reason con∣ceive a total Deprivation or Annihila∣tion
of them more than of the rest, nor without injury to the Humane Nature, (to which we attribute so great perfecti∣on and integrity of parts in that condi∣tion) debar her the freedom of exerci∣sing any of her faculties (other than what argue and favour Corruption) which so much tends to the perfection of a Humane body; ther's no Privation of Sight, of Hearing, or of Touching, why then of the other? are the Saints Hos∣mei, and are not Goglites? if the want of an eye or an ear be such a blemish and imperfection, as may not befall a glorifi∣ed body, is not the want of a nose as great a deformity? but Odors and Ol∣faction there is in this state, and this Sense hath its Objects of delight as well as the rest. Glorified bodie are Odoriferous bo∣dies, sending forth most fragrant sents; as they are glorious to the eye, so are they Aromatical to the smell. St. Hierom of the body of St. Hilarion affirmeth, after its ten months burial it was found lively fresh and whole, & tantis fragrans odoribus ut delibutum unguentis putaretur; the like doth St. Gregory witness of St. Servulus, saying, anima exeunte, tanta fra∣grantia odoris aspersa est, ut omnes qui illuc
aderant inaestimabili suavi ate replerentur; and a little after, quousque corpus ejus sepul∣turae traderent, ab eorum naribus odoris itlius fragrantia non recessi; and Bellarmine hence inferreth, the alive bodies of the Saints in Heaven must needs send forth most sweet perfumes, when their dead bodies are so Fragrant. But above all is the glorious body of our blessed Saviour, being perfumed with Mirrh, and Frankincense, with all powders of the Merchant, and whose Garments smell of Mirrh, Alloes, and Cassia; whereupon the Church, that Spiritual Spouse, cries unto Christ her Head and her Husband, melioria sunt ube∣ra tua vino, fragrantia unguentis optimis; o∣leum effusum nomen tuum; Ideo Adolescen∣tulaedi lexeruntte; trahe me post te, curremus in odorem unguentorum tuorum, thus saith St. Bernard. Now if the body of Christ be so Odoriferous, it is most propable the Saints are likewise so, the Members in a due proportion to their head, as in brightness, so in sweetness. The like probability is of the Sense of Tasting, that it should remain in the glorified estate; For if the Power of eat∣ing, then the Sense of tasting, but the first is granted, then why not the latter?
adest vescendi potestas, abest esuriendi necessi∣tas; and so resolves St. Augustine, non po∣testas sed egestas edendi corporibus refurgenti∣um aufertur;Lib, 13. de civit dei. and this puts the difference twixt the Humane Nature, Spiritual and Caelestial, and the Natural and Ter∣restrial; the one eates necessitatis, the o∣ther potestatis gratiâ; Christ after the Re∣surrection did eat and drink with his Disciples, yet not as his Disciples for refreshment and nourishment, non ali∣mentorum indigentiâ, sed ea qua hoc poterat po∣potestate; and therefore the Paraphrase of venerable Beda upon those words of our Saviour (have you here any thing to eat) is worthy our observation.Luk. 24 41. Aliter obsorbet aquam terra sitiens, aliter solis radius calens, illa indigentiâ, iste potentiâ, manducavit er∣go post resurrectionem non quasi cibo indigens, sed ut eo modo naturam corporis resurgentis astrueret; so glorified bodies may some∣times eat to shew their Power and Free∣dom, but never for hunger or satisfaction of a Natural Appetite or an empty Panch. And this Comestion is real and true, not a Fictitious and feigned eating of the Angels, as that of Raphaels; for the bo∣dies which Angels sometimes assume (being no Humane lively bodies) have
not the true and Real faculty of eating, though happily of chewing or grinding, and swallowing down into the interior parts of the body; for a true Comestion is accompanied with a gust or tast, which Sense continues to the glorified bodies, and hath its recreation and delight as well as the other faculties, though not in the Act of eating, which they seldom use; de sensu gustandi scribunt Theologi non usuros beatos cibis mortalibus, sed habituros ta∣men oblectationem aliquam in eo sensu ne su∣pervac aneus esse videatur; futuram tamen ob∣lectationem illam loco & statui beaterum & immortalium congruentem. Bellarmine de ae∣terna felicitate lib. 4. cap. 8. As for the Sense of Touching, there is no difference amongst Divines, nor in∣deed can be any doubt but that it hath its Operations in this blissful state; since the gloried bodies may be felt and touched as all other true and lively bo∣dies may, and as our blessed Saviours was after his Resurrection, as well Pal∣pable as Visible, not miraculously, but according to its own Nature; handle me (saith he) and see, for a Spirit hath no flesh and blood as you see me have. Thus much of the Senses Corporeal, External, and those parts of the body
which are Instrumental and serviceable in the state of glory to the Humane Na∣ture, as they were to her in her Natural condition, onely with these exceptions and limitations. 1. From hence is banisht all sensual lusts and carnal Concupisence, the Eye hath no lascivious looks, the Ear's infect∣ed with no blasphemous breath or im∣pious sound, nor this Sense deflowred with any adulterous touch; here is no lust or desire of generation, no respect of blood; they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; this grosser acquaintance and pleasure is for the Paradise of Turks, not the Heaven of Christians; here is as no mariage (save betwixt the Lamb and his Spouse the Church) so no Matrimonial affections 2. Banish we likewise from hence all Impatibility of Sense; sensus non fallitur nec laeditur circa proprium objectum; no ve∣hemencie of Object can destroy the Sense; in their Natural estate, their ob∣jects many times confound and wound them; too great a light may make a man blind, too great a sound may make him deaf, we may not long gaze upon the Sun without blemish to our eyes; other∣waies here, for the Senses are blessed
and glorious, and so made Impassible and Immortal; he who strengthens the Eyes of the Soul with such a measure of light and glory, that they may see God face to face, and yet not be dasled and confounded with his glory, doth also so confirm and strengthen the Eyes of the body, that without any hurt or damage to themselves, they may behold not one but infinite Suns and Illuminated bodies, though in themselves never so glorious. 3. All Acts of Necessity are hence ex∣cluded, the Soul doth not exercise her Sensitive Faculties Necessarily, but freely, and rules with the body and bo∣dily Organs when she pleaseth, and when she pleaseth the Soul rules alone; For she hath other waies of Operation out of the body more Excellent and No∣ble; the Senses are Secundary means for acquiring Knowledge, not the Primary; only subservient and at command of the Soul. In the Natural estate the Sensitive Knowledge precedes the Intellectual, nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuit in sense; and without Sense there is no in∣telligence. Not so in the Resurrection; the Soul knoweth all things as fully and
infallibly by Intuitive Vision and In∣ate Forms, at once, unico intuitu, by one single aspect, as by those various multi∣plyed Forms imprinted from sensible Objects under so many several notions and conceptions; the Understanding stands not need of an Eye, or an Ear, or o∣ther bodily Organ to evidence the truth of what it apprehendeth, it is not sub∣ject to Sense, but Sense to it, not the Soul to the Body, but the Body to the Soul; for the Nature of a glorified body is to be Spiritual, that is, subject to the Spirit, not that it hath no flesh and bones, but that it is so subject to the Spi∣rit, that at the beck and command there∣of, without any pains and difficultie, it moves most swiftly, Ascending, De∣scending, Coming, Going, and through every place penetrating, as if it were not a body but a Spirit, Ad hoc autem quod sit omnino corpus subjectum spiritui requiritur, quod omnis actio corporis subdatur spiritus vo∣lunati (saith Aquinas) and therefore it is in the Power of the Soul to see or hear, or the like, to use or not to use these bo∣dily Organs, when and as often as she pleaseth, without which in her Na∣tural condition she could not Operate
or reduce all her Faculties into Act. This is the state of that Church, that part of Christs Body triumphant, whose Or∣gans and Senses are Spiritualiz'd, to whom that part of Christs Church militant here doth hold resemblance, the like Analogy and proportion bearing every Member one to another, they on Earth to those in Hea∣ven, as every one beareth to Christ the H ad; as the Spiritual Body in Heaven is Organiz'd, so is the Organical Body on Earth Spiritualiz'd, and hath five Spiritual Senses, Senses refreshed with Spiritual Ob∣jects. This I can assure thee (O my Soul) being a Member of that Mystical Body whereof Christ is the Head, thou art entitled to, yea, and refreshed with such Sensitive Objects as the Saints in Heaven are refreshed and de∣lighted with; Objects for thy Eye, thy Ear, thy Nose, thy Palat, thy Hand, as Form, Sound, Odor, Sapor, Spissitude; but these made Spiritual, and are so to be received; I speak of Christ in the Eucharist, who is made the Object of every Sense, that the ex∣cellencie of the Knowledge of Christ may more fully be evidenced to us from him of whose fulness we all receive; Christ is Visi∣ble
to the Eye, Audible to the Ear, Sweet and fragrant to the Smel, Savory to the Tast; to the Nose, Palat, Hand sensible; he is meat to the hungry, and drink to the thirstie; Angels food, and mans repast. Christ in the Sacrament is the Object of our Eyes, and as real y present here as in Heaven, and is as really exhibited to us, who spiritually dis∣cern him though under other Forms; & hic & ibi veritas, sed hic palliata, ibi ma∣nifesta, he is palliated here, but unveiled in Heaven; here we see him darkly through the instrument of Faith, for we walk by Faith, and not by sight; his real presence is believed, our Corporal Eyes do not behold him otherwaies than veiled under those out∣ward signes of bread and wine; the eys of our Body seeth the signes, the Eye of our Faith the thing signified, aliud latet, aliud pa∣tet, what we see is Bread and Wine, what we believe is the Body and Blood of Christ; what our Souls cannot reach with Corporal Eyes, it may discern by an Eye of Faith; Faith is a director of the Soul, or prospective to the Eyes to bring to their sight such things as are not discernable without in this Vale of tears; through the prospect of Faith is Christ Visible to us, though the Saints in Heaven have a cleaer Viion of him, seeing him face to face  as they are seen. This is but a glimpse
of that beatifical Vision the glorified bodies have of Christ; here per aenigma, there facie revelata, here veiled, there reveal∣ed; unde preciosior dicitur faciei visio, quam speculi frequens imaginatio; non enim pari omnino jucunditate su∣mitur cortex sacramenti & medulla frumenti, fides & species, memoria & praesentia, aeternitas & tempus, specu∣lum & vultus, imago Dei & forma servi? My Soul is athirst after Christ my Savi∣our, O when shall I come and appear before him? Grant (holy Jesu) I may so behold thee (though veiled) here, that when this earthly tabernacle shall be dissolved, when it shall turn to the Lord, and be clothed upon with our horse of immortality and glory, which is from heaven, the veil which to this day is upon my heart may be taken away, and I may with open face behold the glory of my Lord, being changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Amen. Christ in the blessed Eucharist is the object of our Ears, speaking unto our hearts, both in secret whisperings, and in shriller notes, and holds a familiar conference with us; he is an audible Voice, and a speaking Word, the sound whereof is gone to the ends of the
world, that Word which in the beginning was with God, and was God, but was made Flesh and dwelt among us; God made Man, the Son of God the Son of Man, unicus pa∣tris, filius hominis, verbum quippe caro factum; this Word incarnate is that Bread of God which cometh down from Hea∣ven, and giveth life unto the World. This Word is not onely audible to the Ear, but penetrable to the Heart, piercing like a two-edged sword, to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the marrow and the joynts. Those reverend thoughts and medi∣tations we have of Christ (especially in this Sacrament) are nothing else but so many words of his spoken to our Soules; though all our cogitations are not Christs locutions, nor all his communications our meditations, cum enim mala in corde versamus nostra cogitatio est, si bona, Dei sermo est; illa cor nostrum dicit, haec audit; our good thoughts are Christs words, our e∣vill thoughts are our own words: The fool hath sayd in his heart there is no God, there's our own words; The Lord speak∣eth peace unto his people, those are Christ's; one is spoke from the heart, the other is to the heart. Our own words again are twofold, or have two wayes of proceeding, one from Natures
corruption, another from Satans suggestion; but of all these bitter fruits and sinfull ef∣fects proceeding from within us, it is a hard matter to assign a proper cause and author, to demonstrate which are the works of the Devill, and which be the fruites of the Flesh; we are not able so exactly to distinguish in∣ter morbum mentis, & morsum ser∣pentis; inter malum innatum, & ma∣lum seminatum; inter partum cordis, & seminarium hostis; only we may know they both are evill, and proceed from evill; both in the heart, though not both from the heart; this I know most assuredly, though which to ascribe to my heart, which to Satan, I know not. But for my good thoughts (since all our sufficiency is from God) I doe undoubtedly be∣lieve they are the very words of that very Word, verba verbi Dei, written in my heart by the finger of his blessed Spirit: This is that Word which is not sonans onely, but penetrans, non loquax sed efficax, non obstrepens auribus sed blandiens affectibus: Happy art thou (O my Soul) if when thy God calleth, thou answerest with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth; or with holy David repliest, I will hear what the Lord my God will say unto me.
Christ is the object of our Sense of Olfa∣ction, snding forth most sweet perfumes; he is sweet in his Name, Christ Jesus; Christ (i. e.) Anninted, so much the name imports; Because of the savour of thy good ointments, thy name is as oint∣ment poured forth; he is sweet in his name Iesus, a Saviour; there is no other name given under heaven whereby we shall be saved; neither is there any malady of Mind, any disease of the Soul, which this precious balm and ointment cannot cure; Erit tibi sapor & odor in medicinam salubrem morbos si qui fuerint repel∣lentem, venturosque caventem: He is sweet and pleasant to God the Fath r; he is his beloved Son in whom he is well pleased; and the smell of his Son is like the smell of a field whom the Lord hath blessed; he is that Lamb slain from the foundaions of the world, whose bdy and blood being offered as an Holocaust unto God the Father, smelleth a sweet smelling sacrifise unto him; and from whom issueth unto his Spouse the Church, to every particular Member, and to every worthy Communicant partaking of his Body and Blood, such streams of precious ointment, and oyl of the Holy Ghost, run∣ing down not onely to the beard of Aaron, that is (as St Bernard expounds it) to the
Apostles and Ministers of Christ, but unto the very skirts of his clothing, that is, to the meanest of his Members, in infima mem∣bra Ecclesiae, quae est tanquam Christi vestimentum; that even these vile bodies and soules being offered an oblation, smell also a sweet-smelling sacrifise, to God through Christ holy and acceptable; we are anointed with oyl of gladness, but Christ with holy oyl, and oyl of gladness above all his fellows. It falls first upon Christ the Head, so runs down to his beard, so descends to the skirts of his garments, the meanest member in hi Church; the smell of Christs garment is like the smel of Lebanon; but the smel of his ointments super omnia aromata, is better than all spices. Christ is the object of our Spiritual Tast, and that food of Saints and Angels in Heaven, of which it hath pleased God to give a tast to his Saints on earth, feeding them with the bread of Heaven, the food of life which comes from Heaven, that Heavenly Manna and food of Angels the Prophet speaks of, more pleasant and sweet to the tast than honney or the honney-comb. But that we might eat Angels food Christ was Incarnate, the Word was made Flesh, so all are partakers of Christ, the Saints on
Earth, as well as Saints and Angels in Hea∣ven, onely with this difference, Comedunt Angeli verbum de Deo natum, come∣dunt homines verbum faenum factum; pane suo vivunt Angeli in caelis & beati sunt, faeno suo vivunt homines in terris & sancti sunt. Yet doth not every man tast of the food that partakes of the outward Elements, the Natural man hath no sense or tast, no fruit and benefit of this Sacrament, because it is spiritually discerned; it is food eternal, not temporal, spiritual, not corporal; for super∣natural nourishment unto Eternal life, not for physical and natural, which accomplish∣eth its ends in this life; pereat hic physi∣cale nutrimentum, cibis iste non ven∣tris, sed mentis; we feed on him in our heart by Faith and Thanksgiving. My Body is nourished with the outward Elements of Bread and Wine, my Soul is 2nourished with the inward Graces, the Body and Blood of Christ; not with the Bread of Affliction, the corn arising from the earth; but with Consolatory bread, and Angels food, that true Bread descending from Hea∣ven; nor with the Wine of the Grapes of Go∣morrha, but of the true Vine Christ Iesus, the Lamb, the Head, and Husband of the
Church, which at the heavenly Mariage shall be drunk new in the kingdome of Heaven. There we drink not of this Wine made of water (as at the Mariage in Cana) but ex botro illo magno terrae promissionis, qui interim in vecte portatur dum se∣cundùm carnem novimus Christū, & hunc crucifixum; which we drink at the Lords table in types & signs here, which are mortal and perishing; but in Heaven at that great Supper of the Lord, really, and truly, immortal, and incorruptible, enduring to eternal life. For in Heaven is no labouring for the meat which perisheth; the Saints glorified use not corruptible food; their food is spiritual and immortal, fitting and suitable to that state of glory; and their tast is accordingly, no carnal rellish, no earthly savour; nil quippe in his carnale sapit, nil seculare, nil vanum; sed spiritus veritatis & caelestis sapientia est, cu∣jus in utraque suavitas praeliba∣tur. He that cometh to the Lords Supper in his old garments, hath not this spiritual re∣lish, nor shall he be thought worthy to be par∣taker of that great Banquet, the Supper of the Lamb, in Heaven, or tast of that food; as wel those that come here unworthily, as those that
refuse to come though invited, shall all be excluded hereafter, so saith the Lord of the Feast, I say unto you, none of those men who were called shall tast of my supper: And to the unworthy person it is sayd also, Friend, how camest thou hi∣ther not having thy Wedding-gar∣ment? take him, &c. And lastly, Christ is the object of our sense of Touching, we receive him into our hands, we take him into our mouthes, we feed on him in our hearts, we dwell in him, and he in us; so to every sense is Christ spi∣ritually sensible, tangible by the hand, as vi∣sible to the eye, prae manibus, as he is prae oculis.
CHAP. III. Of the Knowledge of the Soul by Intuitive Intellection, or Beatifical Vision. Chap. 3. Book 3. HItherto of the knowledge fetcht from External objects by the means of outward senses, the Internall are not without their use (viz.) Phantasie and Memory; but of these sufficient hath been said already. Nor yet shall we further treat of that Internall intellectuall knowledge which the humane soul in its Glorified estate hath of all Material & Immaterial crea∣ted substances (viz.) of Angels, and abstracted Forms, & other inferior crea∣tures, which are represented to its know∣ledge per speciem, by an innate form and similitude, chiefly and primarily in their universal natures, secundarily in their individuals in one single aspect and in∣tuition, which manner of knowledge is natural and essential to Spirits, and Es∣sences intellectual; for this hath also been elswhere handled. But here we shall principally insist up∣on
that Science of the Soul, or rather Sa∣pience which consists in the sole intuitive Intellection, or Beatifical Vision of the divine Essence and Nature of God him∣self, which is not per aenigma, as in this life, but facie revelata, not in his back parts onely, but the infinite Essence and Majesty, the very quiddity and being of the great Iehovah, as he is in himself (so St. Iohn expresseth it) fully and clearly ma∣nifested. And the divine Sapience which comes by this Intuition or Intuitive Intellecti∣on surpasseth all other manner of know∣ledge whatsoever; this is not natural to any created Angelical Intellect; comes not by any strength of nature created by God into any finite being; nor can it stand with natural reason, how a finite capacity (for so are all created intelli∣gences) should perfectly and distinctly, clarè & perspicuè cognitione perfecta, & non confusa, apprehend, see, and know an in∣finite Essence as intensively Infinite; this is supra captum humanum, and exceeds all natural power. Yet above reason is beleeved (for so is the Faith of holy Church) that the blessed Saints and Angels in Heaven do clearly and fully see, and know God, do
behold him as he is in himself. The Mind and Intellect glorified sees, & the Will enjoyes God, its chiefest, and most desirable good, more fully, and more cer∣tainly, than any man here enjoyes any temporal estate. In this Intuitive Vision, and Fruition of God, is Mans eternal felicity, his bea∣titude, his summum bonum seated; here comes in the fulness of the Promises, here's the consummation of our Hopes, this is the final intrinsical end of Mans Creation, to see God clearly, and to en∣joy him fully; our Beatitude consists in this, and is the same beatitude where∣with God himself is blessed; God is most blessed, and therefore most blessed because he alwayes beholds himself as he is, and eternally enjoys himself; he hath made us partakers in hope of the same chiefest good, to be like him in the same felicity, together with all the glorious Saints and Angels, so saith the Apostle, We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. There were certain Hereticks, Arme∣nians, and others (but condemned of old by several Decrees and Councils) who held it imposible for any created Intel∣lect, by any power whatsoever, clearly
to see God; and therefore they held fur∣ther, the Beatitude which is promised by God, and waited for by us, to consist, non in familiari illo quem speramus divine naturae intuitu, sed cujusdam creati fulgoris ab ea manantis. And indeed in the eye of Reason it is impossible, & unto Nature altogether re∣pugnant, that any created Intellect, by any strength of it own, should perfectly know the infinite Godhead; but what is impossible with men, is notwithstand∣ing possible with God; Multa fiei pos∣sunt virtute divina, quae naturae creatae viri∣bus fieri non possunt, saith Suarez; nam etsi Deus à nullo intellectu creato clarè cognosci potest viribus naturae, videri tamen clarè, & perspicuè poest ab iis quorum mentes divina bonitas supra naturae modum illustraverit, & ad quandam divinae nature participationem evexerit (saith Fonseca.) This is done by a supernatural power; & fide tenemus quod ratione improbamus. Though all power is not excluded from the nature of created Intellection; for an Obediential power is founded in the nature of the Reasonable Soul, even unto acts of divine and supernatural quality, to those supernatural habits of Faith, Hope, Charity, &c. not Acquisite
by any intrinsical power of it own, but infused by God, drawn out of the power of the Soul, eductione supernaturali, ad quam non requiritur ex parte subjecti potentia na∣turalis receptiva, sed obedientialis sufficit; which obediential power is founded in the nature of the Soul,Suarez tom. 1 disp. 15. sect. 2.9. and in that re∣spect is natural and essential to it: In which sense Aquinas is to be understood, saying,1.2. q. 113. art. 1. Rationalis anima naturaliter est capax gratiae; and in another place, ha∣bilitas animae ad gratiam consequitur natu∣ram ejus, 1 parte, q. 48. art. 4. And in the same sense St. Augustine de Praedest. sanct. cap. 5. Posse habere fidem & charitatem naturae est fidelium. And in this sense as Grace, so Glory is seated, and is to be found in the Rea∣sonable Soul; the Soul is capable of Grace, there is a capacity also in the In∣tellect to the light of glory, the clear vision of God, the full enjoyment of him, though not a Natural, properly so call∣ed, yet an Obediential, or a Non-repug∣nant faculty; which power and virtue is not to be found in any other creatures below man. Yet is not this ful Intuition and Fru∣ition of the Divine Essence a compre∣hension of his Infinitie; for it is one thing
to have a quidditative knowledge of any substance, another to comprehend it; and therefore though the Soules of the blessed in heaven have this superna∣tural endowment, fully and clearly to behold God; yet is it not given to any created Intellect fully to comprehend him, because none can un∣derstand or perceive his infinite power, or attain to the knowledge of all those infinite number of things possible to the making of which his power doth ex∣tend. To know all the Individual creatures possible to be made (omnia quomodocunque possibilia) which are infinite; or to know but all the thoughts and cogitations of every mans heart which shall, or may be, is onely proper to God, and is not com∣municable to any created Intellection of Saint or Angel whatsoever; wherefore though Created Intellect by divine as∣sistance is able clearly and fully to appre∣hend the divine nature, as it is in it self, and that all things (any way possible to be) necessarily and naturally are in God; yet are not all things altogether known which are in his divine Essence; quia cog∣nitio omnium omnino quae à deo effici possunt, dari non potest sine comprehensione divinae es∣sentiae.
Ad argu∣mentum quod deus ut speculum est & quod omnia quae fieri possunt in eo re∣splendet, re∣spondet, Tho. per 1. q. 12. a. 8. ad 2. quod non est ne∣cessarium quod videns speculum omnia in speculo vi∣deat nis speculū vi∣su suo com∣prehendat nemo autē deum cum∣prebendit. Of the divine Essence there is a full Intuitive knowledge, which being fully seen, begets the like knowledge of all created beings, all actual existencies of Men, Angels, &c. of their natures, dif∣ferences, properties, powers, and opera∣tions, which are all in him, and flow from him. But of all beings possible only, which have no real and actual Existence (omnia omnino) all of these alltogether cannot be seen by any created Intellect, by any intuitive Vision or Intellection; for such is (as hath been said) onely proper to God, being both a quidditative and a comprehensive knowledg also; & is that perfection of infinite knowledge, than which a perfecter cannot be conceived, which to ascribe to any creature is such an implication of contradiction as falls not within the compass of Gods Omni∣potency. But pass we by the knowledge of all other Existences, and proceed in the de∣claration of that knowledge of God himself which comes by Intuitive Intel∣lection, which for the excellency of its object is termed Sapience:3 ibs 3. dis. 5. b. Aquinas puts this difference 'twixt Science, Intelli∣gence,
and Sapience (viz.) that Science and Intelligence relate to the creatures, and hath them for object, but Sapience onely looks upon God, and in that ob∣ject is delighted; Scientia valet ad rerum temporalium rectam administrationem, & ad bonam inter malos conversationem; intelligen∣tia vero ad creatoris & creaturarum invisibili∣um speculationem; sapientia vero ad solius aeternae beatitudinis contemplationem & de∣lectationem. In this knowledge is all our bliss and joy, the greatest felicity that Man is ca∣pable of, for according to the excellency of our knowledge is the greatness of our happiness and delight ever; now the ex∣cellency of this divine Sapience is mani∣fested, First, by the Faculty and Power. Secondly, by the Object suted to that Power. Thirdly, by the Union of the Object with the Power. And lastly by the Means, Instrument, or Organ of this Union of the Object with the Power. First, the Power and Faculty of Know∣ledge is the Intellect or Mind, which is far more pure, noble, high, and lively,
and therefore more apt for knowledge than any or all of the Senses. Secondly, the Object is God, a divine Essence, an infinite Being, the high∣est, and excellentest of all objects either of Body or Mind, because he is summum bonum, omne bonum, infinitum bonum, Truth it self, and Goodness it self. Thirdly, the Union of the Intellect with God in this beatifical Vision is an Union so near and close, ut essentia Dei totam mentem videntis penetret & mens ipsa in ipsum Deum quasi in mare magnum tota mergatur & transformetur. Bellar. de aeterna felicitat. lib. 4. cap 2. Fourthly, the way and means where∣by God is thus united to the Under∣derstanding, to this Intuitive Intellecti∣on, is per lumen gloriae, by this is God con∣veighed to the soules of the blessed, and to Angelical spirits, and made one with them. In this life the Eye of Reason is dark and purblind, and cannot behold God but by the light of Faith, which is but obscurely, per aenigma; hereafter the eys of our understanding are opened to see God without this light of Faith, but not by its own intellectual light, natu∣ral
and created; nor by the light of Faith, though it be supernatural; but by a light of Glory unexpressibly super∣natural; in a peculiar way and manner flowing from the very Essence of God as a peerless piece of his own uncreated Glory; Lumen gloriae, quod Theologi dicunt infundi beatis, sicut nulli creaturae esse potest connaturale, ita peculiari quodam modo & ra∣tione ab essentia Dei fluit tanquam singula∣ris participatio increati luminis ejus. This light of Glory as it is the meanes and in∣strument of conveighing the Object to the Soul, the divine Essence to the Mind and Intellect, hath God for its proper Object, and therefore works not as an Organ or Instrument of any created Intelligence to which it is commensu∣rate and adequate, but of an increate and independent Intelligence as a pro∣per instrument of God. And now (O my Soul) art thou come to the Mountain of Nebo, to the top of Pisgha, where though thou maist (though afar off) take a view of the pro∣mised Land, having travelled through the planes of Moab, from the deserts of Ara∣bia, and Wilderness of Zin; from the Rudi∣ments
of Philosophie, to the Mysteries of Divinity; thy burblind eason by the con∣duct of Faith is in some measure raised to a Revelation and Vision of that Eternal Be∣atitude, which Naturally thou desirest. First then, thy Science of this was Phi∣losophical, drawn from the light of Nature; Reason teacheth thou art Immortal, and ca∣pable of everlasting Felicity, which consists in the Vision and Contemplation of God thy chiefest good, and hast an Innate concreate desire thereto; And although the principles of Rational Knowledge are for the most part per se nota, so known by their own light as may force an assent; yet in as much as God who is thy summum bonum is a light in∣accessible, such a light as blear-eyed Reason can not behold; the full Knowledge of God is not by Rational principle, Natural Sci∣ence is not a scale large enough to contain, nor a yard long enough to measure out the true Vertue and full force of this divine Essence, but must resolve into principles of a higher nature; here thou must run from the principles of Philosophy to the maxims of Divinity; here thou must submit thy understanding to the rules and articles of Faith. Thy Science of God then is Theological,
drawn (not from the light of Nature, but) from the revelation of God in the Scrip∣tures; the principles of this Theological science are supernatural, and resolve not into the grounds of natural reason, but into the maxims of divine knowledge su∣pernatural; and of this we have just so much light, and no more, than God hath re∣vealed to us in the Scriptures; which is not so full a light as the prime principles of ra∣tional Sciences carry along with them to force reason upon the first sight to yeeld unto it; such as are these (viz.) Every whole is greater than a part of the whole; and again, The same thing cannot be, and not be, at one and the same time, and in one and the same respect. These carry a natural light in them, clear and evident, the Scriptures not so, yet such a light as is of force to breed Faith, though not to make a perfect Knowledge; for though it be life eternal to know God,John 17. and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent, yet this knowledge is no more than a belief; since God requires not a demonstrative knowledge of him here, but our Faith in him, and such a knowledge as may fit that, we walk by faith, and not by sight, or perfect knowledge; for Man having sinned
by pride, God thought it fittest to humble him at the very root of the tree of knowledge, and make him deny his understanding, and submit to Faith, or hazard his hap∣pinesse. Faith then is a Christians rule, and ground of Science; now the evidence of Faith is not so clear as that of Reason, tum ratione objecti, tum ratione sub∣jecti. First, Ratione objecti, God; Faith is the evidence of things not seen. Secondly, Ratione subjecti, the Subject that sees, it is but in aegnimate, in a glass, or dark speech. Moreover, Faith is an act of the Will primarily and chiefly, and not of the Understanding. It is not in this Theo∣logical Science as in other Sciences, where voluntas sequitur dictamen intellec∣tus, but contrariwise, intellectus sequitur arbitrium voluntatis. For Faith is a mixt act of the Will and Understanding, and the Will first inclines the Understanding to yeeld full approbation to that whereof it sees not full proof. Credere enim est actus intellectus vero assentientis, productus ex voluntatis imperio.In sent. d. 23. q. 2. a. 1. Tho. 2.2. q. 2. a. 2. ad 3 Biel. And again, Intellectus credentis de∣terminatur ad unum, non per ratio∣nem,
sed per voluntatem. And Sta∣pleton contra Whittaker. saith, Fides actus est non solius intellectus, sed e∣tiam voluntatis quae cogi non potest;Triplic. contra Whittak. cap. 6. p. 64 imo magis voluntatis quam intel∣lectus quatenus illa operationis prin∣cipium est, & assensum (qui propriè actus fidei est) sola elicit; nec ab in∣tellectu voluntas, sed à voluntate in∣tellectus in actu fidei determinatur. And though the principles of Faith (be∣ing concealed from our view, and foulded up in the un-revealed counsell of God) ap∣pear not so evident and manifest unto us as those of Reason, yet they are in them∣selves much more sure and infallible than they; for they proceed immediatly from God that heavenly Wisdom, which being the fountain and original of ours, must needs infinitely precede ours both in nature and excellency: And therefore, though we be far unable to reach the order of their dedu∣ctions, nor can in this life come to the vision of them, yet we yeeld as full and firm con∣sent, not only to the articles, but to all the things rightly deduced from them, as we doe to the most evident principles of natural reason; so that thou mayst justly say, thy Faith is stronger than thy Reason or Know∣ledge
is, because it goes higher, and so upon a safer principle than thy Reason or Know∣ledge can in this life attain unto. Hoc in∣telligendum est, ut scientia certior sit certitudine evidentiae, fides vero cer∣tior firmitate adhaesionis; majus lumen in scientia, majus robur in fide, saith Biel in 3 sent. d. 23. q. 3 a. 1. Thus much and more maist thou find couched, and ex∣cellently handled by the most reverend Fa∣ther in God, William Lord Arch-bishop of Canterbury, in his book against Fisher, pag. 16. And for certainty and assurance in this kind, Faith doth not only exceed all certainty that can proceed from any natural Science be it never so demonstrative, but in a manner equals the very knowledge by Intuitive Visi∣on in the world to come. St Bernard makes it good too, in sermonibus Domini Gil∣leberti super Cantica Canticorum, cap. 3. Intelligentia quidem etsi fidem ex∣cedit, non tamen aliud contuetur quam quod fide continetur; in intelli∣gentia quam in fide non major certi∣tudo inest sed serenitas; neutra vel errat vel haesitat, ubi vel error vel haesi∣tatio est, intelligentia non est, ubi haesi∣tatio est fides non est; et si fides admit∣tere
posse videtur errorem, non est ve∣ra nec Catholica fides, sed erronea credulitas. Thus are Reason, Faith and Vision instru∣mental and necessary one for another; with∣out Reason no Faith, without Faith no Vi∣sion; and this is all the difference amongst them, 'tis St Bernards still, and exquisitely done, Fides (ut sic dicam) veritatem rectam tenet & possidet, Intelligentia revelatam & nudam contuetur, Ratio conatur revelare, ratio inter fidem in∣telligentiamque discurrens, ad illam se erigit, sed ista regit; ratio plus ali∣quid quam credere vult; quid aliud? conspicere; aliud est credere, aliud est cernere; non tamen aliud quam quod fide concipit conspicere conatur: et si nondum sincerè videre potest, qui∣busdam tamen accommodatis experi∣mentis conjicere tentat, quae jam soli∣da fide concepit; ratio supra fidem conatur, fide tamen nititur, fide cohi∣betur; in primo devota est, in secun∣do prudens, in tertio sobria: & (ut sic dicam) fides tenet, tuetur ratio, in∣telligentia intuetur: bonus iste cir∣cuitus in quo mens rationis ductu per∣vestigando procedit, sed à fide non re∣cedit,
instructa à fide & restricta ad fidem. Thus have I shewed thee (O my Soul) thy spiritual progress, in the search of thy Felici∣ty; this is the circuit and round of the Soul in its Military march to the heavenly Jeru∣salem, in the search of him who is the dear∣ly beloved of my Soul; these are the streets it compasseth about; bonus quidem ratio∣nis circuitus, a happy circuit and progress of the Soul doubtless, when the Soul prose∣cutes its felicity by rational disquisition; and this search too is bounded and limited by the rules of Faith, walking from Faith to Faith, or from Faith to Vision and Contemplation, till it come to the full fruition of what it so much desireth and loveth. And now having brought thee to thy journeys end, to thy harbour and haven of joy and bliss, I will here sing a Requiem to my soul, a nunc dimittis to my Spirit; Lord now lettest thou thy servant de∣part in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. And since the way to this beatitude lies by the gates of Death, that there must be a se∣paration of Soul and Body, before there be a full Vision and Fruition; I doe here desire to set this little house in order, and to make
this my last Will and Testament: where I be∣queath my Soul into the hands of God that gave it, and my Body to the grave in Christian buriall; Earth to Earth, Dust to Dust, Ashes to Ashes, in hope of a joyfull and glorious resurrection unto eternal life, through the merits of Christ my Saviour. Amen. FINIS.
