m395 e199_51 99859423 111503
THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE THE LORD KIMBOLTON HIS SPEECH In Parliament, Ian. 3. 1641: Concerning the Articles of High Treason exhibited against him, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hambden, Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigge Knight, and Mr. Strowde. By the Kings Majestie. London, Printed for Iohn Thomas, 1641.
THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Lord KIMBOLTON HIS SPEECH In Parliament, 3. Jan. 1641. con∣cerning the Articles of High Treason exhibited against his Lordship, Sir Ar∣thur Haslerigge, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hamb∣den, Mr. Hollis, and Mr. Strowde by his Majestie. Mr. Speaker, THere hath already been so much spo∣ken by the other Gentlemen con∣cerning this Accu∣sation of High Treason, even suf∣ficient as J conceive to cleere us all that are impeached, that J know not what to say more touching the same,
onely under favour give me leave to speake what J conceive of the cause of the procuring of this accusation of the authors that procured it, and of the effects which I perceive will follow vpon the same. Mr. Speaker it is not long since this Hono∣rable House accused of high Treason the Twelve Bishops for their illegall and Trayterous at∣tempt in their Petition and Protestation against the King and Parliament, these Gentlemen with my slfe and others having the persecution of that businesse and other charges of great Crimes against them committed to our trust, did vnani∣mously with one conseat follow the same, bring∣ing to a Period our debates and disputes concer∣ning their crimes what wee conceive they were guilty of vpon their severall charges, and what guilty for framing and preferring their Petition and Protestation to his Majesty, that they were guilty of misprision of Treason vpon their for∣mer accusations, and guilty of high Treason vp∣on this their last designes, & these our Votes and conclusions grounded and warranted not onely by the Common lawes of this land, but by divers presidents and Acts of Parliament we present to the whole house for consideration and confirma∣tion of the same, by a generall Vote with whom we againe agreed by our publique Votes, and thereupon they were impeached and committed, this J conceive provoked their malice against us, and was the principall cause of this their plot, in
drawing an Accusation against us for the same crime of Treason, thereby to make us seeme as vile as themselves, and to take away our Votes at their tryall. And thus J have joyned together both the cause and the Authors of this Accusa∣tion. The effects J conceive will be dangerous and cause great troubles in these Respects. I. Jn turning the Current of the Parliament proceedings against them upon us, by which de∣vise they may have further time to put in pra∣ctice their plots, and bring to perfection their purposes against the Parliament. II. That being busily imployed concerning this businesse in their disputes about breach of Pri∣viledge of Parliament, in illegall accusing the Members thereof, and drawing a Declaration to his Majesty concerning the same in appeasing him by shewing the fincerity and integrity of the Parliament towards his Majesty and other things and pertinent, thereunto. This High Court may lay aside these proceedings, and avert their purposes touching the Jrish affaires, where∣by the Rebellion there may increase, and forraine ayd brought to them to the vtter loosing of that Kingdome.
III. Many feares and troubles will arise in the Citizens of LONDON concerning this Accu∣sation of desperate and hellish Stratagems in a∣gitation, as well against them as the Parliament by dissolate and disaffected persons to the safety and security thereof, causing them to stand con∣tinually upon their guard of the Trayned Bands which will be to them a great charge and Mo∣lestation. IV. It will incourage ill affected Cavaliers and Commanders about the Court, to attempt any mischiefe against both Houses of Parliament or particular Members thereof, vpon the least op∣portunity that shall be offered them, thinking thereby they shall doe the King good service, which otherwise perchance they dare not adven∣ture to put in practise. V. It will provoke and stirre vp a dislike of these designes in the hearts of all his Majesties subjects, and disaffection to his Sacred person, cause great vproares and tumults of the Citi∣zens; yea, and J feare a generall insurrection
in this Kingdome, if not suddainely preven∣ted, which God forbid. And thus Mr. Speaker, having nothing more to say concerning these Articles, I humbly crave of this honorable house, that I may have expodition in my tryall upon the same, and that all things done by this wise Councell may tend to the honour and glory of Almighty God, the peace and safety of his Sa∣cred Majesty and all his Kingdomes, FINIS.
