P1720 E1043_9 99866965 119254
THE SPEECH AND CONFESSION OF Hugh Peters, Close Prisoner in the Tower of London; And His Horrible Expressions and Doctrine▪ when Our Glorious Soveraign was led to Martyrdome. With the manner how he was taken on Sunday Night last in Southwark; who to save himself, crept into bed to one Mrs. Peach a Quaker, which had lain in Child-bed two days. And afterwards escaped to the house of Mrs Mun, where he was taken, with divers pieces of Gold, and Silver Medals, sewed in his Skirts; And a strange Almanack taken out of his Pocket. London, Printed for George Horton, 165.
THE SPEECH AND CONFESSION OF Hugh Peters, Close Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON. IT hath seemed good to the Divine Providence, which we may truly call wonderful, so to over-rule of late, the Counsels of our former Oppressors, (who by strange success, and al∣most incredible dexteritie in villanie, had al∣most
involved both our Church and State in unavoidable ruine; grinding without compassion, these (once free) but at length wofully enthralled Nations, fastning on their neck, an Iron, uneasie yoak of servitude, making them (with Samp∣son) basely to grind, and abide captivity and curbing them with rigor, who before repined at, grew weary of, and re∣jected the milder Scepter, and so to ensnare them in their contrivances, that their Plots (like Potters Vessels) were broken upon the Wheel, nor produced any thing but con∣fusion and distraction to themselves together with unsetled∣nesse in the Nation; whence arose Discontent, losse of Trade, and Poverty; and by means of the last of these, the wasted Peoples Whisperings▪ Murmurings, and Repinings on all hands were so many and urgent, that the Master-builders of our new Babel by their own Jealousies, Misun∣derstandings, and Animosities, were in short time dispier∣sed hither and thither, through the good hand of God, bles∣sed be that happy Gale. What heght of fury, and desperate resolution was on their side, God knew, and took notice of, nor was it unknown to most of those, who desired, and prayed for such a composure, and settlement of af∣fairs, as we now see, through his great Goodnesse, & undeserved kindnsse to Us, vvho considering the preparations and contrivances to hinder vvhat We now happily enjoy, could not expect this redemp∣tion, but as a purchase, and vvith the losse of the lives of thousands, the shedding much blood, and exposing our hopes to extream hazard.
The oppressed City, and groaning Countreyes were resolved, either to shake off the Arbitrary Yok of Usurpation and Tyrannie, or to perish in the Attempt. On the other hand, the fatal Causers of our long-past Calamities, animated with guilt and despair, were resolved to make good their Ground, or ex∣pire like Cateline; that is, sell their life as dear as possible, and cover the place, they maintained fight∣ing in life, with their breathless Carkases after death; or like Zimry, rather than lose (by surren∣der) their Power and Estates, fire the whole Nation first, then se some Cities and Castles on flame over their Heads, and perish together. Yet it pleased the Lord of Hoasts, to dissipate their Armed Powers, frustrate their Designs, and leave the Ring-leaders, stript of all Succour, to the Scourge of Justice. It stood with the Honour and Wisdome of the Most High, to restrain the Rage and Fury of Man; to glorifie Himself, by delive∣ring up these great Midianitish Oppressors, insult∣ing Moabites, Philistim Lords, (with other their Confederates, who grew like Melons out of Dung∣hils) to the Divine Hand of Justice.
Amongst the rest, their Baalam-like Prophet and Southsayer Hugh Peters, is close prisoner in the To∣wer of London. Some difficulty there was in the discovery of him; but upon Intelligence, that he privily lurked about Southwark, two Messengers were sent on Friday last to apprehend him; And entring the house of Mr. Broad a Quaker, in St. Tho∣mas Parish, whose daughter then lay in, they search'd, but miss'd him, he being (according to his custom) crept▪ into bed to the young woman, where the Mes∣sengers modesty forbad their search, she having bin delivered bt two days before; And while they were searching at one Day a Cobler, Hugh the Fire∣brand escap'd from Childbed, leaving behind him his Cane with a Rapier in it, a Bible, and gray cloak. But on Sunday night they found him at one Mr. Muns in the Maze, who denyed himself to be Peters, and said his name was Thompson, threatning the Messengers with an Action at Law for offering to affirm he was Hugh Peters, and therefore refused to go with them, till at last (being assisted by the Con∣stable and others) they forced him; which he per∣ceiving, desired he might speak privatly with Mrs. Mun, which they denyed, unlesse he would speak in their hearing; after which he said, I will go, but I beg for the Lords sake that you will not call me r. Peters; for, said he, if it be known that I am
Hugh Peters, the people in the street will stone me. But forcing him away, there was sme tugging; and feeling his Skirs hard, they unript them, & found 5 pieces of Gold, some silver Medals, and out of his Pocket they took his Almanack, which he was very much troubled at▪ After which, they brought him to the Tower, & delivered him into the custody of the worthy Lieutenant Sir John Robison, still avering his name was Thomson; till at last in private to Sir John he confessed who he was. This is St. Hugh, who when our Glorious Sovereign was led to Mar∣tyrdom, fell so heavy upon his righteous Soul, blas∣pheming him upon his then Text, (Psal 149. To bind their Kings in Chains &c) and many other sordid Notions; too wicked and prophane to be here recited. FINIS.
