p4132 e1010_23 99864882 117114
THE OUT-CRIES OF THE Poor, Oppressed, & Imprisoned; OR A safe WAY to free the Poor of this City and the whole Nation of England, from Begging and Starving. Presented to the Council of Officers, Nov. 24. By William Pryor, and Thomas Turner. To which is Annexed, A PLEA For the Poor and Helpless, against the Enemies of their Peace. By William Pryor. LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Elephant and Castle near Temple-Bar, 1659.
THE OUT-CRIES OF THE Poor, Oppressed, & Imprisoned; OR A safe WAY to free the Poor of this City and the whole Nation of England, from Begging and Starving. IT's strange to consider the immediate wit∣ness of Jehovah, against the injustice, and unrighteousness of men, when declining from that which is his glory, and their often avowed principles, (viz.) to releive the poor and fatherless, the helpless, such as have no might to plead their Cause; surely the sudden changes of late multiplied, doth demonstrate, that the Lord is risen at the deep sighs of the needy, against the Assyri¦an, formerly, the Rod of his anger, the vailed oppressor
that keeps pollitickly the spoyle of the poor, in the house of his servants, which makes all his prayers and sollemne ser∣vices, an abomination to the Lord; that which the Lord requires, Amos 5. When he had declared, his abhorring the smell in their assemblies, the noise of their songs, and the mellody of their vyals: Let Judgement, saith he, run down like water, and righteousness as a mighty stream, yea exe∣cute, saith he, true Judgment, and shew mercy, and oppresse not the widdow nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the poor; the fast that God requires is to loose the bands of wickedness, to undoe the heavy burthens, and to let the oppressed go free; to break every yoake, to feed the hungry and cloath the naked: Hath not the great Jehovah often said it in the Scripture of truth, that all Sacrifices and services, without these are an abomination to him? hath not oppression been the cause of all changes? was it any thing but oppression, that turned out the Bishops, and all that Hierarchy? yea, hath it been any thing but the complaint of oppression, the want of impartiall justice, that hath been sounded forth, in the oppresseds eares, as the argument for all changes that hath been since. Oh how have they been often filled with hopes of releife, that have been many years bound in chaines of tyranny, by such alarums, why should deferred hope make the poor and helpless sick unto death? they have often cried this many yeares, to those that have called themselves Ministers of justice, of all degrees below Parliaments, and to Parliaments, themselves, but all void of bowells of com∣passion to the hungry oppressed, forgetting the afflictions of Joseph, while they are in there delicate injoyment with wine in bowles, surely their cries have gone up to heaven, in this last change, in breaking the reines of all Government; Is not the Lord now eminently a trying the Officers of the Army, whether they will perform their vowes, in breaking every yonk which Magistrates of all degrees contrary to their oaths have neglected, yea doth not the poors straights, & their own straights both cry aloud to this work, as one deep to another? is not the work of Jehovah, now before them, hath not pro∣vidence prepared it for them, is there any thing to be done
on their parts but confirmation? And hath not the Lord miraculously, put power into their hands to do it? hath he given them power to Rout Parliaments, to change Customes, to null Laws, to create & null Protectors, to create Councils, to communicate power, to make Lawes paramount? and have they not power, to releive the poor and oppressed? will not the pleading the want of power, be concluded by all unbyassed men, a mocking of God and his People, a slight∣ing his Providences, a contemning of Gods prize, neglecting his Temple work, in considering and relieving his Poor? Oh that they would now consider in this their day, the things that belong to their peace, before God arise against them, as a man of War, as against those before them, for turning Judgement into Wormwood: Oh that they would consider what admirable Effects the confirmation of that one Bill now before them would produce. 1. By it all Prisons would be turned into Work-houses, for the Poor that are now ready to perish. 2. By it Felons would not be unrighteously punished be∣fore judgment & conviction, besides prevent many Fellonies. 3. Unjust Imbessellors of the Poors Stock, would receive exemplary justice. 4. The Revenues and Gifts, already imbesselled and de∣tained, will raise a sufficient common Stock, to imploy those, Poor that are able to work, that are now ready to perish. 5. The standing Revenues of the several Prisons, will maintain many hundred of Poor aged and decripped Persons that are not able to work. 6. The corrupt Impowering of Masters of Hospitals, to Let ancient Donations upon their original Rent; and their large Fines into their own pockets, to the defrauding of the Poor, will be avoyded thereby. 7. The Rents properly belonging to the Poor, will be Re∣stored, and Reinstated. 8. The Moneys due upon ancient Donations, unjustly de∣tained, will raise such a common Stock, as will set all the Poor in the several Counties a work that are able.
9. The Increase of the Revenues belonging to the several Hospitals of England, being raised to their true value, will maintain all those Poor that are not able to work, besides what are maintained at present. 10. By it starving of Debtors in prison, and the ruin of their Families, to the defrauding of their Creditors, would be avoyded, and the Channel of Justice opened, that they that do wrong, may receive for that wrong without respect of persons. Oh that it was in the Officers hearts to resolve and fix in this good Work, that the God of Justice may delight to dwell amongst them, and write upon them his Sentance of Righteousness, when their breasts are manifested to be the habitation of goodness and compassion to the hungry and oppressed; the springs of the Lord will appear amongst them, and they will be called the Repairers of the Breaches, the Re∣storers of paths to dwell in, and the Servants of Jehovah will be their Sanctuary, when the Lords Righteousness goes be∣fore them, his glory will be their Rereward; then will the People of the Lord be encouraged to fight for them, and he by his eternal Covenant, will be engaged to be their Leader, then all their undertakings will be prosperous, when the bow∣els of the Poor are refresht; and we the poor Servants (for the Lords sake) shall be engaged to bless the Lord for them, and engage with them, to the hazzard of all that is near and dear unto us. William Pryor. Thomas Turner.
A PLEA For the Poor and Helpless, against the Enemies of their Peace. IT's marvellous to consider the working of men against the design of God in this last age of the World, now Christ is smiting the Image of the beast on the feet, what stumbling blocks the Emissaries of the man of Sin, the Adversary to Truth and Peace casts in the way of the People of God? into whose hearts God hath put it to fullfil his will, that if possible they may be either induced to a confederacy with those that God hath appointed to utter ruin, or else laying before them the want of Power. I shall for brevity-sake take it for granted, that it's Gods great design to smite the Image of the Beast in pieces. Now the Particulars considerable are. First, What the Image of the Beast is in general. Secondly, To define by the Scriptures of Truth, it's Par∣ticular branches. Thirdly, To demonstrate how they are to be broken, and by whom. In Answer to the first of these, what the Image of the Beast is in general. These particulars are considerable: First, what the Beast is. Secondly to define the word Image.
Thirdly to answer the Question. First, The Beast is the several Rulers of the World, that keeps man in subjection contrary to the rules of Christ Jesus: this might be demonstrated by a Cloud of witnesses, denying Christ to be only Lord, Jude 4. For which the Jews was de∣stroyed in the Wilderness after delivered out of Egypt, vers. 5. And the Angels reserved in chains of darkness, vers. 6. The Priests for changing the Ordinances of the Lord, Mal. 1.6 are made contemptible and base, Chap. 2. vers. 9. Such are compared to Brute Beasts, by Jude, vers. 10. From all which I thus reason, that those that deny Christ Jesus to be the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, are Beasts: But those that leave the Laws of Jesus, and establish their own fancies for Laws, and compel subjection thereto, denies Christ Jesus to be King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Therefore they that leave the Laws, of Jesus and establish their own, and compel subjection thereto, are Beasts. And those Beasts in conjunction in their own Laws, against the Laws of Jesus, compleat the power of that Beast that ascen∣ded out of the bottomeless Pit, spoken of, Revel. 13. Secondly, For the word Image, it hath only one gene∣ral signification in Scripture, it signifies Ruling, or command∣ing; see a proof of this, Gen. 1.26. Let us make man in our Image, saith the Lord: and in the next words demonstrates how, (viz.) Let him Rule, or have Dominion over all Crea∣tures, &c. Daniel interprets the word Image so, Chap. 2.38. Christ is said to be the express Image of the Father, Ruling all things, &c. So that the Answer to the Questi∣on is plain before us to all unbyassed understandings, that the Image of the Beast in general, is all those Laws that are esta∣blished by the Beastly Powers of the world, that are oppo∣site to the Laws of God and of his Christ, by the establish∣ment of which Laws the Kingdomes of this World, are said to he the Kingdomes of men, Ruled by mens Laws, admi∣nistred by Ministers of mens appointing, such as are ready to serve their wills, and lusts, by which the poor are tramp∣led on, and perish as at this day, and Justice is turned away backward, and truth faileth, and he that seeks after Justice,
makes himself a prey, and the Assyrian, the politick vailed oppressor by heathenish institutions is upheld in his oppressi∣on, &c. by means of which the poor of the Lord are exposed to woful miseries, some starved to death in their houses for want of bread, others in the streets for want of harbor, and others perish in prison, and some rather than expose them∣selves to politick fury of heathenish instruments and instituti∣ons, choose rather to leave their native country and sell themselves slaves into remote parts; me-thinks the conside∣ration of these should make hearts of flint relent. But to pro∣ceed to the second generall, (viz.) What the particular branches of this Image is? Answer, the Scripture concludes it in these four heads, (viz.) Kingdome, Power, Strength, and Glory. I shall in the strength of the most high, First, demonstrate in part what we may understand by these branches distinct. Secondly, how they run parallel with the Kingdome, pow∣er, strength, and glory of the World. Thirdly, demonstrate how they are against Christ. Fourthly, demonstrate them to be the cause of all Tyranny, Theft, Murder, and Animosity: Of these in order; and, First, what we may understand by Kingdome in a Scrip∣ture account. Answer, Kingdome, is a people in subjection to a Superiour, be they few or many; and hence it is that such a Superiour is said in a Scripture sense to be a King; the Kings of the earth stood up, the Rulers took Counsel toge∣ther: there Kings and Rulers are terms convertible, he thats a King is a Ruler, and he thats a Ruler is a King, and the parties under their Rule are their Kingdome; this being plain to every common capacity, I shall wave it and proceed to Power: what that is? Answer, it is command, ordinance, law, or commission; by which the Kings, or Beastly Magistrates, or Ministers of the World, Rule their Kingdomes contrary to the Statutes, Laws or Ordinances of God, which are the higher Powers, Rom. 13.1. To which all ought to be sub∣ject, and for not subjecting, receives to themselves condem∣nation, or Judgment, as at this day: from whence come warrs, saith the Apostle, is it not from mens own lusts, being led
away from the pure Laws of God, to the Laws of men, that are to perish in the using, Col. 2.22. Whence observe by the way, That observing the Laws of man instead of the Laws of God, is the cause of Warrs, Contention, Condemnation and Judgment. Thirdly, What we may understand by the strength of this Image. Answer. It is a sutable ability to force subjection to their Wills, Laws, or Edicts, within their Jurisdictions, or Terri∣tories; this is visible in the Beast, Revel. 13.12. In causing the Earth and them that dwell therein, to worship the first Beast, by forcing subjection to his Laws, Exercising all the first Beasts Power, or Laws, Blaspheming the Authority of God, his Tabernacle, and Worshipers, making Warr with his Saints, Revel. 13.6, 7. Lastly, The glory of this Image, is; their people, or Vassals, ready subjecting to their Laws or Commands. Solomon sayes, the glory of young men is their strength; and this strength united, in ready and cheareful submission to the Laws or Com∣mands of their Kings, is their Glory. How wonderful is this manifested in the Kingdoms of men, at this day? what glory∣ing is there in Superiors, when their Vassals are in subjection, and what cruelty on the contrary is exercised, when their wills are crost? Now I shall only take a view of the particular Branches, And then proceed to a demonstrating, how they run parallel with the Kingdome, Power, Strength, and Glory of the World at this day. First then, we may learn, that the Beasts Kingdom, is peo∣ple Subjecting to the Kings of the Earth, in Counsel against Christ Jesus, the King of Kings. Secondly, That the Beasts Power is the Laws of the Kings of the Earth, contrary to the Statutes, Laws, and Ordinances of God and of his Christ. Thirdly, The Beasts strength is his ability, to force Sub∣jection to his Laws, to the Blaspheming the Authority of God and his Tabernacle, and his Worshipers, and to make Warr with the Saints.
Fourthly, The Beasts glory, is peoples ready and volluntary Subjection to his Laws and Statutes. Now a few words, how the Kingdome, Power, Strength, and Glory of the world run parallel with the particular Bran∣ches of the Beasts Image. Consider I pray, is not the Kings of the Earth, now in consultation against the Lord and his Christ, how they may hold up their Scepters by staving off his Scepter of Righteousness? Oh what striving is there by men of all degrees (though the Reines of all Government be bro∣ken) still, to keep up the power or Laws of the former Beasts? who is there that appears for the Laws that admini∣ster Right to the poor, equal with the Mighty? are not Ru∣lers of all degrees taking Counsel together to make up a Model of Government answerable to there fancies, some for Holland, other for Venus, but a few for the Laws of King Jesus, though often solemly engaged thereto with hands lift∣ed up to the Most High? how active are Priests, and Lawyers of all degrees against, taking away their Dianah, by which they have their Wealth? how do those Locusts, and Catter∣pillars that live upon Simmony, and the sins of the people, strive to cast stumbling-blocks in the way of those, whose hearts the Lord hath toucht with his work in hand, in razing the Foundations of Babylon, and filling to her, double the Cup of his Indignation? Yea, how is the beastly strength of the world exercised even at this day against God, against Christ, against his Poor? why is it that the releiving the poor, and oppressed, sticks so much in the Birth, is it not be∣cause the Heathenish Institutions, and Ministers are in the way? why should the Rulers of the World be so backward in submitting to the higher Powers, the Commands of God; is it not because they love the praise of men more then God? Oh that the gods of the World would in time consider, how little stead those broken Reeds, on whom they now lean, will stand them in, when they shall come to die like men? will they not then repent there Blaspheming of the Authority of God, by keeping up an Authority of man, shaking hands with the deceivers of his people, prophaning his Tabernacle thereby, and his Worshipers, to the involving of his Saints in
Warr; yea, is not the self same beastly glory visible even to any unprejudiced Eye? how willing are men of all degrees, still to be Subject to the fore mentioned beastly Powers of the World; pretend to be Christians, and yet Traytors to Christs Laws, is sad Christianity. Thirdly, The antipathy beween the Laws of God, and of Christ; and the Powers of the man of sin, is thus manifes∣ted. First, The Laws of God and of Christ sayes, pervert not the judgment of any of the Afflicted, Prov. 31.5. The Laws of the Beasts of the World justifies the wicked for a reward, and takes away the righteousness of the righ∣teous from them. Secondly, the Laws of God sayes, Open thy mouth wide, for the dumb, in the cause of all such as are appointed to des∣truction, and plead the cause of the poor and needy, Prov. 31.8, 9. The beastly Laws of the World, opens the mouth wide, for those that have a large purse to plead their Cause, whilst the poor are sent empty away. Thirdly, The Royal Laws of God sayes, Loose the band of wickedness, undoe the heavy Burthens, and let the oppressed go free, and break every yoak. The beastly Laws of the world, continues the wickeds bands, the heavy burthens, & makes the oppresseds yoak heavier by the extorting fees of Lords, Counsellors, Attornies, Clarks, Criers, Summoners, Sheriffs, Jailers, &c. The Laws of God sayes, Deal thy Bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that are cast out into thy house, and cloath the naked, and hide not thy self from thy own flesh. The beastly Powers of the World, feeds the Rich with deli∣cates, whilest the poor perish for lack of Bread, take in the Rich for jollity sake, whilst the poor perish in the streets; cloath their Associates with Silk, Purple, and Scarlet, with Gold and Precious things, whilst the poor for lack of cloath∣ing perish; yea, is not the poor their own flesh, what devices is now amongst the great ones of the World to avoid the hearing the cryes of the poor?
The Laws of God sayes; Thou shalt not despise the Persons of the poor, nor honour the Persons of the Mighty, Levit. 19. I need not demonstrate, how contrary to this royal Law of Je∣hovah, the beastly Ministers of the Powers of the world Act, how is the poor and the poors Cause despised? how are they destroyed by delatory promises, and delayes of Justice, and there poor In∣nocents exposed to the merciless cruelty of the ungodly, and their poor Parents starved in Prison, whilst the Persons of the Mighty are honoured, (I had almost said worshiped) with bowing and cringing Idolatry; the time would faile me to demonstrate in how many particulars the beastly Powers of the world are in di∣rect opposition, to the royal Laws of Jehovah; and the poor, whilst promised liberty from chains of Tyranny, are made sick unto death, with differred hopes, &c. I shall speak a few words in demonstrating the fourth Particular, arising from the Branches of the Image of the Beast, (viz.) That they are the cause of all Tyranny, Theft, Murder, and Animossi∣ty. First, That they are the cause of Tyranny, is manifested in these Particulars. First, In creating themselves Lords over the Lives, Liberties, Estates, and Consciences of their Vassals, the only design of the Kings of the earth. Secondly, Making Laws answerable to their wills, or desires. Thirdly, Forcing Subjection. This is the natural product of the Kings of the earth, in Council against the Lord, and against his Annointed, especially when ac∣companied with Kingdome, Power, Strength, and Glory, by ma∣king themselves Lords over the lives of people, they stir up to Warr, to satisfie their Lust, in inlarging their Territories. Secondly, by making themselves Lords over the Liberties of their Vassals, they come to fill their Prisons, by which men are ex∣posed to misery and want, which is the cause of Theft, especially by those that have been two highly educated, and maintained, to dig, and to begg they are ashamed, who rather then starve, fall to stealing, which many times begets murther, especially in hot spirits that will rather kill then be taken. But further, the beastly Rulers of the World, when they have
brought men into misery, and want, by Tyranny; because they will be in direct opposition to the royal Law of Jehovah, of restoring four-fold; they make a Law, that if men steal they shall be hang∣ed, so they necessitate them to steal by Tyranny, and then hang them for it, and this begets anymosity; secret hatred, seeking for reveng; the product of which is murder; thus are the beastly Ma∣gistrates or Ministers of the World, exercising their own beast∣ly powers, or Laws, contrary to the Laws of God, and of his Christ, manifested to be the chief original cause of Tyranny, Theft, Murther, and Anymosity. And so I come to the third general, how these beastly Powers of the world, are to be broken, & by whom, and for what? First, now they are to be broken? Answer, by the advancement of the Laws, and Statutes of King Jesus, which shall be for a Standard for his people, by which Judgment will be laid to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, when the Kings of the aerth shall be ashamed, Isa. 52.15. And the refuge of lies discovered, by the brightness of the appearing of Jesus, when all creatures shall be tryed by the Spirit of Judgment, and burning; the Lord hath said it; for as much as the people refuse the waters of Shiloh, or the pure undefiled Laws of Jehovah, and rejoyce in Rezin and Remelia's Son, the original authors of Laws opposite to the Laws of God; therefore the Lord hath said it, he will bring the Assiryan scourg even upon them that profess themselves to be his own people, and it shall overflow and go over, and fill the breadth of the Land of Immanuel; and he gives this reason, because his people say a confederacy with those that God would not have them say a confederacy; God hath determined to destroy Babylon head and tayle; branch and root, but they would preserve the gleaning of the vintage, some of the fairest daughters of Anti∣christ, the finest spun Lawyers and Priests, and their choysest Laws: Oh that those into whose hearts & hands, God hath put it to ful∣fil his will, would be cautioned to take heed of saving that alive, which God hath appointed to utter destruction: remember Saul saving Agag, &c. Consider the word of the Lord by the Prophet Isa. Chap. 8. and see whether the Lord doth not come home to you that are a making an agreement with the brats of Babylon, the sworn enemies of Christ: he tels you three times o∣ver, vers. 9. Ye shall be broken in pieces, and your Counsel with
them shall come to nought, for the Lord hath yet a people, that have not defiled their garments, with whom God is, verse 10. That will not say a confederacy with Babylon, but sanctifie the Lord of hosts himself, according to his commandment, vers. 12, 13. For the Lord of hosts will now assuredly be a sanctuary to his servants, and a stone of stumbling to those that stumble at his Laws, and many will stumble and fall, and be taken and snared, by seeking the li∣ving amongst the dead; not going to the Law and Testimony of Jehovah for direction. So that the answer to the first part of the Question is plain, that God will destroy the Beastly Powers of the world, by the advan∣cing the Laws and Statutes of his Son, and confounding all Coun∣cils, and actions to the contrary. The next particular considerable is, by whom the beastly pow∣ers are to be destroyed? This is answered, Revel. 17.14. By the Lamb and his faithful ones with him, who are to accomplish their work upon Babylon, according to the voyce from heaven, Rev. 18.6. To give her double according to her works; as she hath li∣ved delicately, and faired deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. The faithful of Jehovah are to accomplish this work upon Ba∣bylon, with the high praises of God in their mouths, and a two edged sword in their hands, to execute upon Kings and their peo∣ple, the judgment written: This is the prophesied of honour, of the Saints of Jesus, not such as are Saints according to the fashi∣ons of the world, but in substance. I shall only take notice of one thing more, that is, for what the great Jehovah wil break the Beastly Fabrick of Babylon to pieces, and destroy it root and branch. The answer is general, Revel 18.5. For her sins reached unto heaven, and God hath remembred her iniquities; Therefore woe unto them for their unrighteous decrees and grievous prescriptions, by which the needy are turned away from judgment, and the poor from their right, and the widdows made a prey, and the fatherless robbed, Isa. 10.1, 2. Ye tread upon the poor by taking from them burthens of Wheat; Therefore saith the Lord, ye shall not dwell in your built houses of hewen stone, nor eat the fruit of your pleasant Vineyards; for I know, saith the Lord, Amos 5.12. your manifold Transgressions, in afflicting the
just, in taking of bribes, & turning aside the poor from their right, the Lord hath said it, Amos 8. The end is come, when the needy are swallowed up, to make the poor of the Land to fail; when the rich by consent shall make the Ephah small, and the Shekel great, and false Ballances, that they may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shooes; The Lord hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, he will never forget their works. Alas, alas, is not this end come upon us here in England? Oh England is not thy poor become a prey to all the Beasts of the field? Is hot the doleful cry in prison and out of prison, in all Cities, and all corners of the streets, Bread, Bread, Bread for the Lords sake? And is not the Lord generally out of credit amongst men? the poor sigh and la∣ment their wants, die for want of Bread, are starved for want of Cloathing, and who is it that layes it to heart? Though the Lord hath sworn it, he will surely avenge him of their adversary, and plead the cause of the poor: Shal not the Land tremble when God ariseth? Surely, if his wrath be kindled to action, as most certain∣ly it is, happy are all they that put their trust in him. Now that the God of Justice in this his day of visitation, would direct all those that set their faces Zion-ward, whether Shrubs, or Ce∣dars, that they may neither transgress on the right hand, in going beyond their bounds, nor on the left hand, by a sinful compliance, is the earnest prayer, and fervent desire, of The unworthiest of the Lords Servants, and the Poors Servant, for the Lords sake. William Pryor. THE END.
