S2166G R230267 99895962 153578
A SEA-CABBIN DIALOGUE, Between two Travellers lately come from HOLLAND. Translated out of Dutch; And Dedicated to all those who desire to understand things rightly. LONDON, Printed by T. M. 1652.
A Sea-Cabbin-Dialogue, Between two Travellers, lately come from HOLLAND. Viz. Kitt and Boulton. Kit. WIll it not be imagined that these But∣ter box Flemings are enfatuated for their weighing Anchor, and hoising their Sails towards England, to doe Pennance there for their brethrens misdemeanors at Amboyna, and to pay an after-rec∣koning for the once Cautionary Towns? As also to be talkt withall concerning the Fishing in that Sea, which without the permission of the English Nation, must be to them Mare clausum, and not Liberum, not∣withstanding late Grotius his opinion and Rethorick. Besides, all the due af-recknings, and liquidations for severall injuries, depradations, detentions, spoils and the like. Truly, it seems to me a meer riddle (I say) why those wise and grave States-men, who have so manfully with-stood the Don Deigos de matta-mores, and all the power of the Austrian adherents; should be induced to submit themselves to any other law save the Cannon? And why they should not make use of Dunkirk (that second commodious Algier Pi∣rats Nest) whence they might have lanched forth Squadrons of Fire-ships on the English-fleets, and might have taken the opportunities of Winds, Tides,
and dark nights to send them into the very Sea-ports, nay up as high as London-bridge. Boul. Why not? Canutus the Dane did once do the like before, for all the ships watcht that Rode in the River: And what did not those States Admiral Hems∣kerck attempt and goe through within the Bay, and under the Fort of Gibraltar? Kit I marry: And why should not they blow up the ships on the coast, by such a like engine, as Corne∣lius Drebbell invented? which was to swim betwixt two waters; and the which is practised by too many wicked men in this age. It is apparent that the Common-wealth of England is as subtile as Jacob: But why should the Hoghen Mogen sell their Birth∣right? For (I pray you) what would the English get by a breach, nought save blows? Boul. And what would the Hoghen Mogens get by the bargain? Kit. By a Peace with the Hoghen Mogens, I con∣fesse the English will have made just such a Feast as the Fox and Crane did; and it would be but accord∣ing to the Dutch old saying; They would shear the Sheep, and leave the shearing of the Hogs to the Hol∣landers. But since they have bought up all the West∣phalia bacon (to make fire-ships withall) they will be such guests unto the English, as Sampsons Foxes were to the Philistines; for that they would be soon constrained to change their entertainment: They may therefore amuse the English with a pratie, or a tale in a Tub; that so whilest they are a feasting on Custards and Bag puddings, the Butter-box-Flem∣mings may have time to buy up all the Pitch, Tar and Masts, from the frozen parts; that so in the mean while their landsmen may get off their goods.
Boul. I, and all the Timber from the Black-sea, where the grand Signior builds his Gallies. Ket. Nay, you need not to jest? I am in earnest. Boul. Nor do I; for that I am fully perswaded, in case the English agree not with them; they will as then have had time enough to be possest of all such things, whereof the English stand in need; and the present want whereof would for ever make the Eng∣lish uncapable to supply, and make good their Fleets. Ket. And they must expect as aforesaid to meet nought save blows: For that Kees knelessen will fall too his Sable-cutter, and his Gravesand Cheese buck∣ler, and will pay it home with a Te meer den hoop te meer smiitick daer doot, the more in number, the more I shall be sure to kill; for in a word, it is but too appear, that in case the English be let alone, they will become so mighty, as that they will en∣force Laws on others, and that new Laws too; do we not already see that they speak in a known lan∣guage, and not at all in heathen greek? The Hollan∣ders have hitherto said, Striike ende set; but the Eng∣lish will strike at the best of the traffiques, profits, and so set out laws for their Neighbours? Are they not become such skilfull gamesters, as that they have gi∣ven check-mate to King, Queen, and what not? Boul And I pray you, have the Hoghen Moghens done much lesse? Kit. The Duke d' Alva, the Cardinal Gramvel, and Don John of Austria were the causes thereof, by their cruel & tyrannical forcing of the consciences of men; by their entrenching on the Liberties, Lives, and E∣states of every rational breathing soul amongst them. For my part, if I were to determin this case, I would have the Hollanders stand it out at any rate, since of all
Nations that ever made wars, they alone have enrich∣ed themselves thereby: Now suppose the English be at Peace with them, why as then they will sweep away all the profits of the traffique? But if the Hollan∣ders stand it out, it will remain theirs; and they will likewise have a concourse of all the best English Sea∣men, who affect the Royall Party; besides, the French, Danes, and who not? All which will be Striike ende Set, with them. Boul. Truly, me thinks your discourse savours much of an Arch-fire-brand; and not as that of one who should have learned to practise the Hollanders too ancient main sayings, viz. Houdt vast ende beleght; that is, hold fast and contrive: Secondly, Het is goet met een ghesondeheigt te bedde te gaen; it is good sleeping in a whole skin. And as for the Hoghen Mogens, they are wise, and know by a long experience, what Nation is best to live in peace withall; so likewise do they know, that Saw-dust and Sand cannot make good Morter; Even so, any Nation that is of a con∣trary Religion cannot compose so firm an amity, but they will alwayes be subject to change. Kit. What talkest thou of Religion? that's a pretty toy indeed to reflect on in this age: would not many at the present say as an eminent Person during the last Baricadoes of Paris did, to wit, Le Dieu de ces temps sont de venu trop vieux ill en fault Mouler d'autres; That the gods of those times (meaning the stone idols in the Papists Churches) were become so old, as that they needed to be new moulded. Boul. But I pray you interrupt me not; I have not stopt you in your carreare: The Hollanders, I say, are well acquainted with the power of the English Nati∣on, both by Land and Sea.
Kit. By Land! they are fierce blades indeed, and a plain knock-down, pell-mell, is their greatest skill, as Count Harcourt observed of them; as long as they might lie in beds, have their good-ale at their Noses, and their Night-caps on their heads; so likewise hath experience manifested their great exploits at Sea, viz. Cales and Rochell. Boul. I, but these are old stories; that was a fooling age, wherein men and their followers were charmed by love toyes; even as Ʋlysses his men were by Circes. The English present warriours, think more on the lay∣ing of their enemies in the dust then of powdering their haires; they fight and pray, as Moses and the Israelites did. Kit. In this kinde, you seem to talk of Saints, but I pray you, doth not the world conceive the contrary of some of them? Boul. Puf! the world is a Fools-cap; there is no gold without some drosse, before it be seven-times refined. Kit. I, but when will that be, at Doomsday think you? Boul. I beseech you let me proceed, (and stop your fierd-brand vain) Do not the English as they lye in their beds, see through their Windows the Hol∣landers fleet sailing too and again along their Coasts? Were not the Hollanders constrained to advise their Indian Squadrons to saile about; when the businesse of Amboina was first reported? May they not be taken every where, and every day? Have the Hoghen Moghen so many Shires of firm ground as the English? And whereon Nations may live happily, and may make the Seas the parting-wals
betwixt that great Nation, that careth not whe∣ther any come amongst them or no? In England all the Elements are good, among the Dutch all the Ele∣ments are bad; the English have within themselves whatsoever they need; the Dutch have nothing of all they want, save Butter, Cheese and Fish. And for all the fire-brand-like expressions of the firing of Fleets at Sea, in Ports and Harbours, nay, the very Stairs of London Bridge Tavern; though it be granted that all the Canon shot from the Block-houses at Gravesend should doe no harm against such Barks as might take the opportunity of Windes, and Tides, and dark nights; though Men-of-war riding on the River, and be lovingly linkt together with Cable-bracelets, should not be capable to hinder the passages of such Boats no more then the Damiaten chains could im∣pedite the Belgians fetching away of the silver Bells which are at Harlem: Finally, suppose that men should be so moapish as to believe the old stories which Mother Shipton recounted in a Chimney-cor∣ner, or such like which Almanack makers have di∣vulged on the same score, when as they wanted mony to clear those which they had made in Ale-houses and Tobaco-shops. In the mean while, I pray, have not the English Bacon to make Fire-ships withall, as well as the Hollanders? can they not make use of Drebbels or such like inventions, to drive between two waters, and to get under any of their adverse parties ships? And when as you talke of Dunkirk, cannot the Eng∣lish stop up that Harbour, or any other they shall have a minde unto? As it was intended, during the late breach between Spain, France, and England. Really, I am of an opinion, that neither the English nor the
Dutch will be so far overshot in the true principles of State, as to be diverted by bravado's, far lesse by scare∣crows; viz. the pretended impossibility of an a∣greement betwixt them; The General States may ever remember their own saying, Concordia res parvae crescunt, magna dilabuntur; they have done well, wise∣ly, and like themselves in going for England, where they may try what may be done in a friendly way: when as the English will also doubtlesse be so wise as to remember the Scripture saying, viz. Beati pacifici, and to accept of possibilities, as well as of conveni∣encies. Moreover, I am confident that this will fall out according to the Marquis of Spinola's usual say∣ing, who was of an opinion, that Treaties ought ne∣ver to be refused, viz. Entretenemos à essa platica; let us entertain this parley: so likewise, doe the Dutch also say, Tuschen loven ende bieden, vergaederen end ver∣eenighen de lieden, between asking and bidding chap∣men assemble and agree: The rigour of the law, (it is true) demands the life, but the Judge doth for the most part suffer the party to be freed by a more easie satisfaction. Kit. It seems then that you minde an agreement, and not to say as the French, viz. Il fait bon pescher en eau trouble, Its good fishing in muddy water. Boul. Why, truly I ever minded, it according unto the Italian saying, Qui pissa chara gaba el medico, He that makes clear water may laugh at the Physitian. I did ever endeavour to perswade all men to agree, and when as I found parties to be at such a distance, and at such an enmity together, as that it was requisite to use art in the reconciling of them, as then I endea∣voured to deceive them both by a lawfull stratagem, onely to make them friends.
Kit. But how could you make that good, since de∣ceits is alwayes to be abhorred? Boul. Deceit in such like punctilo's is not only law∣full but very necessary; as for example, When a Span∣yard is to be treated withall, he must be made believe (by reason of his haughty humour and high spirit) that his adverse party seeks him: And truly, the Ho∣ghen Moghen, (be it spoken without offence) were so well acquainted with their own strength, as that they would hardly have been induced to yeeld unto a parley with the Spanyards, had they not been made to believe that Speck-John (as they call the Spanyard) was out of breath; and were glad to lay their heads, as it were, on the block: To instance herein, I shall only alledge the effects of some words, which unfortu∣nately were uttered by the Chancellour of Brabant, Peckius, in a Speech which he had intended to make unto the General States, at the expiration of their twelve years Truce; when as he onely said thus, viz. That it was conceived, those States had as then had time enough to bethink themselves, whether or no, it were not fit for them to reunite themselves with the King of Spain. At which very words, the Assembly rose, interrupted his speech, and rejected the Treaty; Declaring unto the said Peckius, that all the favour they could shew unto him, was to save him from the Turff-wives rage at Delft, as he past through that place in his journey homewards. Kit. According unto your computation therefore, the Hoghen Moghen and English must needs agree; for you would as I perceive have the one to offer fair, and the other to take lesse, and thereby gull all the fire-brands whatsoever: a match it must needs be to
your thinking, but say you so? why as then for all this the Hollanders will be too hard for the English howsoever. Boul. Lesse of your brags, I pray. Kit. What I urge stands with common sense and reason, and I will make it good. Boul. I shall laugh at that heartily. Kit. They may agree, that I grant you; and re∣main in possession of Esau's Pottage to boot: and yet neverthelesse the English shall never attain unto those advantages which the Hollanders possesse. Boul. I should wonder if you could clear me that point? Kit. I shall easily doe it, and though I may prove to be very plain with you; yet you shall finde that I shall strike home to the marrow: therefore do but observe what I shall relate unto you, viz. The old Princes of Orange, William, Maurice, and Frederick Hen∣drick, (that compleat number of admirable Patriots) who having taken a survey of the united States Gene∣ral affairs, pitcht at first on those expedients, where∣by they might make them Potent, Rich, and Secure for ever; which they effected, and gained the peoples love to boot: First, by their settling of the publique Security, or Faith; and secondly, by the reducing of the value of monies; and in this manner they secu∣red themselves, and attracted all Nations; I say, all Nations, and not so onely, but their Substances and Stocks to boot. Moreover, they setled a Record Of∣fice, whereby they prevented all kinde of cheats and deceits whatsoever, either in Sales, Transactions, or Morgages, and whereby they also got in a little space of time many millions of pounds in ready monies, as
also a considerable yearly revenue, and the love of all men. They permitted Liberty of Conscience, the contrarys whereof lost the King of Spain those said Province. They established Banks of Loan, and of Sale, whereby all needy persons were relieved; they thereby abollished and extirpated all Lombards and Jewish Brokers, who (as the English Usurers do) take 30, 40, and more per Cent. Use, and who gave such excessive rates for money, as that none could be had at any reasonable condition. They established a Bank of payment, whereby the credits of all Negotiants was raised. They imposed easie customs on all man∣ner of Importations and Exportations by Forreigners; like unto the French, who permitted strangers to ex∣port their Salt for eight shillings the Bushel, when as the Natives pay foure pounds sterling for the same. And by these means they reduced the valuation of monies, and its Use unto 3, and 4, per Cent. whereby they got such a vast stock of monies, as that they were able to buy and sell all kinde of Wares at far better rates then any other Nations could doe. And these are the main causes, why the English, nor any other Nation whatsoever, shall not be able to out-vie them, by reason that they are not in a capacity to equall them therein: Besides, their thriftinesse in manning their ships with a lesse number of men then others, & also their more sparingnes in Dyet. And as by these courses they have made themselves potent, rich, and secure: so have they also from time to time made use of several main advantages, which were not so much reflected on by others; nay, which is worse, willfully neglected: Ha! Dunkirk, Ha! Hollanders and French, for having gotten the hand of the English in the Cloth
commoditie? And have they not made all Nations to be even doating on their Clothes: As for Fullers Earth, alas they want not that neither! Boul. And what have you else to say, I pray? Kit. Why? nought. save that Dunkirk that same Dunkirk will pay the English home one day. Boul. I professe unto you, I am grieved to see you so much mistaken, and so exorbitantly to continue your brags in this kind; and since they are meerly such, I shall take a little further pains to undeceive you hereon; for that you must needs take notice how that the Common-wealth of England both can, and will at their own conveniency settle all such esta∣blishments, as the Hollanders have made use off; be∣sides many others which may stand with the good and honour of the English Nation. Kit. I, but when I pray? Hath there not been a Bill discours'd of long since for the establishing of a Record-office, and have any of the Propounders ever as yet acquainted the Parliament with the many millions of pounds, which will thereby accrew within the very first six weeks time of its erectment, together with the love, ease and applause of the Peo∣ple; besides, one hundred and forty thousand pounds sterling yearly revenew to boot? True it is, that something hath been spoken of smal Fees unto Clarks, but what is that to the State? Moreover what course hath there been all this while taken against the transporting of Fullers-earth? as if a publique theft were not as punishable by death as a particular robbery? Boul. These things its true touch to the quick, so likewise need you not to fear but that they will be heeded.
Kit. I, but what say you on the particular of Dun∣kirk? Boul. I professe unto you, that I have not said half of that which lyeth on my heart, nor the least part of that which is even at my tongues end. Kit. I see you would fain shift off the satisfying of me on the Cloth-trade, and on the particular of Dun∣kirk. Boul. There is an expedient in reserve, whereby the Cloath-trade may be made more worth unto the English, then the golden mines are to the King of Spain; and the resolves thereon may be of as great a consequence as any thing that hath as yet been deba∣ted; And as for Dunkirk, were there many such like, they might be curbed, nay gained: but I shall skip over Dunkirk, and tell you that whensoever the En∣glish Company shall be weary of Rotterdam, it may be settled at Bridges; and hereon I could tell you more of my thoughts, were it not a secret. And that you may judge how considerable a bargain it will be for any man to be possest of the Town of Dunkirk; be∣sides, what I have told you of stopping up of its Port; you must know, that whosoever shall be master there∣of, the same town and themselves may be called up∣on for the payment of seven millions of pounds, which are due unto the English Nation, the said Town being one of the Cautionaries which stands bound for the said Debt; and thus, I think, I have satisfied to the purpose. Kit. I, now you say something! and here me thinks you tell me several considerable particu∣lars all at a clap; as the settling of a Cloth-staple at Bridges, the stopping up of the Port of Dunkirk,
and the demanding of seven millions of pounds; now all these will serve to curb and vex parties. Boul. Thou art soon moved to thy teastish humour I see. Kit. Not so neither; but I would have such men as will not do things by fair means, be wrought upon; by a, You shall doe it: yet howsoever those seven mil∣lion of pounds make a pleasing noise in my ears: why should there not a Hue and Cry be made after them? for that in case they can be found out; as then many ill husband souldiers, would not be so over-hasty as they are to sell their Debenters at four shillings in the pound: But I pray you, doth not this savour of the Queen of Fairies story? and is there such a thing in rerum natura as the Flanders Debt? is it not a faire nights-dream? Boul. I can assure you thus much of it; that when as I past of late through the Neatherlands, I was told, how that there were those, who had proffeed unto Sir Balthazar Gerbier (the late King of Englands Resi∣dent in those parts) no lesse then thirty thousand pounds for a gratuity, onely to move the said King to have granted a favourable Composition unto the Debtors, for the totall. Kit. What say you man? Was there thirty thou∣sand pounds proffered unto him; and had not that Resident learned the Bribing trade, which was so rife in that age? And is there not at present a wise man for himself (among such as may be able to prosecute the Debtors) who can obtain leave from the State of England to be imployed in such a fair business? Why, what is become of that Resident? Can he not speak? Can he not be wisht to discover unto a fit Person
how those monyes may be come by? And by what means a nimble Lad might compasse that Gratuity? Truly, this particular seems to be a Riddle unto me; Nor can I finde any impediment, why this State should not look after the same? What remarkable cause can there be to let it lye dormant? Is it not a Debt for Monyes which were Lent? are there not good Bonds exstant for the same? And hath not the Debt been formerly claimed? Nay, are there not se∣verall considerable Persons in England, as well of the Gentry as among the Merchants, who have sustained great losses both by Sea and Land, by the Spanish Sub∣jects? And cannot these be so wise to themselves, as to obtain that the State of England might permit them to endeavour the said Debts recovery? And to crave the benefit of the Parliaments Act; which al∣loweth a third part of concealed Debts; and the which might serve towards their reimbursments? Is there not a Nimble Clark that hath Eares and Eyes that way? Truly, it passeth my understanding that such a considerable thing should lye dormant: Nor can I perswade my self that the English Nation should be more Spaniolized now, then they were in Fistolo Gundamor's dayes; but grant they were, why should they not demand their own due? For my part, were I an English man, I would have all the World to know, that its not in this age, as it was formerly; when as a Venetian Ambassadour returning from the English Court homewards, and meeting his Succes∣sour, who was making thither; he gave him this advice, how that he was not to expect to finde any English men in that Court; but to the contrary, Span∣yards, French, Dutch, and an unexpressible number of
such like Factionaries: And truly since thou hast a∣wakened me by the sound of those seven Millions of pounds, I would have the Don Diego's put to it roun∣ly, and pay they should with a vengeance. Boul. Fie upon thee; thou wouldst still have me to be quarrelsome? now with these, then with the o∣thers: fie thou knowest it is not my disposition. Kit. Thou art mightily mistaken in me, Man, quarrell saist thou; Thinkest thou that I am ignorant of the Spanish Maxim, and of their saying, viz. que pa∣ralas conveniencias se hazen loscosas: Thou full well knowest how thou didst put me beyond my Byas, when as I discussed the matter between the English and the Dutch; and finally how thou wroughtest me into a well liking of the Dutch Ambassabours coming for England; and how that we concluded: that they will do better to strike the Naile on the head by a good agreement; and in this manner thou hast made me a Convert in that regard But doest thou all this while think that I can be ta∣ken with lindas Reverentias; or with smooth words? do but observe their owne saying, Palabras y plumas elvi∣ento las lleba. And have they not by words shifted off the administring of Justice for the bloud of a Gentle∣man who was imployed by the State? and have they not forsooth shifted it off upon their Sancta Inquisiti∣on? which would torment them even in purgatory (as they suppose) should they not maintaine their Sanctuaries Prerogative. Boul. But all this while I wonder what harme the Spanyards have done unto thee. Kit. Truly none at all: Nor do I bear them any particular grudge; a man may, I hape, discourse free∣ly
must it needs be confest that there are many gal∣lant men amongst them: their King is a brave Prince, and I do highly esteem that Nation: But experience hath taught such men as delight in observations to distinguish betwixt those things which are fit, and others which are not warrantable; Besides there are divers of my acquaintance whom they have most e∣gregiously and abominably abused. Boul. Well, I must needs tell thee in one word, how that (although I have been much pleased all this while with thy discourse) thou art mightily mistaken. Kit. Wherein I pray? Boul. By reason thou conceivest the Spanyards are to be called upon, for the seven millions of pounds a∣bove-mentioned; when as the inhabitants of Bra∣bant, Flanders, Artois and Henault are the Debtors; For that the money was lent unto them in Queen Elizabeth's time; since which those States and People have made it their particular Debt. Kit. Nay, and if the case stands so; as then I have sundry expedients in my Budget, to procure satisfa∣ction thereon, and that without any brags at all. Boul. I but I pray you; what were those horride and abominable abuses, which thy acquaintance and friends have sustained by the Spanish subjects? Kit. Why, even as many as the millions of pounds; O that yee had seen the miseries which a world of English have suffered in the Spanish and Flemming Dungeons, after their ships and goods were detained from them: Boul. Do they not observe the Articles of Peace? Kit. What talk you of Article of Peace? they were speciall ones indeed.
Boul. Why sayest thou so? were they not contri∣ved by wise and juditious men? and were they not sworn too on the Gospel? Kit. Now talkest thou most like a Ninnihammer, didst thou never heare who was the contriver of those Articles? why, marry ile tell thee: The once Conde Duca d'olyvare, the Spanish Kings favorite; and one who was more Spaniolized then a Castillion Ʋieso; viz. Francis Cottington; who by his fair contrivance of some part of the said Treaty; did cut the Throats of sundry English Negotiants and sea-faring-men. Boul. In what manner I pray? Kit. Why if we were not on so short a journey; I could tell thee a thousand things herein; but I per∣ceive we are neer the lands-end. Kit. However continue thy discourse as long as we are aboard. Kit. In a word therefore (mark well what I say) there is nothing so sure as that in case the Common-wealth of England doth not oblige the Spaniards to reform and amend the said Articles of Peace, the many bleeding hearts of a great number of good En∣glish men, will not conceive their condition to be better in these times, then they formerly were: I mean such as have by their Traffick; for that I have seen their intolerable and innumerable greevances. Boul. Can you exemplifie herein? Kit. Marry that I can, and it's that the Spanish and the Flemmish (which were wont to be called the py∣rating Dunkirks) do use a game called have at all; and for the most part do (as the Italian Robbers, who first kill a man, and then pick his pockets) imprison, torture and slay those they light on; and then make sale of their ships and goods.
Boul. But what said the Merchants hereunto? and those who were Copertners in the Ships ladings? Kit. Why, this was their course, to the Admiralty Courts they went, first to that of Dunkirk, next from that of Pontius they are sent up to Pilat at Bruxels; where for the most part they are sure to be condem∣ned: for that those Grandees, the Governours of Towns, and the most eminent'st men in those parts, have their shares in the Bootie; being so interest ad∣venturing Pyrats, (as the Barron of Wakken was,) in so much as that its an impossibility for any English men to be righted there. Boul. Tell me, I pray, wherein all this while the Treaty of Peace is defective? Kit. In several particulars, which I could specifie in; and yet I must be brief; although there might be much said hereon, had we time; to instance in one, And it is the 25. Article of that Treaty, which runs thus, viz. That if during this peace, any thing be attem∣pted, or done, by the Subjects of either; the attemptors and such as offend therein, shall be onely punished and no others. Boul. Why, this seems to be just and consonant to the word of God. Kit. You should say, answerable to the Cottingto∣nian law-giver's meaning, which by your leave, I shall make appear thus, It is unpossible for any men espe∣cially the English, to be indemnized by the attem∣ptors or offenders, by way of justice; for as I told you before, the several Grandees have a share therein; besides, the impossibility for an English man who is wronged in the Indies, and those remote parts, to obtain any satisfaction at all, from those diminutive
Vice-gerents, whose will is a law, and whose inte∣rest is their Mammon: Nor can these wilfull Pirates be hindred in their pursuance of the English even in∣to the very Ports of the Land. Of these impossibili∣ties to obtain justice, Cottington was not in any wise ignorant; and therefore his contriving of such an Article, was in favour of the Spanyards, whose Pen∣tioner he then was, and its no wonder, he is still so. Boul. And if so be, the Spanish and Flemmish Sea∣men of War (or any others, under what pretence so∣ever they may be set forth) doe so egregiously abuse the English, and that there is no justice to be had; besides, that the substance of many Widows and Or∣phans (who have lost their Husbands and Fathers; together with their Ships and Goods, as abovesaid) hath been exhausted in the like fruitlesse pursuances: It therefore seems that the granting of Letters of Mart, is the shortest way. Kit. This may prove to be as bad a remedy as the evill it self; for that in the first place, those who in∣tend to man out Ships on such an expedition, must be at vaste charges; secondly, they run the hazard of a lost Voyage; thirdly, its a question, whether that which they take will countervaile the cost, when as the charges are deducted. Moreover, the Owners may pretend, that its a hard case to have their Ships and Goods taken, when as they have not done the wrong; And what would not severall souldiers think hereof? when as very often for a punctilio between Princes, whole Countries are laid waste, Cities, Towns and Villages are reduced to ashes, both old and young put to the Sword; Virgins and even Girles ravished, with many the like cruelties.
Boul. As then me thinks it might prove a very fit expedient to seise on the Ships and Goods of such a Nation, whereby the English may (in so high a na∣ture) have been prejudiced, and the which may be effected in the very Ports of England, and even in the Merchants Ware-houses. Kit. I marry, why, now thou speakest common sense, for it was the same course which Queen Eliza∣beth took; and whereby she got the love of the peo∣ple; and caused her self to be feared by all Nations. Other States have done the like on the same occasions. The righting of subjects being a Maxime of State, which is not to be gain-said; and which the Spanyards themselves do not deny, but to the contrary they have confest, and must avouch the same. That whereas it is the publique Faith; which doth make good reciprocal Bonds; so can there not be a true and firm peace, save upon such just and invio∣lable principles, as that by vertue of them, every par∣ticular subject may be righted; for that otherwaies, a Peace would be far more dangerous then open war; during which, parties can better stand upon their guards, then in the time of a professed friendship. Boul. I doe remember several examples, of what I have alledged; when as Forreigners have on the like occasions seised on the English-ships and goods with∣in their jurisdictions. Kit. You may easily remember them, for that they are of a very fresh date; even since the last Parlia∣ment of England hath been assembled. Boul. Doubtlesse you mean, one Peter le Duke, who being authorized by the French Council of State, to arrest such ships and goods, as belonged to the English
Subjects in obedience to the Parliament; by Virtue of which order, the said le Duke did force open the En∣glish Merchants Counting-houses at Saint Malos. Kit. So likewise do I remember, how that the King of Denmark, did in the year 1643. seise on a ship be∣longing to the English Merchants Adventures, as it past Gluckstadt on the river of Elbe, and the which was bound for Hamborough; as also foure other ships belonging to the East Land company, as they past the Sound: All which ships together with their lade∣ings were confiscated, without any suit at all in the Admiralty Court. And this ceisure was undergone by the said King of Denmark; because the Parliaments ships had taken a Denmark ship called the Christian Ark. Nay the Spanyards themselves have done and day∣ly do more then what is above specified; for that they seize on such ships as chance to be in the company (by meer accident, and not having any relation at all to them) of such others on which the said Spanyards pretend to have a right; and to instance herein, we shall only alledge Captain Davis and Freeman's case, who were lately abused in the like manner by the Spanyards. Moreover as there are an infinite num∣ber of such like examples, so doth it behove those, whom the great Judge of Heaven and Earth hath hath placed in authority; to remember (on such occa∣sions) when as those who live under their obedience are wronged; and that its impossible for them to be otherwise redrest; To do them justice in the like man∣ner as is before specified: unlesse they expect that the old womans ghost (who stopt Adrian the Emperor in his way, saying, Cease to be, or do Justice) should cry in
their Ears, Doe Justice to those that are true unto you, or Take not upon you that function which the Lord hath permitted you to exercise. And thus I shall conclude with the last part of that which is to be said on a busi∣nesse of this nature, viz. That whensoever a State is in possession of any ships, goods, or monyes, apper∣taining unto the Subjects of any Nation, from whom they may have received an injury; The best and spee∣diest way to right their own Subjects so offended, and endammaged; is to dispose of those said ships, goods, and monies unto them; and to leave it unto that Prince, whose Subjects have wronged the others, to satisfie his said Subjects, which committed the said out-rage, out of those specialties, ships, goods, and monyes, as the said Prince may be in possession of: (by them so unjustly taken.) And thus there is an end of an old Song. Let us therefore hasten to shoar, and there observe whether the Hoghen Moghen Ambassadours will a∣gree; and thereby make good their old saying, viz. Houdt vast eude beleight; or whether they are come o∣ver in such a Crafty way as the late Marquesse of Spi∣nola was used to practise (as aforesaid) and whereby he over-reached such men as were subject to be drawn in by smooth speeches; when as he said, En∣tretenemos à essa platica; although he had no minde to conclude any thing at all; onely out of a subtile vein, to gain time; according to the Italian saying, Per arte eper ingano, si passa la mitta del Anno &c. Nor can it be believed that they intend to make use of the French Pollicy, viz. If fait bonpescher en eau trouble, But rather that both parties will be just and wise, and observe the saying, That the greatest Craft is to have none at all, &c. FINIS
The Second Part, OF THE Holland-Sea-Cabbin-Dialogue; CONSISTING, In a sharp dispute between a stout English Sea Captain, a Dutch Merchant, and a Masty Freeze-lander; who in his last comming over from Holland, betroathed himself under the Decks unto Goody Drigle-Drag-taile; Whose Hogs at his landing he sold to buy himself a gaudy Coat, wherewithall he at present Swaggers on the Old Exchange. Whereunto there is added, Gooddy-Drigle-Drag-tailes, pittiful lamentation to Wabbity Clonters, and Jannety Stronts, her Goships; all of them lately come from Holland by the Fleet which was conceived to be in sight of Portsmouth. LONDON, Printed by T. M. 1652.
The Second Part of the Hollanders Sea-Cabbin-Dialogue. Mer. WHo of us three, I pray, shall prove him∣self to be the wisest? and reflect on a Gig, which was acted by the Harlemmers Rhe∣toricians: Whenas a single man appear∣ing on the stage, uttered his minde in this sense; viz. Three and five is nine, which he con∣tinually reiterated as he walked up and down; a while after, a merry Grig starts forth at the other end of the Stage, and saith thus; To meddle with no∣thing, is best; and these two might happily have re∣mained uninterrupted till this very day, had not a third party interposed; & hearing the first mans note, that three and five was nine; he endeavoured to per∣swade him, that he was in an error; for that to all mens knowledge, three and five were but eight: At which the five and third man being displeased, and falling into a rage, seeing himself thus abruptly controled, he gave the other (who endeavoured to rectifie him) a sound box on the Ear, saying, that's nine with a ven∣geance, at which our third party capered to some tune
laughing heartily and repeating his first lesson viz. To meddle with nothing is best; Whereas the affirming party was sufficientiy ashamed, and the assembly not a little pleased: As also all busie bodies, partly instru∣cted; carrying so emphaticall a lesson away with them, viz. How that, to meddle with nothing, was the best and safest way. Cap. Thou hintest very well; and if so be that Meddle with all-party, had performed his part on the Old Exchange: Marry as then, he would have learned more wisdome, then to spread brags of the buying of Dunkirk, and all the Westphalia bacon: As if we English were children, and to be scared by such a mock-show, and could not make fire-ships as well as our neighbours: nay, as if we wanted Spades and Pick-axes, to levell your Hontsbosch, your Ca∣dykes, and your Slapers; and to make the Sea over∣run all thy Country. Mer. Nay brother, that's such another brag as was lately vented in a Beer-sellar, amongst such mad Sea-blades as thou art. Cap. I would have you know, that we Sea-Captains are as wise as Moses was, and not at all so foo∣lish as Pharoah: For that he passed the Sea, and tasted not a drop of it: But Pharoah and his drunken crew were so mad as to drink their bellies so full on't, as that they all kickt up their heels. And though we trade on the water, yet we drink good wine: I would have you to know that we are rational men, as well as o∣thers; and doe understand our selves in such a manner as shall appear unto all the world. And as for the particular of Beere drunkards, apply that to your own country men; especially, to the nasty Freeze,
who would not resolve on the saving of thir souls, their lands, lives, and liberties, when as William of Nassau represented unto them the distressed estate, wherein their Country-men were (before their at∣taining to be the mighty Kaes Copers, from Kaes knee-lessen, drye brochelde Necus Schipper:) untill they had first drunk with him, and permitted them to salute his wife the Princesse, opsie-Freeze, by a slovenly great bearded fellow: And as then, it was William, thou art a good fellow; they stroked him on the shoul∣ders, and told him they would make a man of him; telling him thus, Willem, Willem, wy sullen een man van uw maken, so ghy wilt deughen: Englished thus, William, William, we will make a man of thee, so thou wilt prove honest: I marry, would they; and I marry as then should he have monies. And as then John van old Barnavault, with two others of the brethren line∣ally descended from such Schoomakers and Bre∣wers, as never were acquainted with the wearing of a pair of Cuffs; and these forsooth, were sent over to the great and matchlesse Queen Elizabeth; who at first dash gave them a flat denial; telling them that she could not with a safe Conscience assist Rebels, such as were the subjects of a King, her dear brother; unto whom she was particularly obliged; concluding with a Quere, how they could imagine, that she should suffer the bodies of her Noble English men to be their stop dykes; and for the which they might perchance one day pay them with ingratitude: A thing which is but too much practized now a dayes, by such as have been obliged above reason. Whereupon Barnavalt, (who had a groates worth of Pedantical broken latine in his poutch I should say Rhetorick Though it was
a little polish't over in Erasmus stile) why as then he could crouch, stoop, fawn, and flatter in this manner; (returning the Queen this answer;) To your sacred Majesty, we have made our addresses, as to a dear Mo∣ther, we like little children imploring for Milk; and if so be our fate should be such as to be denyed, why as then we must starve; and in the like tearms they moved that good Queen to compassion, the which it seems God would permit: And she answered them that they should not onely have milke from her royal breasts, but even the very last drop of her blood; and how is this, I pray, repaied? Why marry, even by the blood of our true English at Amboyna; and whe∣ther heaven should not send down to know whether it be so or no; and doe according unto the cry which is lately gone up from Portsmouth? Let all the world judge; and likewise let Heaven judge? whether all the water which might over-whelm thy ingratefull soil (by the piercing, as aforesaid, of thy dikes, the Honts-bosch; the Slapers, Cadikes, and the like) might be capable to wash off so great a guilt. Freez. Sirra Captain, if thou wilt drinke with us; up sin Freeze, we will make thee an Hornest-man. Capt. Right, this is even as I said afore of William Prince of Orenge. Freez. Sirra Captain, I would have thee to know, that I have a brave green Cheese, coloured by good sheeps dung; and a good pickle Herring: Nay better then all this, I have a couple of lusty freeze Mares to be∣stow upon thee, to'th end that if so be thou art furi∣ous enough, thou maist Cover them thy self, and thou maist term their Foals Beschie: nay Elizabeth, if thou beest as plaine as we are, for so we call our Mares;
ha, ha, Bessie, ha with a whip we make them flie, faster then Ship sailes when the wind blowes at the high∣est, and though you make all your sailes. Capt. Why how now Good man Furcoat, and Fur∣cap? sirra sirra say you? thou that walkest on the Ex∣chang, and struttest even as if the present being of the Hogen Moghens Ambassadors amongst us, did make thy Dice to runne naught but Sisse, Cinke; whereas thou art but a meere Duce (Dunce I should say) nay a meere Asse, and a Foole in Graine. Drible-D. Truly sir Captain, he hath made a Fool of me indeed; alas, I can assure you 'twas my Sow, and Pigges that paid for this brave Coat, and for his ranting in lieu whereof, I now hear by Jannetie Stronts, and Wabbetie Clonters reports, that we must all return from whence we came; and that which is worse, we must returne not halfe so wise as we were, for that we thought we should have been coupled. Jan. Stronts. Thou shouldest rather say, be marry∣ed together, that so the state of Holland might have beene the Wife, and the Common-Wealth of Eng∣land the Husband, and that by so lovely a copula∣tion, they might not onely have produced Herrings, but Whales, to make good store of Oyle for our cloath; for that you must know we have an art to make cloath far better then yours? and the Moun∣fiers, the Signiors, the great Min-Heeres, are all of them in love with our cloath; besides we know how to make Fooles of you English, by getting away your Fullers Earth: Moreover we have another expedient (though it lyes Dormant) and the which we will put on foot with speck John, the Don Diegos; for that we are great comrades at present; although its
not unlikely, but that they should gladly see us fall foule, and take one another by the throat, that so they might have an opportunity to have at us againe. Freez. So ho, goodly Driggle-Draggle-tayle, have a care of thy troffe, for that thy Hogges and Pigges are gone. Jan. Stronts. Hearke I pray how this surley stal∣lion snarles? marry come up, this would be a hot match, and a faire copulation indeed. Freez. Why? that we shall, and agree in spite of all the Fire-brands in the World; and now I will take a turne amongst the English, since I see my walking amongst my own Country-men is carped at; am I not a free borne Man? shall there not be free quarter between us Captaine? I pray you tell me; shall we rake coals out of the ashes? give me leave Captaine, wee are all Adam and Eves Sonnes; we are of one and the selfe same Religion, take my word for it, such as would have us to fall foule; doe not minde any good to either of us; still I say, a green Cheese thou shalt have, and a Mare to boote: Nay thou shalt ride me if thou wil'st, and my gooddy Driggle Draggle taile too, for I must plainely tell you, it was but a Match under the Decks. Capt. How now sirra? I tell thee, I scorn thee, thy Generation, thy Nation, thy Coat, thy Cheese, thy Mares; and farre more thy infamous goody driggle-draggle-tayle bitches. Marc. Good sir Captaine, let us talke like Bro∣thers. Capt. Brother? I scorne thy Motion, Brothers saist thou? what Brothers? Cain and Abel were Brothers; and the Hollanders may happily prove to be the Slay∣ers of Abel.
Freeze Well said brave Captain, still you grant us to be the elder brother. Mer. Pray sir Captain, let us talk as brothers, in him who hath made us so. Capt. If you were Christians, that were somewhat; but you seem to be worse then Jews and Devils Mer. Good Captain, although we were what you suppose us to be; yet however let us talke like bro∣thers; let me intreat you to passe by this S. Christo∣phers Hircanum; Let us I pray you discuss and ponder the case; and I pray you what is it that raises the storm, save your abundance of matter: I perceive you are incensed. First, by your remembring the barbarous proceedings of a company of drunken knaves, who were on the other side of the world, too farre from their Masters to have their hands held from abusing of the English: were not, I pray you, the Holland Ambassadours two years together dancing an atten∣dance on the late two Kings pleasures, proffering their Majesties and the Nation satisfaction? Shall a wrong done by a company of knaves, during the reigns of forreigners, who are dead and forgotten, be so much resented by those, who will not acknow∣ledge them nor theirs, although they should come on earth again? besides, the wrong which was acted, was happily done against such, who if they were alive might perchance not be in a possibility of deserving this Common-wealths justice or favour: For that it may be they might have proved arch-malignants. And grant all this were not so, yet what shall we say? They are gone and cannot be recalled▪ and if satis∣faction must be given for blood, then let us remem∣ber the free-grace, which our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ hath offered to all mankinde; rather then to call upon the ancient laws, which seem to be the sum∣mit of Rigour, as life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth; And if this must needs be urged; would it not prove a piece of high injustice, if so be for the striking out of one tooth of a mans head, that hath his double range of teeth compleat, the tooth of the offender should be plucked out, although he had but one in his head; certainly you would judge this to be a great deal of cruelty. Amboyna businesse, I grant you must be clea∣red; the right of the English Seas must be acknow∣ledged; for that is most notorious, how that when as King Philip the second of Spain, was married to Queen Mary, yet could he not claim any Prerogative in the English Seas, in the behalf of his Subjects: Fer∣dinando Tursis its true did fish in the English Seas, but it was on a Licence for 22. years, Signed by Queen Mary, as well as by Philip the second. But you will say, what other injuries have there been done you? Why, such things as are both possible and conveni∣ent must be effected, to which purpose we conceive the Ambassadours are come over, accompanied with such orders as may conduce thereunto. Capt. I marry, they are come indeed, for what I pray? to out-brave us with a Fleet, and to kill the good People? I must needs tell you that these are not times, wherein a Cat might not look upon a King; for that as now a King (undisguised) dares not look upon an English Cat; nay, not so much as on a dead Cat; nay, not so much as on Tom VVhittingtons Cat, which is hung up for a Signe: And must they for∣sooth, come with a Fleet on our coast? O, were there not a prohibition on the importation of Oaths by
Hollanders as well as by English, why I could even swear and swagger at this horrid abuse. Mer. Good brothers, let me intreat you to give way to the exportation of Oathes by strangers, al∣though they should not pay any custom at all for it. Cap. I will have thee to know (and all the world to boot) that we can set out two hundred Men of Warre; and by our dividing of them into four fleets, we shall be able to master the Seas; and so we shall not need to think on such utterances, as the cutting of dikes, which we scorn, and abhor the thoughts there∣of; being not so over-presumptuous as to contradict the Lords Decree, by making a second Flood. For that all the Nations of the earth shall finde us to be answerable to the Etymologie of our name, viz. An∣gelical. That which is fair and just must be expected from us; we will doe as we would be done by; ami∣cable in times of Peace; and fair quarter if it must needs come to a Warre: and thus much may suffice for the principal. But as for accessaries, I pray thee tell me, good sir Merchant, canst thou perswade thy self, that we Sea-Captains, and such others of us as doe resent the blood-sheddings of our country∣men, of our brethren and freinds, can be disswaded from the begging of our Rulers (even on our knees) that we may have liberty to put to Sea: You must know that the whole Nation hath but one tongue, and one heart in this regard; can we not at our ease take all the Merchandises wherewith the Holland ships are fraughted? Need our English men venture one groat in Merchandises? Doth England consist in Harlemmer meeres? In Zuyder Seas? and in Rivers? Your country men have no Lands nor Parcks; Doe
but cut off their Traffick, and as then God be with you, ingratefull Generation; And all this while you would have us repeale an Act: I marry, an Act of Parliament: which must be as inviolable, as the de∣crees of the Parthians and Medes. And moreover it seemes by your discourse, that you would faine have us to believe, that the Parliament hath been mis-informed by some self interessed Men, who may perchance be accused of some secret Mono∣poly; and the which may tend to the ruine of a num∣ber of Merchants, Artists, and Trades-men. Merch. If I doe not prove it to be so, nay if I make it not appeare unto you, that it is one of the greatest Monopolies that ever was hatcht against this Nation, as then call me Foole, Nitty-breech, Ninny-hammer, Cocks-cumbe, or any thing what thou wilt. Cap. Say you so? Why, I doe very much question whether thou wilt not prove to be the Actor, who troubled himselfe to maintaine that five and three were but eight; and that forgetting the merry Grigs Axiome, viz. To meddle with nothing is best: thou at length maist chance to get a sound box on the Eare for thy paines. Mer. Hold there sir Captaine; you may be mista∣ken, for that our discourse infers no consequences. Cap. However, I know thou art a Pen-man, and hast the liberty and prerogative of thy Counting-House; and as thou wilt'st not transgresse the Law of Nations, so will not I please my selfe, by asserting un∣to that which is before mentioned, viz. that five and three are nine: yet however I shall be content to hear what thou canst say, against that unquestionable truth: How that the Act which prohibites the Im∣portation
by strangers, of such Commodities as are not of their Countries growth, tendeth to the ad∣vantage of our Negotiations, and to the main curtai∣ling of all Forrayners, especially of the Hollanders, who (had not this been) would not have beene so over-hasty, as to harp upon that string. Merch. Why truly, let me tell you, it may be the States of Holland have been made to understand, that the said Act was rather publisht in a threatning manner then otherwaies; and the which I would have you know, no power in the World could ever yet brook; for that every Cock (althoug his feathers be never so Hoary) conceives himselfe to be Master on his owne Dunghill: so likewise know you the French Proverb, Amouret seignieuri, n'endure point de Compagnie: although its granted, that comparisons doe for the most part halt, and offend: wherefore we shall proceed to the point, and that we may enjoy our selves with the better Freedome, let us ere we en∣ter on our discourse, turne home-wards these home∣ly Gossips, gooddy Driggle Draggle-tayle, Wabbetie Clonters, and Jannitie Stronts, who seem to be alarmed by the noise of a breach; and as for the plain down right Freeze-Lander, we will leave him to take a walke, and ayre himselfe, whilst we, (laying aside all particular interests and passions, especially that kil∣ling and destroying humour; for that you must needs grant, when men have fought it out to the last; yet must they (after many losses on both sides) come to an agreement at last, go on with our discourse. Capt. I but yonder comes our importunate Freeze-Lander againe; how shall we shift him? Freez. And why shift me sirra Captain? I would
have thee know that now I have taken a turne round the Exchang; I am resolved to interrupt the Gentleman that spake last, and also to tell thee to thy face, that thou art either a great Imposture, or mightily mista∣ken, as touching the Sea proceedings; for that it will be proved, hw that the Hollanders my compatriots have been first set upon, and most Egregiously abused, which truth, shall be made good by substantial proofs, and well grounded evidences, and the which our Ambassadors will not be backwards to represent. And how that the English have committed such spoyles and out-rages upon us, as are not to be paral∣lel'd; For is it not publike, how that one English man of Warre, who set forth with a Letter of Licence (or Mart as you may call it) hath taken more then thirty Holland Merchant men; and I pray you how can this stand before God and Men? that by reason of a par∣ticular pretence, a whole Nation should suffer so ge∣nerall a damage: Moreover was it ever heard of, that Soveraignes and States doe breake, on the occasion of every particular persons falling foule? that would be just as if Neighbours should set each others Hou∣ses on fire, when as their Servants or Domesticks chance to disagree. And as to thy former question, whether the Hol∣landers were not worse then Jewes? what an unhand∣some language is that? and how injurous? since all the world knowes them to be honest plaine dealing men, that their word is more binding then all the English Lawyers clauses, for, too, and, and which they insert in their Beds-sheets like Indentures, deeds and covenants: The Hollanders you must know mean right to the English; and love them so well, as that they of∣fer
to ioyne with the English Nation against any par∣ty that shall not keepe a faire correspondency with them: Now that it stands with the interest of the En∣lish Nation, to keepe a good quarter with the Hol∣landers, hath been proved by twenty undeniable Ar∣guments. Besides who can gain-say, but that they are Chri∣stians? Nor doe they (as it is scandalously surmised) profane the Lords day; nor in the least omit his ser∣vice: have they not set a deep forfeiture on any per∣son that shall be found to sell any thing on the Sab∣bath day? And sure I am, that amongst them, thou shalt not see such a spectacle as Pauls Church is in, at pre∣sent; for that they would either pull it downe, or build it up againe; to the end that strangers should not have occasion to question their Christian profes∣sion. Therefore sirra Captaine let me advise thee to leave thy crackings, quackings, and Fulminations, as also thy grinning at my Coat, the which I must tell you, is lyned with a good Fur: For though I doe sometimes talke of a green Cheese, and of Freeze∣land Mares; yet am I of such a constitution, as not to blush at any Nick-names of Butter-box, Flem∣ming, or the like; to which I have a reply at hand, and that in Ryme too; For that it is granted we doe love Butter, and we doe finde it to be good, according to the saying; Buttertie voor, en buttertie naer, doet Een Mens leven hondert Iaer; which I will thus english you, Butter before meales, and after repast, will make a man hundreds of yeares out-last. In this sense it was, that Prince Maurice of Orange outvide the Marquesse of Spinolas Quible, when as he feasted the said Marquesse during the Treaty of their Truce; and at which
time the said Marquesse tooke an occasion to com∣mend his Country, preferring it before Holland; in∣ferring how that Lemmons and Orenges did grow there twice a yeare, whereunto Prince Maurice said, that Holland must needs be a far better Country, for there Butter and Cheese did grow twice a day: and whereby his Souldiers were maintained fat and lu∣sty; and thus much I thinke sir Captaine may serve your turne, in lieu of our Butter-box-Flemming Ti∣tle, which you so unhandsomely brand us with. Capt. Be shrow my heart thou hast hit the Naile on the head now; in good sooth, I did alwaies respect this Dromidary Freeze-lander to be some disquised Rhetoritian, purposely sent to walke about our Ex∣change, for to observe the dispositions of Men: you see how he hath wit at will, and can speake to the purpose too, most like a cunning Logitian; however to the point Merchant I pray you. Merch. Truly if it be so, as that the English Sea∣men have first abused the Hollanders, and that all the bruits which are come from Portsmouth, are not well grounded; why then it concernes every one of us to be circumspect and watchfull, for to disco∣ver what Firebrands these are which goe about to put strife betweene these two Nations, that so they may make the Devill keepe a Holy-day; nay that the Turks and Infidels may laugh at us, when as they shall see those, which professe one and the selfe same Religion, sheath their Swords in each others bowels, Cui bono? for that this question wil certainly be made by all juditious honest and wel meaning persons. And as then, will not all wise Statists conclude, that the great Devill of delusion hath blind-folded us, even
in a time, when as our most assured intelligences do confirme unto us from all parts, that our Adversaries doe greatly combine against us; and that in case wee doe not hasten to prevent them, they will venter ere long to bang us by Bell, Booke, and Candle, since its too apparant that the Spaniards and French will be ne∣cessitated to agree; and their discontented Princes may as soone be moved to put up their Swords, which if they doe, shall we not, I pray you be the object of their sa sa. But now to the point, in reference to that which is bruited concering the instances which are said to be made for the Parliaments repealing of their Act, concerning the prohibiting of the Importation of Goods for strangers, and the which is supposed to be an unquestionable meanes to undoe the Hollanders, and to increase the English Navigation: For (as some conceive) were it otherwayes, why as then should the Hollanders be so solicitous (as they are said to be) to have that Act repealed? Herein I shall ingeniously declare unto you, what I have learnt by experience; and I shall prove it un∣to you, how that the prohibiting of Importation of Goods by strangers, will neitheir encrease the Eng∣lish Navigation, nor undoe the Hollanders; but on the contrary, it will be extreame prejudiciall unto the English Nation. As for example, in the first place; The customes will be diminished by the halfe: for that strangers pay double customes; Nor will the waste of Commo∣dities be greater then formerly, whosoever the Im∣porters be. Secondly, Suppose that from London there be 40.
50. or 100. Ships more set forth to fetch Commodi∣ties; yet it must be granted, that there will be 500. Ships lesse imployed from the other parts of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, which were used to fetch all manners of Wares from Holland. For all the Sea Townes in England carry one or other Commoditie constantly for Holland, Zealand, and other parts beyond the Sea, yea divers Townes, as Yorke, Hull, and all the Countries, Yarmouth, Norwitch, and all that Country; and so likewise of Colchester, Sandwich, and other hath the chiefe Sale, and vent for their Commodi∣ties, and they goe over not halfe freighted, yet commonly all of them returne full of all manner of Commodities from thence: In stead whereof they must all returne for the most part empty, because most of what they bring from thence, are Commodities of other Countries growths, whereby Trading will cease, Merchants will be constrain∣ed to stay for returnes till their Commodities be sold, and their monies received, for to make them over by exchange unto London, and returne thither with their empty Ships: So likewise will they be constrained to return their monies thither in such Commodities as they want, at much dearer Rates (even for their ready money) then they could have had them for in Holland upon time, and would have made two or three returnes from Holland, be∣fore they can make one in this way. Besides that some wares are cheaper in Holland, then at the place where they grow, and where they are made. Moreover it will prove a great losse to all the Townes in England, that they may not take this opportunity, but must he forced to goe further to buy Hempe; To Danzick for Corne, to Venice and Zant for Currens, run great hazards, especially in these times, (when as the Seas are
beset with numbers of men of War) and loofe many moneths time to buy their wares dearer. Besides that all these Townes commonly save halfe of all their exchanges by the returne of those Commodities, and many get the double of their exchanges by returne of them. To all which, the experient in the Traffick do adde this for a maine Argument, of the undoing of the Trade of most of the Townes, in England. viz. In that all other Townes except London, can vent but a lit∣tle Hempe, a little Iron, a little Spice, and so of a hundred things more, and therefore its argued thus. That their Ships must needs lye still, because those small Townes cannot vent a Ships loading of each, or of two or three Commodities; nor have they money enough to have a stock lye in Holland, in Wares to be sold; and another stock to be sent to another place, to fetch home Commodities from so remote Countrie. That many Hollanders will goe and dwell in East∣land, France, and other places; and so will bring home Hempe, Pitch, and Tar from Eastland; as also Wynes, and Salt from France and Spaine, the which as it cannot bee hindred, will enrich them, and impoverish England. And as experience tells, that as by this meanes all, or many Forrayne Commodities will be the dearer in Eng∣land, it will thereupon ensue that the English Nation will loose a great part of their Trade in forraigne parts; and that the Hollanders will incorporate the same to them∣selves, by being also to sell cheaper then the English. And this for the particular reasons, whereby the Argument is made the more infallible, in that they have more Money then they can well bestow at three and foure per cent. use; and that as they have more
Water then Land, nor any Parkes for to squander a∣way their monies on wild Deeres; nor doe they mar∣ry unto Lords Sons, or Ladyes Daughters, for that they say Sort by Sort: they therefore imploy all their monies upon Traffick, which they pursue with the more eagernesse; all which considered, I would faine know by what meanes you intend to put them out of their Trade, or hinder them to buy and sell Commodities, at better Rates then the English can buy them, in those parts where they grow? Capt. I doe perceive by thy discourse, that thou hast mainly studyed this Case. Merch. I say nothing but what experience prompts me unto, whereby it may also be made good, how that the sole meanes, whereby the English Traf∣fick may be encreased, is to pitch upon such benefici∣ciall establishments, as are mentioned in the first part of the Sea-Cabbin Dialogue: for that by them mo∣nies will be reduced to a lower value, and for the want whereof, the English will never be able to buy and sell at such easie Rates as the Hollanders do. Capt. Me thinkes thou speakest of particulars, which are mentioned in the first part of the Sea-Cab∣bin Dialogue; so likewise did I heare of other relati∣ons, concerning those advantages which wise Statists have ever found in the imposing of small Taxes on the importation and exportation of Merchandizes: when as the Merchants doe not so much as thinke on the defrauding of the customes; nor on the decei∣ving of each other, by their sundry falsifications of Wares. Merch. Hereon I must needs tell you, how that the bare Animosity and selfe-Interessedness of some per∣sons,
have oftentimes caused an interruption in the good correspondency between Nations. As for in∣stance, The breach betweene Henry the seventh, and Charles Duke of Burgundy; with the Emperour Charls the fifth, between Queene Elizabeth and Phillip the second; as also those with Spaine and France, in the late Kings time: when as at length, after the severall Nations and Parties had sufferd by the like interrup∣tions, it was found requisite to order things againe at any Rate; and thus defective and disadvantagious Treaties were patcht up. Capt. But I pray you? what is that which is whis∣pered among curious men, touching severall parti∣culars which are contained (in a Remonstrance; and the which hath of late been proffered to the Par∣liament, wherein the Author saith, that in case there be not any reflection made on his proffers, he as then remaines a free man borne; and in this states regards a second Colomba. The foregoing lines, of which conclusion makes mention of one Kelly in Queen Elizabeths dayes, who (to the knowledge of severall persons of credit in those dayes, especially old Mr. Challoner.) had the secret of producing of gold, and for the which all the world sought unto him. Now truly my selfe have been on some nooks and parts of the golden World, where I heard that there are certaine particular men, who Trade in Gold, and bring it in lumps to the Spaniards, though they will not discover unto them how they come by it, and its thought that they have some particular mystery therein; nay even an Art of Production. And if I be not deceived, I was also told hereof,
in the same leafe of the said Remonstrance, it is said that the Proponants secrets are of another guess ex∣tent and value then those, whereon Sir Water Rawley and Captaine Cavendish, had fixt their designes. So likewise heard I another Captaine say, that to his knowledg they were of another guess nature then Sir William Wallers late designe. Now in case this be so, why should we not looke after it? for if wee should not fall foule with the Hollanders, or with any other Nations (as the French who are already together by the Eares) why should we as then be so neglectful of our owne good, as to suffer any other Nation to bereave us of such an advantage, and take it away even before our Noses? Besides are there not many Cavaleers abroad, who are able to scrape such a stock together, as may well serve for so ordinary an equipage, towards the effect∣ing of the same; and whereof the Proponant speakes. Merch. Truly as for my part, I conceive that some ill informed person may thinke, that a Reply appro∣ving of what you say, might savour of an Act, to take off the edge of your first fury against the Hollanders. But as for my selfe, I doe speake sincerely, and really as I meane, and as I believe; and therefore I answer you thus in generall termes. That the safest Maximes which this state may put in practise, are to procure unto the English Nation all the possible advantages that may be, especially to∣wards the attaining unto all Christians, glorious and profitable goods: And whereas many of us do con∣ceive that the Parliament reflects on providence; so do many of us believe, that the Officers of their Ar∣mies,
especially their Generall the Lord Cromwell, in∣tend the same; not that he reflects on that which Almanack-makers and other such like Pamphet-wri∣ters set forth; How that the Pope shall be pulled out of his Seat by him, by reason of a Lyon which he bears in his Arms: But that the true Lyon of Judah is he, who shall pull all those out of their Seats, who doe possesse them on false grounds. Now, in case heaven hath Decreed that this shall be effected in these dayes; and by a secondary means, viz. The Parliament of Englands happy Genius, although there were no such thing in his Arms as a Lyon; It might questionlesse be encompassed without the in∣fluence of the Stars, and allusions of Almanack-ma∣kers: For that the Lord hath a regard unto the in∣tentions of men: Cains sacrifice was one as well as Abels, although not accepted of; and its moreover said, My son, give me thy heart, &c. Now for as much as concerns the other particular, which you hinted at; Truly this is my opinion thereon, That it would be a farr wiser part to minde such like Christian, glorious, and beneficiall atcheivements as you speak off; wa∣ving the enraged humour of shedding of blood, and setting of the very Seas on fire; whereby we should but give the Devil an advantage over us, and would he not thereby have handsomly compassed his own ends? Capt. Thou sayest very well, and I doe also re∣member that my friend, who acquainted me, with the Contents of the aforesaid Remonstrance unto the Parliament; told me, how that the great Favourite, the late Duke of Buckingham, had fixt his minde on that secret designe; when as he intended his second
Voyage towards Rotchel; to which intent, he had (by a Treaty with the late King of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus) put himself under the said Kings prote∣ction. Mer. Why, truly as now you doe awaken my me∣mory thereon; for that I call to minde certain over∣tures, which were once made by one Master Fourbisher, unto the said King. Capt. Which mean you? Those which were in∣vented by a Scot, one Sir. Thomas Dishington (who by a Wit of this Nation was usually tearmed, a mouldy Turd) the same who when he was in France, under the pretence of being a Scotch Intelligencer, (though he could scarce Marshal up ten words of sense together) served the French as a spye. Mer. The same, the same, 'tis he himself. Cap. I marry, that Dreamer vented a world of Chy∣mera's, concerning one Seignior Pedro, who had been his fellow prisoner in the Bastile at Paris; and who as Sr. Thomas pretends) had left his wife and children in a place where gold did grow, as rise as grasse; and where (as the supposer said) the sunne had solidated a vein of massiff gold as thick as a mans thigh; which (like a Bracelet about a Ladies neck) did surround a hill in Cicily, neere unto the Town of Palerma. Mer. Why, this is a meer Chymera indeed; this was a meer deviding, la pela de l'orsso, the skin of a Bear, yet untaken: but suppose such a thing were; what a number of Pick-axes and Mattoks would there not be requisite to dig up that golden branch? After which, I pray you, how should it be gotten thence? unlesse a man could by some mysticall con∣juration, or by the strength of his faith, remove that
same Mountaine: However had Gustavus had as much faith as a graine of Mustard-seed, he would have removed the said Dishington from England, and caused him to be hanged at Stock-holm, after the ma∣ny favours he had conferred on him, whereof the late Duke Hamilton, and severall other eminent persons of the English Nation being witnesses, did admire; but at length the said King found himselfe to be cheated by the said Sir Tho. who had no less then fifteen thou∣sand Dollers given him by the said King, for the dis∣covery of his pretended secret, as Mr. Ailsberry the Minister of the English Church at Hamborough full well knoweth. Freez. And must I all this while keepe my peace? wrapt up in a Coat, at which you have so much carpt; O yea wise men of Gotam! could not you all this while procure unto your selves the discovery of that secret, which a Spanish second, Anthonio Peres mani∣fested to the Duke of Buckingham, that white faced man, whom the Spaniards conceived to be the person with gray Eyes; and of whom the Indians (that can make Gold by their secret way of production) be∣lieve a prophecie, viz. How that there shall come a∣mongst them a Nation with Flaxen haire, white fa∣ces, and grey Eyes, who shall enjoy Kellies secret: at which time the leaves of the Trees in that Land shall be as Gold? And these are the words in that Remon∣strance which you speake of. Sirra Captain, More∣over, I can tell you, now that the Spaniard, who re∣vealed the said secret unto the Duke of Buckingham, was for his paines poysoned by the King of Spaines black Fovourite. And to the end that ye may heare, see, and know,
I can speake of other guess things, besides greene Cheese, and Freeze-landers Mares; know you also, sirra Captain, that it is but too manifest, that in former ages there were Seekers, as well as in this; but which of the two were the wisest Seekers? there is the que∣stion. So likewise are there sundry propounders, some will goe about to Cozen, and others that mean well; let me tell you, that if so be Sir Water Rawley, Caven∣dish, and Sir William Waller, had not been interrup∣ted, they might have found; But as for such a See∣ker as Disshington was, he might have sought to all eternity, and as then be as far to seek as ever, for he that holds not Lands in Capite; and he (as the Italian saith) that hath there Camera Locante, will be far to seek, although he should have Parret-like, learned a speech to fore-stall the glorious advantages of ma∣king towards such maine ones, for to make that sure, and for to transporr Colonyes thither; to which pur∣pose fine things are invented to amuse people with∣all, especially such as will be Cozened, according un∣to the saying, volenti non fit injuria; for that such things are easily swallowed, if so be they are finely gilded. Disshington he aimed at a designe to intrap some great persons, on a pretence to transport a Colonie; but the question is; whether he had so much honestie and understanding, as was requisite for such an un∣dertaking; though 'tis true, he had lighted on a Rhetorick, which better wits then himselfe had ven∣ted. viz. That to move men towards the planting of a Colonie, and to beget in them a disposition to aban∣don their naturall Soyle, to inhabit another: They
must be entertained with the hopes of conquesting some great matter, and the which must be hard to come by, for that else it would not seem to be a wor∣thy undertaking for them. As for instance, The conquesting of the golden Fleece, the obtaining of a Land promised unto the Israelites, and the like; to obtaine Victories against the common Enemy; unto which if you add the pul∣ling of that dayld beast, Anti-Christ out of his Ro∣mish seate, it will not be amiss; for that such things take with the vulgar: as also the enlarging of a Na∣tions bounds on other Soveraignes and Nations: All which propositions, as they must be pleasing, so must they be feasiable, for to keepe the peoples minds in a longing expectation, and in a constant resolution, Capt. How now man? art thou a sleepe Freeze-lan∣der, saist thou? art thou not rather some Joseph Scali∣ger, translated into the lyning of a Coat? art thou not some Franecker or Leawarden professor? For as now thy language, and discourses plainely discover, that thy former termes and comparisons were but meere disguises, and that those gooddy driggle drag∣gle tayles with her Gossips, were but feined per∣sons: have I found you out I faith? I know now where thy Bashs lye (as the scofts say) why even to make us speake our minds, and thereon to take thy Raise: are you there with your Beares sir? why now we shall have you open up to us, the Greek and La∣tin stories, and expound unto us the two waies where∣by men must be ruled; how Armies are to be man∣aged, and how an Army is to be embatalled; how they are to be kept on foot, and how by them a man may attaine unto his severall ends.
Moreover, I doe perceive that according unto the story of the Wine, thou hast studyed how to possesse the hearts of men, how to master their Forces, and how to daunt their courages: ha, ha, good Mr. Doctor Freeze, I have discovered thee I trow. Thou maist happily have made that inscription which a Venetian Ambassador had placed over his Coat of Armes. viz. Populi, & Regum, nosse ingenium: for that I perceive its thy Maxime, to endeavour to dive into the bottome of each ones particular inte∣rests: There are indeed but two waies to Govern men by, either by Force or Love. The second where∣of cannot well be practised, without some dissimula∣tion, if not deceit; and this in effect hath a reference to the two former sayings, the which I have been mo∣ved to utter, on thy sudden discovering of thy selfe: my now Latin Freeze, whose Master of Art-like ex∣pressions, infer how that the practicall part of a true States-Mans universall principall, is to offer unto all those who are to be gained, a present and safe preser∣vation of their particular interests. The Hollanders Common-Wealth, together with severall others, have shaken the Monarchicall Yoaks from their Necks, have made themselves masters of Armies, of Treasures, as well as of the meanes and lives of men; nay of particular men, as also of all the state presenting priviledges to their inhabitants, they reformed the Religion; yet with a kind of To∣leration even to the Romanists at first. They confer∣red glory on the Souldiery, and received the Nobility into eminent places. Freeze. I Marry, but he that desires to vanquish by love and faire meanes, must avoid the giving cause of
suspition, least they might apprehend, that he intends to mix his particular ends with their interests: And therefore let him ever propound that by a third par∣ty, which he desires to compass: let him endeavour to render every one capable of it in particular, that to all whatsoever he saith and doth, may tend to that his wished end. Let him in all his proceedings, show his love unto all men, integrity in all his Negotiations, mildnesse in the beginning, courage in the progresse, and at last, his strength in the prevailing; as for example the wine doth which we before spake of: for that at first it suffers it selfe to be mastered in divers respects, un∣till at last it being gotten into the stomacks of Men, it thence ascends up unto the head, and so by its strength over-masters the Man its master. Capt. Ha, ha, my Freeze, I thought I had found you out. Freez. The greatest secret amongst Polititians, hath ever beene to embrace and establish a Religion, to maintaine Justice, and equally to administer the same; But, and if they had done no more, they had done just nothing: for that you must know, Religion hath two parts; the first is a profound knowledge, the second is an obedience in the observing of Com∣mands, which last is generally received by all men. viz By those of the Reformed Religion, the Calvinists, Lutheranes, Anabaptists, Brownists, Papists, Jewes, Turks, and all of them doe generally agree on the point of obeysance and obedience in relation to those things which are commanded, whether they be naturall, morall, or divine: yet however the first part is dan∣gerous, consisting in evasions, controversies, and ca∣vils,
which are the meer off-spring of all disputations, contentions, Schismes, and divisions. The people must not be made to learned, but must be kept at worke by Handy-crafts, and liberall Arts, though but soberly fed with knowledge. Wherefore many have blamed Agrippa de vanitate scientiarum. Was it not a maine madnesse in those who thwar∣ted the erecting of an Academy for all Arts and Sciences: which would not at all have moved spirits to such an insolent rebellious humour, as your in∣solent double Night-Capt snivelling nosed would be States Preachers, have lately done; and whom the Hollanders doe handsomely pay home with a ba∣nishing bill of Dismission, whereas they presume to tell their Rulers, things must be done thus and thus; and you shall doe whatsoever we brawle and roar in the Eares of gooddy Driggle Draggle tayle, Wabbetie Clonters, and Jannetie Stronts, together with such o∣ther Turf wives, and Butter-whores, who they set on to break their Rulers brains. Capt. Goe to my Freeze-lander? I see I have not judged amiss of thee, and I do heartily thank thee for thy having thus discovered thy self. Merch. O what a hap is this! 'twas a good wind in∣deed that put us by our first conceptions; who would have thought that we should have pitcht upon this discourse? Capt. Why the very truth is, that when I heard thee utter all those Arguments on the point of a free importance (it being a businesse which I have not at all dived into) I thought it not fit to make any Re∣ply thereunto; besides that the Parliament is wise,
and knowes best whether or no it stands with their interest to leave a free Commerce or no? For that they (heing the quintessence of the Lands wit) will doubtlesse take such a resolution thereon, as shall seem most consonant with this Common-wealths concernment. Nor was there ever any great General justly blamed for the raising of a Siege, when he could imploy his Army better in another undertaking: & in this sense it was that I reflected on a better occupation then blood-shedding; and therefore I rather chuse to call unto mind that particular which is spoken of in the Remonstrance lately given to the Parliament, viz. The profers of great Secrets, and other advan∣tages; For that truly I have heard much of a thing which hath not as yet been revealed. Merch. Truly if the case be so, why as then Captain it will greatly import thee to look after those things, both for thine own and the publicks good. Cap. And why should it not as much concern your self I pray? Merch. Alas! we Merchants (at least many of us) are like resty Horses, that neither can, nor will be bea∣ten out of their old Track, according unto our seve∣rall vocations; if you tell me of a Balthazar de Mou∣cheron, or a Curtin, and such like; why they I grant have been fit for such undertakings: but however, by the by, it seems somewhat strange unto me, that the State looks not after such things: And on the o∣ther side also, it seems as strange to me, that since the Proponant is a stranger, he hath not made his propo∣sals thereon to the East and West Indie Companies in Holland; and wherefore should a thing, which may be so great a consequence, as you infer by your hinting
on Kelly, in Queene Elizabeths dayes, perish with him? And we talke so much of Loreto, Civita Ʋechia, or any other Landing Port, to seek for I know not what; (though the designe were never so good) and neg∣lect to make our selves sure of a Treasure; after which the men of all ages have sought; and whereby all the Worlds atcheivements are to be compast and strengthned. Moreover, why doe we hear men talk of a particu∣lar, which is contained in the aforesaid Remonstrance, touching seven millions of pounds due unto this Na∣tion; and why is there no reflection made thereon, whilst that we let our minds rove afar off in seeking after things so remote; and in the mean while, none of us seems so much to mind these concernments at hand, as to say, let us have those seven millions of pounds, for that they may serve to take off the Assess∣ments and other charges, and so disburden the Peo∣ple; the rather, for that the Gentlemen who knows the meanes to recover the said seven Millions of pounds, doth incessantly crave leave to be there∣unto authorized, onely in four Words. viz. Goe and get them. Cap. Truly it is a strange fate which doth infatuate the brains of men that will not hearken to such faire proffers. Freeze. Good Captaine, I must conclude, with that which hath proved to be true in all ages: The weak∣nesse of some men is such, as that it doth often move them to neglect such things as are proffered unto them; and to seeke after those which flye them. And this is one of the maine causes why we in all states find a world of men, who doe so over-practise
the saying. viz. To meddle with nothing is best: as that at length, they prove to be good for nothing, and so farewell. Cap. I pray you my worthy Freeze, do not cut off so short, let us enjoy thee somwhat longer, and let us en∣large our conference, since we met for the best. Freez. What would you have us to discourse of be∣sides? Capt. Marry, I would fain hear thy opinion on our present case; and what course (to thy thinking) there ought to be taken concerning the Law? Freez. Why have you not that, by vox populi? Capt. What say you of vox populi? that's vox dia∣boli. Freez. So also is it vox Dei, if so be the people were confident that they are worthy of the saying, contained in the 23. Chap. of Deut. ver. 14. For the Lord thy God, walketh in the middst of the Camp to de∣liver thee, and to give thine Enemies before thee: there∣fore thine Hoast shall be holy, that he see no filthy thing in thee, and turn away from thee. Capt. So likewise doe I remember, that in the 17. ver. it is thus said; There shall be no whore of the Daugh∣ters of Israel, neither shall there be a Whore Keeper of the Sonnes of Israel: and if the people be free from that sinne; then indeed may their voyces be, Ʋox Dei. Freez. Have not your Rulers made a decree against this vermine? and I doubt not, but that at their first modelling of the Law, they will have a care to pro∣vide Emphaticall Articles against the same. More∣over let me tell you, that your crooked Law makes people runne into the crooked paths of sinne; and that it will never be rectified, unlesse it be squared
and angled by the Law of God. Besides unlesse your Rulers fix on the modelling of a Law, and not on the single reforming thereof, observing Gods Commandment unto Moses, to put off his shooes, which I conceive to be, by putting away sinne, the cause of the old Law, and to walk upon a holy ground, on such principles as are answerable to the dictates of that Godly Book, and in particular the Go∣spel: Nay, as a Divine saith very well, that Honest Book, in default whereof this your pretended setling of the Law will be but lost labour, and as a meer mock∣show, or as the lamentations of a Theef under the Gallows, who endeavours to protract the time, until some brybed reprieve be brought: and therefore I would have your Law served as a Judge did a Theef in Queene Elizabeths dayes, who receiving a reprieve for a Malefactor, caused the reprieve to be put be∣twixt the Theeves neck and the halter, and then commanded the Executioner to goe through with his part: So would I have the Law to be gone through withall by a setting of such Lawes as are answerable to the will of God, and as may befit the very essence, resemblance, and being of a Common-Wealth: for that otherwise (as I told you before) it will be but lost labour, and much like the discourses of (a com∣pany of impertinent Logitians) who talking of a Chaos, do perswade themselves, that God, out of that confused thing (though made by himselfe as they say, and whereby they consequently argue him to be the Author of confusion) made the world by de∣grees, determining thence, that things were after∣wards put in order: according to which sense of put∣ting things in order gradatim, your Rulers, cannot
(to my thinking) pitch upon a better expedient, then to settle an order which may be conformable unto his orderly disposall, who is the Author of all orderly perfection, and who hath given the severall Celestiall Orbs their particular functions. Moreover even as when this grand Artist had atcheived all his works, he as then created that image of his, for whose sake all those Celestiall bodyes were ordained to per∣forme their severall functions: He as then made Man and Femall, the which he did doubtlesse with an in∣tent, to the end that the Femall should be of use to the man; and therefore (in my minde) it may just∣ly be expected, that even this Femall Creature ought to be of a publik use in a well setled Government, and to beare a fit part in the Common-Wealths con∣cernments; that excepted, which is not allowed of in Israel; not for the whore keeping Sonnes of Israel. Capt. Marry, I like very well of your Proposition, in case they be kept out of the Pulpits, and out of the seates of Judicature; remember, I pray you, your Alice Pierce, and that some of them doe but too much exercise the patience of men? Freeze. Truly, there have been Prophetesses a∣mongst them; and our Lord Jesus Christ himself pre∣ferred some Women even before his Apostles; for that unto a woman he manifested the truth of that great good which he had wrought for all mankinde: Women, we see, would not leave him; they held him fast by his feet; they ceased not to kisse and wash them with their tears; they followed him even un∣to his death: Nor would they depart from the grave, before they had found him; Women have instruct∣ed and admonished men; and Women may be
thought fit to admonish one another at select times in pious meetings. Capt. I doe confesse, that it would be more decent, that they should reveal their faults to each others, then that they should, as the Papists, fill the ears of Priests with those infirmities, who do alas, steal upon them, through the charms and crafty insinuations of wicked men: when as by their imparting of those slips unto Priests, it doth for the most part happen, that as then, the saying is fulfilled; They confesse to the Devill, who makes the sinner worse then she was before. Freeze. Wise and Pious Widdows, as also such wo∣men as have left off childe-bearing, and childe-breed∣ing, and who have such under them as are capable to look unto their house-keeping, might be imployed in severall directions and functions proper to their Sex; as the Hollanders have several Establishments, where∣of women are the directours, as women had in for∣mer ages the mannaging of great undertakings? Capt. Let not them order dances? Freeze. Such dances as Miriam, Aaron's sister, with all the women and maidens of Israel did dance, could not be amisse; and which I would have both men and women to practise: but let us break off now, I pray you; for that after dancing, its fit to betake ones self to rest. Capt. Stay yet a while, I pray you; for that I have something more to move concerning women, and the settling of the Law. Freeze. You may finde much of the first, in Charls Gerbier's Elogium Heroinum, and in Mr. Hugh Peters, his Good work for a good Magistrate; by the latter of
which, most cases concerning Religion, Mercy, and Justice, may be regulated in the Common-wealth of England. In the first, (as I say) you will finde severall observations note-worthy, touching the usefull and laudable qualities in Women. In the second, you will meet with all those particulars, which are to be min∣ded by all those, who intend to attain unto a great deal of quiet by a short cut. In the first, you will meet with many notable examples of the learning and wis∣dome of women; of their constancy and courage; of their chaistity; of their abilities to govern: he more∣over tels you, how that Ceres Queen of Sicily was the first that taught people to live under laws; that Va∣lasca Queen of the Bohemians, governed her Estates without the Councel or advise of any men; he tels you also of the Piety, and Religiousnesse of women; on the proofs that Mary Magdalen and Martha her si∣ster, did preach the Gospel of Christ amongst the Illi∣rians, and converted all its inhabitans, how that the Sara's were devout, the Maryes humble, and pacified persons: The Elizabeths Religious, observing all the Commandments of God blamelesse; the Priscillas heavenly, and rich in discourse; the Bathesbis, Loyses, and Eunices, carefull in the instructing of their Chil∣dren in the knowledge of God; and finally, how that Catharina, Alexandria, being under the Tyranny of Maxcentius, was illuminated with divine knowledge from above, and constantly maintained the faith of the Gospel. Secondly, you shall (in Mr. Hugh Peters his short cut to a great quiet) find that work for a good Magi∣strate, which may stand with Religion, Mercy, and Justice: without which there can be no good settle∣ment,
nor any Moddel framed, whereby all men may be found to observe Peace; the main securing where∣of must be setled by the framing of a good Consci∣ence: whereby the grand enemy of order, will be kept out and debarred. Capt. Why truly I must needs confesse that I have found so many truths, recorded of worthy women in the said Elogium Heroinum, as that I greatly marvell how so many injurious Pamplets, have been pub∣lished against them in England. Secondly, I have found so many observable things, in the good worke for a Magistrate, as that I cannot per∣swade my selfe, but that if those particulars which are therein mentioned, were setled here in England, this Nation might be justly termed a happy one indeed: in the which short cut, if you observe it, there is also a specification, how a good number of Women may be very well imployed. Finally, Its my conceite, that in case that honest Book, the Bible, be laid before those who shall be ordained to prescribe Rules and Lawes, as then we shall no more stand in need of those Catterpillers, called Attornies and Solicitors; for that as then all men may be confi∣dent, of a short cut to a great quiet: as also that the Cheat will thereby be confounded to some purpose. Freez. I must needs tell you that ere long, you may see somewhat in Print on that subject: in the interim I shall believe that the condition of the English Nati∣on, will be the more answerable unto the essence and constitution of a Common-wealth; whereas there shall be a Law, whereby the old Norman Law shall be extinguished: that every man shall have liberty to debate his own case, before such honest men as shall hear them gratis
Capt. Since you mention the word Gratis, I must aske you in the first place, whether you would not have three kind of men to act gratis? viz. Ministers, Judges, and Physitians. Freez. Yes indeed, that I would; that is to say, I would have the State to maintain the Ministers, the Judges, and the Physitians. Capt. But what say you to the Law it selfe? unto Clyents, and their manner of addresses? Freez. Why marry, I would have the old Law first of all to be so deeply interred, as that it should never rise again, except at dooms-day, when as the corrupt Lawers themselves shall be brought to their Tryall, without any Habeas Corpus, or reprieve at all. Secondly, I would have this Common-wealths Judges to be such, as that the Scripture phrase might be applyed unto them, viz. For that now, Saints shall judge the world. 1 Cor. ch. 6. v. 2. To the end that men might not hear those reproaches which are mention∣ed in the fifth vers. of the same Chap. viz. I speake it to your shame: is it so, that there is not a wise man a∣mongst you? no not one that shall be able to jugde be∣tween his brethren? That so likewise the question in 1 Cor. ch. 6. v. 1. may not be asked, viz. Doe any of you, having a matter a∣gainst aonther, go to Law, before the unjust, and not before the Saints? Cap. But I pray you? where shall there be such found amongst Mortals, who inhabit flesh and Clay? Freez. Thats a question indeed, though it may be soon resolved; For that whensoever the Rulers shall fix on such a resolution, they may easily find out such as will make good H. P. his saying, in his short Cut to great ease; and by the prosecuting of this their designe, they may acquire unto their Government, the true forme of a Common-wealth.
For that at the very entrance of their framing a Plat-form to decide all controversies, the which may arise between man and man in temporall matters, as well as in criminall; as al∣so on the point of Meum, and Tuum; they may pitch on the meanes to remove all Causes whence the grand controversies amongst the most eminent's Families do arise: mark me well, and be not startled at it; I say the causes which proceed, from an elder Lording brothers domineering over his younger brother, for naught forsooth, save that he hath a Title above him, that he hath an Estate, and that he therefore can spend and domineer like a little Tyrant over his slaves. 1. To prevent all which Fathers give to thy eldest Son a double portion, if you please but divide the rest of the Estate equally amongst your Children, as then they will be all Free Common-Wealths men, and not Bond-men, as then a second, third, fourth; nay youngest brother more or lesse, shall be able to do the States good service, to live like a free man borne, and not be reduced unto desperate courses. 2. Moreover let all Fathers, appoint this double propor∣tion to their eldest Sonnes conditionally; That is to sy, in case he proves to be a vertuous man, in default whereof, let the younger brother have that double proportion, if he be more deserving then the elder: whereby men will be brought to study godlinesse and goodnesse. 3. The second main thing, which (in my conceit) is to be pitcht upon, is the settling of a general Record office, the practicall part whereof will for ever cut off a world of contentions, dis-inable cheats from going on in their destructive courses, and settle all men in their proprieties. In the third place, let your Rulers remove all Arrests whatsoever, or Debts, and consequently all imprisonments for the same. 4. Let them also abrogate the putting of men to death for Theft; Doth not the Text say, And if any man sue thee at Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloake also, Mat. 5. v. 40. 5. Why should we urge the saying, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, for that it would seem to be a piece of injustice, to put out the eye of a man, who hath but one, for having put out anothers, who had two: and so likewise with the Teeth, in which regard to my thinking, the scripture old Law might be dispens'd withall. 6. Let no Marriages be lawfull, without the Parents consent. And this is all which you shall have from me for the present, least the five and three man should step in again; and that the merry grig should have cause to urge his former saying, and to laugh at us by his inferring. That to meddle with nothing is best. FINIS.
