S267 42476321 151313
MAIESTIE Irradiant, OR The Splendor Displayd, OF Our Soveraigne KING CHARLES. CHARLES, the Second: The Name, is Renowned; The Title, Royal: So Renowned, is the Name; So Royal, is the Title: It makes, even— Rhetorick, to be Silent: Impudence, to be Asham'd: and Treason, to be Amaz'd: He was Born, A Prince: In the merry Month, of May: In the happy Time, of Peace. But Not so Bred, as Born; Nor so Train'd up, as Worthy. Being, from his Tender Age, Sadly enforced, unto the worst School, of an Intestine War. His Tutor, a man in Arms: his Book, Military: his Lesson, Stratagemical: and The Application of his Learning; The Defence of Majesty. He was An Early Soldier: and a rare Proficient, in so severe a Discipline. Dolus an virtus? is a Question: but His Virtue, and his Valour, parallel. He is Undoubtedly Victorious: (fortius est, qui Se:) having Conquered Himself. In His Enjoyments, by being Temperate: His Passion, by being Moderate: His Greatnesse, by being Humble. This Conquerour,— Carries his Trophies with him: Yea and many times, (like One of the Sages) Omnia Secum: his Goods too. His Life from the 10th. year, to the now 30th. hath been, a weary Pilgrimage; and (like our best Progenitors) A Sojourners Condition from one Kingdom, to another people. He is Such a Son, of such a Father; CHARLES the Patient, of CHARLES the Pious: That, Next the most pious Martyr, CHARLES the First; The most Patient Sufferer, is, CHARLES the Second. He is, Successively the King, of Great Brittain, and Ireland: Proclaim'd and Crown'd, in Scotland. where (Being most undutifully Treated) He was (Being in England) most notoriously Betray'd. The Battail at Worcester, (Famously Memorable, as much, For his Deliverance, as his Valour) was the fatal Signal, of the Rebells Ruine. They had, The Day, but not the Victory: The Place, but not the Person: God's Mercy, and the King's Escape; are a Twin of Wonders. A Prince,— So much Accomplisht, as most Incomparable: of such rare Deportment, He is Belov'd, and Fear'd. of such Excellent Discourse, He is observ'd, and follow'd. of such prudential Designs, He is Admir'd, and Blest. A Prince—Not more Royal, then Religious: Nor lesse Holy, as to God: then Just, as to Men: and Sober, to Himself. He is one, That wears Christ's Banner, Upon his Forehead: The Cross, upon his Crown. A Sufferer for the Truth: and A Defender, of the Faith. Such a Prince—Whose Constancy to the Church, of England; and whose Arguments, for that Constancy; have rendred him, (By his most acute Opponents) not only, CHARLES the Zealous; but, CHARLES, The Wise: A Prince, Not Wilful, but Unanswerable. Happy are the People, (Bona, si sua norint) that be in such a Cafe; to have such a Prince, to be their King. and such a King, to be their Nursing Father. The Lord make us, as thankful for him, as Happy, in him; the Best of Men. Crowned with, the Best of Blessings So prayeth—and so resteth—for GOD, and King CHARLES;Anthony Sadler.
