S3736A E1512_1 99868380 170043
A HEAVENLY CONFERENCE BETWEEN CHRIST AND MARY AFTER HIS RESURRECTION. WHEREIN The intimate familiarity, and near relation between Christ and a Believer is discovered. LONDON, Printed for John Rothwel, and are to be sold at the Fountain and Bear in Cheap∣side, 1654.
TO THE READER, THe scope and business of this Epistle, is not so much to commend the Workman, (whose name is a sweet savor in the Church,) As to give thee a short and summary view of the generalls handled in this Treatise Though much might be said of this emi∣nent Saint, If either detraction had fastened her venomous nails in his preti∣ous name, or the testimony of the Subscri∣bers of this Epistle, might give the Book a freer admission into thy hands. This only we shall crave leave to mind the
Reader of, That this bright Star, who sometimes with his light refreshed the souls of many of Gods people, while he sone in the hoizon of our Church, set (as we may say) between the evening of many shadowes, and the morning of a bright hoped for Reformation, which though it be for the present overcast, yet (being so agreeable to the mind of Jesus Christ, and ushered in with the groans and prayers of so many of his Saints) we doubt not, but will in Gods own time break forth gloriously to the dissipating of those Clouds and foggs which at the present do eclipse and darken it. Now as it is the wisdom of God in bringing about his own designs, to raise up fit, and suitable instruments, for the work of every Generation. So it is also the gratious dispensation of God, to put seasonable words into the mouths of those his Servants, who by faith, do fix their Prutitus disputandi scabies ecclesiae. Sir H. VVotton.eyes on him for the guidance of his bles∣sed spirit, as every judicious Rea∣der may observe in the works of this reverend Divine, who foresee∣ing (as it were) what a degene∣racy
of spirit Professors in his time were, falling a pace into (that itch of Questi∣ons and Disputings like anoxious hu∣mor, beginning then to break forth a∣mong Professors,) like a skilful Physici∣an, applyed himself to preserve the vi∣talls and essentials of Religion. That the souls of his hearers being captivated with the inward beauty and glory of Christ, and being led into an experimental knowledge of heavenly truths, their spirits might not evaporate, and discharge themselves in endless gainless, soul-unedifying, and conscience∣perplexing questions: For as it is in na∣ture, a man that hath tasted the sweet∣ness of honey, will not easily be perswaded that honey is bitter. But he that hath only taken it up upon credit, may soon be baffled out of it, because no act can go higher then its principle; and so it is in Religion; for those good souls that have imbraced the truths of Jesus Christ, up∣on a supernatural principle, and expe∣rimented not only the truth but the good∣ness of them, in their own souls, they are the clinched christians, the good hold∣fast
men (as Mr. Fox stiles some Chri∣stians in his dayes) they are the even and steady walkers. Whereas those that have only a form of godliness, a slight tincture, who have only out of novelty and curiosity, or pride and ambition, or other self ends, professed Religion, will prove giddy and unconstant, like Clouds carried about with every blast; and while they promise themselves liberty, be a prey to the net of every fancy and opi∣nion. To the sound and practical Christian that is not squeesie stomacked, will the truths in this treatise be grateful, sup∣posing therefore, and desiring, if thou are not, thou may'st be such a one. Here is offered to thy consideration, a divine and heavenly Discourse betwixt Christ and Mary, between a soul-burthened sinner, and a burthen-removing Savi∣our. Thou may'st here see how diligent Mary is to seek, how ready Christ is to be found. Mary hath her heart brim full of sorrow, Christ Comes as it were leaping over the Mountains with com∣fort,
and bowels of compassion. Mary was in a strong pang of affection; nay her affections were wound so high, that her expressions seem broken, and her acti∣ons might seem to savor of irregularity, were it not to that excellency of the object, did warrant the height of her affection, and the compassion of Christ was large enough, not only to interpret for the best, but also to pardon and cover all her infirmities. The woman was bet∣ter at her affections, then expressions. They have taken away my Lord, she speaks at random, names no body, whe∣ther Jews, or Disciples, or Souldiers. But see the strength of her faith, she is not a∣shamed to call him Lord, even in the lowest state of humiliation, though Christ be reproached, persecuted, despi∣sed, rejected, dead, buried, yet he shall be Maries Lord. Again, I know not where they have laid him, she dreams of a bodily asportation, and resting of Christ somewhere, and speaks with in∣dignation, as if she looked upon it as an indignity, or incivility, nay of cruelty, Saevitum est in cadavera, saevitum est in ossa, saevitum est in cineres. Cypri∣an
of the Roman Emperors cruelty, to remove a dead body. What was done to Christ, Mary takes it as done to her, and good heart she thinks she hath so much right to him, that he should not be stirred without her knowledge. And I know not where, &c. Now while Mary is seeking Christ, Ideo con∣versa est, quia an∣geli assur∣rexerunt praesentiae Christi. Gerfon. . i. e. se do∣mum ver∣sus praeter virum suum qui subseque∣batur ip∣sam. Juni∣us in anal. in Gen:(who is never far absent from a seeking soul) he stands at her back. Christ is neerer to us many times then we think of. Sometimes a poor soul wants the sight of comfort, more then matter of comfort, and is like Hagar, weeping for water, when the well is hard by: seeking of Christ is the souls duty; but Christ manifesting himself is the souls comfort. Mary turn∣ed her self, and she saw Jesus. Gerson saith the Angels rose up at the presence of Christ, which Mary seeing, made her turn about; but omitting that conjecture, The original word  is sometimes used for a turning of the face; but most frequently for a turning of the whole bo∣dy: but to put it out of doubt here, it is said exegetically, . She turned her self back. The same phrase the Steptuagint use of Lots wise looking
back. Many times Christ hath his face towards us, when we have our backs upon him, and therefore if thou wouldest finde Christ, turn thy self to him. Again, here thou may'st see the true Joseph, he knowes Mary, when she knows not him, but takes him for the Gardner. Christ is alwayes before-hand with us in his grace, he loves us before we love him, and calls us before we call him. Mary travails with desires to find Christ, and Christ is full of yernings towards her: like Joseph, he could refrain no longer, and because the general manifestation of Christ wrought little, he calles her by her name Mary, and she being a sheep of Christ, knowes his voice, and answers him with a title of dignity, Rabboni, that is to say, my Master. We may see here, that discoveries of grace are not fruitless, they stir up in be∣lievers, reverence, and obedience. Let us sin because grace abounds, is the De∣vils application of Christs Doctrine. These and several other particulars, are with much brevity, spirituality, and perspicuity handled in this Treatise, and
with that liveliness that they shew they come from one, whose own heart savored what he taught to others. The largest part of this Book is spent upon that sweet Doctrine viz. A Believers interest in God as a Father, and the comforts that flowe from that sweet relation. The foun∣dation of our relation to God is here handled, and how God is first a Father to Christ, and in him to us. What can be more comfortable in this earthly interest shaking, disjoynting confounding age: then to clear up to our souls an interest in God: Tolle meum, & tolle Deum, as he said, it were better for me there were no God, then that he should not be my God, this will be thy comfort, that when thou canst not say, my state, my liberty, my House, my Land, my friend, my Trade, thou may'st be able to say, my Father, my God. If therefore thou savorest the things of God, this▪subject will be acceptable and grateful to thee, and if this Treatise may be any wayes instrumental, for putting thee upon study how to get it, or upon practice how to im∣prove it, or in casethy soulsits in darknes,
how to endeare and clear thy inte∣rest, the publishers shal have much of their aim, and thou wilt have no cause to re∣pent thy cost in buying, or thy pains in reading. We shall adde no more but this. Blessed is that man or woman that hath an interest in him, who is the Fa∣ther of Jesus Christ by eternal Genera∣tion, and of all believers in Christ by a∣doption and regeneration, in which inhe∣ritance and portion, that thou may'st have a share, shall be the prayer of Thy souls, and thy faiths Servants in the work of the Ministery for Jesus sake. Simeon Ash, James Nalton, Joseph Church.
A heavenly Discourse be∣tween Christ and Mary after his Resurrection. JOHN 20. 16. Jesus said unto her, Mary, she turned her self and said to him, Rabboni, that is to say, Master: And Jesus said to her, touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my Brethren, and say to them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God, and your God. THe same love of Christ that drew him from Heaven to the womb of the Virgin, from the womb of the Vir∣gin to the Crosse, and from the Crosse to the grave: the same love of Christ moved him to discover himself after he was risen from the grave, to them that he knew did intirely and wonderfully
love him. And therefore before he would ascend to Heaven, he did vouchsafe many apparitions and dis∣coveries of himself, partly to instruct them in the certainty of his Resur∣rection, and partly (but especially) to comfort them. Those that he knew, did love him. His first apparition of all was made to Mary, the woman out of whom he had cast seven Devils. She was much beholding to him, and therefore loved much. No Sex may discourage any sinner from Christ. She expresseth her love to Christ, by her desire of finding him, by her seeking & weep∣ing, notwithstanding all impediments before she found him. As she wept, she stooped down and looked into the Sepulchre, and there saw two Angels in white, a colour of glory, purity and joy, because it was a time of joy; they were one at the head, and the Exodo 25. 20,other at the feet. As in the Law, when the Mercy-Seat was made, two Che∣rubims were also fram'd and placed, one at the one end, and the other at the other end thereof, with their fa∣ces looking one towards another. And
when Christ was risen, there were two Angels, one at the head, another at the feet, to shew that peace was to be expected in the true propitiatory, Jesus Christ. One at the head, the other at the feet of the body of Jesus. And they sate there; it was a time of peace; peace was made between Heaven and Earth, God and man, and here is a posture of peace, They sate quietly. In Christ, Angels, and we are at one, God, and we, and all. There is a reca∣pitulation, and gathering of all things Col. 1. 20.in Heaven and Earth. Ministery of Angels towards Christ. Luke 2. 9. 10. Luke 22. 4. John 10. 12. Act. 1. 10. Heb. 1. 14. Psal. 34. 7. Luke 16. 22. Mat. 24. 31 The Angels they attended on Christ in all the passages of his life & death, till they brought him to heaven. They brought news of his birth, comforted him in his agony, they were at his re∣surrection, and you see here they at∣tend. At his ascension they accom∣pany him. And as they did to the head, so they will to the Members. In our Infancy they take charge of our tender years, in our dangers they pitch their tents about us; in our deaths, they carry our souls to Abra∣hams bosome, a place of happiness. At
our Resurrection their Office is to gather our bodies together. That ser∣vice and attendance they afforded the head, they afford to the Members, to mysticall Christ, as well as naturall. Therefore let us comfort our selves in the service they did to Christ. Now besides the apparition of the Angells, here is the speech of the An∣gels Woman why weepest thou? they knew she had no cause of weeping; for Christ whom she sought, was ris n a∣gain. She answereth, because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. If it had been as she supposed, there had been cause enough of her weeping, if her Presence of Christ comfor∣table.Lord had been taken away; for when the Lord is taken away, what remain∣eth that is comfortable? And if the Lord be not taken away, it matters not what is taken away; for he is all in all. Carnall people, so they have their wealth, and friends, and com∣forts in the world, they care not what is taken away. But she is of another mind. They have taken away my Lord, and what comfort can I have, if
my Lord be taken away. But it was but the speech of an o∣pinion, she did but think it. And there were two things might lead her, truth and probability, which is the founda∣tion of opinion. Probability, he is not here, therefore he is taken away. Truth Christ promised he would rise again, therefore he would take away him∣self. There was certain truth to weaknesse of faith now seen.ground faith, and weak probability to ground opinion; yet such is the nature of weak persons in distress: if there be probability & certain truth, yet they will be sure to cleave to their probabilities. Oh theirs be great sins, I, but there is greater mercy for faith to lay hold upon. So the presumptu∣ous sinner faith, God is mercifull, I, but God hath excluded thee from Heaven, thou art an adulterer, a swea∣rer, a filthy person, thy opinion is 1 Cor. 6. 9.grounded scarce upon probability. God is mercifull, but not to such sin∣ners, as live in sins against reconcilia∣tion, as thou dost. Therefore when one hath but probability to ground opinion, and the other certain truth to ground faith, be so wise for our
souls, as to take the best, and leave the other. If she had remembered his promise, to raise himself out of the grave, she needed not to have doubt∣ed. They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him. They have taken away, she instanceth none. And when she had thus said, she turneth her back, and saw Jesus stand∣ing, and knew not that it was Jesus. When Christ speaks the Angels are silent.The Angels hold their peace when Christ speaks, and it is their place so to do. But she knew not that it was Jesus, in respect of her passion. Her senses were held, partly by the power of God, partly by a kind of passion that was a Cloud between her and Jesus, that she knew him not at that time. What doth Jesus say to her? Christs first words after his Resur∣rection. Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou? The first words that ever Christ spake after his resurrection to them he appeared to, is, woman why weepest thou? It is a good question af∣ter Christs Resurrection, what cause of weeping, when Christ is risen? Our sins are forgiven, because he, our head,
and surety hath suffered death for us, and if Christ be risen again, why weep we? If we be broken-hearted, humbled sinners, that have interest in his death and resurrection, we have no cause to grieve. It is therefore a good question to them that believe, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou? They were questions, not for satisfa∣ction to him, he knew it well enough, but to draw out her mind, and to draw out by confession what God had hid in her heart, that he might comfort her afterwards. But she supposing him to be the Gardi∣ner, said, Sir, if thou hast born him hence tell me, &c. She had a misconceit of Christ, as if he had been the Gardiner. Beloved, Misappre∣hensions of Christ in good men.so it is with a sinner, especially in times of desolation of spirit, and dis∣consolate condition, they present Christ to themselves as an enemy. She in passion thinks Christ the Gardiner. Do not many when they be melan∣choly of body, and troubled in mind, conceive of Christ as an Austere Judge, that will undoubtedly damn such wretches as they are, who pre∣sent
Mat. 11. 28 Christ to themselves in that fa∣shion, that the Scripture doth not; doth not he bid all that be weary and heavy laden, come to him? and yet they out of passion will present Christ to be an austere judge, that will take them at their disadvantage, observe all their wayes, and will surely damn them. Passion clouds un∣derstan∣ding. It is a great violence that passion and opinion offers to truth, and to sa∣ving truth, and the hardest matter in the world for a distressed conscience to apprehend God aright, and to ap∣prehend Christ aright. Secure persons apprehend God under a false notion, they apprehend God as a God all of Act. 17. 81mercy, and Christ, as if he were not judge of the world, as if he observed them not, nor their sinfull courses, and therefore they care not whether they serve him or no. And Satan pre∣senteth Christ, all of mercy, and Sa∣tan and their hearts meeting toge∣ther, the mistake is dangerous. It is a great art of faith, and an excellent skill to apprehend Christ sutable to our condition that we are in. When we be in any sin, then think him a
Judge, then think of Moses, rather then of Christ, then think of Christ, as one that will judge both quick and dead, for their hard and wicked actions. But when we be humble, and broken-harted, and touched with sence of sin, present him as a sweet Saviour, inviting and alluring all to come to him. Come to me all ye, &c. Mat. 11. 28. Esay 40. 11.Present him as a gentle Shepheard, present him in all the sweet relations he names himself by in the Scriptures, lest otherwise we do Christ disho∣nour, and our selves wrong. If thou have born him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away. She was a likely woman indeed to take Christ away; for a weak woman to take a heavy body away. But love Love, a willing grace.thinks nothing impossible. Faith and Love agree in this, nothing is impos∣sible. Love is strong as death. Neither Cant. 8. 6.love nor faith care for difficulties, they arm the soul to break through all. Tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away. One would think the dead body
might have frighted the woman, and the heavy body might have been a∣bove her strength; but she was in such an extasie of love, and desire and grief, for want of her desire, that she considered not well what she said. They be words of passion, and in∣deed if you observe the story of Mary Magdalen, she was a woman of extre∣mity in all conditions; like Jonah, when he grieves, he grieves exceeding∣ly, when he rejoyces, his joy is wound to the highest pitch. So she was full of love when she loved, and full of grief when she grieved, and full of joy when she joyed, she had large affecti∣ons, all were in the highest measure, and strained to the highest pin in her, and that made her say, If thou hast &c. Jesus could not indure her longer in this perplext condition, he was too mercifull, and therefore saith, Mary; she turned to him, and saith Rabboni, which is to say, Master. And Jesus said to her, Mary. The words are a sweet and loving intercourse between Christ and Mary; in a seasonable time when she was in
all her perplexity, and depth of sor∣row for losse of her Lord. Christ sea∣sonably at length, (as not being able to hold any longer, but must needs discover himself,) saith to her, Mary. You see first of all Christ beginneth, and saith, Mary, she answereth in the second place, and saith Rabboni; and till Christ begins, no voice in the Nothing can com∣fort the grieved soul till it heares the voice of Christ.world can do any good. The Angels they spake to her, but till Christ spake nothing could comfort her. Christ began, and till Christ began nothing would comfort Mary. Christ began himself, and used but one word. It is a word, and but one word. Nothing will comfort but the word of Christ. The word that comforted her, when he spake, and it was but one word, and yet enough, ther was such fulness of spirit, and comfort in that one word. And she answered with one word a∣gain. You may aske, why they spake but one word? Beloved, he was full of affection, and she was full of affecti∣on also, too full to expres themselves in many words. As it is in grief; Grief
Ingntes dlores stupent▪ sometimes may be so great, that scarce any words are able to express it; and if any words, then broken words, (which shew fulness of affection) ra∣ther then any distinct sense. Christ was so full, and she so full, that a word discovers. And indeed there was so much sense, and so much love, so much contained in these little words, Mary and Rabboni, that it is impossible to express them shorter, and her passion would not stay any longer discourse, it was by words, and by one word, Mary, it was by a word, which sheweth he took notice of her. Christ knowes the names of the Starres, he Christ takes no∣tice of all ▪knowes every thing by name, he knows every thing of a man, to the very hair, he knowes their parts, and their very excrements of their parts, he knew her, and acknowledged her too; Mary. 1. It is a word of knowledg, and familiar acquaintance, and acknow∣ledgment. 2. It is a word of compassion, be∣cause he had held her long, and now could not longer. He pittieth the state she was in, he saw her ready to
ink for grief, and melt for sorrow, and therefore he said, Mary. 3. As it is a word of compassion: so it is a word full of exceeding love. 4. And it is a word of peculiar ap∣propriation; Mary, whom I have so much respected heretofore. And a word of satisfaction on his part out of his pitty, and out of his love, and former familiarity & acquaintance. Mary, I am the man thou seekest, I know what all thy seekings tend to, thou wantest him whom thou lovest, thou wantest me, I am he, whom thou seekest. Rabboni She answered him again, Rabboni, which is interpreted, Master. She re∣turned him an answer again, she spake to him, he first began, then she follows, she found the virtue of his speech in her heart, there was an influence of it to her heart; and his love witnes∣sing to her heart, raised her love to him again. So it was an answer of Christs speech, and from the same af∣fection, an answer of love, and an an∣swer of exceeding large affection, and satisfaction to her soul. Oh my Rab∣boni,
the soul of my soule, the life of my life, my joy, my rock, my all that can be dear to me. Rabboni, I have e∣nough. As he desired to give her sa∣tisfaction, so she takes satisfaction in the word. And yet it was not full sa∣tisfaction; for after she claspes about him, and would not let him go. It was an affection that stirred up much desire more and more to have The be∣lieving soul is ne∣ver satisfi∣ed till it comes to Heaven.communion with him, so that he was fain to check her afterward, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; she had not enough, as indeed a believing affectionate soul hath ne∣ver enough till it be in Heaven. And thus you see the sweet inter∣course upon the apparition, and first discovery of Christ to Mary. He spake to her, and she answered him again with the same affection. And it is a word of dependance, as it is fit, Rabbo∣ni my Master, it is not only a word of honour, not any superior, but a supe∣rior in way of teaching, there was submission of conscience to the Rab∣boni; as the Rabboni labouring to sit in the consciences of people. It is a Sy∣riack word which signifieth in the o∣riginall,
Multiplication of knowledge in him that speaketh, & that laboureth to breed much knowledg in him that is spoken to; and therefore it is a word of great respect and dependance. She might well call him Rabboni; for he was Master of Masters, Rabboni of Rabbonies, the Angel of the Cove∣nant, the great Doctor of the Church, the great Gamaliel, at whose feet all must fit, and be taught. So ye see what sense and affections are in these little words. The fulness of heart that was in this Couple cannot be exprest, were it possible to say all that could be said. And therefore we leave the Hy∣pothesis, and come to make applica∣tion of it to our selves. Obser. 1. First, we may learn here, that till Christ himself discovers himself, no teaching will serve the turn. No, the Cathedra habet in caelis qui cord dcetteaching of Angels will not serve turn, till Christ himself by his holy spirit discovers himself; when Christ doth it, it is done. And therefore it should teach us so to attend upon the ministery, as to look up to the great Doctor, that hath his Chair in Hea∣ven, and teacheth the heart. If he teach, it is no matter how dull the
Scholar is. He is able to make any Scholar, if he instruct. I will not in∣large the point, because there be par∣ticular places, wherein they will be inlarged. Observ. 2. The second thing I will observe is this; That Christ when he teacheth, he doth it by words, not by Cruci∣fixes, not by sights. We lost our sal∣vation, and all our happiness by the Necessity of hearingear, and we must come to it by the ear again. Adam by hearkening to Eve, and Eve to the Serpent, lost all, and we must recover salvation there∣fore by the ear. As we have heard, so we shall see. We must first hear, and then see. Life cometh in at the eare, as well as death. Faith ye know is the quick∣ning of a Christian, the spirituall life of a Christian; now faith comes by hearing. And therefore I beseech you in the bowels of Christ, set aside prejudice, and meekly attend Gods Ordinances. Do not conider who we are; we are but poor Ministers, frail men as your selves. But consider the Lord that is pleased to convey life, and salvation, and grace, and what∣soever is fit to bring to Heaven this
way: therefore they that despise this way, set light by salvation, as the A∣postle saith, Acts 14. They judge themselves unworthy of the Kingdom of Heaven. They can read at home; Note.but is that the way God hath sancti∣fied? Did not the Manna stink, when gathered on the Sabbath day? There is a curse upon all private industry and devotion, when it is with neg∣lect of publick Ordinances. She could have no comfort till Christ spake. Nay the very sight of Christ could not comfort her. Let this I pray you be enough, that I may not inlarge the point any further. This is the way for comfort. We must hear him in his Ministers here, if we  him comfortably  after, Come ye blessed o m  &c. 3. It was but one word. Mary; and is there so much force in one word? yea, when it is uttered by Christ. One word coming from Christ Christ can easily comfort.and set on the heart by the spirit of Christ, hath a mighty efficacy. The word had an efficacy in creating all things, fiat, fuit. Let it be done, it
was done. Let there be light, there was light. So let there be light in the understanding, and there it shall be presently. So in all Christs cures, he said the word, and it was done. So in all spirituall cures, let him say the word, it is done. Nay a very look of Christ, if the spirit go along with it, is able to convert the soul, Respexit Christus, flevit Petrus amare, Christ lookt on Peter, he wept bitterly; what will his word do, when his look will do so much? It was but a word, and but one word, say but the word, saith he in the Gospel, and my Servant shall be healed. This should make us desire that Christ would speak, though but few words to the soul; That he would cloath the words of men mightily with his word, and with his spirit, and then they will be mighty in ope∣ratio nd works. One word, but it was a prgnant word. It was full of affection, she knew it well enough. Mary. What to call her so familiarly, so sweetly by her accustomed name; it wrought on her bowels present∣ly. 4. But to go on, you see here again,
that Christ must begin to us before God is the beginner of all sa∣ving workswe can answer him. He began to Mary, and then she said Rabbony, all the passages of salvation are done by way of Covenant, by way of commerce and entercourse, between God and man; but God begins first. In electi∣on indeed we choose him, but he chuseth us first. And he knoweth who are his, and we know him; but he knows us first. And in calling, we an∣swer, I, but he calleth first, and we do but eccho to his call: in justification, forgivness of sins, we accept of justi∣fication, and submit to the righte∣ousness of Christ, and Gods purpose of saving man that way; but he giveth faith first, for faith is the gift of God. We glorifie him here on earth, but it is from a result of Gods glorifying us in Heaven, some ear∣nests we have, but they are of Gods giving. All we do, is but reflexion of his love first, or his knowledge first. The Christian soul saith, thou art my God, I, but he saith first, I am thy salvation. As Augustine saith, non fru∣stra dicit anima, Deus, salus tua, when God saith, I am thy salvation, it is ea∣ie
for the soul to say, thou art my God. And this may teach us in our devoti∣ons when we are to deal with God, when we are to bring to him any re∣quest, to desire him first to reveal him∣self to us, desire Christ to reveal himslf by his spirit to us. It is an errour in he case of mens devotions; they think to bring something of their own strength, and to break in as it were upon God, without his discovery first. But Paul saith, Gal. 4. 9. We know God, or rather are known of him. We must desire, that he would make known his heart to us first, and then we shall know him again, that the would speak to us by his spirit, and then we shall answer to him again; That he would say to our souls, he is our salvation; and then we may lay claim to him, he is our God. Desire the spirit of revelation to reveal his bow∣els and love to us in Christ, by his ho∣ly spirit; for certainly, in every re∣turn of ours to Christ, God begins to us, all in all, though not so sensibly; but we ought to pray every day more and more for a sensible revelation, that God would reveal his love to us
in Christ. And we cannot but answer, if Christ saith, Mary, Mary, cannot but answer, Rabboni. ObjectBut you will say then, it is not our fault, but Christs fault if he must be∣gin. If God begins, we shall answer. Answ.I answer briefly; That God doth alwayes begin to us, and is before∣hand with us in all dealings with our selves. He giveth us many motions, and never withdraweth himself from us; but when he is despised, and slighted first: therefore let us take heed that we labour to answer Christs call, vvhen he doth call. If vve slight it, then in a judicious course, he ceaseth to speak further to us, if vve slight his beginnings of re∣velations. There be many degrees and passages to faith and assurance; if vve do not observe the beginning, hovv God begins to reveal himself to us by little and little, speaking to us by his spirit in our hearts vvhen he The motions of the spirit must not be slighted.begins; then in a spirituall judge∣ment sometimes he leaves us to our selves. And therefore let us regard all the motions of the spirit, and all the speeches of the spirit of Christ; for
he begins by little and little, else our consciences will say afterward, we are not saved, because we would not be saved. We would not yield to all the passages of salvation; but when he was beforehand with us, and of∣fered many sweet motions, yet we loved our sins better then our souls, and so repelled all. Therefore I be∣seech you do not refuse the sweet messages from Heaven, the gracious and sweet motions of the spirit of Christ, make much of them. God hath begun to you, be sure to an∣swer. Alloquen∣ti Christ fideles re∣spondent.Learn it of Mary, when Christ began, she set not her heart and infi∣delity against it, but she opened her heart, and said, Rabboni; learn there∣fore the duty of spirituall obedience, when God speaks, speak Lord, for thy 1 Sam. 3. 10.Servant heareth. Do not shut your eares to the motions of Gods blessed spirit, do not harden your hearts a∣gainst his voice, but open your hearts as she did; Rabboni. Our Saviour Christ here saith, Ma∣ry, Grace a graduall work.but when? after he had concealed himself from her a long time. It is not presently, Mary, nor Rabboni. He had
cōcealed himself a great while. Christ doth not usually open himself fully at first, though at first he doth in some degree; but he observeth degrees, as in the church in generall. You see how that he discovers himself in his graci∣ous promises by little and little, dark∣ly at first, and at last the Sun of righ∣teousness ariseth clearly. So the day-Starre ariseth in our hearts by de∣grees. It is a great while before Mary heareth the satisfying speech of Christ; Mary. But why doth Christ thus conceal himself in regard of his fuller mani∣festation? Quest. It is partly to try and exercise our faith, and other graces, and therefore God doth seem to withdraw himself Reasons why God defers mercy.in the sence of his love. 1. To see whether we can live by faith, or whether we be all together addicted to sense, as the world is, who live altogether by sense, and not by faith. 2. He would have our patience tryed to the utmost, he would have James 1. 4.patience have its perfect work, she had much patience to indure all this;
but her patience had not a perfect work till Christ spake. Mat. 15. Mark 7. 27. 28. 3. Christ will stir up, and quicken zeal and fervency in his Children; and therefore he seemed to deny the wo∣man of Cnnaan; first he giveth no answer, but a harsh answer. A Dogge. And she works upon it, though I am a Dogge, yet Dogs have crumbs. All which denyal was only to stir up zeal and earnestness. And therefore though Christ doth not manifest himself to us at first, yet it is to stir up zeal and affection, to seek after him more ear∣nestly. A notable passage there is of this, Cant. 3. 16. The soul sought Christ, and sought long, and sought in the use of all means; but at length she waited, and in waiting she found him. 4. Christ doth this for to set a greater price upon his presence, when he comes to make his presence highly valued, when he doth discover him∣slf. Desiderata diu magis placent, Things long desired please more sweetly. And things, when wanted, are ingratiated to us, as warmth after cold▪ and meat after hunger; and so
in every particular of this life. And therefore God to set a greater price on his presence, and that he would be held more strongly, when he doth reveal himself, he defers a long time. That is one reason why he did defer revealing himself to Mary, that she might have the more sweet content∣ment in him, when he did reveal him∣self, as indeed she had. Long deferring of a thing doth but inlarge the soule. Want inlargeth the desire, and capa∣city of the soul, so doth love. Now when we want that we love, that emptieth the soul marvellously much, it mortifieth affection. When God keeps off a long time, and we see it is God only must do it, then the affection is taken off from earthly things, and the heart inlarged to God by love, and the want of the thing we love. And therefore we set a price on the thing; so that we are wonder∣fully pleasing to God. It is very be∣neficiall to our selves. What lost Mary by it? so shall we lose nothing. We have it at last more abundantly; We have it as a mighty favour. Mary taketh this as a new blessing all toge∣ther.
When things are kept long from us, & God only must discover. When the heart is kept from second causes, the heart is inlarged. Certainly, this comes from God, and God should have all the glory of it. God is wise, and therefore makes us to stay a long time for that we do desire. We all of us are in Maries case in a spirituall sense, sometimes or other, we misse Christ, I mean the sweet sense of Christ. Lay this down for a rle, that Christians ought to walk in Commu∣nion with Christ is the Chri∣stians life.sweet communion with God and Christ, & that it ought to be the life of a Christian to maintain the Cōmuni∣on, that Christ hath vouchsafed be∣tween us and himself. Then certainly we lose Christ wonderfully, and not against our minds, but willingly by our own slighting of him, and by our own undervaluing of him, or by our negligence, and presumption. Christ though he be low, yet he is great, and he will have us to know his greatness. There must be communion with due respect. One way or other, we de∣prive our selves of the sense & sweet∣nesse of communion with Christ.
What must we do then? we must do Directions to re▪injoy Christ.as this woman did, turn over every stone, use all kind of means, leave not one, till we find him; and when all means are used, wait still. Persevere in waiting, as Peter speaks. Believers wait, hold out in waiting, for Christ in his time will come, he cannot hold long. As Joseph did suppresse his Gen. 45 3.love and affection for politick ends a great while; but his pitty towards his Brethren was such, that his bowels would not suffer him to conceal him∣self longer, his passion was above his policy. I am Joseph: And so let us in the use of all things, seek Christ, and the sweet sense of his love which is better then life it self. And indeed, what is all without Christ? Christ is Psal. 63.so full of compassion, he will not long suffer us to be prolonged; but will at length satisfie the hungry soul: how many promises have vve to this end? Caution. Take heed of such a temper of soul, as cares not vvhether vve find Christ, or no. Oh take heed of that, if vve vvill seek him, seek him as Mary, she sought him early in the
Mat. 28. 1. Mark 16. 9 Luk. 24. 1. Joh. 20. 1. morning, she brake her sleep, and sought him vvith tears. If any thing be to be sought vvith tears, it is Christ, and communion vvith him, she sought him instantly, and con∣stantly, she sought him so, that no im∣pediment could hinder her; she vvas so full of grief and love. She sought him vvith her vvhole heart, she vvait∣ed in seeking, that is the vvay to find Christ. Seek him early, in our youn∣ger times, in the morning of our years. Oh that we could seek Christ, as we seek our pleasures; we should find more pleasure in Christ then in all the pleasures of the world; if we could perswade our base hearts so much. Seek him above all other things. A∣wake with this resolution in our hearts to find Christ, never to be quiet, till we may say with some comfort, I am Christs, and Christ is mine. When we have him, we have all, seek him with tears; at length we are sure to find him. He hath bound himself, that if we knock, he will open. And if we seek, we shall find. If we seek wisdom early with our whole hearts intirely, sincerely, seek Christ, for Christ, and
then we shall be sure to find him as she did. Thus seek him in the word & Sa∣craments, wherein he discovers him∣self Where to find him.familiarly. Seek him in the, Temple. Christ was found in the Temple, and then we shall be sure to find him Luk. 2. 46.both here, and hereafter. Specially we shall find him in our hearts. You see how familiarly he comes to us in the word, speaks to us by a man, like our selves. And how familiarly by the Sacrament, by common bread, and common wine, sanctified to do great matters above nature, to strengthen faith. He cometh to us through our faces, into our souls in the Sacrament. He cometh to us, through our ears in hearing the word, through our sight in seeing the bread broken. He comes by familiar things, and by a familiar manner of conveying; as if he should Christ conveyeth himself to us by the ear, and by the eye, first by the word and Sacra∣ments.name every one, I come to thee, and give thee my body. Think with our selvs, now Christ cometh to me, when the Minister reacheth the bread and come to me, think of heavenly bread, & of the gift of Christ to me by means, & can he do it more familiarly? Is it not as if he should say, Mary? and that is the ex∣cellency
The ex∣cellency of the Sa∣crament. of the Sacrament. It convey∣eth Christ to all the Saints, and to e∣very one in particular, as if he named every one. And what an incourage∣ment is this to answer again, to open our hearts to receive him, together with the Elements; to imbrace Christ, joyn with Christ, and then to keep him, when we have him; do not lose him, he will not be so dealt withall, remember the Covenant we have made to him. I beseech you let these sweet considerations of Christ dwell in us, and work on every one of our hearts. If they do good on us here on earth, if we by faith lay hold on him, and have intercourse with him, what will it be in the day of judgement? How comfortable will it be to hear him say to every one in particular,  Cor 6. 2.Come thou, and thou, stand on my right hand, sit and judge the world with me? Doth he know our names now on earth, and giveth to every one parti∣cularly by himself, if we come wor∣thily? and will not he know us then? oh that is far more worth then the worlds good, to know us then, and to call us by our names. Therefore I be∣seech
you be acquainted with Christ. Have intercourse (all we can) with him in the word and Sacraments, and never rest, till we find this sweet re∣sult in the use of the means, That he is ours, and we are his. Caveat. Take heed therefore in these times, desperately addicted to formality and Popery, I say take heed we do depend not upon any outward thing; but look to Christ in all his Ordinances, look to the spirit; all Gods children, the church of the first born, they are , such as are taught of God. Who can take away the oppo∣site disposition of mans nature to goodness, but God by his spirit? who can shine into the soul, and quicken the soul, but Christ by his spirit? who is above the heart and conscience, but Christ by his spirit? therefore take heed of formality, submit your hearts to the great Prophet of the Church, The teach¦ings of Christ by his spirit are pow∣erful, and cannot be resisted.that Moses speaketh of, Deut. 18. who shall be the great teacher of the Church, lift up our hearts to him, that he would teach our hearts, and remove the naturall disposition that is in us, that he would take off the
veil from our hearts, and teach not only what to do, but to teach the very doing of them. Teach us to hate what is ill; teach us to believe, and to re∣sist all Satans temptations; who can teach this, but the great Teacher, whose Chair is in Heaven? therefore take heed of depending on formall things. Lift your hearts to God, that he would joyn his teaching with all other teaching. This cannot be too much stood upon, I beseech you therefore take it to heart. General promises must be particu∣larly ap∣plied. Give me leave to add a few things more. If Christ speaketh in generall to Mary, she answereth in generall. And when he speaks aloof to her, she answereth aloof to him, a far off, and never gave him a direct answer, till he gave a direct word to her. When he said Mary, she gave him a direct an∣swer Rabboni, not before. I beseech you therefore, let us not rest in gene∣rall promises, and the generall graces, that be so much stood on by some, That God hath a like respect to all. Trust not to that, we must not enter into his secrets; but let us obey his precepts and Commandements. And
withall remember this; When we hear of a generall mercy and Commande∣ment for all Nations to believe, and that Christ came to save a world of sinners, alas what is that to me, unless Christ dying for sinners, is no com∣fort to the soul, but by a par∣ticular ap∣plication.thou by thy holy spirit speakest to my soul, and saist in particular, I am thy salvation, and speakest familiarly to my soul. Generalls are in some de∣grees comfortable. But if I find not particular interest by the witness of thy holy spirit to my soul, if thou sayst not to my soul, I am thine, and thou art mine, all is to little purpose. Therefore in the desires of our souls in prayer, let us desire the Lord to re∣veal himself in particular. We trust too much in Generalls. God is mer∣cifull, and Christ came to redeem the World. They be truths, and good foundations for to sound faith upon; but they will not do the deed, till by daily prayer vve seek to the Lord, that he vvould in a particular manner re∣veal himself to us. This doth Paul pray for, Ephes. 1. That God would vouch safe to them the spirit of Revelati∣on. And this is the office of the holy Spirit, his speciall office is, to reveal
Spiritus Dei, & Dei, & ho∣minis secre∣ta cognoscit. to every one in particular, his estate and condition to God-ward. The Holy Ghost knoweth the secrets in the brest of God, and in our own hearts. Now the Holy Ghost only can reveal the particular love that lyeth in Gods brest, to our particular souls. And therefore we should desire God, that the holy spirit may be sent to seal to us our particular salvation, and never be quiet till we be sealed in par∣ticular assurance, that we be they, whom Christ came to save. This we ought to labour for, if we labour for it, we shall have it, sometime or o∣ther; for God loveth to be familiar with his Children. He loveth not to be strange to them, if they seek his love, but to reveal himself first or last. And few seek it, but God revealeth himself by his spirit to them, before they die; if he doth not, they are sure of it in Heaven. And therefore they that be against particulars, they are enemies to their own salvation. Mary regarded not, while Christ spake of generalls. But when he came to particulars, then, Rabboni, and not before.
Jesus saith unto her, touch me not, I am not yet ascended to my Father, &c. This verse containeth Christs Pro∣hibition, or Christs Commission, or Charge. His prohibition. Touch me not; and his reason, for I am not yet ascen∣ded to my Father. His Charge. Go to my Brethren. And then directeth what to say to them. I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God, and your God. The words be very naturall, and need no breaking up to you. But I shall handle them, as they follow one another. Jesus said to her, touch me not. John 20. 27. Touch me not. Why? he would have Thomas not only touch, but to put his finger into his side, that is more then touching him. But our Saviours intent is to meet with a dis∣position in Mary something carnall, something low and mean, in regard of this glorious occasion, Christ being now risen and glorified; for his re∣surrection was the first degree of his glorification. And therefore touch me not. She came with too much a car∣nall
Love to Christ cannot be satisfied without the injoy∣ment of Christ. mind to touch him, when we said Rabboni, it was not satisfacti∣on enough for her to answer Rabboni; but she runneth to him, and claspeth him, and clingeth about him, as the affection of love did dictate to her. But saith he, touch me not in such a manner, this is not a fit manner for thee to touch me in, now I am risen again. In a word, she had a thought to converse with Christ, in as familiar a manner, as be∣fore, when she powred oyntment on his head. He was the same person, but the case is altered; that was in the dayes of his humiliation, now he was Sense much affects carnal men.risen again, and it was the first degree of his glorification. There was ano∣ther manner of converse due to him, and therefore, touch me not. Thou thinkest to touch me as thou didst be∣fore, Christ af∣ter his Re∣surrection is to be touched by faith, and not by sense.but thou must not do it. She was too much addicted to his bodily pre∣sence. 1. It is that, that men will labour after, and have laboured for, even from the beginning of the world, to be too much addicted to present things, and to sense. They will wor∣ship Christ, but they must have a picture before them They will adore
Christ; but they must bring his bo∣dy down into a peece of bread, they must have a presence. And so instead of raising their hearts to God and Christ in a heavenly manner, they pull down God and Christ to them; this the pride, and base earthliness of man will do. And therefore saith Christ, touch me not, in that manner; It is not with me now as it was before. The Regene∣rate knoweth no man, no not Christ himself after the flesh.We must take heed of mean and base conceits of Christ. What saith Paul, 2 Cor. 5. I know uo man now, ac∣cording to the flesh, no, not Christ himself, now he is risen. Christ was of such a Tribe, Stature, had such gifts and qualities. What is that to me? Christ is now Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. He is glorious in Hea∣ven, and so I conceive of him. I know no man after the flesh, no, not Christ himself. I forget what he was on earth, and think of him, what he is now in Heaven. Therefore to bring him down to our base conceits, to sense, and the like, this is the humour of men, that labour to crosse the scope of the Gospel. For why are men so addicted to outward things, outward
complements? It is pride, it is sata∣nicall pride; they think that God is delighted with whatsoever their fol∣ly is delighted withall. Because a∣mongst Joh. 4. 24.men, there must be a deal a doing: therefore they think God is well pleased with such things. God is a spitit, and though outward things be necessary, yet all must not be turn∣ed outward, as in Popery. We must not bring God down to our foolish conceits, as if he were delighted, as we are. 2. It is wonderfull easie too; all outward things, any naughty men have them with their sins. Let a man Extern dei placere ne∣qutunt.perform a little outward comple∣ment, he may be what he will be, let him live as he will; and be possest, that outward things will serve the turn, he is safe, his Conscience is daubed up, till God by sense of wrath awakeneth conscience, and then they shall find it another matter to deal with God then by comple∣ment. 3. There is also a great glory in outward things. There is commenda∣tions, and mens observance of them,
as in the Pharisees, and in Popery. But the spirituall worship of Christ hath no observance to the eye of the world, it is between God and the soul, men naturally love those things Hos. 10. 11.that be glorious. It is said of Ephraim, that he loved to tread out the Corn, but not to plow; that is, Ephraim will take that which is easie, but not that in Gods worship which is hard. There be two things in Gods service. An easie thing, which is outward rduum & difficile est in fide vivere.complement. And an hard thing, which is, to trust him; to deny our selves, to relie upon him, and live by faith. And that Ephraim will not do. Ephraim will tread the corn, because the Heifer may eat corn. But there be hard things in Religion which he will not practice. He will not plough. Touch me not, saith Christ. Thou hast not conceits spirituall enough to deal with me, now I am risen. Christ not to be touched, because not as∣cended. But what is the reason, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Fa∣ther; That seemeth to be a strong rea∣son. But it seemeth to be a contrary reason. Touch me not now, when my body is present, but touch me when I
am gone, and removed out of sight of all flesh. Touch me not now, when thou mayst touch me, and touch me when there is an impossibility of touching me. This is seemingly strange; But indeed there is no con∣trariety in it. Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to the Father. non solum significat tangere, sed ad haeere, cōglutinari. Esa. 52. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 17. A taberna∣culo im pi∣orum ho∣minum recedite. Num. 16. 27. There is a double meaning of the words. First of all, touch me not; for I am not yet ascended, &c. Thou needest not claspe, and cling about me, as if I would stay no more with you below, I am not yet ascended to the Father, there will be time enough afterwards. For the word, touch, in the originall, doth not signifie meerly to touch; but claspe, associate, joyn, and soder with a thing: the Scripture speaking of the evill man, you shall not touch him, that is, not make him one with him. The Devill shall not take him from Christ, and make him one with himself. It is a strange word in the o∣riginall, Thou claspest about me, thou dost more then touch me, thou cling∣est to me, and wilt not leave me, as if I would go presently to the Father; but I am not yet ascended to the Fa∣ther.
That is one part of the mean∣ing. But there is farther then that, I am not yet ascended to the Father, touch me not. That is, it is another manner of touch that I look for, better for thee, and in some regard for me, to touch me by the hand of faith when I am as∣cended to the Father, then touch me, and take thy full of touching me. But for the present I am not ascended, I have not done all. I have not mani∣fested my self to my Disciples in full, when I am ascended, all is done, and then there is place for touch: And that I take is meant here, I am not yet ascended to the Father, thou thinkest I have done all is to be done; but thou art deceived, I must ascend to the Fa∣ther, and when I am there, I expect to be touched after another manner, af∣ter a gratious spiritual manner, which Mitte fidm in caelum, & tetigisti.is by faith, as Augustine saith, well, send up thy faith to Heaven, and then thou touchest Christ. As he said in the Sacrament, Quid paras dentem, & ven∣trem, Crede, & manducasti: what dost thou prepare thy teeth and stomack for? believe, and thou hast earen. So
the best communion with Christ is to believe, till we come to Heaven to have eternall communion with him. This touch will do thee little good, and it pleaseth me as little. When I am ascended to the Father, then touch me at the full, so you see what Christ meaneth. The life of a Christian here, and the manner of the dispensation of Christ here, is by promise, and by his spirit that we should live by faith, and not by sense. The life of sight is pre∣served for another world, when we are fitted for it. She was not fit for a life of sense, but was to expect the Holy Ghost from Heaven, to be filled with that, and then to be filled with faith and love, and then to have an holy Communion with him in Hea∣ven. But I am not yet ascended. Thus you see the meaning, touch me not. There be two reasons of Christs prohibition. 1. Her respects were too carnall and ordinary, considering he was in the state of glory. And then 2. for that there will be time enough: do not stand imbracing of me. There
is a greater work for thee to do. Christs care of mourning souls.Christ preferred the great work of giving notice to his Disciples of his Resurrection, before the Office of re∣spect, and service to himself. Go a∣bout a duty, that I more regard a great deal. Go tell my Brethren, I as∣cend, &c. So that every part of the Text yields satisfaction to that prohi∣tion. Go (saith he) to my Brethren, I have another work for thee to do. Touch me not, Thou claspes about me as if thou hadst nothing to do: there is another work to do that pleaseth me better, and more fit for thee, to comfort them that are in distress, my poor Brethren and Disciples. And therefore go to my Brethren, and say unto them, so that Christ prefers a work of cha∣rity to his poor Disciples, before a work of complement to his own per∣son. She clingeth about him, but this is not it I would have. Those poor souls are mourning and disconsolate for me, as if I re clean taken away, go to them, and prevent their farther sorrow. God hath a wonderfull respect to
others. It is strange that Christ should say, Go, and be reconciled to thy Bre∣thren, and then offer thy sacrifice. As if he would have his own sacrifice Charity.neglected, rather then we should not be reconciled to others. And so a work of charity and love is preferred before an officium and complement to himself. Let us shew our love to Mat. 5. 24.the first Table in the second, our love to God by our love to man. Every thing hath its measure and time. A∣way therefore with this over-much imbracing and touching. Go thy way thou hast another work to do, Go to my Brethren; And so you see (as I take it) the full meaning of the words. Observe the circumstances. Who must go? Here is a Commission, and command. And to whom? To the Disciples of Christ. And when doth Christ bid her go? when he was risen, and in the first estate of glory. What is the Message? Tell my Brethren, I am ascending to my Fath▪ and your Fa∣ther; to my God, and your God. It is worth your considering a little. 1. Who is sent. A woman, a woman to
be the Apostle of the Apostles, to bethe Teacher of the great Teachers of the world. Mary Magdalen vvas sent to in∣struct the Apostles in the great Articles of Christs Resurrection and Ascension God uses weak in∣struments to effect, great matters.to Heaven. By a Woman death came into the vvorld, and by a woman life was preached to the Apostles; because indeed she was more affectionate, and affection taketh all. And that makes that sex more addicted to Religion, by the advantage of their affection; for Religion is meerly a matter of affecti∣on: though it must have judgement shine before it, yet it is especially in the heart and affections. And she had shewed a great deal of affection, she stood out when the rest went away, John 19. 25. She was constant, and broke through all difficulties, and then God honoured her to be the first preacher of his Resurrection. Gods course is to trust secrets in earthen Vessels, that earthen Vessels should carry heavenly treasure, and therefore stick not at the Vessel; but look to the Treasure. A woman may teach the greatest Apostle. Look not to the man, but to the Message. Elias 2 Cor. 4. 7.
will not refuse the meat because the 1 King. 17. 4.Raven brought it. And a con∣demned man will not refuse a pardon, because a mean man bringeth it. Take off pride in spirituall respects. When God ho∣nours any man to bring news of re∣conciliation, stoop to him, of what condition soever he be. 2. To whom must she go? Go, tell my Brethren the Apostles. Go to the Apostles that are disconsolate men, now Orphans, deprived of their Ma∣ster and Lord. Disconsolate men, and not in vain, so not without cause; for they had reason to be discomforted, not only for their want of Christ; but for their own ill carriage towards Christ. One of them denyeth him, and the rest forsake him; and yet my Bre∣thren, go tell my Brethren. When did he speak this? after his Resurrection in the state of glory, in the beginning of it, and when he is ascending to Heaven, and yet he own∣eth them as Brethren, though such Quest. Answ.Brethren, as had dealt most unbro∣therly with him. But how came they to be his Bre∣thren?
And how come we to be Christs Brother? Christ is the first Rom. 8. 29born of many Brethren; He is the Son of God by Nature; and all o∣thers, Rom. 8. 17now, by grace and adoption. Christ is the Primo-genitus, amongst many brethren, and in Christ, we Heb. . 14.have one Father with Christ. We have one honour, we shall be all Kings, and Heirs of Heaven, as he is. If Sons, then Heirs: the Apostle makes the cohe∣rence. Now we are all in Christ, Sons of God, Heirs with him. To go to the condition of nature that he took, our nature, and therefore having our flesh, he is our Brother. The ry Reprobate may say so. Yet that is a ground of comfort, that he is a man as we are, but that is not the main thing considerable. He is our Brother in a spirituall respect, in regard of adop∣tion. He is the first Son of God, and we in him Sonnes. He is the first Heir of God, and we in him are Heirs. And therefore go to my Brethren. Christ not ashamed to be neerly related to us. Beloved, It is a point of marvel∣lous comfort, that Christ was not a∣shamed to call them Brethren, Psal. 22. 22. I will declare thy name amongst
by brethren, saith Christ. Our Saviour Christ alludeth to that Psalm in this passage, and so it is read, 2 Heb. out of that Psalm. Christ hath taken all relations (that are comfortable) up∣on him, towards us. He is the ever∣lasting Father, Isai. 9. The Prince of peace. He is a second Adam, and therefore a Father in that regard. The first Adam is the Father of all that pe∣rish. The second Adam is the Father of all that shall be saved. As he is our Brother, so our Husband. He could not be our Husband, except he Joh. 15. 15were our Brother. He must take our nature, and be one with us, before we can be one with him. He is our friend, before this time he called them friends. As you see in John, I will call 1 Cor. 11. 3 1 Cor. 12. 27. Ephes. 5. 23. John 2. Revel. 22.you friends. But here is a sweeter tearm Brethren. There is no relation that hath any comfort in it, but Christ hath taken it on him. He is our head, Husband, friend, Father, Brother, and whatsoever can convey comfort to us. And the truth of it is, he is these things more truly then any Relation is made true on earth. For these Relations of Husband and
Wife, and Brother and Sister, and Father and Child, are but shadows of that everlasting relation that Christ hath taken upon him; the reality and truth it self is in Christ. We think there is no Brother, but the Brother in flesh, no Father, but Father in flesh. Alas, these are but shadows, and quickly cease, the fashion of the world passeth away. Brother is another Re∣lation whereof these are but shadows. These do but represent the best things that are in Heaven: Christ is the Father, Brother, Friend, and whatsoever is comfortable in Heaven; therefore go, tell my brethren. Object. I, but saith the poor soul, I that have been so sinfull, and so unworthy Answ.a wretch, shall I have comfort in this, that Christ is my Brother, and I am Christs? I cannot do it. I profess thou canst not do it, flesh and blood must not teach it thee, thou must be taught by the spirit of Christ; but consider how the Apostles used Christ. Thou canst not call Christ Brother, because thou hast been a sinner, and hast carried thy self unkindly to Christ. And did not the Disciples so?
Relation to Christ must not be denyed because of sin. Luk. 15. 21 did not they leave him, and one of them deny him, and that with Oaths. Therefore whatsoever our sins have been, deny not our relation to Christ. The poor Prodigal said, I am not worthy to be called a Sonne, I am not worthy to be called a Servant. He denyed not that he was a Sonne, but he was unworthy of it. And so I a unworthy to be a spouse and bro∣ther of Christ, yet do not our unfaith∣full hearts to much pleasure, as to de∣ny our relation. The Apostles were so dignified, as to be called the Pillars of the world; but these left him, and yet for all that in this time of their desertion of him, go tell my brethren. Therefore be not discouraged, go to Christ in our Tentatio, est ad Chri∣stum eundi opportuni∣tas, ut no∣bis suc∣currat.worst condition, in our greatest temp∣tations, when our hearts misgive us most, that we have used God most unkindly, and Satan ply'd us most with desperate temptations, yet own him for our brother, who owned his Disciples, when they dealt most un∣kindly with him. I beseech you count it a comfort unvaluable, which no tongue is able to express, that
Christ after his Resurrection, should call brethren. He might well call them brethren after the Resurrection, be∣cause then all debts were discharged by his death. He had paid their debts, and now the acquittance was due to them, because Christ, as surety, had payd all. Now I am risen, go, and tell my brethren so. If we can make use of the death and Resurrection of Christ, and say, Christ hath dyed for my sins, and rose again for my justification, I will interest my self in his death, I will claim the vertue of his Resur∣rection, then take the comfort of this. In Popery they had much comfort in those dark times, when a Company of proud carnall beastly men ruled the roast according to their own lusts, these Clergymen made a great pother with fraternity and brotherhood. And if they were of such a fraternity of Vanity of Popery & Popish Orders.Dominick or Francis, or meerly in a Fryars Coule; it was not only satisfa∣ctory, but meritorious, they could not do amisse, away with these shadows. Here is the brotherhood that must comfort Christians, that Christ own∣ed us for brethren after his Resur∣rection.
He payd dear for it, alas, are we worth so much, that God should become man to die for us, to rise a∣gain for us, to justifie us, and make us brethren? That infinite love, that God became man, and dyed for us, and rose again to own us for his bre∣thren, will satisfie all doubts. Shall we doubt any thing of that love, when he out of his free love, will own us as brethren, shall not we own him? I con∣fesse it is a marvellous thing, in times of temptation it is difficult to make use of it. Oh, but pray with the good Apostle, Lord increase our faith; with the poor man in the Gospel, I Mark 9. 24believe, Lord help my unbelief. So when any temptation cometh for our Relyance on Christs comforts.unworthiness, and our undeserving: then think Christ after his Resur∣rection call'd his Apostles brethren, and he will be content to be my bro∣ther, if I will believe, he dy'd for me, and I will cast my self upon him, therefore away with all doubts. There be many other observations out of the words. Will you have the first words in estate of glory, his first words after death? go and tell my bre∣thren. Think in a desperate extremi∣ty,
think of the sweet message he sent by Mary Magdalen to his unworthy The con∣sideration of Christs free grac and love keeps from des∣peration.brethren, that he had dy'd for, and given his blood to make them his brethren. Think of his free love to you, it is not for your worthiness or unworthiness, but of his own free love that he came from Heaven to take your nature, it is his own free love that he came to die; and there∣fore conceive not of worthiness, nor unworthiness; but consider the com∣mand of God to believe, and if we perish, perish there. Cast our selves on our brother, that will own us in our worst condition, that is the grand use. 2. Again, if God owns us in his glorious condition, shall we be asha∣med A Chri∣stian is Confessor.of the Doctrine of Christ, of the Children of God, to own them? what saith Christ? It is a terrible Thunder∣bolt; He that is ashamed of me, and Mark 8▪ 18of my word before men, I will be a∣shamed of him before my heavenly Father. Take heed of being ashamed to stand out a good cause, in matters of Religion. Christ was not ashamed to call us brethren when we were at the worst, and he himself in a glori∣ous
condition; he was in glory, and the Disciples drooping in considerati∣of Deserting of Christ is betray∣ing of himtheir guilt, that they had forsaken him, and yet brethren still. And shall not we own him, that owneth us in state of glory? how shall we look that he will own us hereafter, when he truteth us with his cause and glory, and we betray all to plea∣sure such and such? Can we look Christ in the face with comfort, if we neglect his cause, his truth and his Church? 3. Again make this use of it, Christ is our Brother, and will not he take our parts. Absolon was a disobedient Son, yet Absolon would not let his Si∣ster Tamar be abused, he would be re∣venged of that. And will Christ suf∣fer his sister, his spouse, his Church Comfort in that Christ is our Brother.to be abused long? nay, will he leave his Dove, his love, his undefiled one, where he hath placed all his joy, and contentment to the malice and fury of the enemy long? certainly he will not. Certainly he will be avenged on his enemies. If nature that he hath put into the wicked sinfull men, teach them to revenge indignities offered to
their kindred, will Christ suffer his Brethren, his sister to be abused. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? now he is in Heaven, the Churches case is his own. And therefore comfort our Christ in glory owns his Churches Cause.selves with that sweet Relation, Christ hath undertaken to be our brother in state of glory; what a comfort is it that we have a brother in Heaven? what a comfort was it to the poor Patriarks, when they thought with themselves, we have a brother, Joseph, that is the second man in the Kingdom. And so, what a great com∣fort is it, for poor Christians to think, that the second in Heaven, that sitteth at Gods right hand, that is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and that ruleth all, is our brother. Is not this a main comfort, yea beyond all expression, if we could make use of it by faith, answerable to our trouble. Therefore go to Joseph, that hath laid up comfort for us, he hath com∣fort enough for us, he hath treasures of comfort, whatsoever is necessary for us; we may have in Christ our el∣der brother. And therefore, go to my brethren.
Use of ex∣hortation by faith to labor to be one with Christ. I beseech you, let us make a use of exhortation to be stirred up, to labor by faith to be one with Christ, and then he will be our head, our Hus∣band, our brother, our friend, our all. Say what you can, Christ will be all in all to all his. He hath enough in him, of his fulnesse we shall receive, and grace for grace. Oh labour to be one John 1. 16with Christ. Do not lose such a comfort as is offered. He offereth himself first to be our Saviour and Redeemer, and then our brother, ne∣ver rest therefore till we have part in Christ. And then labour to make use of Faiths usual work.in all temptations, catch fast hold of every thing that is usefull, as it is the nature of faith to do, like Benhadads Servants, who made use of that word, brother. He is my brother said the King of Israel, as common Offices make kindred He had but let passe the tearm of brother, and they would not let it go, but catcht at it, thy brother Ben∣hadad. We see what wisdom flesh and blood can teach, to make an improve∣ment of any comfort in the world, if by kindred, or office, or any relation in the world they make use of them.
And when we be in Christ, shall not we make use of them, when we be troubled with sense of sin, or in des∣perate conditions? when Christ calleth us brother, shall not we answer, I am Christs calling his Disciples brethren, adds much to our com∣fort.thy brother? Blessed be thy mercy and love that descended so low, as to make me thy brother. I beseech you let us not lose the comforts we may have in the Disciples, being call∣ed Christs Brethren, when they were in some sort enemies, but he knew their hearts were sound, and it was but their weakness: therefore let no weakness discourage thee. He will not quench the smoaking flax, nor break the bruised Reed. Is thy heartright to Christ, art not thou a false Hypocrite, a secret Traitor to Christ, and to his cause and Church? then be of good comfort, thou mayst go to Christ, as to thy brother. Though Peter denyed him with his mouth, yet he confest him with his heart. And therefore, go tell my Dis∣ciples and Peter, he hath most guilt, and therefore hath most need of com∣fort. Be thy guilt never so great, if thou wilt come into Covenant with God, here is mercy for thee,
and therefore make this use of it. Ne∣ver forget in your worst condition, that may be, since Christ will stoop so low to own you to be brethren, to make use of it, if your hearts be right towards him. Go to my brethren; now I come to the Commission, or Charge given to her▪ Go to my brethren; who is the party charged? Mary: And what is her charge? to go to the Apostles under the sweet tearm of brethren; When doth he call them so? after his Re∣surrection, when he was in the state of glory: what is the Message? it is very sweet. Go, say to them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God, and your God. I ascend, that is, I pre∣sently am to ascend, in a very short time I shall ascend. It was but forty dayes between Easter and the Ascen∣sion; Faith presents things to come, as present.and all that time Christ appear∣ed now and then. It is the nature of faith, where it is glorious, for to pre∣sent future things, as if present; espe∣cially when they be near. I ascend, that is, I shall very shortly ascend, and it is all one, as if I ascend presently. To whom do I ascend? I ascend to my Father. To my Father, that is not
comfort enough, therefore to your Fa∣ther too; I ascend to God, that is not comfort enough: therefore to my God and your God. We shall unfold the words as we come at them. First Mary Magdalen a woman, a sinner, is used in the great work of an Apostle, to be an Apostle to the A∣postles. I would there were that love in all men to teach what they know, and that humility in others to be in∣structed in what they know not. It were a sweet conjunction, if it were so. She was a mean person to in∣struct Love teacheth what it knowes.the great Apostles. But beloved, where there is a great deal of love, there they will teach what they know: and where there is humility, there they will be taught what they Humility will be in∣structed in what it knowes not.know not, though they be never so great. And God will humble the greatest, to learn of the meanest some∣times: therefore he sendeth Mary to the Apostles. I beseech you in matters of salva∣tion stand not on tearms. Let us take truth from Christ, let us see God and Christ in it, see our own comfort in it, not stand upon persons. Aquila and
Priscilla teach the great men know∣ledg. And so it is; sometimes mean persons are honored to be instru∣ments of great comforts to persons greater then themselves. She is to go to the Apostles under the name of Brethren, Go tell my Brethren. And she must go to the Apostles that were Christs Brethren, and owned to be so, now when he was in glory, when he was risen, and exempt from all his for∣mer abasements of the Crosse and grave, where he was held captive, three dayes under the dominion of Christ as∣cended into glory, forgets not his people in debase∣ment.sin; when he was freed from all ene∣mies of salvation, and had triumphed over all. Go tell my Brethren. So you see there is a sweet affinity and near∣ness between Christ and his. Christ took our nature on him for this end, he became flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, that we spiritually might be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. It is no comfort at all, an inducing comfort it is, but no ac∣tuall present comfort, that Christ was incarnate for us; for all the world might have comfort in that, Turks, Jews, Pagans, that had the nature
of man in them. And all have some comfort in it, as their nature is digni∣fied, and that he took not on him the nature of Angels, but the nature of man, his spouse, his Church it is, that hath the comfort of it. Therefore it is not sufficient, that he be bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh; but we must be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. We must be ingraffed, and baptized into him by faith, and then the tearm holdeth, and never till then, so that there is a sweet nearness betwixt Christ and his. Brother is a It is the highst honor to be a mem∣ber of Christ.most comfortable relation. It is com∣fort that he took our nature upon him, that God would take dust and ashes, earth into the unity of his per∣son, for God to become man is a great dignifying of mans nature; but to take not only our nature on him; but to take our person particularly near to him, thou, and thou to be a Member of Christ, there is the honor of it. It induceth us to come to Christ that hath loved our nature so much. But the other is an actual pre∣sent comfort, when we can say, I am my Beloveds, & my Beloved is mine. Our hearts are too narrow a great
deal to imbrace the whole comfort that this word affords unto us. That Christ should own us as his Brother after his Resurrection; for that shew∣eth a reconciliation. Brother is a tearm of friendship, nay more then a tearm of reconciliation, for a man may be reconciled to an enemy; but it is a tearm of amity, to shew that when we believe in Christ, and are one with him, our sins are quitted, death is overcome, Satans head is crushed when God is reconciled. What have they to do with us? they By faith in Christ both sin, death and hell are overcome.are only to serve our turns to bring us to Heaven, and fit us for it. I be∣seech you consider of the excellent freedom and dignity of a Christian; his freedom, in that he is the Brother of Christ, free from all, being owned by Christ after his Resurrection, all The free∣dom of a Christian.being quit by his death, who w as our surety, else he should have been in the grave to this day. And then think The Chri∣stians dig∣nity.of our dignity, to be Brother to him, that is King of Heaven, Lord of Lords, Ruler of the whole world, that hath all things subject to him. O that our hearts were inlarged to conceive
the wonderful comfort that every Christian hath in this Relation. Go tell my Apostles under the sweet tearm of Brethren. Satans Objection. Who art thou, will Satan say, flesh and blood a peece of earth, wretched Sot, wilt thou claim kindred of Christ? The Chri∣stians Reply. I, saith the Christian-believing soul. It is true, if it were my own worthiness, it were another matter; but shall I give him the lie, when he owned me for his Brother after his Resurrection, shall I deny the Relati∣on? therefore never believe Satans tempting words and sinful flesh; for Satan cometh to us in our own flesh, and maketh us think God and Christ to be such and such. I but what saith Christ himself, believe him and not Satan, that cometh to Christ to be belie∣ved, and not Satan.thee in thy own despairing, dark, doubting flesh. Believe the word of Christ, who calleth thee Brother, if thou believest in him, and castest thy self upon him. This sheweth the dignity of a christian, when he is once in Christ, the excellent, super-excellent trans∣cendent
glory of a christian. When they told our Saviour Christ, that his Mother and Brethren were to speak with him; saith he, they that hear my word, and do it, they are my Brother and Sister, and my Mother. This is the excellency of a christian that he is of so near a kin to Christ. When we believe Christ, it is all one, as if we Mother, and bro∣ther in spirit, is preferred before▪ mother and bro∣ther in the flesh.conceived Christ, as if we were Bro∣thers to Christ, as if we were of the nearest kindred to him. Nay it is more, he preferreth Mother, before Mother, Brother, before Brother; ther; Mother in spirit, before Mother in the flesh, and Brother in spirit, be∣fore all other Brothers. Therefore an excellent thing to be a christian. When once a Christian giveth him∣self to Christ, and denyeth his own doubting despairing heart, (which is the greatest enemy he hath; 1. Then what belongeth to him? then God is his, and Christ is his; he must have an inheritance, he is fellow Heir without, all are his. 2. What carrieth he in him? He carrieth in him the spirit of the Fa∣ther and the Son, and the graces of
of the spirit which make him lovely to God. 3. What cometh from him? Ha∣ving the pretious graces of the Holy Ghost in him, what can come from him as a christian, but grace and comfort to others. He is a Tree of righteousness, and what can come from a good Tree, but good fruit? so far he is so. Christians are fruitful Trees of righteous∣nesse. So if you regard what belongeth to them, what is in them, the inheri∣tance they shall have, or what cometh from a christian, that is, Brother of Christ, he is an excellent person, more excellent then his Neighbour: there is no man in the world, never so great, but is a base person in compari∣son of a christian. What will all be ere long? if a man be not in Christ, these things will add to our vexation. It will be a misery to have had happi∣ness, the greater will be the misery, when they must be parted withall. And therefore raise your hearts to consider of the excellent condition of a christian, when he is once the Bro∣ther of Christ. I confess it is an hidden dignity, as
Paul saith, our life is hid with Christ in God. We have a life, a glori∣ous life, but it is hid. It is dark, some∣times under melancholy, sometimes under temptations, sometimes under the afflictions of the world, and dis∣grace, and so it is an hidden excellen∣cy; but it is a true excellency. The world knoweth us not more then they know God, and Christ; but it is no matter, God knoweth us by name, He knew Mary by name; as it is said in Isaiah, I have called thee by name. He is a Shepheard, that knoweth his sheep by name, and is known of them. He knoweth thee, The world knowes not the excellen∣cy of Gods people, and there∣fore re∣gards them not.and thee, and thee, by name, yea, and the hairs of thy head are numbred, and therefore it matters not, though thy dignities be hid with the world, yet God knoweth them, he hath written all thy members in a book, and he hath a book of remembrance of thee. And therefore it is no matter, though it be an hidden dignity, it is a true dignity to be a brother of Christ. Let us oppose this to the disgrace of the world, and to all temptations of discouragement whatsoever. What
are all discouragements to this? they fall all before this, that we are the Sons of God, and Brethren of Christ. What can discourage a man that is thus apprehensive of this Excellency upon good tearms. I will inlarge the point no further, but leave it to your own meditations, and the spirit of God work with it. Go to my Brethren. When doth he bid her go? now after his Resurrecti∣on, The con∣stancy and humility of Christ.when he was to ascend to Heaven. The first degree of his glory was his Resurrection, after his lowest abase∣ment in the grave. You see that ho∣nour doth not change Christs dispo∣sition; as it doth amongst men, when they be advanced to great places, they will not look on their old friends and acquaintance; but Christ had no such disposition, he owneth his poor Disciples in their greatest abasements. Go tell my Brethren. Now, when he was in state of glory, ready to go to Heaven, and he giveth them a more comfortable title now, then ever be∣fore. In the Gospel he called them Servants and friends and Apostles and Disciples; but now Brethren, a word
of all sweetness, and nothing but sweetness. Go tell my brethren present∣ly, Christ would have no delay; for he saw they had present need. Christs Christ speedy in comfort∣ing.love is a quickening love, and the fruits of it are very speedy. There is more then angelicall swiftness in Christ, when there is need of him. God helpeth at need, in the most sea∣sonable time, and he knoweth the time best of all. He did but rise in the morning, and the very same day, Go tell my Brethren: ye have Cant. 2. that Christ cometh leaping upon the Mountains, when he was to help his Church, he leaped over the Moun∣tains, as in the eight verse. The voice of my Beloved, behold he cometh leaping upon the Mountains, skipping upon the Hills. He cometh from Hea∣ven to Earth, from the Earth to the Grave, and now he is risen, he is all in hast, he maketh no stay, because his manner of dispatch, is, to help and comfort by the Ministry of others. God quickly, do not stand imbracing of me, but go and tell my Brethren. Object.But why then do not we find com∣fort sooner, that are afflicted.
Answ. Beloved, where is the fault? Is it in Christ? you stand out at staves end with Christ, you will not imbrace comforts when they be offered, or else you be not sufficiently humbled; for he is wise, as he is swift, he know∣eth which be the best times. You see then, that Christ (as soon as ever it is fit for him) he will come. If he should come sooner, he would come too soon; if afterward it would Christ takes his ow time to com∣fort the humble soul.be too late. He is the best discerner of times and seasons that can be, and therefore wait his leasure. If thou want comfort, humble soul, whatsoe∣ver thou art, wait his leasure, cer∣tainly he knoweth the best time, and when the time is come, he will come. He that will come shall come, there is no question of that. Now as he sent her in all hast, pre∣ferring it before any Complement to his own person; so it is a constant love: as it is a quick love, that God bears to his Children, so it is a con∣stant, invincible love. They had dealt Christs love constant.most unbrotherly with him; for eve∣ry one had forsaken him, and Peter had denyed him: yet go, tell my Bre∣thren.
One would think this water would have quenched this fire, this unkind, and unbrotherly dealing would have quenched this love in Christs breast. It is true, if it had been the meer love of man, it had been something; but it was the love of an infinite person, that took our nature out of love, and therefore it was a constant and invincible love; nothing could conquer it, not the thoughts of their unkind dealings, no not their denying and forsaking of him. But still, go, tell my Brethren. Love is strong as death. Death could not hold Christ in the grave, but love held him on the Crosse. When he came to the work of our Redemption, love then held him on earth; but when he was in the grave, it brake through all there. Indeed, it was stronger then death in Christ. Question. Why is Christs love so constant, so invincible, that nothing can alter it? Resol.The ground of it is, it is free love. He fetcheth the ground of his love from his own heart, not from our worthi∣ness, or unworthiness, but from his own freedom, and Gods eternal pur∣pose.
God hath purposed to save so Gods love is constant because grounded on his own eter∣nall pur∣pose.many, and those, and no more he giveth to Christ to save. And God looketh on his own purpose, and Christs free love, and that is the ground of all. And therefore whom he loveth, he loveth to the end, be∣cause he looked on us in his election. Fuda∣menta ta∣en stant inconcuss Syois.The Lord knoweth who are his, the foundation is so sure, if once we be Gods, we are ever Gods. For Christ looks on us in Gods election: there∣fore if ever he sheweth his love to us, once his love, and for ever his love. If any thing in man could hinder it, it would have hindered it at our first conversion, when we were at worst, even enemies; if nothing could hinder it then, what can hinder it afterwards? as the Apostle reasoneth strongly, Rom. 5. 10. If we be reconciled by his death, much more will he save us by his Christ by death reconciles us, by his life he saves us▪life. If when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, now much more being re∣conciled, shall we be saved by his life. If when we had no goodness, but op∣position, and rebellion in us, we were saved by his death, Christ is much
more able to save us now by his life, triumphing over death, and being glorious in the Heavens. Obj. Oh, but saith the poor soul, I am a poor weak Creature, and ready to fall away every day. Answ. I, but Christs love is constant, whom he loveth, he loveth to the end. What saith the Apostle, Rom. 8. neither things present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate us from the love of Christ; and therefore be Trusting in Christ takes off trouble.strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, do not trust to your selves, nor trouble your selves for things to come. If thou be free from guilt of former sins, never question time to come, God is unchangeable in his nature, unchangeable in his love. He is Jehovah, I am alwayes, not I was, or will be, but I am alwayes. If ever he loved thee, he will love thee for ever. You see the constancy of Christs love, go tell my Brethren; now when they had most deeply offended him, they were Renegadoes, having all left him, and then when he had most need of their comfort, being in greatest extremity, and yet go tell my Brethren.
Beloved, let us not lose the com∣fort of the constancy and immutabi∣lity of Christs love. Let us conceive that all the sweet links of salvation are held on Gods part strong, not on ours, the firmness is on Gods part, not The links of salvati∣on hold firm on Gods part.on ours. Election is firm on Gods part, not on ours. We chuse indeed as he chuseth us; but the firmness is of his chusing: so he calleth us, we answer; but the firmness is of his action. He justifieth, we are made righteous, but the firmness is of his imputation. Will he forgive sins to day, and bring us into Court, and damn us to morrow? no, the firm∣nesse is of his action. We are ready to run into new debts every day; but whom he justifieth, he will glorifie. The whole chain so holdeth, that all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth cannot break a link of it; whom he calleth, he will justifie and glorifie: therefore never doubt of continuance, for it holds firm on Gods part, not thine, God imbraceth us in the arms of his everlasting love, not that we imbraced him first. When the Child falleth not, it is from the Mothers holding the Child, and not from the
Childs holding the Mother. So it is Gods holding of us, knowing of us, imbracing of us, and justifying of us, that maketh the state firm, and not Gods love n Itera∣ble.ours; for ours is but a reflexion, and result of his, which is unvariable. The sight of the Sun varieth, but the Sun in the Firmament keepeth al∣wayes his constant course: so Gods love is as the Sun invariable, and for ever the same. I only touch it, as the foundation of wonderful comfort, which they undermine that hold the contrary. The next point is, that Christ chose Mary to go tell his Brethren, and un∣der the sweet title of Brethren, to de∣liver this sweet message, I am going to my Father and your Father, to my God, and your God. He telleth them the sweetest words in the worst times. In darkest times Christ is near to comfort. This point differeth from the for∣mer thus. The former was, that Christs love is constant, and alwayes the same; but now Christ most sheweth his love when we are most cast down, in the worst times, if our casting down be with repentance. He never said Brethren before, but reser∣ved the tearm of Brethren for the
worst time of all. The sweetest disco∣veries of Christ are in the worst times Simile▪of all to his Children. Mothers will bring out any thing to their Children that is sweet & comfortable to them in their sicknesse; though they frown∣ed on them before, yet the exigency of the Child requires it when there is need, any thing cometh out that may please the Child. The poor Disciples were not only in affliction, being the scorn of the world, the Shepheard being smitten, and the sheep scatter∣ed: but their inward grief was greater, they were inwardly confoun∣ded, and ashamed to see Christ come to such an end, they were full of un∣belief, though Christ had told them, he would rise again, they could not believe; and so what with fear, and what with doubt, and what with grief for their using of Christ so un∣kindly, and leaving him, certainly they were in a perplexed and discon∣solate condition: yet now, go and Note.tell my Brethren. We see then, that after relapses, when we be in state of grace, to deal unkindly with Christ, must needs be matter of grief and shame; yet if we be humbled for it,
and cast down, even then Christ hath a sweet message for us by his holy spirit. Go tell my Brethren. In the Canticles, The Church, the spouse of Christ, had dealt unkindly with Christ, by losing him and forsaking him. Chap. 3. 5. In the third Chap∣ter she had lost him, and sought him on her bed, but found him not, she The Churches care to find her beloved.rose, and went to the watchmen, and then went through the City, but found him not, at length she found him, whom her soul loved. Then Christ speaks most sweetly and com∣fortably to her in the beginning of Christs sweet and comforta∣b e spech o his beloved.the fourth Chapter; but especially in the sixth Chapter, after she had dealt most unkindly with Christ. He standeth at the door knocking and waiting, till his locks dropt with rain, in resemblance of a Lover that standeth at the door, and is not suffer∣ed to come in. Afterward he leaveth her for this unkindnesse, yet not so, but that there was some sweet relish left upon the door. God alwayes leaveth something in his Children to long after him, and at length af∣ter much longing, Christ manifesteth himself sweetly to her, Chap. 6. 4. and breaketh out. Thou art beautiful
O my love as Tirzah, comely as Jerusa∣lem, Christs high com∣mendati∣ons of his spoueterrible as an Army with banners, turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me, thy hair is as a flock of Goats, &c. and so goeth on, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled one. He could not satisfie himself in the com∣mendations of his Church, being as it were overcome with love. And this sheweth, that after we have dealt unkindly with Christ, and our con∣sciences are ashamed, and abashed with it, as it is fit they should, yet if we will wait awhile, and be con∣tent, not be desperate, nor yield to temptation; if we stay but a while, Christ will manifest himself to us, and shew that he valueth, and prizeth the hidden graces, we cannot see; he can see gold in oare. He can see hid∣den love, and hidden faith and grace, that we cannot see in temptations, and he will manifest all at length, and shew his love when we stand most in need of it. We see it in David, who was deeply humbled for his folly with Bathsheba; for there was not one, but many fins, as murder and adultery, &c. yet being now hum∣bled,
God sent him, and Bathshebah, wise Solomon to succeed him in his Kingdom. He forgetteth all, and so you see our Saviour Christ forgetteth all their unkindness, he biddeth her not go tell my Renegate Disciples, that owned not me, they care not for me, I care not for them, I am above death, and all, and now will use Note.them, as they did me; oh no, but go tell my brethren, without mentioning any thing that they have done un∣kindly. What is the reason? it is sufficient to a gracious soul, that it is thus. It is the course of God, but there be reasons to give satisfaction. Reason 1▪ First, the love of Christ to a poor disconsolate afflicted soul is most sea∣sonable, when they have relaps'd and dealt unkindly with Christ, then Christ not only forgiveth, but for∣gets all, nay and calleth them under the tearm of Brethren, which is more Kindnesse shewed af∣ter dejecti∣on is very seasonable.then forgiving and forgetting. Oh now it is seasonable; for there is a wonderful dejection of spirit af∣ter unkind usage of Christ, in a soul that knowes what Christ means. It is
as a shower of rain after great drought, it falleth weighty upon the soul. Reason 2. Secondly, The freedom of Christs love most appeareth then, when no desert of ours can move it; for is not that love free, when we have dealt unkindly with him, and joyned with the world, and with the flesh, and dealt slipperily with him, that then he will speak kindly to us, and make love to us. Lord, if I had had my due, what would have become of me? If he had sent them word ac∣cording Christ deals not with us after our deserts.to their deserts, he might have said, go tell the Apostate base people that have dealt unworthily with me, whom I will send to Hell. Oh no, but tell my Brethren; his free love appeareth most at such times, when our souls are most deject∣ed. Reason 3▪ Thirdly, Satan roareth then most then he most of all sheweth his horns, when we are relapsed, oh saith he, if thou hadst never found kindness it had been something; but thou hast dealt unworthily, that hast had so many favours, and dost thou so re∣quite
the Lord of glory? Now this love of Christ doth exceedingly con∣found Satan, and trouble his plots: he knoweth then, that God leaveth men, and he joyneth with a guilty conscience, and a guilty conscience maketh them to fear all they have de∣served: shall I look God in the face, & Christ in the face, when I have used Satan by laying guilt to our charge labors to carry us further fom God.them thus? shall I receive the Sa∣crament, and joyn with Gods people? now Satan doth joyn with guilt of conscience, and carrieth it further, and when God seeth them dejected and humbled for this, he speaketh more comfort to them then ever before. There is none of us all, I can except none, but had need of this: have we dealt so unkindly with Christ since our conversion? have not we dealt proudly, and unkindly, and carlesly with him? and if we have the love of Christ in our brests, it will shame and abash us. Now if we have joyn∣ed with a temptation, Satan will say; will you go to God, and to prayer, that have served God thus? shall I yield to this temptation? if we can shame our selves, and say, Lord I take
all shame to my self, I have dealt most Comfort to those that sh me themselvesunworthily with thee; we shall hear a voice of comfort presently. And therefore whatsoever our condi∣tion be, be invited to repentance, though thou hast fallen, and fallen a∣gain, I have dealt unkindly; did not Peter so, and yet, go tell my Disciples, and tell Peter. The Pope will have him head of the Church, I am sure he was head in forsaking of Christ, and indeed Christ ever upbraided Peter with forsaking of him, now only he biddeth him feed, feed, feed, that he John 2▪ 15, 16, 17might take more notice of it; but he was so kind, that he never cast it into his teeth. Obj. But saith the poor drooping soul, if I had never tasted of mercy, it had been something. Answ. But object not that; for though Peters offence was great, yet his offence was great; and though thy sins be great, yet if thy repentance and humiliation be answerable, thou shalt have most comfort of all. And therefore let no man be discoura∣ged. If we go on in sinful desperate
courses, as the fashion of the world is, speak what we can, if we speak out our lungs, many will not leave an oath, nor their prophane base cour∣ses, and filthy wayes; ill they have been already, and ill they will be, till they come to Hell. Some such there be; but better, we are to speak to: whosoever thou art, that are weary of thy prophane base godless courses, be humbled for them. When thou art humbled, and broken-hearted, then think of Christ as he offers himself, think of nothing but love, nothing but mercy. Satan will picture him thus and thus; but when thou best humbled and broken hearted, he is readier to entertain thee, then thou We are not so rea∣dy to come as Christ is to receive.art to fly to him. And therefore at such times consider how Christ offer∣eth himself to thee. He that dyed for his enemies, and seeks them that ne∣ver sought him, that is found of them that sought him not, will he re∣fuse them that seek him? If thou hast an heart humbled, and hast a desire of favour, will he refuse thee, that re∣ceiveth many in the world? therefore do not despair. We as Ambassadors
beseech you, saith the Apostle. Thou desirest Gods savour, and Christs love, thou desirest them, and Christ intreateth thee, and then thou art well met. Thou wouldst fain have Well m when Christ and the soul met toge∣ther.pardon and mercy, so would Christ fain bestow it upon thee: therefore joine not to Satan, take heed of temp∣tations in such a case as this is, take heed of refusing our own mercies; when God offers mercy in the bowels of his compassion, rfuse it not. Christ is ready to shew great kindnesse in our greatest unkindnesse, if we be humbled for it. Presump∣tuous sinners. But this belongeth to them that be broken hearted, that can prize and value Christ. They that go on in presumptuous courses shall find Christ in another manner of Majesty, they shall find him as a Judge, whom they despised as a Brother, and they that will not come in, and subject themselves to his mercy, they shall find his justice. If they will not come under this Scepter, they shall find his rod of Iron to crush them to pieces. And therefore let no corrupt carelesse person, that will go on, fortifie their
presumption from hence. It belong∣eth only to them that be humbled, and abased with the sight of sin, and consideration of their unkindness, and The most humble Christian, most sub∣ject to be discoura∣ged. Rom. 5. 20.unworthy dealings with Christ. I know such are not subject to discou∣ragement, and Satan is most ready to close with them, in strong temptati∣ons above all. Oh but let them never despair, but consider what the Apostle saith, while sin aboundeth, grace aboun∣deth much more. If there be height, depth, and breadth of sin in us, there is now more height, and depth, and breadth of mercy in Christ, yea more then we can receive. Object. Answ. I have fallen from God, saith the soul: what if thou hast? but God is not fallen from thee. Peter denyed Christ; but did Christ deny Pete? no, Christ hath not denyed thee. What saith the Lord in Jeremy, VVill the Husband take the VVife when she hath Jer. . 1. Comforts against great sins.been naught? no; yet return to me O Is∣rael. But say, thou hast been false, and committed such and such sins, whatsoever they be, though Adulte∣ry, yet return to me.
Quest. Oh but is it possible God should do it? Our com∣forts fail not, be∣cause he is God and not man, Resol. Yea, it is possible with him, His thoughts are not as thy thoughts, his thoughts are as far above thine, as Hea∣ven is above Earth. Obj. Why, no man will do it? Answ. I, but here is the mercy of a God, I am God, and not man: there∣fore his comforts fail not. If he were so, he would not regard one that hath been so unkind; but he is God, and not man. Go to my Brethren, I come now to the matter of the Commission, tell them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God, and your God, which is all included in Brethren; for if we be Gods in Christ, then God is our Father. But we must not deal in few words with disconsolate souls, but come again, and again with the same words. As how many times have you the comfort of the Mssiah in Isaiah, and the rest of the Prophets, again, and again. Our hearts are so prone to doubt of Gods mercy, of Christs Note.love, especially after guilt, that
all is little enough; and therefore Difference between a carnal and a gratious heart.our Saviour studieth to speak sweetly to the heart. Go tell my Brethren: that which a carnall heart, and curious head, would count Tautologie, and superfluity of words, a gracious heart thinks to be scantness; oh more of that still, I have not enough. This is the pride of men, that will have all things to satisfie a curious ear; but a gracious heart hath never enough. And therefore Christ addeth comfort to comfort. Go tell my Brethren, I as∣cend to my Father, and their Father, to my God, and their God. The Message it self is Christs ascension. The place whither, is to the Father, a common Father to him, and them; every word hath comfort. I ascend. I ascend to the Father, and to my Father, and your Father too; now I Sin impu∣ted to Christ as our surety.have quitted my self of death and sin, imputed to me as a surety, & I am go∣ing to Heaven to make an end of all there. I ascend to God, to my God, and to your God. We have all one com∣mon
Father, and one common God▪ First, for his ascension, he did not yet ascend. Why then doth he speak for the present. I ascend, Faith makes things absent present.that is, I am shortly so to do. And it was in his mind, it was certainly so to be; and therefore he speaks of it in present. It is the phrase of faith, to speak of things to come, as if they were present, faith makes them so to the soul; for it looketh on the word, and all things, as they are in that word, who will make good whatsoever he saith. And therefore it is the evidence of things that are not yet, yet they be evident to a faith∣full soul. If we could learn this aright to make things to come present, what kind of people should we be? could we think of our Resurrection and ascension, and glory to come, as present, they would be present to our faith: the things present, or sense, could not withdraw us. If we could set Hell before us, could the pleasures of Hell bewitch us? if the time to come were present, could any thing in the world withdraw us? it could
not be. And therefore it is an excel∣lent skill of faith to set things to come before us, as present. Saints look for∣ward as Christ did. He ascendeth, he implyeth, that he was risen, that was past, and there∣fore he nameth it not. All Christs mind was on ascending. Those that are risen together with Christ, their mind is all on ascension, all on Hea∣ven. And this is one main reason, because where any thing is imperfect, there the spirit resteth not, till it at∣taineth to that perfection, that it is destinated unto. When any thing hath a proper element and place, where it must rest, it resteth not till it be in its proper place and Element. The perfection of the soul is in Hea∣ven to see Christ face to face, and God in Christ. Heaven is the Element of a Christian, it is his proper Region, he is never well till there, and there is his rest, his solace and contentment, Till we come to Heaven, our desires are unsa∣tisfied.and there all his desires are satiated to the utmost. Till we be in Heaven, we be under desires; for we be under imperfections. All the while we are in imperfections, we are in an uncom∣fortable estate, and while we be so,
we are not as we would be. And therefore wheresoever any are parta∣kers of Christs Resurrection, they mind the ascension as present. Where any grace is, there the thoughts are for Heaven presently. Let us take a scantling of our dis∣positions from hence. There be ma∣ny that think it good to be here al∣wayes, they never think of ascending. If they could live here alwayes, they would with all their heart; but it is not so with a Christian, it is his de∣sire to be where his happiness, his Sa∣viour, his God, and Father is, where his Country and inheritance is; and therefore he mindeth ascension, and things to come. When any thing is done, he thinks, that what is done, is not yet enough. Simile.As your great Conquerours in the world, they forget what they have conquered, and remember what they have yet to do. So Christ, ha∣ving got conquest over death, he thinks now of ascension, to conquer in the eyes of all; for it is not enough to conquer in the field, but he will conquer in the City, he will conquer
to Heaven, and make shew of his Conquest. I ascend to lead captivity captive, to make a shew, as it is ex∣prest, Colos. 2. 15. While any thing is to do, or receive, our souls should not be satisfied, but still stretched out to desire further and further still, more and more still, till we be there where our souls shall be fill'd to the uttermost, and there is no place of further deire, as Heaven is the place to satiate, and fill all the corners of the soul. Quest. But how shall we know whether we be risen with Christ, or no? Notes of our spiri∣tual Re∣surrection. Resol. Partly, we may know it by our former courses. Christ, when he was risen, all the Clothes were laid together in the grave, he left him be∣hind, and rose with an Earth-quake, there was a commotion, and after his Resurrection he minded Heaven. So if ye be risen with Christ, your for∣mer vile courses lie in the grave, your Oaths are gone, prophaness and wick∣edness of life gone. Tell you me, you are risen, while you carry the bonds of your sins about you? your pro∣phane,
wretched, swearing, ungodly persons, filthy speakers, that have an heart more filthy, vile in body and soul, can they have any part in Christ? where is that, that bound you before, you carry it about still: therefore you be in the bonds of the Devill, you be in the grave of sin, there is no ri∣sing. Resurrection is with commoti∣on, there was an Earth-quake when Christ arose, and there is an heart-quake when the soul riseth; can the soul rise from sin without commoti∣on? In the inward man there will be division between flesh and spirit, without any adoe at all; and there∣fore they that find nothing to do in their spirits, where is their rising a∣gain? But that which is proper to the oc∣casion in hand, is the third, where grace is begun, there will be an in∣ward proceeding and ascending with Christ. How shall I know therefore whether I ascend? First, by minding things above, the Apostle telleth us directly, Col. 3. 1. Mind things above, be heavenly minded in some sort, live the life that
Christ did, after his Resurrection; all his discourse was, after his Resur∣rection of the Kingdom of Heaven, and his mind was on the place, whi∣ther Heavenly minded∣nesse.he was to go, and so a true Chri∣stian indeed, that is truly risen, his thoughts and discourse is, (when he is himself) heavenly. Other things he useth as if he did not, as while we be in the world, we must deal with worldly things; but we must deal with them, as that which is not our proper Element, 1 Cor. 7. 37. They used the world as if they used it not; and they married, as if they did not; for they knew the fashion of this world pas∣seth away. And therefore they that af∣fect earthly glory, carnal affections and delights, they cannot think of these things with any comfort. They be moles which grovel in the Earth. Some make a profession, and they as∣cend higher as Kites do; but they look lowe: they make high professi∣ons, but their aims are low. The true Eagles that ascend to Christ, as they ascend, so they look upward, and upward still; they do not mind things below, they do not take a high
pitch, and still continued arthly mind∣ed; but they look high, as well as ascend high: therefore let us not de∣ceive our selves. 2. Yet more particularly, those that ascend with Christ, they that are in Heaven, and they that are on earth do the same things, though in diffe∣rent degrees and measure. What do they in Heaven? there they meddle Converse with the world, be not defiled with the world.not with defilements of the world, and so though a Christian be on earth, he defileth himself not with the world, or ill Company. He will con∣verse with them, but not defile him∣self with them. They that be in Hea∣ven, are praysing of God, and so be they much in praysing of God here. They that be in Heaven, love to see the face of God, they joy in it. And they that be heavenly-minded here, joy in the presence of God, in the world, the Sacraments and his Children. If they be ascend∣ed in any degree and measure, this they will do. And then they will joy in communion with God, all they can, as they do in Heaven: you have some carnal dispositions, that are ne∣ver themselves, but in carnal Com∣pany
like themselves. If ever we mean Heaven injoyed on earth.to be in Heaven, we must joy in Hea∣ven, on Earth, that is, in them that be heavenly in their dispositions. If we cannot indure them here, how shall we ever live with them in Heaven? Quaere. What was Christ to ascend for? what is the end of his ascension? The end of his ascension was to Reasons of Christs ascension.take possession of Heaven in his body, which had never been there before. 1. And he was to take possession of Heaven in his body, for his Church, that is, his mystical body. So he as∣cended to Heaven, carried his blessed body (that he took in the Virgins womb with him.) 2. And likewise he ascended to Heaven, to take up Heaven in behalf of his Spouse, his Church, as the Hus∣band takes up Land in another Coun∣trey, in behalf of his Wife: therefore he did ascend. 3. And likewise he ascended to leave us his spirit, that he might send the Comforter. He taketh away himself that was the great Comforter, while he was below. He was the Bride∣groom, and while the Bride-groom
was present, they had not such a measure of the spirit, Christs pre∣sence supplyed all; but Christ as∣cended to Heaven, that his departure from them, might not be prejudicial to them; but that they might have comfort through the God of com∣fort, the spirit of comfort, the Holy Ghost. I will send the Comforter. And though there was no losse by the ascension of Christ, they might fear by losing of Christ, that all their comfort was gone. I, but Christ tell∣eth them, I go to prepare a place for you. He goeth to take up Heaven for his Church, and then to send his spi∣rit. What a blessed intercourse is there now, since Christs ascension, between Heaven and Earth? Our bo∣dy is in heaven, and the spirit of God is here on earth. The flesh that he hath taken into heaven, is a pledge that all our flesh and bodies, shall be where he is ere long. In the mean time we have the spirit to comfort us, and never to leave us till we be brought to the place where Christ is. This is great comfort, and this is the main end why Christ ascended to the
Father, that he might send the com∣forter. And comfort might well come now in more abundance, then before, because by the death of Christ all enemies were conquered, and by Our ene∣mies con∣quered, and God appeased by Christs resurrecti∣on.the Resurrection of Christ, it was dis∣covered, that God was appeased. The Resurrection of Christ manifested to the world what was done by death, and now all enemies being conquered, and God being appeased, what re∣mains but the sweetest gift next Christ, the Holy Ghost. And that is the reason why the holy Ghost was more abundant after Christs Resur∣rection, because God was fully satis∣fied; and declared by the rising of Christ, to be fully satisfied, and all enemies to be conquered. 4. One end likewise of his Resur∣rection was, to make a shew of his Con∣quest. There is a double victory over the Enemy. There is a victo∣ry Victory & triumph.in the field, and triumph together with it. And then there is triumphing in Civitate Regia, a triumphing in the Kingly City. So Christ did conquer in his death, and shewed his Conquest by resurrection; but he did not lead
captivity captive, and make shew thereof till he ascended, and then he made open shew of his victorious tri∣umph in Civitate Regia. Heb. 9. 24▪ 5. One special end likewise why he would have this Message sent, that he was to ascend, was that he might appear there in Heaven for us, as Heb. 9. He appears for ever in Heaven for us, and maketh intercession for us. When the high Priest was to enter into the holy of holies, (which was a type of Heaven) he carried the names of the twelve Tribes ingraven in stones up∣on his brest. Christ our true high Priest being entred into the true Holy of Holies, carried the names of all his Elect in his breast into Heaven, and there appeareth before God for us. He carrieth us in his heart. Christ doth fulfill that which in John 17. he prayeth for; appearing in heaven Christs blood speaks mercy and pardon.before his Father, by virtue of his blood-shed, and that blood that speaketh better things then the blood of Abel, it speaks mercy & pardon, the blood of Abel crieth for vengeance & justice; but the blood of Christ saith, here is one that I shed my blood for.
And when we pray to God, God ac∣cepts of our prayers, and by virtue of Christs blood-shed, there is mercy and pardon, and favour procured; which is sprinkled by faith upon the soul, God manifesting to the soul by his spirit, that Christ dyed in parti∣cular for such a soul; which soul praying to God in the name of Christ, that blood not only in Hea∣ven, but sprinkled upon the soul, speaketh peace there. The spirit saith that to the soul, which Christ doth in Heaven. Christ saith in Heaven, I The spirit hr, and Christ in Heaven here to∣gether.dyed for such a soul, the spirit saith in the soul, Christ dyed for me, and the blood of Christ is sprinkled on e∣very particular soul. As Christ in Heaven appears, and intercedeth for me, so the spirit intercedeth in mine own guilty heart, that always speaks discomfort, till it be satisfied with particular assurance. Christ dyed for me, and God is mine, and Christ is mine. Thus particular faith sprink∣leth the blood of Christ upon the soul. So that now my sins are not only pardoned in Heaven, but in my soul. There is not only intercession
in Heaven, but in my soul. My soul goeth to God for pardon and for mercy, and rejoyceth in all the mer∣cies it hath, and hopeth to have. What is done in Heaven, is done in a mans soul by the spirit in some mea∣sure. His Resur∣rection & ascension declares the Father to be satis∣fied to the utmost. 6. The last end is, that he might shew that our salvation is exactly wrought, that God is perfectly satis∣fied to the full, else he should never have risen, much lesse ascended to Heaven. And therefore if we once believe in Christ, for forgiveness of sins, and yet say, I doubt of salvation, it is all one, as if you should go about to pluck Christ from Heaven. The doubtful distrustful heart, till it be subdued by a spirit of faith, saith, who shall ascend to Heaven, to tell me whether I shall go to Heaven? or who shall enter into the deep to tell me, I am freed from hell? I am a∣fraid, I shall be damned, saith the guilty heart; till the spirit of God hath brought it under, and perswa∣ded it of Gods love in Christ. Say not, who shall ascend up to Heaven? for that is to bring Christ down from Hea∣ven.
And what an injurious thing is Rom. 10, 6. 7.it to bring Christ from heaven, to suffer on the Crosse. This is a great indignity, though we think not of it, to doubt of our salvation, and not cast our selves on his mercy? For as verily as he is there, we shall be there. He is gone to take up a place for us; he is there in our name, as the Hus∣band taketh a place for his spouse. And if we doubt whether we shall come there, or no, we doubt whether he be there, or no. And if we doubt of that, we doubt whether he hath wrought salvation, or no; and so we bring him down to the Crosse again. Who shall descend to the deep? that is, to bring Christ from the dead a∣gain: such is the danger of a dis∣trustful heart. So that by Christs as∣cending into Heaven, we may know all is done and accomplished, all our enemies are subdued, God is ap∣peased and fully satisfied, Heaven is taken up in our room, and therefore labor for a large heart answerable to the large unchangeable grounds we have, for faith to pitch and bottom it self upon.
Christs intercessi∣on. Therefore make this further use of this ascension of Christ, and thereup∣on his intercession in Heaven for us. He is there to plead our cause, he is there as our surety to appear for us; and not only so, but as a Councellor to plead for us; and not only so, but one of us, as if a Brother should plead for a Brother; and not only so, but a favo∣rite there too: all favorites are not so excellent at counselling perhaps; but we have one that is favorite in Hea∣ven, and is excellent at pleading, that can non-suit all accusations laid a∣gainst us by the Devil. He is the Son of God, and he is one of us; he ap∣peareth not as a stranger; for a stran∣ger, as the Councellor is perhaps for his Clyent, but he appears as our Brother. Let us think of the com∣forts of it. He appears for us to plead Apoc. 12. 9our Cause, with acception of his person and Cause. For he, before whom he pleadeth, God the Father sent him to take our nature, die and ascend into Heaven for us, to sustain the persons of particular offenders. He must needs hear Christ, tha sent him for that purpose. Where the
Judge appoints a Councel, it is a sign he favoureth the cause. Perhaps we cannot pray, are disconsolate, and vexed with Satans temptations: the poor Clyent hath a good cause, but cannot make a good cause of it; but if he get a skilful Lawyer, that is fa∣vourable to him, and before a favou∣rable Judge, his comfort is, his Ad∣vocate can make his Cause good. If we would confess our sins, as that we must do, we must take shame to our selves in all our distress, and disconso∣lation of spirit, we must lay open our estates to God, and complain, and then desire God to look upon us, and Christ to plead our cause for us, and answer Satan; and when Satan is ve∣ry malicious and subtle, as he is a ve∣ry Christ more skilful to save, then Satan is to destroy.cunning enemy to alledge all ad∣vantages against us, to make us des∣pair: remember this, we have one in heaven, that is more skilful then he, that is the accuser of the Brethren. That accuseth us to God, and to our own souls, that accuseth every man to himself, and maketh him an enemy to himself. But we have a pleader in heaven, that will take our part against
the Accuser of our Brethren, and quiet us at length in our Consciences. Per∣haps we may be troubled a while to humble us; but remember that he is in Heaven purposely to plead our Cause. It is a good plea to God, Lord, I know not what to say, my sins are more then the hairs on mine head, Satan lay∣eth hard to me, I cannot answer one of a thousand, I confess all my sins, hear me, and hear thy Sonne for my sake, he is now at thy right hand, and pleadeth for The super excellent advantage of Gods people, a∣bove the world.me. And desire Christ to plead for us. We have not only all the Church to pray for us, Our Father, but we have Christ himself to plead for us, and make our cause good. If Christ saith, I shed my blood for this person, and appear now by virtue of my re∣demption; and the condition of the Covenant is, if we confess our sins, he is merciful to forgive, and if we sin, we have an Advocate in Heaven, to whom we must lay claim: the party 1 Joh. 21.hath confest the debt, and therefore the bond must be cancelled. He hath performed the conditions on his part, and therefore, make i good on thine
own part. And being the spirit hath shamed thee for thy sins, what can the Devil say? What saith Paul? It is God that justifieth, who shall condemn? Rom. 8.If God the party offended do justifie, who shall condemn? It is Christ that dyed, that is not enough, that is risen again, that is not enough, it is Christ that rose again, and sitteth at the right hand of God for us, and maketh inter∣cession for us, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? let the De∣vil accuse what he will, Christ is ri∣sen, to shew that he hath satisfied, and is now in heaven, there appearing for us. Oh that we had hearts large e∣nough, for these comforts, then should we never yield to base temp∣tations. It is against the pleasure of God that we should be disconsolate: there∣fore we wrong our own souls, and sin against our own comfort, when we let the rains loose by inordinate and extream sorrow. We lose that sweet∣nesse that we might injoy by giving way to discomfortable thoughts. In∣deed if a man examine his life from the beginning of his conversion, to the
end thereof, he may thank himself for all his trouble. The sin against the holy Gospel is a kind of rebellion a∣gainst God, though we think not so, when we will not be comforted, nor imbrace grounds of comfort, when we have them. The comforts of God ought not to be of small esteem to us, the sweet comforts, large, exceed∣ing, eternal comforts of God, we ought to esteem of them as they be, and therefore our Saviour Christ sendeth to them speedily. All Scripture is to this end, for con∣solation, even the Scripture that tendeth to instruction, and direction, that so men may be in a state of com∣fort; for Cordials are not good, but where there is purgation before. So All Scrip∣tures are for con∣solation.all Scriptures that are purging, to tell us our faults, they be to bring us into a comfortable condition. Other Scriptures that tend to instruct our judgements, and settle us in faith what is the end of all, if we walk, not comfortably towards God, and strongly in our places? Therefore when we look not to comfort, and joy in all conditions, we abuse the
intendments of God. But I beseech you make not a bad use of it; for if you know it to be so, if it worketh not gratiously on you, and winneth you to respect God the more, and love him, that is thus indulgent and gratious; but go on in offending conscience, and break peace The flight∣ing of the Ministry is the ha∣vock of conscienceoff, then at length conscience will ad∣mit of no comfort. Many that have had excellent comforts, have made havock of their consciences, and will go on in spight o Ministers, in spight of their consciences, and Gods spirit joyned with conscience, at length it is just with God to give them up to despair, wicked sinners that trample the blood of Christ under their feet; But for all other that strive against corruption, and would be better, it is a ground of marvellous com∣fort. I shall come to the Message it self; tell them, I ascend. He speaketh of that as present, which was surely to be. So we should think of our future Estate, as if we were presently to go to heaven. Faith hath this force, to make things to come, present. If we could
keep it in us, and exercise it, could we live in any sin? but that it is distant, that is the cause of sinning, we put off things in a distance, if it be at the day of judgement, that is far off, and therefore they will not leave their present pleasure for that, that shall not be, they know not when. But look on things in the word of a God, that is Jehovah, that giveth a being Faith makes all present.to all, who hath spoken of things to come, as if present, and then you will be of another mind. Faith is the priviledge of a Christian, which ma∣keth things a far off present. No wicked man but would leave his swearing and prophaness, if he saw Fath the Christians priviledge.the joyes of Heaven, and pains of Hell; and it were no thanks to him; but to believe God on his word, that these things shall be, that is the com∣mendations of a man, and the excel∣lency of a Christian above another man. Another man doth all by sense; but the Christian will trust God on his word. I ascend saith Christ. We must not think of the ascnsion of Christ as a severed thing from us,
Think on Christ as ascended with him. but if we would have the comfort of it, we must think of it, as our selves ascending with him. Think of Christ as a publick person, and a sure∣ty for us, and then we shall have great comfort in that, that he saith, I as∣cend. God prepared paradise, before he made the Creature, he would have him to come into a place of honour and pleasure. And so God before e∣ver we were born provided a place, and paradise for us in Heaven, that we might end our dayes with greater comfort. We may be streightned here, many a good Christian hath scarce where to lay his head; but Christ is gone to prepare a place for them in Heaven. And this may comfort us in the consideration of all our sins; for sin past, and for corruption present, and for any sin that we may commit for time to come; for any thing that is past, if we confesse our sins to God, he will forgive them: the blood of Christ cleanseth us from all sins, even for the present corruptions that at∣tend on us. We have one that stands between God and us as a surety, & he will give us his spirit to subdue our
corruptions, and at length make us Ephes. 5. 20.like himself, a glorious spouse. If we were perfect men, we needed not a Mediator, and this may teach us com∣fort, rather because we are sinners, and daily subject to offend God. We have one to make our peace; for time to come, if we sin, we have an 1 Joh. 2. 1. Mat. 6. 12.Advocate. When Christ taught us to pray, forgive us our daily tuespasses, he supposed we would daily run into sins. We have an Advocate in Heaven every day to stand between God and us, to answer God, to undertake that at length we should cease to offend him, and for the present, we are such as he shed his pretious blood for, and he appeareth for us by vertue of his death, which is a marvellous comfort. We think if we commit sin, there is no hope; but what needs a Mediator, but to make peace between the par∣ties disagreeing? If all things were made up between God and us, what need of an intercessor? but God know∣eth well enough, we run into daily sins, by reason of a spring of corrup∣tion in us, which is never idle. And therefore we may daily go to God in
Go to God for pardon of sinners in the name of Christ. the name of our Advocate, and desire God for Christs sake to pardon, and desire Christ to intercede for us; let us therefore shame our selves. There is not a Christian but will be in himself apprehensive of being thrown into Hell every day. There is a spring of corruption in him, and should God take a forfeiture of his daily rebellions, his conscience tells him, it were just. And therefore we must every day live upon this branch of his priestly office, his mediation. We must live by faith in this branch To rely on Christ is to feed upon him.of Christ, and make use of it continu∣ally; for this will keep us from hell. And therefore if we sin every day, go to God, in the name of Christ, and desire him to pardon us. This is to feed on Christ, and there∣fore we should more willingly come to the Sacrament. When we be in heaven, we shall need a Media∣tor no longer; for we shall be per∣fectly holy. We cannot think of these things too much, they be the life of Religion, and of comforts, and it may teach us to make a true use of Christ in all our conditions. Poor
souls that are not acquainted with the Gospel, they think God will cast them into hell for every sin, and they live as if they had not an high Priest in Heaven to appear for them. The matter of the message is, Christ ascendeth to God, as a com∣mon Father, and God to him and them. He doth not say, I ascend to God is first Christs God and Father, and then our God & Father.the Father, that were no great com∣fort; for what were that to them? or to my Father only: neither doth he say, I ascend to our Father, for that is true in the order of it; for he is not in equal respect the God and Father of Christ, and the God and Father of us. And therefore he speaks of himself in the first place. I go to my God and your God. For he is first, and specially Christs Father, and Christs God, and then ours; as we shall see in the particulars. We have a common Father, and a common God, with Christ. God the Father is Christs Fa∣ther, by eternal generatiō, as he is God and man: we have therefore the na∣ture How God is the Fa∣ther of Christ.of Christ, ashe is God and man. There is this difference between Gods being Christs Father, and the Father of any else.
First of all, God is Christs Father from eternity, God had a being, and was a Father from all eternity. There is no man of equal standing with his Father, he is born after his Father cometh to be a man; but Christ is of God from all eternity, his generation is eternall, and therefore there is a grand difference. Then Christ is coequal with the Christ co∣equal with his Father.Father in glory and majesty every way. The Sun is not coequal with the Father, but Christ is with his Fa∣ther. Again, the Son in other Generati∣ons comes of the Father, and is like the Father, taken out of his substance, but of a different substance from the Father; but Christ and the Father, both the persons are in one substance, in one essence. The essence of the Father differeth not from the essence of the Son. We must remember this to give Christ the prerogative, and preheminency, that God is his Fa∣ther in another manner then ours. He is his Father by nature, ours by adop∣tion. What he is by nature, we are by grace: though Christ was intent
upon his ascension, yet he forgetteth not this grand differrnce here, but mentioneth it. Go to my Brethren. We must not call him brother again, we may think of him as our Brother; but my God and my Lord, as Thomas saith. Joh. 20. 28If the greatest person should call us Brother, yet it is most behoveful for the inferior to say, my God, my Lord, to acknowledge Christ as a great per∣son, and to make use of his love to strengthen our faith, not to diminish our respect to him in any way. It is his infinite mercy to tearm us Bre∣thren; but when we go to him, we must have other tearms. Thus we see how to conceive of Christ after his Resurrection. When he hath triumphed over all his ene∣mies, and reconciled God by his death, then I go to my Father, and your Father. Then he is a common Father by virtue of Christs satisfaction to di∣vine wrath and justice, and victory and triumphing over all his enemies. So we must not conceive of God as our Father; but in reference to Christs victory over death. God is our Fa∣ther by vertue of Christs satisfaction
to justice, and conquest over all our enemies. The God of peace, (saith the holy Apostle Paul, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, in the conclusion of that excellent Epistle,) that brought you from death to life through our Lord Je∣sus Christ. How cometh he to be the God of peace to us, which brought us from death to life, by our Lord Je∣sus? why? the Resurrection of Christ makes him the God of peace. Who raised him? He raised himself. But who together with himself? The Fa∣ther raised him. And could the Fa∣ther raise him, if he were not reconci∣led? But now he is the God of peace; 1 Col. 20.for peace is made by the Crosse and blood of Christ, the great peace-ma∣ker of heaven and earth; now we may conceive of God under the sweet re∣lation of a Father. Now this Relation of a Father teacheth us, as what we may expect from God, so what we ought to re∣turn to God again, and how we ought to carry our selves one towards ano∣ther. God a Father. 1. What we may expect from God, being a Father? We may expect what∣soever
a Child may expect from a Fa∣ther. God taketh not upon him emp∣ty names. He saith, he will be a Fa∣ther, not only called a Father; but I will be your Father, and you shall be All com∣fort is from God reconciled to us in Christ.my Sonnes, 2 Cor. 6. ult. All the Fa∣therhood, and all the kindred in hea∣ven and earth, that is spiritual: the comfort of it cometh from God the Father, reconciled to us in Christ. The word in the original is so strong, that we cannot express it in English. Fathers on earth are but poor Fa∣thers, and they be but beams of the Fatherly affection that is in God. God will let us see by these beams of compassion, that is in a Father to a Child, what real compassion he bear∣eth to us. The true reality of Father∣hood is in God. And therefore when we hear of the name of Father, think of whatsoever lieth in the bowels of a Father to a Child, and that we may expect from God our Father, and in∣finite more. It is a great indulgence; Mal. 3. 17.as a Father pittieth his Child, Malac. 3. so God will pitty us. Will a Fa∣ther cast off his Child? Indeed he will cleanse the Child. So God will
Father is a tearm of indul∣gence. take away our abominations, and purge us when we defile our selves: it is because of an eternal relation he casteth us not off; we may expect from him indulgence, and it is an indul∣gence of indulgence. God needed no Sonne, when he made us Sonnes; yet he had his Sonne, and angels to praise himself withall. Can we pitty and pardon a Child, and will not God pardon and pitty us? why should we conceive worse of him then of our selves? will we give pitty to a Father? and not pitty to the Father of all bowels and compassion? and there∣fore think not that God will cast us off. God pardons us, and healeth our infirmities, and pittieth us, as a Fa∣ther pittieth his own Child, Psal. 103. It is a name under which no man must despair. What? despair under the name of a Father? despair of mercy when we have a Father to go to? The poor prodigal when he had spent his patrimony, his body, his good name, had lost all, and nothing Luk. 15. 18left, yet he had a Father, and I will go to him. And so when we be at the last cast, and have spent all, we have a
Father: therefore go to him. What saith the Church, Isaiah 63. 64. Doubtlesse, thou art our Father: when the Church was in a poor condition, Though our righteousnesse be as a men∣struous Cloth, and we be defiled, yet thou art our Father, we are the Clay, thou art the Potter, &c. So that it is a name of indulgence. You have his disposition set down by the Father of the prodigal. The Sonne saith, he will go to the Father, the Father runneth to him, and meet∣eth him, when he was coming, God Gods infi∣nite love to a sinful man.runneth to us, and is ready to meet us, when we begin to repent of sin, and are sencible of our faults. He is more ready to pardon, then we to aske par∣don. I touch only some principal things, that you may remember against the evil day and hour of temptation. He taketh not on him the relation of a Father for nought, but will fill it up to the uttermost. It is no empty Re∣lation. 2. It is a name likewise of com∣fort. It is the speech of a natural man, a little punishment is enough
Heb. 12. 6. from a Father, he knoweth whereof we are made, he remembers we are but dust; he knoweth we are not Iron, nor steel, he knoweth our making, and there∣fore he will deal gently with us, when he doth correct us, it is as ne∣cessary as our daily bread, to have gentle correction to wean us from the world; yet he doth it gently. A little punishment will serve from a gratious Father. A name of provision. 3. It is a name likewise of provisi∣on, that we may expect from God, that he will in all our exigencies, and necessities, provide for us whatsoever shall be needful. What saith our Sa∣viour Christ to the poor Disciples, doubting of want? It is your Fathers Luk. 12. 32good will to give you the Kingdom, what then? fear not little flock, he that will give you a Kingdom, will not he give you daily bread? viaticum, provision for a Journey. He that intendeth us Heaven, certainly he will provide for us here. And therefore in the Lords prayer, before all Petitions, as a ground of all, he putteth in our Fa∣ther, and therefore, give us our daily bread, our Father. And therefore he
will give us grace to sanctifie his name, and do his will, and forgive us our sins. Expect all from our Father, which is the ground of all. Christ had much adoe to perswade his Dis∣ciples, that they should not want ne∣cessaries, and therefore he makes whole Sermons to strengthen their faith in this, your heavenly Father knoweth what you stand in need of. The Luk 12▪ 30Sonne cannot aske, but the Father can interpret any sigh, any groan, and knoweth what we would have. And therefore being Gods Children, we may fetch provision from him in all conditions. Father is a name of protection 4. And with provisions, protecti∣on likewise, and therefore make this use of it; In the temptations of Satan, lie under the wings of our Father. We have a Father to go to, make use of him, make use of his protection, that God would shield us, that he would be a Tower, as he is a Tower, and the Pro. 18. 20righteous man may fly to him. Lie under his wings, he is a gratious Father, and he hath taken this sweet relation on him for this purpose, that we may have comfort in all conditions. You
see then what we may expect from God, by this sweet relation he hath taken on him in Christ, to be our Fa∣ther. 2. This word, it is a word of Re∣lation, What we owe to God as a Father.it bindeth God to us, and us to God. We are to honour him as our Father. This one word is suffici∣ent to expresse our duty to a Father, and that is a word of reverence; for it includeth a mixt affection of fear and love. And it is an affection of an inferior to a superior. He is great, Fear God for his greatness, love him for his goodness.therefore we ought to fear him. He is good, therefore we ought to love him. There is with him beams of Majesty, and bowels of compassion. As there is beams of Majesty, we ought to fear him as bowels of compassion, we ought to love him, so that fear and love mixt together, is the affection we owe to God, as our Father. If we tremble, and are afraid to go to him, we know not he is loving. If we go to him over boldly, and sawcily, we forget that he is great: therefore we must think of his greatness, that we forget not his goodness. We must so think of his goodness, that we forget
not his greatness: therefore go bold∣ly to him, with reverence to the Throne of Christ. In the word Father, there is more saving power then in ten thousand, it toucheth his very bowels, when a Child wanteth any thing, and is in distress, let it but say, Father, or Mother, and the bowels of the Parents yearn upon him. If God be our Father, go to him boldly; but with reverence, go with affyance to his bowels. Oh it is a perswasive word. What cannot we look for from that Majesty, that hath condescended to be called Father, and to be a Father to us in all our necessities? either we shall have what we want and lack, or else we shall have that which is bet∣ter; he is a wise Father, he answereth not alwayes according to our wills, but alwayes according to our good. He seeth it is for our good, that we are not presently cōforted. The Physitian Gods wis∣dom and love.giveth a sharp potion. O I cannot in∣dure, & the Chyrurgion lanceth, oh I cannot indure it; but the Chyrurgion knoweth it is not healing time: even so we would be presently taken off from under crosses; but God is a wise
Father, & knoweth how long it is fit for us to continue under the Crosse. Come to him boldly therefore, un∣der the name of a Father, that he may move his bowels, and surely will hear us. For as in Psalm. 27. when all for∣sook me, my Father and Mother for∣sook me, but the Lord took me up: Fa∣thers in the flesh, and Mothers die; but the Lord taketh us up, he is an eter∣nal Father, and therefore a ground of eternal boldnesse with God, and of e∣verlasting comfort. He was our Fa∣ther before we had a Father in the world; and he will be our Father, when we shall cease to be in the world. They be but Instruments un∣der God, to bring us into the world, God is our true Father. Our other Fathers are but under God, to give us a being, to fit us for Heaven. He pro∣videth the best inheritance and pater∣nity for us in Heaven. And therefore God keeps the best things till the last.never be disconsolate, but remember, I go to my Father, and your Father; which is a word of eternal comfort. He was our Father from eternity in election, he will be our Father to eter∣nity in glorification. Can a Mother
forget her Child? yea though she should, Esay 49. 15, 16.yet can I not forget thee, thou art writ∣ten in the palm of my hand. God hath us alwayes in his eye. A mother can∣not alwayes think of her Child, she sleepeth sometimes; but God is a Father, that never sleepeth. Psal. 121. 4.The Keeper of Israel neither slumbereth nor sleepeth. And this is our comfort in all times, and for eternity. And therefore we ought to carry our selves to God reverently, and go bold∣ly to him, and alwayes make use of him. And this we should learn likewise to maintain a sweet frame between God and us; shall God open such an advantage to us? shall God be our Faith and prayer fetcheth all from God.Father, and bear the gracious eternal affection of a Father? and shall not we by prayer and faith, fetch from our Father all we stand in need of? As our Saviour saith, you that be earthly Fa∣thers, Mat. 7. 9. 10.when your Children ask such a thing, will you deny? And have we a Father so rich, so loving, and shall not we have intercourse with him in all our daily necessities? What a Trade is open to us, if we know what
a comfort is laid up in the sweet rela∣tion Mat. 6. 8.of a Father. Your Father knoweth what we stand in need of; and he will give thee the spring of all graces, not only a broken heart, a spirit of life, and vigor in his service; but go to God, and he will give thee his holy spirit, which is the best thing next Christ that can be. And therefore be incouraged to make intercourse be∣tween thee and God; considering we have a Brother in Heaven, our nature is there, and our spirit is below, we have the best things in Heaven, next Christ, on earth, and God hath our flesh in Heaven, by Christ; and there∣fore why should we not be much in prayer, and much in prayses in all our necessities. Beloved, it is a comfort of that largeness, that I can∣not God not a Father in Christ to the wickedexpress it; I rather leave it to your admiration, that you may see what use to make of this sweet relati∣on of Father. 1. But we must know, that every one cannot say, my Father; for there are a company of men in the world, that may say in some respects, our Father; but in other respects they cannot. As
our Saviour Christ saith peremptori∣ly, John 8. 44. You be of your Father the Devil. They bragged of God their Father, and they were of their Father the Devil. Therefore consider who is fit to take this name into their mouths. My Father, mark the dispo∣sition of the Scribes and Pharisees, and then you shall see who be fit to bragg of God as their Father. They be very formal men, look to their outward devotion, who so devout as they? They studied it; but what were they The Hy∣pocrite disposi∣tion.for the inside? they were malitious men, they were satanical men, men opposite to the power of Religion, ar∣rant Hypocrites, painted Sepulchres. It is no matter for Complement, or formality, an Hypocrite may have much of that in the eys of the world, yet may be a Child of the Devil for all that, and a Pharisee for all that. Thou maist be malitious against the truth, as the Pharisees sought Christs blood. A man may be like Herod, seeking the blood of Christ in his Members, persecuting Christ, as all cruel men do. They seek to devour Christ in his professors, what they
can, they disparage and dishearten them, they are enemies to the power of Religion, and to the Ordinances of God; they be the Children of the Devil, and therefore have no reason at all to bragg, that God is their Fa∣ther. Indeed an inward bitter dispo∣sition against the power of Religion, though under any formality, is a Cha∣racter of a satanical spirit, & such can∣not say, Our Father; If they do, it is an usurpation; for their true Father is the Devil . Who then can say our Father? those that by the spirit of the Father, To whom God is a Father.and the Son, by the Holy Ghost, are ingraffed into Christ, by a spirit of a∣doption, and have the stamp of the Father upon them. The likeness of the Father, and of Christ, whom God begetsto his own likeness, that are (in a word) like Christ. Christ is the first Son, and in him, and for his sake, we are Sons. He is the natural Son, and they may say our Father, that la∣bor to express the disposition of Christ, who is the first Son. See this disposition of Christ in the Gospel, Christs dispositionhow marvellously patient he was un∣der the hand of his Father, obedien
to the death of his Crosse, humbled, full of love, full of goodness. He went about doing good. Do we thn walk as Christ did? carry we the image of the second Adam? have we the patient, humble, meek disposition of Christ in our measure? do we love Christ in his members, God in his Image? do we The Cha∣racter of a gratious Christian.love the Ordinances, and the power of Reigion? this sheweth what we are, and is our conversation sutable to our inward disposition? do we walk in light? do we shew by our conver∣sation, whose Children we are? do our speeches give a Character of the inward man. If this be in us, though in never so small a measure, with comfort we may say, our Father. Quaere. But may not another man, that is not in Christ, come to God under Solution.the sweet name of our Father? yea, he may come to him as his Father by creation and providence, or sacra∣mentally a Father, or as brought into the Church, and having God to cre∣ate him, and to provide for him. Lord thou hast shewed thy self a gra∣cious Father thus far, though I can∣not from any inward perswasion say,
My Father. Thus far as I can, I say my Father, strive against our spiritual infidelity, believe God, and cast our selves on his gracious promises in No sin should hinder us from go∣ing to God as our Father.Christ, God will meet us at the same time, and he will send us his spirit, to make us his Sons. And therefore let no man that hath been a wicked li∣ver, be discouraged from going to God in the name of a Father, in that wherein he is a Father. Lord thou hast created me, and preserved me, and it is thy mercy, I am not in Hell: yet thou offer'st to be my Father in Christ, thou hast made gracious pro∣mises, and invited me; and upon this, when the heart yieldeth to the graci∣ous apprehensions of God as a Father, there is a spirit of faith wrought in the heart presently: therefore think of the name of a Father, and the very thoughts of it will bring the spirit The name of Father speaks no comfort to the mali∣tious ene∣mies of Christ.of adoption. Only it speaks no comfort to the bitter malicious satanical ene∣mies of Christ, and the power of Re∣ligion, they be Children of the Devil. But now poor souls that groan under the burden of sin, let them think that
God is a Father, and of the mercies of God, though they do not see they be interested in them. By the very contemplation of the mercies of God in Christ, and his inviting them, to receive them, the spirit of God will be wrought in the soul, whereby they may have confidence to come to God▪ as a Father. I desire you therefore to remember this, it is the first Sermon of our Sa∣viour Christ, after his Resurrection, and therefore forget not to think of God as a Father, and Christ as a Bro∣ther. Indeed whatsoever comfort is in any relation, God and Christ have taken it on them. A Father is more comprehensive then any other Title, Christ is Father, and Husband, and Spouse. And God is our Rock and Shield, and whatsoever is comforta∣ble, he hath taken on him; and in Christ we may command him to be so. And if we had ten thousand Worlds, they could not be compared to the comforts that arise from hence, that we can call God Father. It is more to us, if we could improve it in our spiritual Trade for Heaven, then
if we had a thousand worlds, espe∣cially in dayes of affliction, and in the hour of death. For it improveth whatsoev er is in the bowels of God for poor distressed souls. When no∣thing else will comfort, this will comfort, if we can say to God, Fa∣ther. Though we cannot make a distinct prayer, yet if we can say, Fa∣ther, God can pick matter out of our broken Language. Now Christ is ascended up to Heaven, he doth us more good then he did, when he was Simile.upon the earth. The Sun in the Fir∣mament yieldeth us heat and com∣fort; but if it were nearer, it would do us hurt, or if further off, it would not do us so much good. God hath placed it (being a common light of the world) high, to inlighten inferior bodies, and to convey influence by means into them. And so Christ the Son of righteousness being ascended, and advanced to Heaven, doth more good then on earth. And therefore saith he, it is for your good that I as∣cend. It is for our good that we have Christ in Heaven to appear there for us.
I ascend to my Father, and to your Father. Father is here taken perso∣nally, not essentially, though it be true in that sense, to my Father, as the first person of the Trinity especially. Christ might well say, I ascend to my Father now; for he was risen again, and was mightily declared to be the Son of God, by his Resurrection from the dead. Thou art my Son, this day Rom. 1. 4.have I begotten thee, that is, this day Heb. 1. 5.have I declared thee. It is said of things, fiunt, cum pate fiunt, they are done, when they be open, and decla∣red to be done. Christ was the Son of God when he rose again, because he was discovered by his glorious Re∣surrection to be so indeed. And therefore Christ may well say after his Resurrection, I go to my Father, and your Father. Observe from hence, That God in Christ is our Father. We say, Relations are Minimae entitatis, they are little entities founded on o∣thers; but they are, maximae conse∣quentiae, of great concernment. I beseech you, before I leave the point, give me leave to go on a little further in this, to shew that wonder∣ful
mercy that admirable goodness, which the tongues and hearts of all the men in the world, and Angels in Heaven are not able to express, that love of God which is contained in the Relation he hath taken on him in Christ to be our Father. Gods un∣expressible and won∣derful love to man∣kind. 1. Consider who, and whom. Who, the great God, that hath the Son to solace himself in; he did not adopt us, because he wanted Sons, he had Sons of his own, and Sons of his love to sollace himself in, what need he have took Traitors, Rebels, ene∣mies, to make them his Sons? Oh it is a marvellous advancement of our nature, that God should in Christ become our Father. It is said, Psalm Psal. 113. 6.113. God abaseth himself to behold things below; and indeed so he doth, (with reverence be it spoken to his great Majesty,) he abaseth himself in regard of things below. In regard of us worms of the earth, that be ene∣mies, yea Devils by nature. For ma∣ny ye shall see the Devil in them, in their lying, and opposing of goodness. And God will alwayes have some amongst men, to shew others what
they would be, if God left them to themselves. God abaseth himself to behold things below. Not, that it is a diminution of Majesty to do it; but God in Christ hath stooped so low, that he could go no lower, and he is Our nature advanced in Christ, as high as can be.advanced as high in our nature as can be. How could God become a man, a curse, God in the second person with us, God in the first person to be so near to us, as a Father, and God in the second person to make him a Father, to be so low as Christ was, which is to be as low as hell it self. God a Fa∣ther to his discnso∣late Disci∣ples. 2. Consider to whom this message is sent. He is your Father, even a Fa∣ther to you the Disciples, now you are disconsolate. God owneth us for his Children at the worst. He took our condition notwithstanding all our infirmities. When we be pronest by a work of the spirit to condemn our selves, then God is nearest to ju∣stifie us. When the poor prodigal said, I am unworthy to be a Son, make me an Houshold Servant, you see how the Father entertaineth him. So the poor Publican dareth not lift up his eyes, and yet went away justified. David,
when he could not pray, but murmur Psal. 117. 11.and rebell, and said in his heart, all men are lyars, yet thou heardst the voice of my prayer; even then, when he could not pray, but groan, and sigh to God. I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet thou regardest the voice of my prayers. When he said, out of a murmuring spirit, and rebelliousness of nature, I am cast out of thy sight. A Speech that tended to desperation, yet God heard the voice of his prayer. When Job 42. 6. 8Job said, I clothed my self in dust and ashes; God said to him, I have accepted thee. When we by the spirit think our selves unworthy to be accepted, or to look to Heaven, or to tread upon the Earth, then God looketh on us, wor∣thy in his Son; and never more wor∣thy, then when we acknowledg our own unworthiness. Go tell my Disci∣ples at this time, when they had dealt Gods love to us is from his own bowels, not from our goodnes.so unworthily, I go to their Fa∣ther. It is from his own bowels, and not any goodness in us, that he loveth us. He loveth the work of his own spirit, his own nature, that that is of his own. Though the Child hath many
infirmities, yet the Father seeth the nature of the Child, and therefore loveth it. God seeth his Image of ho∣liness in us, in some poor measure, and he loveth his own in us. And he lo∣veth our love to him, which is in some measure. Though the Disciples had got into corners, after their un∣kind dealing with Christ, yet he knew they loved him. As where there is love, there will be a reflection of his love back again. And then God knoweth, if he should not shew mercy to sinners, he If mercy were not shewed to sinners, none could be saved.should have none to serve him on earth. And therefore saith the Psal∣mist, Psal. 130. v. 4. There is mercy with thee, that thou maist be feared; that is, worshipped. If God were not merciful to sinners, where should he have any to worship him? And there∣fore God sheweth himself to be a Fa∣ther, even to sinful Creatures, even in their wickedness, he seeth his own nature in them. He seeth some love, some work of respect in them, and if he should not love them, he would have none to fear him. Beloved, live upon this. I spake
before of the love of Christ. Here is the love of God the Father, who is content to be a Father, even in our sinful condition. If God be a Father Comfort in afflicti∣ons.to us, as to Christ, then let not our hearts be discouraged in afflictions, persecutions, temptations. God was a Father to Christ in his desertion. God leaveth us to our selves some∣times, and we fear his love. Did not he leave his own Son upon the Cross, Mat. 27. 46My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? & yet he ceased not to be a Father. For persecution of enemies, was not Christs whole life fill'd up with per∣secution, and yet a Son? For temp∣tations, thou art tempted, and think∣est thou art none of Gods Children. Satan did tempt our blessed Saviour, that he might be a merciful Saviour, and know how to succour thee in times of temptation: therefore be not discouraged, say not, when thou art deserted, persecuted, asflicted, God Christs Father in all his per∣sections.tempted, God is not thy Father; for by that reason, thou maist argue, God was none of Christs Father, God was Christs Father, notwith∣standing his desertion for a time, and
notwithstanding his afflictions in the world, his persecutions of all sorts of men, and notwithstanding his temp∣tations, God was his Father still. This we must observe, Father is not a rela∣tion to day, and none to morrow. It is an eternal relation. Dum percutis pater es, Dum Castigas, pater es, saith Augustine, while thou strikest us, thou art our Father, whilst thou correctest us, thou art our Father. Parents are tender to their weakest and sick Children, and God is most tender of all to them that be weak. Go tell Peter, And therefore never be out of con∣ceipt of God, or Christ, we cannot be in a condition wherein, on any sound grounds, we may run from God. But if this be so, let us learn of God to be indulgent. If it were to speak to The Law necessary to be teached.Ministers, I should be large to advise them to preach the Law and the Gos∣pel. The very Law is preached in mercy. The Lord taketh a severe course; but it is to order us. All Gods severity is reducible to mercy, and Christ: all his afflictions, humiliati∣ons, and abasements, do they come from unfatherly affection? no; but
to draw us home to him. And there∣fore never be terrible to any; but with a bowel of compassion, but with a mind that they may see themselves, and see the comforts they have in Christ: We ought to be of his affecti∣on, the great Pastor and Bishop of the Church. And so for ordinary Chri∣stians, they should be indulgent one to another. Some are alwayes cutting in Ulcers, always wounding and tear∣ing themselves with ill usage, and misconstruction, keeping themselves from growing up in a better life, by observing the infirmities of them that be better then themselves. Oh, but go tell my Brethren, that my Father own∣eth them for his Children, which may be a use of marvellous comfort to us. Shall a Child be always prowling Conten∣tation in all condi∣tions to be laboured for.for it self? we think there is neither Father nor Mother, to take care for it, your heavenly Father knoweth what you need. We ought to labor for con∣tentment in all conditions; for God is our Father. And for others, if God be our Father, let us look to others, that be our brethren, own them, and car∣ry our selves to them as brethren. Let the strong carythēselves lowly to the
weak, it is a sign of greatest strength to be most indulgent. Many account it great commendations on their part to be censorious, and to be severe; I but that is the greatest part of their weak∣ness, if they have any goodness in them. For who was more indulgent to the Disciples then Christ, who saw their weakness? He bore with all their infirmities. Where we see any goodness, let us bear with many weaknesses, we ought to be peaceable men, Beati sunt pacifici, they that be appeased in their consci∣ences, in sense of their own pardon, are ready to shew mercy to others. Busie contentions, quarrelsom dispo∣sitions, argue, they never found com∣fort from God himself. If God be a Father, and we are Brethren, it is a levelling word, it bringeth Mountains down, and filleth up vallies. All are Brethren, take them in what condition you will, if they be great in the world, Brethren of an Humility a lesson to be learned from Bro∣therhood.high degree, yet brother levelleth thē. If they be of low degree, yet it filleth them up, & raiseth thē to the height in this brotherhood. And therefore go tel
my Brethren, tell them all; for they be all equally Brethren. If I were to speak to persons of qua∣lity, and great parts, as I am to speak to mean, let them be put in mind of their condition. Nothing should raise us up so high, as to forget the e∣verlasting relation of Brother. Infir∣mity should not so far prevail with us, as to forget that which the Chil∣dren of God have to eternity. And for other persons more eminent, if he be a King, let him not so mind that, as to forget all other. For all relati∣ons determine in death, and must be laid in the dust: all must stand on equal ground before Gods Barre, and they that have most to answer for, have the highest accompt of all: and therefore it is ground of humility to all. Let them that are in greatest emi∣nency consider this; Paul after con∣version, 2 Cor. 5. 16.could say, henceforth know I no man after the flesh. There is a great deal of humanity in the World, com∣plement is very ordinary, which is the Picture and out-side of humanity; but Christian love, which is, a degree above humanity: the Apostle calleth
it  brotherly love, that is the scorn of the world. They will own a Brother in office; but owning them in the sweet bonds of Brotherhood, as they are the Sons of God, here is Heaven, make much of them in that kind, that is a strange thing in the world; but we must know what it meaneth, before we come to Heaven, we must respect a Christian, be he what he will be, under all his infirmi∣ties, if he hath a good spirit in him, which God the Father seeth, and Christ seeth. We must bear love to all Saints. Some will make much of an eminent man, that hath excellent parts, because there may be some countenance from such persons; but here is sincerity that beareth love to Love to the Saints the highest mark of sincerity.all Saints. He wraps them up all in the general tearm, Go tell Peter, a∣mongst the rest, that hath offended, more then the rest. If you will know whether you be true Brethren or no, or Sons of God, or no; make a use of tryal, by what is formerly delivered. I shall inlarge my self in that point, because all de∣pendeth upon it. God is the Father
of all by creation; he is the Father in a general Covenant, of all that receive the Sacrament, and are baptized. But if they have no other relation to God but so, they may go to Hell, as Judas and others did: therefore we▪ must know whether we may claim this re∣lation of Father, on good grounds or no, else it is an usurpation. Notes of adoption. 1. Those that belong to God, the spirit of God witnesseth to them, that they are Sons. They that are adopt∣ed, have the spirit of adoption in some degree, God sendeth his spirit into their hearts, that assures them, that they be Gods Children. And how∣soever this is the first, yet God giveth some intimation by his spirit, that they look to God in another familiar manner then before, and he looks on them in a Fatherly manner, so there be some intimations, and insinuations, and hints, though the spirit of adop∣tion witnesseth not fully, and glori∣ously to the soul always, because we are not fitted for it; but sometimes in great afflictions, and desertions. Where the spirit of God is, there is Communion with God in the spirit
of adoption. And when the voice of the spirit of adoption speaks not lowdly, yet there is a work of the spirit: there is something in us re∣newed by the spirit, there is some∣thing of the new Creature. When a Christian cannot hear God say to his soul, I am thy salvation, yet a man may see a work of grace: there is a love to God, to the Ordinances, to the people of God, a mourning because God may be our God, though we cannot alwayes, make ithe cannot mourn, a sighing, because he hath not an heart plyable. He is discordant with his condition, when he is disconsolate, so that there is a work of the spirit helpeth him in his worst condition. Besides, there is a spirit of suppli∣cation in some measure, though he cannot make set discourses to God, yet he can in a sweet manner lay o∣pen his sorrow and grief to God, and leave them in his bosom. They be broken words perhaps; but God can pluck sense out of them. God know∣eth the meaning of the sighing of his own spirit, though broken speeches. So that where there is any tongue for God in a man, there is a spirit of
prayer, there is not a strangeness of God to go altogether by; but the spirit hath a kind of acquaintance with God, and it goeth to God in a familiarity, and layeth forth grief, and putteth forth Petitions, in ano∣ther manner then the World doth. Again, a Christian in the worst condition; God not only shineth on him through the Cloud, but there is a spirit in him that sigheth, to go through all thick Clouds to God. There is a spirit of supplication, and of love in some degree, for that is promised. The spirit shall help our infir∣mities, when we know not how to pray: the intercourse and Communion Even sighs & groans pierce through thick Clouds get to God.with God is never broken off, where there is any spirit of adoption. There∣fore Jonas and David, and the rest, though they could not pray, yet they sighed to God, and would not leave him. If they could not imbrace Christ, they would touch the hem of his garment. They will not yield to the stream altogether, but strive a∣gainst it. And though they be carri∣ed away with the strength of the
stream, and see no goodness in them∣selves, yet they that be with them, shall see a spirit striving to another condition, then they are in. Some∣thing of Christs, something of Gods spirit there will be in them. And take them at the worst, they will appear better then the civil man, that thinks himself a glorious man, though he hath nothing, but for shew and fashi∣on, who would be in such a mans condition, without some brokenness of heart, some sighs? 2. Likewise we may know it by our sympathy and Antipathy. Our sympathy with them that be good, and antipathy to that which is naught. There is a love of that which is good. So things, good things are connatural to a good man. There is a Good things connatural to good men.relish in good Company, and good things. As there is sweetness in the best things, so there is something in the Children of God, that is answera∣ble to the God whom they serve. He is never so out of tast, but he findeth his chief comfort in this thing; and he is never himself so much, as when he is conversant in these things,
though in different measure, some∣times more, and sometimes lesse. There is an inward antipathy to God in a proud carnal man, that hath not his heart subdued by grace, there is a contrariety to the power of that grace, which outwardly he professeth, and a sympathy with the world, and the spirit of the world. Take a good Christian at the worst, he is better then another at the best. I beseech you therefore, examine our dispositi∣ons, how we stand affected to things of an higher nature, then the things of the world, to spiritual things, how we can relish spiritual things, Gods Ordinances, & any thing that is holy; surely, if there be the life of God, and Christ in us, there will be a kind of cōnaturalness, & suitableness of taste to the sweetnes that is in holy things. To come to the next, mark the or∣der here, Go to my Father, and your Fa∣ther. We are the Sons of God at the second hand. God is the Father of Christ first, and then ours. He is his God first, then our God. This is a weighty point for direct∣ing of our devotion, that we may
know in what order to look on God. How to go to God in prayer.See God in Christ, see all things in Christ first, and then in us. Look upon him as Father to Christ, and then to us. Look on him as a God to Christ first, and in Christ, a God to us. Look on him, as having e∣lected us; but elect in Christ first. See our selves justified; but see Christ ju∣stified first from our sins, and his justi∣fication declared by his resurrection. See our resurrection and ascension, and glorification in Heaven, not di∣rectly; but in Christ our head, who is in Heaven, and taketh up place for us. See God loving us; but look on it in Christ, who is Sedes amoris. The next thing to God, is his Son, and he loveth none, but in him. When we consider of any spiritual blessing, say with the Apostle, Blessed be God who hath filled us with all spiritual blessings in Christ. Otherwise we do not know Ephes. 1. 3.our selves, nor God. Whatsoever is derived from God to us, is through Christ: all promises are his first, they are made to him, and to our nature in him, and they are performed for his sake; he taketh them from God
the Father, and they be performed for his sake. He is the true Aaron, we are but the skirts, the Oyl that is power∣ed upon his head, runneth down to his skirts, it runneth to the meanest Christian; but the Oyntment of grace is first powred on his head. Of 1 John 17his grace we receive grace for grace, and of his fulness. The first fulness is God himself, the second receptacle of all, is Christ, God-man, the third are we; we have it at the third hand. God emptieth himself into Christ, as Mediator. In him are the fulnesse of all riches, the treasures of all wisdom and knowledg, we are compleated in him, and in him we are full. His is not only a fulness of the Vessel as ours is; but a fulness of the Foun∣tain. And it is for our comfort that it is so, that Gods love is to Christ first. There is a firm foundation, when God loveth us in his Son, and we are Children in his natural Son, in whom we are adopted, then our state is firm. Or first state in the first Adam was not firm; but now our nature is ta∣ken into the unity of the second per∣son, it is firm. So that the love and
care, and Fatherly disposition of God towards us, it is sweet to us, be∣cause it is tender to his Son. It is eternal to us, because it is eternal to him. He can as soon cease to love his Son, as cease to love us. For with Mans in∣sinite hap∣piness by Christ.the same love he loveth all Christ mystical, head and members. There is not the least finger of Christ, the least despised member of Christ; but God looketh on him with that sweet eter∣nal tenderness, with which he look∣eth upon his Son, preserving the pre∣rogative of the head. Oh this is a sweet comfort, that now all the ex∣cellent priviledges of a Christian are set on Christ, and then on us: and therefore we should not lose them; for Christ will lose nothing. When the favour of a Prince is founded on his Son, whom he always loveth, the af∣fection is unalterable on the Son; and therefore the case is good. So Gods favour to us is fonded on his love to his Son, & therefore unalterable, and eternal: we should therefore look up to God in his son, put up all our Petitiōs to him in his son, expect all from him in his sonne. He is in Heaven for us,
to do that that belongeth to us. Ex∣pect all from God through Christ, and do all to God through Christ, love God in Christ, and Christ in God, our selves in Christ, and our selves in the love of God. Christ is in God, and God is in Christ. God, and Christ are in us, there is a mar∣vellous sweet relation, and commu∣nion between God and us, and Christ and us. It is a sweet communi∣on, and mysterious to us. How sweet is the communion between the soul and the body, the soule being so spi∣ritual, and the body a peece of earth. But what is this to the mystery of mysteries, when God takes clay and dust into unity of his person, and all Clay and dust taken into unity of the person of God.this is for this union. The great and glorious union of Christ to our na∣tures, is, that he may take us into his mystical body, and so make us one with himself, and one with the Fa∣ther. He took our natures, that he might convey his Fatherly goodness and love, and spirit to us. The sweet union of the two natures of Christ, is to confirm union between the Father and us, and Christ and us. And we
are never happy till we be assured, tha we are one with Christ, which is the issue of his excellent prayer. John 17. Our blessed Saviour fetcheth the comfort of our Father from this, that God is his Father first, and so to joyn both together, That God is our God, because he is his God first. It is a point very considerable, That whatsoever comfort we look for from God, and in God, we must see it in Christ first, before we see it in our selves; be∣cause we be but Sons by adoption, and we have all we have from God through Christ. Whatsoever we see in Christ, think this will belong to us. And whatsoever we look should belong to us, see it first in him. As ve∣rily as he ascended, we shall ascend, As verily as he rose, we shall arise. As verily as he is at Gods right hand, we shall be there too; for by faith we sit now in heavenly places with Christ, and we shall judge the world, Ephes. 2 6.and be for ever with the Lord. What∣soever we see in Christ, interest our selves in it. And therefore we must not conceive of Christ, as a severed
person; but conceive of our selves in union, and communion with Christ our head, and to conceive of Christ as our head and surety, and second All we have, or can expect to have, must be obtained through Christ.Adam. And as a quickening spirit, that communicateth all to us. And therefore when we are to deal with God, be sure to go through Christ, as we expect all from God through Christ, so give all to God through Christ again. Be sure to take Benjamin with us when we go, & come cloathed with the Garments of our elder Bro∣ther, and do not doubt when we come with Christ; for else we disho∣nour Christ: shall I come in the sweet name and mediation of my Sa∣viour, that hath perfected salvation, and not be accepted of God, when God hath ordained him for that pur∣pose? If we stagger, and doubt to re∣ceive any thing at Gods hands, we wrong not only Gods bounty, but Christ the Mediator; carry this there∣fore all along with us, do all in him, and desire God to pardon all for his sake, and God will regard us. Use. Let us therefore make this use of it, and add this further, That if so be
God is first the Father of Christ, be∣fore he is our Father, and first the God of Christ before he is our God, and that all our good is dependent upon what God is to Christ first; then doth not this follow from hence, Blesse God for Christ as well as for our selves.that we should not only thank God for our selves; but thank God for whatsoever he hath done to Christ; not only comfort our selves in it, but let God have the glory of it. And this the spirit of God in the holy Apostles Peter and Paul led them to. Ephes. 1. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; what? and nothing but so? nay, with a reduplication, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, even because he is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, because out of his infinite depth of wisdom and goodness, he hath found out a way to save us in Christ, to be a Father to him, and in him a Father to us. It is said of the Virgin Mary, A Genera∣tions Luk. . 8.shall call her blessed. Why? be∣cause she was Mother of the person that was God: she was the Mother of Christ in humane nature, and of God, because we may not sever the persons. And shall we blesse the Vir∣gin
Mary, as Mother of God, and not God as Father of Christ? If she be the Mother of Christ-man, then God is the Father of whole Christ, and therefore blessed be God, not only that he is our Father, and our God; but that he might be thus with satis∣faction to divine justice, he hath Christ as man the object of Gods love and pre∣destination as well as we.found out such a way to be the Father of Christ, and Christ, as man, is an object of Gods love, and predestina∣tion as well as we. We deserved no∣thing at Gods hands; but he found out uch a way by taking the nature of man into unity of his second per∣son, and so became a Father of Christ, and of us. And therefore blesse God, who hath predestinated Christ to e the Lamb of God, that hath freed him from sin, and raised him from the dead, that hath carried him into Heaven, and set him at his right hand, & ordained him to be judg of quick and dead. Are these things se∣vered from us? no, they be favours that be ours in Christ, his first, then ours. And therefore whensoever we think of any thing Christ hath of his glory in Heaven, as he is King of Hea∣ven
and earth, and hath all power committed to him, glorisie God for it, and think of it, this is mine; he is mine Husband, my head, he hath ta∣ken up that glory, and whatsoever is in Heaven, and injoyeth them, he hath taken it up for me; and there∣fore we should blesse God for it. So the Apostle Peter, blessed be God the Fa∣ther 1 Pet. 1. 4.of our Lord Jesus Christ that hath begot us again to an inheritance immor∣tal, undefiled, that fadeth not away, re∣served in the Heavens. He hath begot us to a lively hope, through the Resur∣rection of Christ from the dead. So it is from the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, that Christ saith, God is my Father, and your Father: since Gods justice is satisfied by my Resur∣rection, that is, declared to be satisfi∣ed, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God, and your God. I be∣seech you let us not lose the comfort of these things, since our Saviour Christ intendeth them for comfort. To come to the words. First Christ saith, God was his God, and our God, because his God. In what How God is Christs God.sense is God Christs God? As media∣tor
as man, both in regard of his per∣son, and in regard of his office, God is Christs God every way. See Psal. 22. which is a Psalm of Christ, David being but a type of him in it, Thou art my God from my mothers womb, and so God is Christs God in his par∣ticular person from his Mothers womb. For first, God was Christs God, when by his holy spirit he sanctified him in his Mothers womb, and brought him out into the world. Let the foolish disputes of Fryars, and dreams, and dotages of dunsical times go. But thou art my God from my Mothers womb. And 2. He is Christs God, because he saved him from the massacre of the Infants. Our Saviour Christ makes that prayer in Psal. 22. on the Crosse, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? 3. God was Christs God in pro∣tecting of him in his young time, and afterward in going along with him still to his death, and in death, my God, my God still. He would own God to be his God still, when God had de∣serted him to his sense and feeling, yet my God still. So God was Christs
God, as Christ wasman: take Christ as mediator, God is the God of Christ; for God the Father hath by his Authority put on Christ whatsoe∣ver he hath. The Father hath sent him into the world. The Father sealed him, the Father set him out as a propitiation for our sins. The Fa∣ther hath declared him, and annoint∣ed him, and all these tearms of Au∣thority, whereby the Father hath shewed himself to be Christs God, e∣ven in his office of Mediatorship. So in regard of the care of his person, from his Mothers womb, and for ever, and in regard of his office as Mediator, he might well say, I go to my God. In regard of the intimate familiarity, and acquaintance, maintained even on the Crosse, he might say, my God. But the comfort of it lyeth in the second clause, That as God is the God of Christ, so he is our God, be∣cause he is the God of Christ. What is it to be a God to any? In a word to be a God, is to be all-sufficient, to any, to be sole-sufficient, and to be self-sufficient. To be a God, is to be all-sufficient for every Creature, to be all-suffici∣ent,
when nothing else can be suffici∣ent. And to be self-sufficient, to be sufficient of himself, and therefore to reduce all back again to himself. Now God is a God of himself, for himself, and by himself. God is all-sufficient, self-sufficient, sole-sufficient; and whatsoever the Creature hath, it hath it from him. There is (in a word,) in God, a sufficiency for all good and happiness, and an efficiency to apply that sufficiency for the good of the Creature. And in particular to be a God to any, is to do that for a Crea∣ture, that no Creature in the world can do but God. To make it of no∣thing, to free it from misery, that it is beset withall, when no other can free it, to recover it again. God is Jehovah, that hath a being of himself, giveth being to the Creatures, that can make the Creature of nothing, and being something, can make it no∣thing. Now, if God be a God to any, he is not only to give being to us, in a certain rank of Creatures, as we are advanced above other Creatures, as to have a being, or a life of growing,
or a life of sense, or to advance us to a life of Creatures indowed with rea∣son, whereby we are common in that fashion with Angels, and understand God himself. Alas, this were a poor priviledge, if it went no farther, then to set us in that rank of Creatures, though a great favour. But consider∣ing us in a lapsed estate, it is a poor favour to leave us here. And there∣fore God is said to be our God now in a state of grace, when he advanceth us to an higher being and life, then all this, to a life of grace here, and of God our God in the state of grace.glory hereafter. When out of his so∣veraignty and power, he reduceth all to help forward his main end, the sal∣vation of his in peculiar. So God is a God in peculiar of some that he ta∣keth out of base mankind. There is a world taken out of the world, as Augustine useth to speak. And thus he is a God not to bestow a life of grace, and supernatural being here, but a glorious condition hereafter in Heaven; and to make all things ser∣viceable to that, that we may say, all is ours, because we are Christs, and 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.Christ is Gods. So that whatsoever
befalleth a Christian, is serviceable, and conducible to the main and last end. And that is for God to be God indeed, to make us his in Christ Je∣sus, to give us a new Creation, and a new State, better then at first. The Cove∣nant of grace founded on Christ. Now, what is the foundation of this, that God is our God in the Co∣venant of grace? we say it is founded on Christ, God is Christs God, and then our God, and that is the reason why Christ is called Emanuel, which is as much as to say, as it is expound∣ed, God with us. Not only because when he took our nature on him, there was God and man in one person; but the meaning of the word is, Christ is Emanuel, God with us, by being God in our nature, and satis∣fying divine justice in our nature, hath brought God the Father, and us together into a sweet Covenant. So that God may be our God, and our Father, notwithstanding his justice; because all is satisfied by Christ, who took our nature to die for us. Christ is Emanuel, because he hath made God and us one. So that God is our God, and not only so, but our Father
in him. Thus you see how it cometh to passe, that God is our Father by Christ, who came to bring us again to God; as his whole office was to bring a few that had been singled out of mankind to God again, from whom they fell; for we all had com∣munion with God in Adam, but we lost it, and now must be brought a∣gain to God, which must be done by Christ, God and man. Thus much for the foundation of the point, That God is Christs God, and God in Christ is our God, to do all things for us, to bring us to an happy condition here, and an ever∣lasting happy condition in Heaven. We see here, it is brought as a ground of comfort, and so indeed it By vertue of Christs resurrecti∣on, God is not only our Father but our God.is. And we may observe from hence, That now by the Resurrection of Je∣sus Christ, God is not only become a Father to us, but a God. This is a ground of many cōforts, go tell my Dis∣ciples, now I am risen again, & there∣fore justice is satisfied, and now they may have lively hope of a better con∣dition hereafter. For God is my God, that hath raised me up, and who will raise up mine too: so that now we
are copartners with Christ, sharers with him in the Fatherhood of God, and God is God in common with Christ and us. This may well be brought as a point of comfort, if there were any comfort in the world of sweeter effi∣cacy then this, our Saviour would have sent it to his Disciples. Com∣fort being his main Office, and his main end, he would have the best comfort after his best Resurrection. And he picks this from amongst them all. Go tell them, I go to my Father, and their Father, to my God, and their God. And therefore it is a pregnant comfort, and indeed no heart can con∣ceive the comfort of it, that we have interest together with Christ in God, and with the Fatherhood of God. And both these the Scripture joyneth together, 2 Cor. 2. 6. I will be your Fa∣ther, and your God. God our God in covenant with Christ. To unfold the comforts more, God is said to be our God in Covenant in Christ. He is the God of Christ, and therefore of us; because he hath made himself over to us. A thing is said to be another mans, when the Title is
past to another man. Now God hath as it were, past over himself to his believing Children, and Members of Christ. He hath made over him∣self to them to be their God, as he was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Ja∣cob, and all the Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles: so he is of every good believing Christian, to the end of the world. God maketh himself over to be theirs, and (as the Scriptures stile is) he is their portion and their Inhe∣ritance, a blessed portion, a blessed inheritance, more to us, then if all the world were ours, then if Heaven were ours, then if ten thousand worlds were ours; for he is our God that can create millions of worlds more then this, if it were needful. Habet omnia, qui habet habentem om∣nia. He hath all things, that hath him in Covenant that hath all things. And therefore when the Scripture saith, I go to their God, it implyeth, I go to him, that is, all in all to them, that is larger then their hearts can be; for what heart can conceive the fulnesse of the comforts arising from hence, that God is our God. Many know they
need comfort of such a transcendent Interest in God great comfort.nature. The heart of man is so dis∣trustful, so faithless, and the consci∣ence is such a clamorous thing, and therefore he cannot think this is too much. I beseech you therefore, do not lose the comfort of it, that in Christ God is our God; though we can say of nothing else it is ours, per∣haps we cannot say, great houses are ours, or great friends are ours, or In∣heritances ours, that is no matter, we can say, that is ours, which is infinite∣ly more then that. We can say, God is ours in Christ. Nay, being exhort∣ed to say by the spirit of faith, that God is ours in Christ, all things in the world are ours. As you have it in that place of Scripture, All things are yours, why? because you are Christs, and Christ is Gods. Whether things present, or things to come, Paul, Apollos, Cephas, life, death, all is Even af∣flictions & Satan him∣self con∣spires to make us happy.yours, you are Christs, and Christ is Gods, that is, all things must by a command from God, conspire to make us happy, affliction, or Satan, or death, or trouble of conscience, or desertion, or every thing to help us to
Heaven. The curse is taken away, and there is a blessing hid in every thing that befalleth a Christian, to bring him to Heaven: therefore it is a com∣fort of infinite extent. All is yours, because God is yours. You shall see the extent of the comforts further by retail, as it were. If God be ours, then all is ours too; what be they? the Scripture telleth you, and I should spend too much time in unfolding of them. 1. If God be ours, his wisdom must needs be ours, to find out wayes to do us good; for his infinite wis∣dom hath found out a way in Christ by satisfaction of his justice to bring us to Heaven. He can make us go be∣yond all the policy of our Neighbors; for his wisdom is ours. 2. If we be in danger, his power is ours, to bring us out. 3. If we have sinned, his mercy is ours to forgive us. He himself being ours, his mercy must needs be ours. The whole being ours, it followeth out of the strength of reason, that the parts also must be ours. 4. In any want, his allsufficiency is
ours, to supply it, or to turn it to good, and make it up in a better kind. 5. In a word, God being ours, whatsoever is in God, whatsoever God can do, whatsoever he hath is ours, because himself is ours. And therefore I beseech you, make this use of it, to get into Christ by faith, to be one with Christ, that so God may be our God. Get faith above all graces, the grace of union, and the grace of communion, that being one with Christ, we are one with him. God being ours, all is ours, yea the worst thing in the world is ours. If God be not ours, it is no matter what else is ours. Alas, all things must be taken from us, we know not how soon, and we taken from all things else. What if we ha d a King∣dom, as Saul had, if we be forsaken of God, as he was. What if we had Paradise, if we offend God, we shall be cast out? What if we had the dig∣nity to be Apostles, if with Judas we have not God, what will all come to? What if a man should enjoy all the world, if out of Christ, it would
yield him no comfort. As the Em∣peror said, I have gone through all varieties of conditions, Et nibil mihi prodit: but it hath done me no good. If we had all what is it, but vanity of Eccles. 1. 2. Eccles. 2. 17.vanities, and not only so, but vexati∣on. Now when we have God to be our God, he is able to fill the soul. He is larger then the soul, and he is able to quiet the soul, he is the rest of the soul, the soul is quiet, in him is the Center, as the place of quiet. If God be ours, then the soul resteth in it; for God filleth the soul, and qui∣ets the soul, and hath alwayes fresh comforts for the soul, infinite still to all eternity. There is nothing in the world, but we do as it were deflorare, take away the flower of it by use, and it becometh stale. Though a man continue many thousand years in the world, yet he will be weary of all things in the world, because there is no freshness in them. It is finite, and the soul is larger then the comforts of the world. But in God is a spring of fresh comforts to everlasting. Consider the things that inable him to be our God, to fill the soul, and to
be larger then the soul, to quiet, and calm the soul in all the troubles of it, and then to have fresh springs of comforts, what a comfort is this to have God, for our God? Never rest till God be made our por∣tion. Let it therefore raise up our souls to labor after our God, and never rest till we have some interest in this great portion of God, to be our God. When we can by faith go out of our selves to Christ, and lay a right and just claim to God to be our God: this is a comfort that reacheth from everlasting to everlasting. It giveth us forgiveness of sins, when we had lost our selves, because we are in Christ he hath forgiven us. In all extremi∣ties and troubles, when no creature can comfort us, it is his glory to shew himself a God. It reacheth to the Re∣surrection of the body; God is Abra∣hams, and Isaacks, and Jacobs God, when dead, because he was the God of whole Abraham, Isaack and Ja∣cob, and therefore of soul and body. And it reacheth from all favours of this world, so far as is for our good, to all eternity, being our God, he will protect us from all extremities in
this world, he will speak comfort to our souls, which nothing can do but God. When we be dead, he will raise up our dust, because he is our whole God, the God of our souls and bo∣dies, and we shall be for ever with the Lord. It is a comfort of wonder∣full extent. Ʋse 1. Let us therefore make this use of it. Labour to make him so to us; for as he is to us, so God by his spirit is our comforter, who being sa∣tisfied, giveth us his spirit. We must make God our God, and then he will be a God unto us. These be mutual, wheresoever they be, wheresoever God is God to any, they by the spirit ob∣tained by Christ, have grace to make him so to themselves. What is it for us to make God a God to us? It is this, to set up God a throne in our hearts, and to give him a Soveraign∣ty God our joy, our comfort, our Rock, our all.over all things in the world, that we may say in truth of heart, God is our joy, God is our comfort, God is our rock, God is all in all to us. When we give him supremacy of affection above all the world, we esteem no∣thing above him, we value him above
all esteem, his loving kindness is bet∣ter then life it self; for else we do not make him a God to us, and then it is no comfort to hear all the comforts spoken of before. For all to whom he is a God in the Covenant of grace, and have hearts to make him so, the spirit raiseth up their affections to make him a God to themselves. Amor tuus, Deus tuus, as it is said of old, what we love most is our God. What we joy most in is our God, what we relie and trust in most, is our God, as it was said of the wedge of gold. And therefore if any thing hath our affec∣tions more then God, or equal with Examine our hearts what we make our God.God, that we make our God. It is a quaere of the greatest concernment in the world, to put to our hearts. What do I make my God? as David putteth the quaere to himself: now Lord, what is my hope, is it not in thee? And so put this quaere to our selves. Lord what is my joy, what is my hope, what is my trust, what is my comfort, is it not in thee? If our hearts cannot make an answer to this in some sincerity, surely as yet we have not made God our God.
Time may be, that he may be so; but till by the spirit of God we be brought to see an emptiness, and va∣nity in the Creature, and a nothing∣nesse in all, in comparison of God, that we can say, whom have I in Hea∣ven but thee? We have not comfort, because we do not make him ours by a spirit of mutuallity. Where there is a Covenant of grace, there must be a mutual making of God our God, as he maketh himself to us. Alas we may be ashamed of it, the best do often forget themselves. Oh how do men value the favours of a man, and the promises of a man, the seal of a man for such, and such a be∣nifice, and how doth it grieve them to have the frowns of flesh and blood, the frowns of greatness; but when their Consciences tell them they are It is of e∣ternalcon∣cernment, to make God our God.under guilt of many sins, and God is not in good tearms with them, how doth this affect them? and when their consciences cannot say, they have promises sealed in Christ, of the favours and mercies of God here, and hereafter: alas it is dead comfort,  give me that which is
present, and take you that which is to come, is the Language of both. How few can say from sincerity of heart, that they make good to be their God. And therefore it is of greater concern∣ment then we take it. Ʋse 2. As it is a ground and foun∣dation of comfort, so of all obedience to God, as it is prefixed before the Exo. 20. 2.Commandements, I am the Lord your God, you shall have no other Gods but me, & do all in obedience to me from this ground. But much more now; then he was the Lord God that Do all for God in obediencebrought them out of Egypt. But now God may prefix, I am your Lord God in Christ, that have brought you from hell and damnation, that intend you Heaven and happiness, and there∣fore do so, and so. Since this is the spring of all obedience, we ought to labor to make it good, and often to examine our selves, as before, what we make our God, and what we pitch our affections on. Alas, is our soul for any thing but God? hath not God made us for himself? and will our hearts rest in any thing but God? why then should we love va∣nity, and besot our selves? when
death comes, they may say as Saul said, The Philistins are upon me, and God hath forsaken me. Death is on me, trouble, sickness, vexation of consci∣ence is on me, and God hath forsa∣ken God gives us our be∣ing and wel being, and doth all for us till we come to Heaven.me, I have no God to go to, what a miserable estate is this? And therefore I beseech you, let us labor to have interest in the Covenant of grace, to make it good, that God is our God in Jesus Christ. Who giveth us a being to be Chri∣stians, to have a new nature, to have a good being, but God? who main∣taineth and preserveth that be∣ing, but God? and who keep∣eth and preserveth us, till we get into a glorious being in Heaven; but God, who is all-sufficient, self-suffici∣ent, sole-sufficient, only sufficient, this God is our God now in Christ. God is to us in a more special sin∣gular manner, then to other Crea∣tures, because he hath raised us to a more excellent being, not only as men, we being in the highest rank of Creatures next the Angels, and so he is a God to us, more then to inferior Creatures, that have a more circum∣scrib'd
and narrow being. Man hath a large being, a reasonable soul, and is fitted by nature to have communi∣on with God, who is wisdom it self, and with Angels; but all this were little comfort, unless we had higher degrees of being then this. If God be our God in Christ, we have a spiri∣tual being, which is as much above the dignity and prerogative of our ordinary being, as our being by na∣ture is above the basest Creature in the world. And so God setteth a stile upon us sutable to the excellency of our spirituall being: there is no∣thing excellent in the world, but we are learned by it. Now to let out the advancement and excellency of the dignity we have from God in a spe∣cial manner, to be Sons, Jewels, his Portion, his diadem, to be whatso∣ever you can imagine, that is glori∣ous and excellent. An excellent con∣dition, though spiritual, and con∣cealed from the world. Gods Chil∣dren are concealed men, as you shall see afterward, they be hidden men, the world taketh no notice of them, because their excellency is seen with
another eye, then the world hath. The God of the world blindeth the eyes of worldlings. They cannot see into the excellency of Gods Chil∣dren, no more then they can know God himself, and Christ himself. So you see what it is to be a God in na∣ture and in grace, to be all in all unto us, to have our whole subsistance, and dependence in him, in him we live and move, and have our being, and well-being. In this, our excellency consisteth, that God is our God in Christ, who was God, and that he might bring God and us to good tearms together, that he might make God our God, he was Emanuel, God with us, to make God with us in favour and love. The God-head is nearest the humane na∣ture Humane nature nearer to Christ then the nature of the Angelsof Christ, of any Creature, it is nearer to Christ then to the Angels; for God hath not taken the Angels into hypostatical union to be in the same person; but God in Christ is so near our nature, that there is an hypostatical union, they make one person, our nature being taken into the second person. By reason of this
near union of the God-head to our nature cometh that comfort and near union between God and our nature, whereby God hath sweet communion with us in Christ. God by his spirit, though not hypostatically, yet grati∣ously is one with us, and hath com∣munion with us now as his Chil∣dren: so that sweet entercourse be∣tween God and us now, is founded up∣on the nearness of the god-head to our nature in Christ, in whom it is nearest of all, in whom it is advan∣ced above the angelical nature. And therefore our blessed Saviour might well say, I go to my God, and your God, to his God first, and then to our God. Now we may say, God is our God, and upon good grounds, because God is Christs God, and in him our God, which is a point of singular comfort, and therefore I will inlarge my self further in it. Doct. Doct. For God to be our God, espe∣cially in having that in our hearts unfolded, in regard of our spirits and best being, is the most fundamental comfort that we have. For from
this, that God is our God, commeth all that we have that is good in na∣ture and grace. Whatsoever is com∣fortable commeth from this spring, That God is Christ, is our God, our reconciled God. That Gods nature, and ours now, are in good tearms. What God is, wht he is able to do, what he hath, all is ours. Beloved, what cannot we expect from God, that is now becom our God? what he is, what he is able to do, what he hath, all is ours, consi∣dering himself is ours. If we have the field, we have the pearl in the field. And therefore the wise Merchant in the Gospel, sold all for the field, wherein the treasure was. We have the field it self in having God, and we have all that God is, or can do for us for our good, even as we have Christ, and all that Christ is, or hath done, and suffered, and injoyeth, all is ours, because we are Christs, and Christ is Gods, as the Apostle saith, so that having God, we have all, be∣cause we have him that possesseth all, the Creator of all, and preserver of all, and disposer of all. But to clear an objection a little, if God be ours, and all things else,
how comes it that we want so many things. Answ. I answer, it is our own fault for the most part, we want faith to make use of, and improve this comfort. And then again we want nothing that is for our good, want it self is for our good. And observe this, our God is Want it self is for the good of Gods people.so powerful a God, that he maketh the worst things we suffer, a means to convey the greatest good oftentimes to us. If God be our God and Father in Christ, why have we sins? why vexed with the Devil? why persecu∣ted with men? why streightned thus and thus and thus? all this is for our good. God is our God by these, and in the midst of these, and is never more our God, then in the greatest extremi∣ty of all; for then we come nearest the Fountain: there is near and sweet communion between this God and us, when we take of the fountain. When the means are drawn away, the Con∣duits of conveyance, and we have nothing to go to, but God immedi∣atly: there is sweet communion, and sweetest comfort in Heaven; we shall have God in Christ, who will be all
in all unto us. We shall need no Magistracy, Ministery, food, raiment, or defence against cold, or injury; we shall be out of the reach of Satan, and all enemies, God will be all in all God all in all imme∣diatly in Heaven.immediatly. The same God is all in all to us, either by means, or imme∣diately. When means fail he convey∣eth his sweetness, and his power im∣mediatly, but ordinarily by means; And what sight doth in Heaven, faith doth now in some proportion; for as sight in Heaven seeth God in Christ, all in all, and injoyeth that happy vi∣sion, so faith seeth God to be all in all, and Christ to be all in all, though in an inferior degree to sight and clear∣ness of vision: yet for the capacity of this life, we injoy God now, as they do in Heaven. We have inward com∣forts when most deserted. God was never more near our blessed Saviour, then on the Crosse, when he cryed, my God, my God, &c. for then he found invincible strength, supporting him in the great undertaking under the wrath of his Father. And so God is never neerer, then in extremity. In strength, though not in sense and
feeling; and oftentimes in feeling it self, we never have sweeter comforts, then in the want of all outward com∣forts whatsoever, when nothing else can comfort us but the presence of God. And we must know besides that, the state of a Christian in this world, is an hidden condition; for it is to the eye of faith, not of sense; and therefore God is a God to his, though the world see it not▪ There is a secret hidden influence, a secret passage be∣tween Heaven and earth, that none seeth. Who observeth the influence of the Sun, or the sweet influence of the Starres upon the earth? light we see; but there is a secret influence pierceth deeper then the light, to the very bowels of the earth whence me∣tals come. Where no light comes, there is an influence, though not dis∣cerned, and much more can there be influence of strength and power, and hidden comfort, though there be no sight. Cannot God be our God, in re∣gard of strength, supporting and sup∣plying, though there be no visible and sensible comfort, though we see it not our selves. Certainly the soul is up∣held
by an invincible strength in the worst condition that can be. There∣fore this is true, that God is our God in all conditions. Use. Let us make use of this. To what use is riches and friends, if we do not use them? to what use is God and Christ, if we use them not? Nostrorum est, utamur nostro bon. He is ours, let us use him for our special good on all occaions. Oh that we had faith an∣swerable to our prerogative, it is a prerogative more then Heaven and earth, that God is ours, and had we faith suitable, what kind of persons should we be in grace and comfort, and whatsoever is good? Therefore labor to make use of it; but more of this after we have spoken of some rules of tryal, because whatsoever I may say this way may be misapplied. They be excellent comforts; but per∣haps saith the distressed soul, they belong not to me; to whom it doth belong: perhaps it belongeth to me, faith another that is a stranger, and a carnal man, to whom it doth not be∣long. Therefore our Saviour giveth some notes of distinctions, to know
whether God be our God or no. Not to be much in the argument, yet to be plain in it. 1. God is their God in this peculi∣ar manner that I speak, that is in the Covenant of grace, not otherwise, and I speak not what God is by crea∣tion of man; for so the Devil is Gods, and every Creature. But the question is, whom God is a God to in the near∣est bond of the covenant of grace? that is the only comfortable relation that can be; for if God be not our God in that, all other comforts will be nothing. It is better we be no Crea∣tures at all, then not Creatures in the covenant of grace. It is therefore worthy the commending to you, es∣pecially considering our naughty hearts are prone to deceive us, Sataa and melancholly, and temptations do make some refuse the comfort, and some presumptuous persons to snatch at it, when it doth not belong to them. Those to whom God is a God indeed, in a sweet relation of the Co∣venant of grace to be their God, as to the Patriarks, Prophets, & Christ & the Apostles, he giveth his holy spirit
to witness so much to them. Though the voice of the spirit is not alwayes heard in the best Children of God, yet he giveth them the holy spirit, that though it doth not alwayes witness, yet it alwayes works something in them, which may be an evidence that they are Gods. 2. Now the spirit of adoption and Sonship is known by a spirit of sup∣plication especially. Whom God is a God to, he vouchsafeth a spirit of prayer to go to him in all their necessi∣ties, which is an issue or branch of their faith. He giveth them faith to believe it, and prayer to make use of it; for God will not give this great priviledge, without heart to make use of it, which is done by faith and prayer; and prayer is nothing but the frame of faith, Acts 9. As soon as Paul was a good man, presently after his conversion, Behold he prayeth. The child cryeth, as soon as born, and the child of God is known by his praying; as soon as he is converted, an inter∣course is opened between God and the soul, which a christian soul will ne∣ver neglect. If they are plac't in the
worst condition, they will pray to God, or at least sigh and groan, which is a prayer that God can make sense of. Simile, Those that have any strong places of defence in trouble, they will be sure to fly to that in times of war, they will betake them to their Castle, and place of munition. And so they that be Gods in time of danger, run pre∣sently to God, he is their rock, their refuge, and place of defence, repair to him by faith and prayer. The name of the Lord is a Tower of defence, the Pro. 18. 20righteous in trouble fly thither, and they are safe. A man may know what his God is, by his retyring in times of ex∣tremity. Your carnal man if he hath any place to retire to, it is to his friends, to his purse to bring him out. He will go to that, which his instinct will specially lead him to in times of trouble. As every Creature together with the nature of it, hath received an instinct from God, to go to the place of refuge, wherein it is safe, as the weakest Creature hath strongest refuge. The Conies a poor weak Creature, hide themselves most
strongly, out of instinct they have their own weakness. So Gods Child being privy of his weakness, and need of support and strength, hath the strongest support that may be, and runneth to his God. Worldly men have many shifts, as the wily Fox hath; but a Christian hath but one, but that is a great one, he goeth to his God in time of need. And there∣fore you may know who is in cove∣nant with God in times of extremi∣ty, especially, by a spirit of faith, a spirit of prayer. Go to God in things of extre∣mity, by faith and prayer. In times of extremity, no man but a Christian can pray with any com∣fort, with any sweet familiarity, Abba Father; But they be like Pha∣raoh: Go Moses, pray to your God. He had no such familiarity with God as to pray for himself. And so carnal men will say; pray to your God. And many like Devils, will have no cōmu∣nion with God in their prosperity, but Exo. 9. 28.their whole life is a provoking of God to emnity by swearing, loose, de∣bauched, irregular Carriages, hateful even to moral men: their hearts tell them they be even like Satan. VVhat
dost thou come to torment us before our time? what hast thou to do with me? what have they to do with God? they have scarce a Bible in their The wick∣ed out∣wardly make a shew to fea God; but hate him in their hearts.Chambers. If one, it is for fashion sake. And that they may not appear to be naught, they will hold confor∣mity in publick assemblies; but for private familiarity they have nothing to do with it. The shew of Religion goeth under an opprobrious name; but if they would put off the shew, it were nothing, and not make ostenta∣tion of what they are not; but they have no communion with God in prayer. They will go for Gods people, and own him for their God, when they have no trading with him, so much as by prayer. Take heed we de∣ceive not our selves, I beseech you, salvation dependeth upon it. 3. We may further try, whether our claim of God to be our God be a good claim, on good grounds, by our siding, by our partaking; for those whom God is a God to in a pe∣culiar manner, will be sure to side with God. God hath two things in the world, he prizes more then all the
world, that is, his Children and Church. His cause and Religion, they that be Gods, will be sure to side with the Church, they will stand and fall with the Church, and the cause of Religion, they will live and die with it. But a carnal Polititian, that hath perhaps great parts of na∣ture, he is  as the Grecian calleth him, they be for all turns, they can bring themselves to any figure, like water that will receive any figure. Take it, put it into a Vessel that is square, it will be square; put it into a round Vessel, it will be round. How can they own God for their God when they will not seek him, and they are yet to chuse their God and Religion. And because they A carnal man pro∣fesses hi own safety before the advance∣ment of Religion.will be sure to be safe in all times, they will own no Religion in any time. And beloved, is it possible any such should say with confidence, God is their God; will he own them that will not own him nor his Church, nor his cause? you know Jehu cried out, who is on my side, who? cast her out. And so God in doubtful times of danger, cryeth out,
who is on my side, who? stand out, ap∣pear, if you be on my side, if you be on my side, own my cause, if you be not on my side, if you have no de∣gree of goodness, it will appear. Chri∣stian Rom. 7. 8.wisdom is one thing, carnal po∣licy is another thing. The wisdom of the flesh is emnity with God. Many ap∣plaud, and think themselves for some body in this kind; but this wisdom is emnity it self against God. When a man will be wise in a distinct kind of wisdom from God, when he will have a cause severed from God, & will not side with God, he must look that The fearful condition of a wick∣ed man at the hour of death.God will accompt him his enemy, and make him his; but especially in the hour of death, and deep extremi∣ty, he shall not be able to look God in the face, to whom he hath been a traitor in the Church, and in the cause of Religion. And therefore as we will be able to own God for our God, especially in doubtful and dangerous times, side with the Who are Gods ene∣mit.Church, and side with Religion. It was objected to that good Jehona∣dab: a good man, have we any thing to do with Gods enemies? Now there
be two sorts of enemies, that we are especially to have nothing to do withall, if we side with God, enemies within us, and enemies without us. Sin within us, we must take part a∣gainst our sins, take Gods part, and the spirits part against corrupt moti∣ons and affections. Divinity must be∣gin from within, else it is faction without. It is not Religion, but facti∣on, if the Religion begin not in our hearts, and if we hate not sin in our selves. Where there is true antipathy, the nearer any thing is that is oppo∣site to our nature, the more hateful it is. He that hateth a Toad, hateth it in his bosom most of all. And he that hates sin, as sin, hates it in his own heart most of all. And therefore they that will pretend Religion, and be naught in their own particular, it A Christi∣an is a good man in his own particular.cometh not from a true principle; for they that will side with God, side with God in their own hearts, and be good men in their own particulars: therefore I beseech you, try your selves by this. Likewise,  men estem sinne Gods enemy wesoever they see it, and so far as their authority and pow∣er
reacheth, they will take Gods part in themselves against themselves, and in the world too. I will not inlarge the point, because it cometh in by way of tryal, and I cannot but touch it as a tryal. Thus you see how we may know whether we be Gods or no, by owning his cause, and siding with him: you have some expressions in Scripture to this purpose. Micah 4. 5. All people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. Every man will walk and converse in the name of his God, they will own their God, and take part with him, and we will walk in the name of our God for ever and e∣ver, and own his cause at all times, and constantly for ever, and ever. And likewise in Esay 44. speaking of gratious times there, when men shall be bold for the Lord, as in all times some men will. One shall say I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord, and tearm himself Israel. God shall have his tongue, his hand,
and all. He shall say I am the Lords, he shall call himself by the name of God, he shall subscribe to it, and own the cause. 4. Again, if we would know whe∣ther God be our God, we must know whether we may lay just claim to our God, as a peculiar God to us, or no, and that way in which God sheweth himself to be a God in pecu∣liar respect to us. Quest. Now how doth God shew himself a God in a peculiar respect to his Children? Answ. He sheweth himself to have a pecu∣liar respect to them. 1. By peculiar gifts, when he gives to them, that which he giveth to none else: shall we imagine God to be our God, by common gifts, and common graces? no; for thou com∣est to hear the word, so Herod did. Thou receivest the Sacrament, so did Judas, so did Simon Magus. Thou hearest the truth with some joy, so did the third ground. Thou hast ex∣cellent part, so hath the Devil him∣self. But thou art in such a place of the
Church, teachest others, so did Judas. Are these evidences to try whether we be Gods, or no? what then is the peculiar gift, and love-token that God bestowes upon his favorites? they be the graces of his spirit, espe∣cially in regard of God, an humble broken heart, and a believing heart, and a lowly heart, that goeth out of it self, that goeth unto God by faith, and towards man full of love, which argueth a great deal of self-denyal, when a man can love others with de∣nyal of his own profit and ease. He that hath a humble, believing, lowly The hum∣ble man more ex∣cellent then the proud.heart, hath more then all the world besides; for he hath Gods peculiar gift. Many poor souls complain, as if God had no regard to them, and yet in the mean time, they have hum∣ble, broken hearts, which is more then if they had all the wealth and worh that the world hath, which have proud hearts never broken. The return of these favours will be com∣fort in death, and glory in Heaven. What will the fruit of a believing heart be? he hath God and Christ, if he hath a lowly large heart to do
good, he doth that which in the issue, shall further his accompt at the day of judgement, and there is the love of God shewed in his special fa∣vour. 2. So the love of God especially, shall be a special peculiar comfort, that the world is ignorant of, especi∣ally in times of extremity. Inward peace of conscience, inward joy, and Peace of conscience inward joy and com∣fort, signs of love.inward comforts, these are signs of love, that God bestoweth upon a man when he will own him in the worst times, and speak peace to his soul, when nothing in the world will speak peace. When the Lyons roar, the great Lyons of the world roar in extremity, he hath inward peace and joy, and comforts of the holy Ghost, that inward intercourse of God with the soul, is a sign of Gods peculiar love, when God speaketh peace to the soul, when he sheweth the light of his countenance, which David in the 4th Psalm prefers before all outward comforts whatsoever. Gods revealing of himself, as the Scripture calleth it. When God revealeth himself to his, to be theirs, with peace and joy, and
comfort, accompanying it, this is pe∣culiar. 3. Again, a peculiar favour and love-token of God, as to have seaso∣nable and sanctifying correction. To have corrections when they be seaso∣nable, when we be in a way of stray∣ing, and God will bring us home by correction, and when we have sancti∣fying correction, we find by experi∣ence, that all is turned to our good. If I find any thing turn me to my God, I know I am his: if my Crosse be seasonable, and sanctified, he is my God; for he takes that course with me, which he takes with his own people. These be singular signs of Gods love, when he bestoweth the graces of his spirit, his comforts, peace and joy, though not largely, yet so much as shall sustain the soul. And then when he seasonably meeteth us, and will not suffer us to thrive in an evil couse. Oh it is a judgment of judgements, to be hardned in sinful courses of life: how can it but end in desperation at length? and there∣fore it is a great favour to be chasti∣zed, it sheweth, we are Sons, and
not Bastard. Thus we see how we may lay just claim to this, that God is our God in a peculiar man∣ner. 5. To name but one more, to dis∣tinguish a spirit of presumption, from a spirit of faith and truth, that God is our God, is this. 1. If we have grace to answer his dealings towards us. When we can eccho to Gods dealings; God hath chosen us, if we have grace to chuse him for our God. We may know he hath called us effectually, when we answer Gods call: when he biddeth us believe, he giveth us an influence of power, to be able to say, I believe, Lord Mark 9. 24help my unbelief. We may know, he loveth us when we reflect love again, and love him; we may know he compasseth us, when we imbrace him; we may know he delighteth in us, when we can delight in him, and his Servants. Whence is the strength of this Argument? from hence. All good things, whatsoever we do from God, is but by reflection. God shin∣eth on us first, God owneth us for his first, and God must do so in the order
of causes. God being the spring of all goodness, he must begin, we love him because he loved us first, else we could never love him: therefore if we love him and his truth, he loveth Psal. 73. 25.us, that is sure. VVhat have I in Hea∣ven but thee, and in earth in compari∣son of thee? surely he owneth us, be∣cause in order of causes, we can have nothing but from him first. 2. And then again, out of the na∣ture of conscience, if we can go bold∣ly to him as a reconciled God, not∣withstanding guilt of conscience, it is a sign he hath obtained peace of conscience, because it is the nature of conscience, if it hath not peace from God, not to dare to appear in Gods presence. So then, when there is in∣ward peace and love, answering to Gods love, choice answerable to Argu∣ments of Gods shi∣ning upon the soul.Gods choice, apprehending of him, answerable to his apprehension, this reflection and return, and rebounding back to God, is an invincible argu∣ment, that God hath first shined upon that soul. God sometimes will let us see things in the effect, and hide them in thecause. Perhaps he wil not perswade b his spirit, that he loveth
us, hath chosen us, and that we are his; but he will work something in our hearts, because he will have us search our spirits, what good thing he hath wrought, what love, what choice of the best side are in any of these; surely then God is theirs, though there be not an open voice, yet we may know, God hath loved this soul, and spoken peace to that soul, because we can re∣turn nothing to God, but he must shine on us first. Caution. Therefore beloved, let us make use of this, and let us take heed of sa∣crilegious usurpations, that we do not usurp upon Gods house, or God in a peculiar respect. Indeed we may come to God, as his Creatures, we are the workmanship of thy hands, and To call God our God, when he is not so, is an usurpation full of danger.say the truth, though we be in a wicked course of life, but to say thou art my God in Christ, I am thine, thou hast chosen me for thine; when we have not chosen him for our God, nor loved him, nor his cause, nor sided with him, nor have any stamp of him on the soul, have no∣thing but common favour that cast∣awayes have, as well as we, and the
Devils as well as we, (for the Devil go beyond all men in parts,) and yet to usurp the prerogative of being Gods in a peculiar manner, and to be bold with the holy things of God, as if we were of his family; this is a dangerous usurpation, take heed of it. And therefore they that live in courses of rebellion, and resolve not to mend, they take the holy things of God, as the Psalmist speaks, Psal 50. in an holy indignation, what art thou that takest my word in thy mouth, since Psal. 50. 16, 17.thou hatest to be reformed. Thou art an enemy to God and goodness, and wilt be so; thou art in a course of re∣bellion, and wilt be so. The Devils works you do, and will do; can we not take the word of the Covenant into our mouths, and shall we take the seal of the Covenant? therefore resolve to amend, else have nothing to do with God, do not add one sin to another. It is Childrens food, and not for Doggs, it belongeth to them of the family. If thou be none of the Family, what hast thou to do with them? If thou be of the Family, whatsoever thy infirmities are, thou
maist come boldly; for the seals are to strengthen our weak faith. When Simile.the Father is Father of a Child, the Father will not cast away the Child for breaking out with deformity, or lameness; when God hath taken us into his Family, infirmities cannot discard us. But I speak of them, that in a wilful opposite course of sin shew they never had to do with God in fa∣miliar entercourse, God never gave them a spirit to alter their natures. Propriety and proportion, and suita∣bleness of disposition go together, propriety joyneth with suitableness; where God owneth any man, he makes them like himself by his word and spirit, that their natures shall be even and agreeable to holy things, shall have a tast of holy things. And Propriety, by itting our na∣tures for communi∣on with God.where there is not suitableness of ho∣ly things, there is no propriety. Will God own a man, and not make him suitable? will God take his friend, and not give him a friendly nature? he will not; for he first fitteth our natures for communion with himself, else there can be no propriety. Let us not deceive our selves; but if vve
find some beginnings of grace, and can say without arrogancy, or usur∣pation, doubtless thou art our Father, our God, we be not worthy to be thine; but we be thine. If we finde something that cast-awayes cannot have, some grief of heart for sin, some faith, some little measure of love, some love of truth, and inclina∣tion to the best things, then we may come boldly to increase our familiari∣ty, and communion with God; but otherwise it is dangerous to come to Heb. 12. 29 Esa. 33. 14God, we approach a consuming fire, who shall dwell in everlasting burnings? say they in Isaiah, and if God be not in covenant with us, oh he will be consuming fire, everlasting burnings, and we but stubble, & it will increase spiritual judgment in us, hardness of heart, and going on from sin, to sin, till we be accursed for sin: therefore it is a fearful thing to be given up to hardness of heart, they that do con∣tinue in sin, God giveth them up to hardness of heart, to be insensible of his dealings with them. Ʋse 3. If we can in any degree make it good, that God is our God,
and we his people, then let us make Comfort in our in∣terest in God.use of it for our comfort in all times that we have a God to go to, though we have no friend in the world, yet we have him in whom all friends meet. If we have no comfort here, yet we have him in whom all com∣forts meet; for all concenter in him. He hath Father and friends, and worth and grace, and peace and com∣fort in him, and all is in him, if we go to him, we shall find a confluence of every thing that is good, suitable to any necessity of ours. And therefore let us learn to single out of God whatsoever may help us to be in covenant with him. He having made himself over to be ours, let us learn this wisdom to single out of God whatsoever is peculiar to our present condition; for considering he hath made himself a God to us, he is Particular exigencie supplyed by his all-sufficiency.all-sufficient for every turn: therefore out of his all-sufficiency, take out whatsoever is fit for any particular exigency. Lord I am now in a straight, and want wisdom, thou in Christ hast abundance of wisdom. Christ hath in him all treasures. I now want friends,
I want counsel, I want help, I want strength, God hath a fulness of all this for his Children. He hath it not only to content himself, and look on his own happiness, but for his friends that be in covenant with him, that be in covenant with him, that be so Religion is to know God, nd to make use of him for good, to honor him, and to be thankful.near him, that he will own him to be their God. If you aske what is Reli∣gion? it is to know God, to have all-sufficiency in him for my good; and then to make use of him by depen∣dance on him for that good, and by advancing of him in giving him the due honour and thanks of it. And therefore we deserve not the names of religious persons, if we do not study what he is to his Creatures in the Co∣venant of grace. Then make use of it by a spirit of dependency, and al∣wayes giving praise and thanks. This is our whole man, and what is all else? nothing but trouble and vani∣ty. Get our bonds sealed, that he is our God, and then break with all the world beside, come what can come, or what will come, we are sure to be safe. It is a comort of wonderful large extent. The use of the Sacra∣ment
is to seal that God is our God in particular, and that Christ is ours, Sacrament seals God to be ours.as verily as the Bread and Wine are ours. And let us desire the Lord to seal to every one of our souls, that are to have communion with him in parti∣cular, that he in Christ is ours. Christ with all his merits, and the fruits of them, forgiveness of sin, and life ever∣lasting, as verily as the outward man partakes of the outward seals, and then we shall come, and go away with comfort, and be made partakers of that end and use of the Sacrament, for which our blessed Saviour institu∣ted it. Having spoken before of common favours which Devils and Castawayes may have, as well as we, I shall inlarge Man by some sins worse then the Devil.my self a little in this, because it is a point of concernment. As in other sins we be like the Devil, so in this sin a man is worse then the Devil him∣self, if a man will be a common swea∣rer, and opposer, and malitious a∣gainst goodness, being only in love with some idle conceipt of his own, which he will have God himself stoop to, else he will not to Heaven: he
will not be saved but by his own foolery. A man that hath a bitter spi∣rit against the power of grace, that is a common blasphemer, that carrieth a spight against Religion, for him to say, God is his God, the Devil will as well say so. He will say of Paul and Sylas, these are the people of God; but he will not say himself is. For a man to live in sins against Conscience, de∣fend them, oppose all that opposeth his sins, and yet claim an interest, while that disposition standeth in him, it is more then satanical impu∣dency, and it is extream hardening of the heart against all goodness; for how many thousands in the Church perish, and sink to Hell under this presumptuous conceipt, I am Gods, and God is mine, when the title is false, and the evidence false. And therefore is is a point deserving throughly to be examined continual∣ly, what those evidences of graces be, that we venture our souls and salvati∣on upon. I will not stand much to presse the point. But you see the ne∣cessity of it, consider therefore I be∣seech you wha I have sid. If God
be ours, there will be a separation, where there is an owning of God for our God; There will be a separati∣on from all that is not his, as well as a gathering to them that be his. The work of Gods spirit in his Children, is like fire, which hath two proper∣ties, to sever all heterogeneal and strange stuffe and drosse, and the like, and gather all the homogeneal stuffe of one nature. And so the works of the spirit gathereth to the soul so much as is good, and refines that, and severeth that which is contrary. That spirit of God, that telleth them that Gods spirit both a se∣vering spirit, and an uniting spirit.they be Gods, it is is a severing spirit, and a uniting spirit, it severs contra∣ries, and it uniteth things of the same nature, there is a joyning to what is good, and a separating of what is evil. I will add this farther, that where∣soever on good title, we can say, I am Gods, there is a reflect act of the soul to say, God is mine. God hath Friend∣ship in mutual office of duty.put a light of reason and friendship into man. Now friendship standeth in mutual office of duty and gift, where this is not, there is no friend∣ship,
no reconciliation, no owning on good tearms. The end why God saveth a company of men, and bring∣eth them to Heaven, the body of Christ, which we call the Church, it is, that he may have eternal commu∣nion with them in the Heavens, as he hath with the blessed Angels, and in Christ a nearer communion, then he hath with them. Now how can this communion be, unless we turn to God, unless we have something to answer Gods love. Doct. Again note, God is ours, because Christ is ours, the Covenant is first made with Christ, and then with us. Whence we see a ground of particular application of that which we call particular faith, a ground of particu∣lar application, by a spirit of faith of God to us, and Christ to us, that God in Christ is my God, and your God. God to be appre∣hended as he offers himself. The ground of this is, as God of∣fereth himself, we must apprehend him; but Christ offers God, and he knoweth how to offer him. He teacheth us how God is to be present∣ed, and he presenteth him as our God,
and our Father, and therefore let us entertain him, as ours. Thus you see a good ground of particular ap∣plication of God the Father, and Christ to us in particular, in two re∣spects, Particular applicati∣on of Christ how grounded.not only that every one in par∣ticular ought to have a particular faith, and not to think a general faith is enough to believe, as the Church believeth; but to have a particular faith of the object, not only of the subject, but of the object, that, that is his in particular, I go to my Father and your Father. God is the Father, and the God of all the Elect, and only the Elect, and of every one of the Elect, as we say in solidum: that is said to be in solidum, when every one applieth the whole to himself, without diminution of any part. The sum is in solidum to every one that will make use of it, to in∣lighten every Creature that shutteth not his eyes. As a common Foun∣tain is no mans in particular; for no man can say this is my Fountain a∣lone, and yet every man can say this is mine: so that every Saint can say of God, he is mine in solidum, though
he were alone, he may say God is mine. If ten thousands have him, yet God is his God. god careth for all, as if there were but one, and for one, as if none but he. God offers himself, not only to his whole Church, but to every one in particular, and therefore of every one he ought to be appre∣hended. This is founded in all the great points and mysteries of Religion. As for instance, what is the ground of all the Petitions in the Lords Prayer? Our Father. What interest have we to all the Petitions, and to every Ar∣ticle of the Creed, if there be not a particular application? I believe God the Father to be my God, Jesus Christ my Saviour, the Holy Ghost my Sancti∣fier, remission of sins, and life everlast∣ing is mine. We do no more then the Devils. Now every truth in Scripture is written for our comfort, and shall it be no more comfort to us, then to the Devils? doth the Scripture in∣tend us no more comfort then the Devils? yes; but the Devil may say for the Church, there is remission of sins, and a God and Saviour; but not
for me, and that is his torment, he cannot come to particulars. So the Sacraments are to seal a particular faith, as every one in particular taketh the bread and wine, so by a particular Sacraments seal a particular faith.faith, every one may say, Christ is mine, his death is mine, blood-hed mine, remission of sins and interest of Christ is mine. It doth not seal a ge∣neral faith in the Clouds, but a par∣ticular assurance, that it belongeth to every one. And so in the words of the Catechise, the ministerial questioning of sinners, is intended, that every one that believeth, should apply it. If thou believest, and if thou believest, thou shalt be saved, and thy sins shall be forgiven thee. So that if we regard prayer and faith, if we regard the Sa∣craments, or the use of the Catechise, all inforce a particular faith. If we have not particular faith, we lose the vertue of all. So it is for the Com∣mandements; put case, no man is na∣med in particular, yet every one ought to ply in particular, that they ought to abstain from such a sin, and perform such duty; if they do so, they shall be glorified, if not, they shall be
punished. And there is the same rea∣son in faith, as in obedience. A man is condemn'd in Law, though not named in Law, because the general is set down here, and every man ought particularly to apply it, I ought not to have done so, and so. So that it overturneth the end of all, if a man labor not for a particular faith. To go farther. Now if I disablethis in∣terest of particular faith of Gods love, and Christs love,  loose the comfort of weak faith where it is true. What condition were they in now, when Christ biddeth them go? had not some of them denyed Christ, and had they not all forsaken him? and yet notwithstanding, go tell Peter, and tell them all, I go to their Father, and their God. So that the interest that a soul hath in Christ, who hath true faith, though a weak faith joyned with ma∣ny Failings do not cut u off from Christ.infirmities, the interest he hath in Christ is not broke off, as you see by the example of the Apostles. And therefore I beseech you, let us comfort our selves in this, labouring for a particular faith, and then labor to maintain our interest notwithstand∣ing our infirmities and faults, not∣withstanding
our sins past. Let not Satan rob us of our claim, that God is our God, and Father in Christ. Let us learn of Christ, we cannot have a better pattern. What doth Christ on the Crosse, when he had the sins of all the believing world upon him, and had there been ten thousand times more, it had been all one, to so infi∣finite a person God-man, he had made full satisfaction to Gods justice. But having so much upon him, did it take away his claim of God, as his God? It did not, but still he said, my God, my God. Was it a claim that did him any good? was it a useful claim? yes, for it was made good by his Resur∣rection and Ascension, and therefore he might well say, I go to my God, and your God. I have overcome the wrath of God due for sin, and therefore If Christ hath satis∣fied for us notwith∣standing our infir∣mities, we may call God our God.when I that had all the sins of the world upon me, acknowledged God, to be my God, and underwent the burden of Gods wrath, and satisfied for all sin, you may well say my God, not only from the pattern of Christ, because he did so, but as a cause; I may say so, now because Christ said
so then; for he hath fully satisfied his Father, who had laid that burden on him: you therefore that have particular burdens of your own sins, and have not that other; but have a conscience troubling you, it is for good, because if you believe, that is taken away. But put case you had the guilt of your own sins, and of ma∣ny sins beside, what is that to this of Christ, who had the guilt of all sin? And therefore let no guilt hinder you from a spirit of faith, to say, my Fa∣ther and my God. Is Christ ascended to Heaven, to be a mediator of inter∣cession to appear before God; for whom? is it not for sinners? what work is there in Heaven for a media∣tor, if we were not daily sinners? Christ that hath satisfied for sin, bid∣deth us after satisfaction, to think of God as a Father, and to think of his ascension, even for this end, to appear before God for us as our High-Priest, to make daily peace for us. His blood is of everlasting efficacy. And Heb. 12. 24.if Abels blood cried for vengeance, the blood of Christ crieth for mercy. As the appearing of the blood of A∣bel
spake for vengeance, so the very appearing of Christ speaks enough for mercy to the sinner. It is a comfortable clause, that in Hosea 2. 19. where God saith, He will marry them in everlasting mercy: so that mercy is part of the joynture of the Church. God will marry them in mercy; in what mercy? in pardoning Mercy part of our mariage portion.mercy; as the Husband is to bear with the wife, the weaker Vessel, not to put her away for infirmities. Shall we attribute mercie to men, and not to God? Can a friend bear the infir∣mities of a friend, and a Huband of a Wife? & cannot Christ bear the infir∣mities of his spouse? and therefore never think that our infirmities may hinder our claim: you see it did not here. But, go to my Father, and your Father. This comfort we shall be Object.driven to make use of sometime or o∣ther, & therefore make use of it now. Answ. But you will say, this is not com∣fort for common sort of Christians, it is not, and I intend it not for them. It is Childrens bread, and it must not be cast to Doggs: therefore they that have not God for their God, and live in any sin, they can lay no claim to
him; for they serve another God in their hearts, their vile courses are in∣stead of their God, and in their af∣fections above their God: and there∣fore let them not think any promise belongeth to them in that course. Let them think of God, as a consuming sire, as everlasting burnings, while they be such, and that their peace is as the peace that the soul hath when the strong man holdeth all in posses∣sion. When the conscience is speech∣less, and God hath given them up to hardness of heart, which is a despe∣rate peace. This belongeth to them, that are resolved not to live in any sin, that have given themselves up to God: and yet by reason of the re∣mainder of corruption, are driven to make use of that Petition, which Use.Christ bids them to pray, forgive us our daily sins. Assurance. Hence issueth this truth, that a Christian may be assured of his salva∣tion in this world. For first of all grant, that we ought particularly to apply, as God offers himself to us, and that no infirmities, nor sins hinder this claim, then what followeth? but a
Christian believing, and repenting of his sins daily, may be assured that he is in the state of grace, because there be grounds of particular application, that therefore which seems to disable that interest, hinders not at all. And therefore labor to maintain that com∣fortable state of assurance, by all means; the grounds of it is, particu∣lar application, notwithstanding all sins and infirmities whatsoever, be∣cause Satan envieth it most, because it is a state wherein we honor God most. I will not enter largely into the point, because I have spoken of it in other Texts; but for as much as con∣cerneth this time, we must labor for that, without the which we cannot go through that which God calleth us to. 1. There be many duties and dis∣positions that God requires, which we cannot be in, without assurance of salvation on good grounds; what is that? God bids us be thankful in all things, how can I know that? unless I know God is mine, and Christ is mine, can I be thankful for that which I doubt of, and think I ought to doubt of? therefore it is such a
state, without which I cannot perform other duties, and particularly the grand duty of thankfulness. And what a pittiful state is this, that a man should not be thankful for Christ, nor Heaven, nor for the state of another world, that there should be such great matters, and yet they cannot thank God for them. Joy springs from knowledg. 2. Again, God enjoyneth us to re∣joyce. Rejoyce, and again I say, re∣joyce. Can a man rejoyce, that his name is written in Heaven, and not know his name is written there? The Disciples were very weak now, and yet notwithstanding all their infirmi∣ties, they loved Christ, they cast themselves upon him, and had not chosen another Saviour. Therefore Luk. 10. 20rejoyce that your names are written in Heaven, and how can a man rejoyce, that knoweth it not to be so? By Gods writing of the Law in a mans heart, he may know his name is writ∣ten in Heaven. Can a man alwayes rejoyce, if he hath not grounds why? 3. Again, God requires chearful∣ness, God loveth a chearful giver,
and a chearful doer. It is the dispo∣sition, Gods ser∣vice must be per∣formed with chearful∣nesse.that is required in every thing, give me thy heart in every thing thou dost. Alas, how can I perform chear∣ful service to God, when I doubt whether he be my God, and Father, or no? shall not I labor for a heart to yield chearful obedience, doth it not come deadly off? surely it doth. We ought to comfort our selves, and how can a man comfort himself in a con∣dition full of uncertainties, no com∣forts are comfortable without this, That God is our God, and our Fa∣ther, unless we know this; comforts themselves are not comfortable unto us. None of the comforts we have, the comforts of this life, are not comforts to us, when the soul saith, perhaps God feeds me to slaughter, and perhaps I have these mercies as my portion in this world, No world∣ly com∣forts can satisfie the soul.and how can he be comfortable, when he apprehendeth not, that they issue from a spring of love, alas, comforts themselves are uncomfortable. And therefore shall not I labor for that, without which I cannot be comfort∣ed, especially it being a disposition
for our good, to be thankful, and chearful, and joyful, and large heart∣ed. 4. God requires a disposition in us that we should be full of incou∣ragements, and strong in the Lord, and that we should be couragious for his cause, in withstanding his ene∣mies and our enemies. How can there be courage in resisting our corrupti∣ons, Satans temptations, how can there be courage in suffering persecu∣tion, and crosses in the world, if there be not some particular interest we have in Christ, and in God, it cannot be so? unlesse we will denie obedi∣ence to all duty injoyned, we must Assurance earnestly to be la∣bored for.have this assurance which enters into all, which is the spirit that quicke∣neth, and enliveneth all. Therefore labor for it. 2. Else we shall take away the grounds that God inforceth good duties from in Scripture, as he doth 3 Col. 12.inforce duty from this ground. As Elect, see ye put on bowels of compassion. I beseech you by the mercies of God, Rom. 12. offer your selves as a sacrifice
to God Alas, I know not whether I shall have mercy or no; why take away your ground, and overthrow your principles. And therefore shall not we labor for that state of soul wherein we are fitted to be in that disposition, and to perform duty as God would have us. I therefore beseech you la∣bor for assurance of salvation. Grounds of assu∣rance. That we may maintain it the better, see the grounds of it. It is not in our perfection, for then the poor Disciples, where had they been? Alas they had dealt unfaithfully with Christ; but the ground of firmness is on Gods side, the certainty is on Gods part, not ours. Tell them I go to my Father, and my God, and their Father and their God. Though we make breaches eve∣ry day, yet God breaketh not, as Mal. 3. Verily I the Lord am not changeable, and therefore you are not consumed. We change, ebbe and flowe, are to and fro, up and down every day, varying in our dispositions, though there be some root and seed of grace in us al∣wayes, yet there is a change in our dispositions every day, but it holdeth
on Gods part; and therefore Christ nameth not any qualification in Assurance maintain∣ed to us on Gods part.them to build comfort on, but my God, and your God, will yet maintain the relation of a Father to you, that have not dealt as you should do, and maintaineth the relation of a God, notwithstanding your fall. So that we maintain not our assurance on any part in us, but on Gods love. Whom he loveth, he loveth to the end. Our God John 13. 1.unchangably loveth us, in whom there is not so much as a shadow of change. And therefore in the last of the He∣brews, it is called an everlasting Co∣venant. The God of peace that brought Heb. 13. 20again from the dead our Lord Jesus the great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant. By the blood of Christ there is an ever∣lasting Covenant, God will be our God to death, and in death, and for ever. For this relation being on Gods part, extendeth it self from forgive∣ness of sins to life everlasting. It is al∣wayes, the blood of Christ is the blood of an everlasting Covenant. I will marry thee to me for ever. It
holdeth sure on Gods part. Hos. 2. 18. Let us therefore labor to maintain this assurance of salvation from Gods love. 2. But for our comfort, we must do our parts too, though it begin with God. It beginneth on Gods part. He loveth us first, and imbra∣ceth us first, and we must love again, and imbrace again. We must desire of God grace to answer relation. There∣fore I will prescribe some rules, how we may say, God is our God with comfort. That we may have the comfort of it, by making good our interest in him, to make it good that Rule to know how God is our God.we are Sonnes, as well as to call him Father, that we are his people, as well as to call him our God, his spouse, as well as call him our Hus∣band. And because this cometh from God, joyn this withall our endeavors. Lord thou must begin, I desire to shew my self as a spouse to thee, but thou must discover thy self to me. I desire to love thee, but discover thy love first, all I can do is but reflecti∣on. Thou must shine on me first, so
desire God to reveal himself more and more, in Christ Jesus, and then we cannot but carry our selves to him, as we should do in our Rela∣tion. This day we must perform the rela∣tion on our sides: there be two words that go to this heavenly bar∣gain. The Covenant consisteth of two parts. Now deire God, by his grace, to inable us to do our part, for he doth both. And desire him accor∣ding to his promise, to teach us to love him, and to write his Law in our hearts to do what is good, and cir∣cumcise our hearts, and give his holy spirit. We aske no more, then he hath promised, and so go boldly to him. Lord, thou hast made a Cove∣nant with us, we cannot keep it with∣out thee, thou hast not only promised grace and gifts, but the grace to per∣form the Covenant on our parts must come from thee. And this God will do: therefore in the use of means at∣tend upon him, and looking to him, we shall have grace to do our parts, and then maintain this assurance,
without which we cannot live as Christians should live. That we may further maintain this Relation, that God is our God; Let us labor to get into Christ, for it is in him that God is our Father, and to grow up in Christ, to growe more and more, to grow up in faith, and in all grace. A gratious Christian never wanteth arguments of assurance of salvation; It is the dead-hearted Christian, the careless Christian: therefore labor, as to be in Christ, so to grow up in the knowledge of Christ. And so to know God in Christ, la∣bor to see the face of God in Christ, for in him are all the beams of his love, as the beames of the Sun in a Simile.glasse are gathered, so the beams of all Gods love meet in Christ. So lovely is God in Christ, whatsoever we have in Christ, it is from God in Christ. And whatsoever we have from God, it is through Christ, therefore growe in the knowledge of Christ, in faith in Christ. To this end are the Sacra∣ments, that we might growe up in
him, and be fed into Christ. And then we may make right use of it, as the Ordinance that God hath sanctified for this end. And as God doth take us out & set a stamp upō us, so labor to make choyce of God more & more, & choice of God in Christ; for there be the 2. ob∣jects of our faith & love. Chuse God God and Christ the Objects of faih and love.for our God, & esteem him above all, and renounce all other, and resign our selves wholly to him, for all is ours, when God is ours. He setteth us apart from other men, taking us out, and appropriateth us to himself, chu∣seth us for his Jewels. I beseech you labor daily to chuse God to be your God. If we say, we are Gods, let us make choyce of him at the same time, and appropriate him with our choyce. He is mine in particular, there is renunciation of all others. I have served other Gods heretofore, the world, and the flesh, and the favor of man have been my God, but they shall be my God no more: If we chuse him not, and appropriate him as ours, and renounce all other, and give our selves to him, we cannot say he is our God: this we should practice every day: In the solicitation of sin, or de∣spair
for sin, make use of this Interest in God an ar∣gument against sin.choice and appropriation, and resig∣nation: If we be tempted to any sin, why I am not mine own, I am Gods, I have chosen him to be my God, I have appropriated my self to him, I have renounced all other, I have offer∣ed my self to him, therefore what have I to do with sin, with this temp∣tation, I have taken the Sacrament on it, that God is mine, and Christ is mine, with all his benefits, therefor e if there be any solicitatiō to sin, make this use of it; & so we shal grow in as∣surance of our interest in God, when we can make use of it on all occasions. If when we be moved to any sin by Satan, or our own flesh, which is a Devil within us: this is contrary to my Covenant, this is contrary to the The flesh a Devil within us.renewing of the Covenant, so often re∣newed in the Sacrament, & therefore I will not commit it. It is contrary to the State I am advanced to, and con∣trary to my relation, God is my Fa∣ther and my God; and therefore I must be his, and what have I to do with sin? what hath pride to do with a heart bequeathed to God? what
hath lust and filthiness? what hath in∣justice, or any thing else that is sin∣ful, to do in a heart that hath dedica∣ted, and consecrated it self to God, who hath given up himself, and all he can do, and to whom we have given up all we have, and shall we give our strength to sin and Satan, his enemies? Thus we should grow in assurance, exercising the increase and knowledge of our interest. I beseech you therefore let us use these and the like things to make God our God. And if any temptation for sin be joyned, as Satan cannot but solicit to sin; so he labor∣eth when we have sinned, to tempt to despair for sin; for they be the two wayes by which Satan prevails. Now That God is our God, nd our Father is ground of infinite comfort.fetch comfort against both from hence. God is my God, and my Fa∣ther, and Christ teacheth them to call him so; and therefore notwithstand∣ing sin, I may go to God, and call him Father. The Disciples, though their sin was great, yet on their humility they were to acknowledge God to be their Father, and their God. And
therefore answer Satan; I ought not to abuse and break off, and deny my interest in God, as my Father, and my God, for any sin, because the Disci∣ples did not so; and Christ hath taught how to make use of God, and to acknowledge him for my comfort. We cannot have a better guide then God, and therefore never think of God, but as our God and our Father, and labor to answer all Satans temptations in that kinde from hence. Assurance that God is our God, wrought by the sealing of the spirit, and the spirits sanctify∣ing. 3. Again, this assurance that God is our God in Christ, and our Father, is wrought by the sealing of the spi∣rit, and sanctifying of us: therefore take heed, we grieve not the spirit of God. Gods spirit moveth our hearts often times in hearing the word, or reading or praying, when we have any good motions, or when we enter∣tain them, and therefore do not grieve the spirit of God, whose office is to seal us to the day of redempti∣on, to assure us God is our God, and our Father in Christ. Grieve him not, least he grieve us, by reaching and tor∣menting
our consciences, and that is the way to maintain our interest. Take heed of crossing the spirit, espe∣cially by any sin against conscience. Conscience is Gods Deputy, grieve not Consci∣ence is a little God within us.the spirit, grieve not conscience, for Conscience is God Deputative, it is a li ttle God within us. And therefore if we will not alienate God from us, to whom we have given our selves, if we be true believers, do nothing against his Deputy and Agent, the spirit that sanctifieth us, and sealeth us to the day of redemption. This is the way to maintain assu∣rance, that God is our God. For men may be led with a spirit of presump∣tion, and say, God is my God. But if Conscience telleth them, they live in sin against Conscience, and the moti∣ons of the spirit, and suppress them and kill them, as birthes that they would not have grow in their hearts, then they cannot say, God is my God, but conscience telleth them they lie. And therefore I beseech you, labor for an holy life. That faith that ma∣keth this claim, that God is my Fa∣ther
and my God, is a purifying faith. 1 Joh. 3.It is a faith quickening the soul, a faith purifying, a faith cleansing. Faith is wonderfully operative, espe∣cially having these promises; what promises? I will be your God and your Father. Having such promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthinesse of flesh and spirit, and grow up in all ho∣liness in the feare of the Lord. And therefore labor for that faith that lay∣eth hold upon this priviledge. God is our Father, and our God; make it good by this, that it be a purifying faith, an operative faith, that worketh by love, that sheweth it self in our conversation. The more we labor, and grow this way, the more we growe in assurance of salvation. Beloved, favor cannot be main∣tained with great persons, without much industry and respect, and obser∣vance of distance. A man, that will maintain the favor of great persons, must be well read in their dispositi∣ons, must know how to please them, and yield them all observance and re∣spect.
Respect with God preserved with much industry & holiness. And shall we think then to pre∣serve respect with God, without much industry and holiness? It cannot be. And therefore give all diligence, (not a little) to make your Calling and Electi∣on sure. It requireth all diligence, it is worth your pains. We live on this, that he is our God, and will be our God to death, and in death for ever more. That God is our God to ever∣lasting, that he is of an equal extent with the soul, he liveth to fill it, and make it happy. Our souls being of an eternal subsistance, therefore it stand∣eth 2 Pet. 1. 20us upon to give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, else it will not be maintained. Why do not Christians injoy the comforts of this, that God is their God in Christ, more then they do? the reason is, they be negligent to maintain in∣tercourse between God and them. We must know our distances: there must be reverent cariage to God. A loose Psal. 2. 11.Christian can never injoy the com∣forts of God. He is so great, and we so mean, we ought to reverence him,
we ought to love him with fear, and rejoyce with trembling. Humble thy self to walk with thy God, where there is a great deal of humility, it maintaineth friendship. We cannot walk with God, as a friend as Abra∣ham is said to be Gods friend. We must acknowledge our selves to be dust and ashes, know him in his greatness, and our selves in our meanness, if he will maintain this to our hearts, that God is our God. If we be careful to main∣tain this, surely he that delighteth himself in the prosperity of his Ser∣vants, will delight to make himself more and more known to us, that we may be assured of our salvation. All that hear me, are such as have not yet made choice of God, to be their God, or have made choice. Let The fear∣ful condi∣tion of those that have not God to be their God.me speak a word to both; for there be many that yet have their choice to make, that have other Lords, and other Gods to rule over them. Let them consider, what a fearful state it is not to be able to say, in regard of life everlasting, God is my God and my
Father. They can say, they be Gods Creatures; but what a fearful condi∣tion is it` not to be able to say, God is my Father? will not these know, whom he is not a God to in favor, he will be a God to in vengeance. He must be friend or enemy, there is no third in God. God and the Devil di∣vide all mankind, they share all. If thou be not Gods, and canst not say so, on good titles, thou art the Devils. Yet God is daily pulling men out of the Kingdom of the Devil, by open∣ing their eyes to see their miserable condition; yet all go under these two grand titles, Gods and the Devils. If thou canst not say, God is thy God, then the Devil is thy God; and what a fearful condition is it to be under the God of the world by a worldly, carnal disposition; and perhaps thou maist die so, if thou be not careful to get out of it. If God be not our God, he is our enemy; and then Creatures, Angels, Devils are against us, consci∣ence against us, word against us, all against us. If he be for us, who is a∣gainst
us? If he be against us, who is for us? a terrible condition, and therefore get out of it, I beseech you. The office of the Mi∣nistry is to prach life to all re∣pentant sinners. But how shall I doe? is there mer∣cy for such a wretch? yea, he offer∣eth himself to be thy God, if thou wilt come in: wherefore serveth our Ministry, the word of grace? but to preach life to all repentent sinners? He that confesseth and forsaketh his sins, shall have mercy. And therefore God hath ordained Ambassadors of peace to proclaim, if you will come in. And he intreateth you to come in, and he chargeth, and commandeth you. You be Rebels, not only against him, but enemies to your own souls, if you do not. And therefore I beseech you, if you be not yet come in, adde this more, you be sacrilegious persons, if you be not Christians in earnest, have not you given your selves to God in baptisme? and have not you in your lives given your selves to lusts, which you renounced at your baptisme? now you have alienated your selves
from God, to whom you were dedi∣cated. Did not you ingage your selves to God in your Baptisme? and is not he willing to receive you? He thought of you, when you could not think of your selves. And therefore as it bind∣eth you over to greater punishment, if you will not come in, but continue God pre∣venteth us by his mercies.sacrilegious persons from God, to whom you have dedicated your selves, so God preventeth you with mercy. He incourageth by the seal of elec∣tion in Baptisme, to make it good by faith, without which it will do no good, being but a seal to a blank: therefore how many incouragements have you to come in? Take Gods gra∣cious offer, he giveth you time to make your peace, it is nothing, but wilful rebellion to stand out against God. For they that have given them∣selves to God, and now renewed their interest in him, by the Sacraments, let them conceive, what a word of comfort they have in this, That Christ
is theirs, and God is theirs. What an ocean of comfort is it, when all things leave you, as all things will, ye we have God, that will be a God for evermore. At the time of death, what God our comfort in the losse of all things.comfort will it be to say, God is mine, Christ is mine. Life is mine no longer, world is mine no longer, friends forsake me, but I am interessed in God, and have made Covenant with God, who is a God for ever, the Covenant I have made, is an ever∣lasting Covenant. It is of that large∣ness, the comfort is, that the Angels themselves admire it, the Devils envie it, and it is a matter of glory and praise in Heaven for ever. Therefore make much of such a priviledge, that is the envy of Devils, the admiration of Angels, that is the joy of a Chri∣stians heart here, and matter of glori∣fying God for ever, world without end. That God in Christ is become his God here, and for ever, it is a ra∣vishing consideration. It is larger then our hearts, here be comforts lar∣ger then the capacity of our hearts.
1. Glorie under hope of glory. 2. Glory in affl cti∣ons. 3. Glory in God. Cor vestrum soli Deo patere debet, our hearts ought all to lie open to divine things; for they have more in them, then the heart can contain. If we will shut them, shut them to worldly things. Oh the comfort of a Chri∣stian that hath made his state sure, let him glory in the Lord. There be three degrees of glory, in all, let him glory under hope of glory, glory in afflictions, and glory in God, that is, we glory in God to be our God. That in the sharing, and dividing of all things, God hath given himself to us, and what an of∣fer is this? that when God divideth the world to the Children of men, you shall have this, and that, but you shall not have me. But to his Chil∣dren he hath given himself, and he hath nothing better to give, and indeed there is nothing else needs; for there is more in it, then we can speak, but that when God divideth all things, he should give such a share as himself: is not this a glory, that a poor Creature should have God to be
his, and all he hath to be his, to make use of it in life and in death, it is worth all the world; It is worth 2 Pet. 1. 10our endeavors to make our Calling and Election sure, when we may have this comfort from it. FINIS.
