T1093C E1300_3 99867913 169734
THREE HYMNES, OR Certain excellent new Psalmes, composed by those three Reverend, and Learned Divines. Mr. John Goodwin, Mr. Dasoser Powel, and Mr. Appletree. SUNG In their respective Congregati∣ons, at Stephens Coleman-streete, London, and at Mary Abchurch, on Thursday the 8. of October, 1650. being a day set a part for the total routing of the Scots Army in Muslebo∣rough-field, by his Excellen∣cy the L. Gen. Cromwel. Licensed according to Order, and published for the general use and benefit of all the Saints of Jesus Christ, in England, Scotland, and Ireland. London, Printed by John Clowes, 1650.
Three Hymnes that were sung on Thursday the 8. of October 1650. being a day set a part for the total rout∣ing of the Scots Army in Muslebo∣rough field, under the Command of Lieut. Gen. David Lesley, by the Lord General Cromwells Forces. I. SUng by Mr. John Goodwin, in St. Stephens Coleman-streete Church. II. Sung by Mr. Vasoser Powel, at St. Mary Abchurch. III. The third Sonnge by Mr. Appletree, at Mr. John Goodwins Church in Coleman-streete, af∣ter the Sermon in the Afternoon.
Mr. John Goodwins Hymn. 1. PRepair, make ready, oh ye Saints Jehovah is come down, To you and on your Heads to set Salvation as a Crown. 2. Into your mouths a Song he has put. A Song of praise, to him, to give, A Song of joy great store. 3. Look, see and behold, how like himself Hee's come to visit you, He came down, the lofty heavens He made to stoop and to bow. 4. With zeal all clad, as with a Cloake, With vengeance Garments dyed, A Helmet of Salvation He wore upon his head. 5. Of Righteousness Jehovah-like A Brest-plate he put on, And thus in fury great he falls Your enemies upon. 6. And home then repays them all the wrong Which they unjustly had,
Unto you done, and threatned more to do as they were mad. 7. Those Northern mountains which them∣selves Had lifted up so high, With opened mouths against the Heavens their strength to magnifie. 8. With heat of indignation He melted at your feete, And to your Armies gave the strength Their Forts and Glory great. 9. They fled they ran, they made great hast From the presence of your God, When he is angrie with his foes There is no safe abode. 10. One chast man a thousand can pursue Ten thousand put to fight, For God was in the midst of you And taught your hands to flight. 11. And in their heads unrighteousness And cruel Councels were, which caused their hearts to sink like stones Their hands hung down for fear. 12. They fled they ran, they wondered here And there seeking to hide, Their guilty heads in holes of death Lest they should be discry'd. 13. For great were the numbers they had Enough by sword to dye,
Enough to run, enough to come, Into Captivity. 14. Great were the multitudes they had Thousands by sword to dye, Thousands to run, thousands to come, Into Captivity. 15. They fled, they ran, but lost the spoyl To be divided by, Them of the houshold they despise And drawn to slavery. 16. They fled, they ran, right sore afraid To come into deaths bonds, Your Legs redeem'd your feebled knees of their dismai'dd hands. 17. They fled, they ran beyond the line Of their latter confidence, The Forrest of the Land and Sea They left to your Conscience. 18. They fled, they ran, but they soon wheel and chains they left behind, With their deforrm'd devotion Your Liberties to bind. 19. Oh you redeemed of the Lord To whom the silver wings, And golden feathers of the Dove Are now given to your mind. 20. Who are delivered from making pitts And diudging in the Clay,
For whose blest sakes Kings scattered are And turned out of the way. 21. Of their swolne thoughts and proud desires Are sent to the Wilderness, To seek a way where no way is To free you from distress. 22. You whose Task-masters fierce & cruel Your glorious Lord hath troubled, And in performance of your power Their shame and sorrow doubled. 23. For that with inlarged hearts and heightrod streams of spirit, You love and fear him all your days And cause him to inherit. 24. The praises of the earth in words Where ere you come and go, No rest accept of yours gave spirits Until the world shall know. 25. By your good words & works relate The goodness of the Lord, Make the world unto your feast You blessedness afford. 26. Give plenty of it unto those Who feed in misery, And know not how to serve the Lord In their free liberty.
27. Thus let thy enemies O Lord Thus let thy enemies perish, But if that love thy glorious For ever let them perish. FINIS. Mr. Powels Hymne. 1. TO Christ the only King of Saints be praise eternally, Which gave his Souldiers great honour And Kingly Victory. 2. Whom Satan would wisely subdue To those which are his enemies, Lest therefore offer unto him A willing secrasie.
3. For he in love laid down his life and for us shed his blood, To reconcile us to God Who is our best belov'd. 4. And doth adopt us to himself His children for to be, And hath given us his free grace And excellent Glory. 5. The Lord also, his Saints exalt That they on high do raigne, And makes our Enemies to know That Christ is our Soveraigne. 6. The Pope, the Priest, the Anti-Christ The Kings do quake for fear, For Christ into his Throne doth come His glory doth appear. 7. Awake, arise, ô King ô Lord Let all thy proud foes fall, Then we which are thy Church on earth will honour thy great name. 8. Come quickly, come Lord Jesus Christ Thy Saints do waite and stay, To see thy Kingdome here on earth And to to behold thine eyes, 9. The glory and the Victories which thou of late didest give, doth move us for to praise thy name and for thee to be belov'd.
10. That we being thy thy people all And Saints, with one accord, Shall with all hope and courrage free Sing praise to thee ó Lord. FINIS. Mr. Appletrees Hymn. 1. LEt God arise, now up he is As all the world may see, To take his peopls part, wherefore, March to revenge all we. 2. That worke which did occasion us This day to set apart, So great it is, it to discribe No man hath got the Art.
3. Our Enemies which in battel fell Long since us threaten did, Us to anoy which did procure Our Armys march with speed. 4. From London, and from other parts where they well quartered were, To seeke and for to find out those That sought to worke our snare. 5. Before they went, to God they call'd Whose cause they were to plead, To the Church they also sent That they would intercead. 6. That so together, they might prevail With God so them to direct, To guid them in his ways Their persons to protect. 7. When they had passed by Barwick And towards Haddington did come, Thy Saints did sing, in gladness they Would fight with all and some. 8. Our Armies, they prudentially Did seeke that place to gaine, Where siting down, they waited long To fight, but all in vain. 9. Much hardship they did undergo Their Enemies for to find, But those men that make great hoast To Engage had no mind.
10. To Musleborough the enemy came Our Armies for to outbrave, Upon our works immediatly Sought something to atchive. 11 Fifteen select Troops of the Church All Covenanters sore, Came trooping forth, and some did swear That Cromwells Honour to prove. 12. Dead or alive their prisoner Some cry'd they would him bring, And offer him a sacrifice Unto their new-made King. 13. But God our Lord who heard their brags Them disappointed there, Our Army there did many kill The rest all ran for feare. 14. Their Horse, their Speare the Lord did break Great mischief to prevent, Their further hurt did make to cease Their deeds for to repent. 15. Our Noble General also sought With love them to overcome, Professing that nothing they did Should his intentions turn. 16. But nothing could with them prevail To stay them from the same, Though fight they durst not at all Until they had their aym.
17. And brought us to such straights that we No way escape could make, But must yield to their tearms and glad What they would give to take. 18. Then God appear'd himself and did Our Souldiers courage raise, And gave them Victory so great For which wee'l give him praise. 19. As in the days of Sisera The Starrs for us did fight, The Moon to them was darkened But gave to us her light. 20. Foure thousand kill'd was on the place Ten thousand prisoners were, Their bag and baggage they forsook And did their Ordnance spare 21. Their Cullers they did leave behind In number great to see, Edenborough & Leith they also quit And did to Sterling flee. 22. In which they trust to this day Their King and Covenant, Not fully able them to free As all the World may grant. 23. But we will trust and praise our God That this great work hath wrought, That in our strength delivered us When we by prayer did seek. FINIS.
